<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89502-0065 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.5-02-89.f2.A1064</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Bureau of Reclamation</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Quarterly Status Tabulation of Water Service and Repayment ContractNegotiations</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Bureau of Reclamation, Department of the Interior.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of proposed contractual actions pending throughJune 1989. Pursuant to section 226 of the Reclamation Reform Act of 1982 (96 Stat.1273), and to andSection; 426.20 of the rules and regulations published inthe <T4>Federal Register </T4>dated December 6, 1983, Vol. 48, page 54785,the Bureau of Reclamation will publish notice of proposed or amendatoryrepayment contract actions or any contract for the delivery of water forirrigation or other uses in newspapers of general circulation in the affectedarea at least 60 days prior to contract execution. The Bureau of Reclamationannouncements of repayment and water service contract actions will be publishedin newspapers of general circulation in the areas determined by the Bureauof Reclamation to be affected by the proposed action. Announcements maybe in the form of news releases, legal notices, official letters, memorandums,or other forms of written material. Meetings, workshops, and/or hearingsmay also be used, as appropriate, to provide local publicity. The publicparticipation requirements do not apply to proposed contracts for the saleof surplus or interim irrigation water for a term of 1 year or less. TheSecretary of the Interior or the district may invite the public to observeany contract proceedings. All public participation procedures will be coordinatedwith those involved in complying with the National Environmental PolicyAct if the Bureau determines that the contract action may or will have``significant'' environmental effects. Pursuant to the ``Final Revised Public Participation Procedures'' for waterservice and repayment contract negotiations, published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>dated February 22, 1982, Vol. 47, page 7763,a tabulation is provided below of all proposed contractual actions in eachof the five Reclamation regions. Each proposed action listed is, or isexpected to be, in some stage of the contract negotiation process duringApril, May, or June of 1989. When contract negotiations are completed,and prior to execution, each proposed contract form must be approved bythe Secretary, or pursuant to delegated or redelegated authority, the Commissionerof Reclamation or one of the Regional Directors. In some instances, congressionalreview and approval of a report water rate, or other terms and conditionsof the contract may be involved. The identity of the approving officer,and other information pertaining to a specific contract proposal, may beobtained by calling or writing the appropriate regional office at the addressand telephone number given for each region. This notice is one of a variety of means being used to inform the publicabout proposed contractual actions. Individual notices of intent to negotiate,and other appropriate announcements, are made in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>for those actions found to have widespread publicinterest. When this is the case, the date of publication is given. <ITAG tagnum="84">Acronym Definitions Used Herein </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(FR) Federal Register </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(ID) Irrigation District </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(IDD) Irrigation and Drainage District </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(Mandamp;I) Municipal and Industrial </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(Dandamp;MC) Drainage and Minor Construction </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(Randamp;B) Rehabilitation and Betterment </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(Oandamp;M) Operation and Maintenance </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(CAP) Central Arizona Project </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(CUP) Central Utah Project </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(CVP) Central Valley Project </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(P-SMBP) Pick-Sloan Missouri Basin Program </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(CRSP) Colorado River Storage Project </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(SRPA) Small Reclamation Projects Act</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">(BCP) Boulder Canyon Project </ITAG>Pacific Northwest Region Bureau of Reclamation, 550 West Fort Street, Box 043, Boise, Idaho 83724,telephone (208) 334-1161. 1. Cascade Reservoir water users, Boise Project, Idaho: Repayment contractsfor irrigation and Mandamp;I; 29,221 acre-feet of stored water in CascadeReservoir. 2. Brewster Flat ID, Chief Joseph Dam Project, Washington: Amendatory repaymentcontract; land reclassification of approximately 360 acres to irrigable;repayment obligation to increase accordingly. 3. Individual irrigators, Mandamp;I, and miscellaneous water users, PacificNorthwest Region, Idaho, Oregon, and Washington: Temporary (interim) waterservice contracts for surplus project water for irrigation or Mandamp;I useto provide up to 10,000 acre-feet of water annually for terms up to 5 years;Long-term contracts for similar service for up to 1,000 acre-feet of waterannually. 4. Rogue River Basin water users, Rogue River Basin Project, Oregon: Waterservice contracts; $5 per acre-foot or $50 minimum per annum, terms upto 40 years. 5. Willamette Basin water users, Willamette Basin Project, Oregon: Waterservice contracts; $1.50 per acre-foot or $50 minimum per annum, termsup to 40 years. 6. IDs and similar water user entities: Amendatory repayment and waterservice contracts; purpose is to conform to the Reclamation Reform Actof 1982 (Pub. L. 97-293). 7. Sixty Palisades Reservoir Spaceholders, Minidoka Project, Idaho-Wyoming:Contract amendments to extend term for which contract water may be subleasedto other parties. 8. City of Cle Elum, Yakima Project, Washington: Amendatory or replacementMandamp;I water service contract; 2,200 acre-feet (1,350 gallons per minute)annually for a term of up to 40 years. 9. Three IDs, Flathead Indian Irrigation Project: Repayment of costs associatedwith rehabilitation of irrigation facilities. 10. Baker Valley ID, Baker Project, Oregon: Irrigation water service contracton a surplus interruptible basis to serve up to 13,000 acres; sale of excesscapacity in Mason Reservoir (Phillips Lake) for a term of up to 40 years.11. Crooked River Project, Oregon: Irrigation repayment or water servicecontracts with several individuals and with North Unit ID for a total ofup to 25,000 acre-feet of storage space in Prineville Reservoir.12. Various Projects, Pacific Northwest Region: Randamp;B contracts for replacementof needle valves at storage dams.13. Palisades Water Users, Inc., Minidoka-Palisades Project, Idaho: Repaymentcontract for an additional 500 acre-feet of storage in Palisades Reservoir.14. Willow Creek Project, Oregon: Repayment or water service contractsfor a total of up to 3,500 acre-feet of storage space in Willow Creek Reservoir.15. Roza ID, Yakima Project, Washington: Proposed supplementary defermentcontract. Defer 1 year (2 installments) of construction payments becauseof cost incurred by the district to obtain additional water supplies inanticipation of drought.16. Vale Oregon ID, Vale Project, Oregon: Supplementary deferment contractto defer the 1988 construction installment under authority of the Act ofSeptember 21, 1959. The district has experienced a significant reductionin water supply for the 1988 season.17. Five Project Spaceholders, Minidoka-Palisades Project, Idaho-Wyoming:Contract amendments to provide for rental of water to other parties.18. Bridgeport ID, Chief Joseph Project, Washington: Interim and long-termWarren Act contracts for the use of an irrigation outlet in Chief JosephDam.19. Five Irrigation Districts, Arrowrock Division, Boise Project, Idaho:Repayment contracts for Safety-of-Dams repair to Deer Flat Dam.Mid-Pacific RegionBureau of Reclamation (Federal Office Building) 2800 Cottage Way, Sacramento,California 95825, telephone (916) 978-5030.1. Tuolumne Regional Water District, CVP, California: Water service contract,up to 9,000 acre-feet from New Melones Reservoir.2. Calaveras County Water District, CVP, California: Water service contract;2,000 acre-feet from New Melones Reservoir; FR notice published February5, 1982, Vol. 47, page 5473.3. Individual irrigators, Mandamp;I, and miscellaneous water users, Mid-PacificRegion, California, Oregon, and Nevada: Temporary (interim) water servicecontracts for available project water for irrigation, Mandamp;I, or fishand wildlife purposes providing up to 10,000 acre-feet of water annuallyfor terms up to 5 years; Temporary Warren Act contracts for use of projectfacilities for terms up to 1 year; Long-term contracts for similar servicefor up to 1,000 acre-feet of water annually.<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note: </T4>Copies of the standard form of temporary water service contractfor the various types of service are available, upon written request, fromthe Regional Director at the address shown above.</ITAG>4. Friant Unit Contractors, CVP, California: Renewal of existing long-termwater service contracts with numerous contractors on the Friant-kern Canalwhose contracts expire 1989-1995. Water quantities in existing contractsrange from 1,200 to 175,440 acre-feet.5. San Luis Water District, CVP, California: Amendatory water service contractproviding for a change in point of delivery from Delta-Mendota Canal tothe San Luis Canal.6. ID's and similar water user entities: Amendatory repayment and waterservice contracts; purpose is to conform to the Reclamation Reform Actof 1982 (Pub. L. 97-293).7. State of California, CVP, California: Contract(s) for, (1) sale of interimwater to the Department of Water Resources for use by the State Water ProjectContracts, and (2) acquisition of conveyance capacity in the CaliforniaAqueduct for use by the CVP, as contemplated in the Coordinated OperationAgreement.8. Madera ID, Madera Canal, CVP, California: Warren Act contract to conveyand/or store nonproject Soquel water through project facilities.9. County of Tulare, CVP, California: Amendatory water service contract,to provide an additional 1,908 acre-feet and reallocate 400 acre-feet ofwater from the Ducor ID for a total increase of 2,308 acre-feet.10. Shasta Dam Area Public Utilities District, CVP, California: Renewalof Mandamp;I water supply contract. Less than 6,000 acre-feet.11. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, CVP, California: Long-term contractfor water supply for Federal refuge in Grasslands area of California.12. City of Redding, CVP, California: Amendatory Mandamp;I water supply contract.13. City of Dos Palos, CVP, California: Contract for the use of surpluscapacity in the San Luis Canal. The contract will allow the exchange ofwater with Central California ID and transportation to a new point of delivery.The result will be a significant improvement in quality of water made availableto the city's water users.14. North Kern Water Storage District, Buena Vista Water Storage District,Tulare Lake Basin Water Storage District, and Hacienda Water District,Kern River Project, California: Amendatory contract to provide storagespace for Mandamp;I water.15. Contra Costa Water District, CVP, California: Amendatory water servicecontract to add an additional point of delivery to accommodate the district'sproposed Los Vaqueros Project. Amendment will also conform contract tocurrent water ratesetting policies.16. San Juan Suburban Water District, CVP, California: Amend Contract No.14-06-200-152A to provide for the current CVP water rates to conform thecontract with the provisions of sections 105 and 106 of Pub. L. 99-546.17. Centerville Community Services District, CVP, California: Water servicecontract for up to 1,560 acre-feet of Mandamp;I water annually.18. Shasta County Water Agency, CVP, California: Amendatory water servicecontract to provide for reduction in annual entitlement.19. Kern County Water Agency, CVP, California: Temporary agricultural watersupplies of up to 100,000 acre-feet for 1 year.20. California Department of Corrections, CVP, California: Water servicefor up to 1,000 acre-feet of water annually to serve the Sierra ConservationCenter (a State prison) near Jamestown, California.21. CVP, California: Amendatory contracts to include the provision of theAct of July 2, 1956 (70 Stat. 438) in existing water service contracts.22. Beneficiaries of Link River Dam, Klamath Project, California/Oregon:Contract to provide for repayment of reimbursable costs associated withSafety of Dam expenditures.Lower Colorado RegionBureau of Reclamation, P.O. Box 427 (Nevada Highway and Park Street), BoulderCity, Nevada 89005, telephone (702) 293-8536.1. Amendment to Contract No. 176r-696 between the Bureau of Reclamationand the Department of the Army to increase the maximum amount of waterdelivered to the Yuma Proving Grounds from 55 acre-feet to 975 acre-feet,pursuant to the recommendation of the Arizona Department of Water Resources.2. Agricultural and Mandamp;I water users, CAP, Arizona: Water service subcontracts;a certain percent of available supply for irrigation entities and up to640,000 acre-feet per year for Mandamp;I use.3. Southern Arizona Water Rights Settlement Act: Sale of up to 28,200 acre-feetper year of municipal effluent to the city of Tucson, Arizona.4. Contracts with five agricultural entities located near the ColoradoRiver, BCP, Arizona: Water service contracts for up to 1,920 acre-feetper year total.5. Gila River Indian Community, CAP, Arizona: Water service contract fordelivery of up to 173,100 acre-feet per year.6. ID's and similar water user entities: Amendatory repayment and waterservice contracts; purpose is to conform to the Reclamation Reform Actof 1982 (Pub. L. 97-293).7. Indian and non-Indian agricultural and Mandamp;I water users, CAP, Arizona:Contracts for repayment of Federal expenditures for construction of distributionsystems.8. State of Arizona, BCP: Contract for a yet undetermined amount of ColoradoRiver water for Mandamp;I use on State-owned land.9. Contract with the State of Arizona, BCP: For a yet undetermined amountof Colorado River water for agricultural use and related purposes on State-ownedland.10. Contract with four individual holders of miscellaneous present perfectedrights to Colorado River water totalling 4.5 acre-feet, pursuant to theJanuary 9, 1979, Supplemental Decree of the United States Supreme Courtin <T3>Arizona </T3>v. <T3>California </T3>(439 U.S. 419).11. Contracts for delivery of surplus water from the Colorado River, whenavailable, with Emilio Soto and Sons, for 1,836 acre-feet per year; KennedyLivestock, for 480 acre-feet per year.12. Imperial ID and/or the Coachella Valley Water District, BCP, California:Contract providing for exchange of up to 10,000 acre-feet of water peryear from a well field to be constructed adjacent to the All-American Canalfor an equivalent amount of Colorado River water and for Oandamp;M of thewell field, Lower Colorado Water Supply Project, California.13. Lower Colorado Water Supply Project, California: Water service andrepayment contracts with nonagricultural users in California for consumptiveuse of up to 10,000 acre-feet of Colorado River water per year in exchangefor an equivalent amount of water to be pumped into the All-American Canalfrom a well field to be constructed adjacent to the canal.14. Golden Shores Water Conservation District, BCP, Arizona: Mandamp;I waterservice for lands within the district and adjacent areas for delivery ofup to 2,000 acre-feet of Colorado River water per year pursuant to therecommendation of the Arizona Department of Water Resources.15. Hutchison Present Perfected Rights contract amendment to reflect thetransfer of part of the right to Winterhaven, California, Supreme CourtDecree in <T3>Arizona </T3>v. <T3>California </T3>and BCP.16. Winterhaven Present Perfected Rights contract for a portion of HutchisonPresent Perfected Rights transfer to Winterhaven, Supreme Court Decreein <T3>Arizona </T3>v. <T3>California </T3>and BCP.17. County of San Bernardino, San Bernardino, California: Repayment contractfor $28.6 million SRPA loan.18. Wellton-Mohawk IDD and Gold Dome Mining Corporation (Corporation),Gila Project, Arizona: Contract for delivery of 6.14 acre-feet of waterper year to the Corporation through Wellton-Mohawk Division facilities.19. Ak-Chin Farms, Maricopa, Arizona: Contract for the Oandamp;M of on-reservationconveyance facilities associated with delivery of water to the southeastcorner of the reservation; Ak-Chin Indian Community Water Rights SettlementAct.20. Wellton-Mohawk IID, Gila Project, Arizona: Exchange agreement providingfor a reduction in Wellton-Mohawk IDD's contractual right to consumptivelyuse 22,000 acre-feet of Colorado River water per year, providing for dischargeof the IDD's repayment obligation and exemption from the full-cost pricingand acreage limitation provisions of Federal Reclamation law; Salt RiverPrima-Maricopa Indian Community Water Rights Settlement Act of 1988.21. Water delivery contracts with seven Phoenix area cities providing forthe delivery of up to 27,000 acre-feet per year through the CAP; Salt RiverPrima-Maricopa Indian Community Water Rights Settlement Act of 1988.22. Agreements with seven Phoenix area cities providing for the lease ofthe Salt River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community's CAP entitlement of 13,300acre-feet per year to the cities; Salt River Prima-Maricopa Indian CommunityWater Rights Settlement Act of 1988.23. Salt River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community, CAP, Arizona: Amendatorywater delivery contract providing for extension of the contract term andauthorizing the Community to lease its CAP water to the Phoenix area cities;Salt River Prima-Maricopa Indian Community Water Rights Settlement Actof 1988.24. Salt River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community, Salt River Project, Arizona:Amendatory agreement to increase the Community's allotment to BartlettDam water from the Salt River Project; Salt River Prima-Maricopa IndianCommunity Water Rights Settlement Act of 1988.25. Roosevelt Water Conservation District, Salt River Project, Arizona:Agreement assigning a portion of the District's CAP agricultural waterto seven Phoenix area cities; Salt River Prima-Maricopa Indian CommunityWater Rights Settlement Act of 1988.26. Roosevelt Water Conservation District, Salt River Project, Arizona:Agreement to extend the term of the District's water salvage contract;Salt River Prima-Maricopa Indian Water Rights Settlement Act of 1988.Upper Colorado RegionBureau of Reclamation, P.O. Box 11568 (125 South State Street), Salt LakeCity, Utah 84147, telephone (801) 524-5435.1. Individual irrigators, Mandamp;I, and miscellaneous water users, Utah,Wyoming, Colorado, and New Mexico: Temporary (interim) water service contractsfor surplus project water for irrigation or Mandamp;I use to provide up to10,000 acre-feet of water annually for terms up to 5 years; long-term contractsfor similar service for up to 1,000 acre-feet of water annually.(a) The Benevolent and Protective Order of the Elks, Lodge No. 1747, Farmington,New Mexico: Navajo Reservoir water service contract; 20 acre-feet per yearfor municipal use; contract term for 40 years from execution.(b) The town of Lake City, Colorado: Blue Mesa Reservoir water servicecontract; 25 acre-feet per year to support present diversion rights formunicipal use; contract term for 40 years from execution.(c) Mt. Crested Butte Water and Sanitation District, Colorado: Blue MesaReservoir water service contract; 25 acre-feet per year to support presentdiversion rights for municipal use; contract term for 40 years from execution.2. La Plata Conservancy District, Animas-La Plata Project, New Mexico:Repayment contract; 9,900 acre-feet per year for irrigation. Contract termsconsistent with binding cost-sharing agreement, dated June 30, 1986.3. San Juan Water Commission, Animas-La Plata Project, New Mexico: Mandamp;Irepayment contract; 30,800 acre-feet per year. Contract terms consistentwith binding cost-sharing agreement, dated June 30, 1986.4. Southern Ute Indian Tribe, Animas-La Plata Project, Colorado: Repaymentcontract for 26,500 acre-feet per year for Mandamp;I use and 2,600 acre-feetper year for irrigation use in Phase One and 3,300 acre-feet in Phase Two.Contract terms to be consistent with binding cost-sharing agreement andwater rights settlement agreement, in principle.5. Ute Mountain Ute Tribe, Animas-La Plata Project, Colorado and New Mexico:Repayment contract; 6,000 acre-feet per year for Mandamp;I use in Colorado;26,400 acre-feet per year for irrigation use in Colorado; and 900 acre-feetper year for irrigation use in New Mexico. Contract terms to be consistentwith binding cost-sharing agreement and water rights settlement agreement.6. Navajo Indian Tribe, Animas-La Plata Project, New Mexico: Repaymentcontract; 7,600 acre-feet per year for Mandamp;I use. 7. State of Colorado, Animas-La Plata Project, Colorado: Escrow AccountAgreement.8. Grand Valley Water Users Association, Orchard Mesa ID, Grand ValleyProject, Colorado: Contract to continue Oandamp;M of Grand Valley powerplant.9. Ute Mountain Ute Indian Tribe, Dolores Project, Colorado: Agreementfor 1,000 acre-feet per year for Mandamp;I use and 22,900 acre-feet per yearfor irrigation.10. Uintah Water Conservancy District, Jensen Unit, CUP, Utah: Amendatoryrepayment contract to reduce Mandamp;I water supply and corresponding repaymentobligation.11. Vermejo Conservancy District, Vermejo Project, New Mexico: Amendatorycontract to relieve the district of further repayment obligation, presentlyexceeding $2 million, pursuant to Pub. L. 96-550.12. Rio Grande Water Conservation District, Alamosa, Colorado: Contractfor the district to be the vendor of the Closed Basin Division, San LuisValley Project, surplus water if available.13. Conejos Water Conservancy District, San Luis Valley Project, Colorado:Amendatory contract to place operation, maintenance, and replacement costson a variable basis commensurate with the availability of project water.14. Weber Basin Water Conservancy District, Weber Basin Project, Utah:Repayment contract for Randamp;B of the A.V. Watkins Dike.15. Ogden River Water Users Association, Ogden River Project, Utah: Repaymentcontract for Randamp;B of portions of the Pineview Dam, Ogden Canyon Conduit,Ogden-Brigham Canal and South Ogden Highline Canal.16. South Cache Water User's Association, Hyrum Project, Utah: Repaymentcontract for Randamp;B of portion of Hyrum Dam, Hyrum/Mendon Canal, HyrumFeeder Canal, Wellsville Canal, and other miscellaneous work.17. State of Colorado, San Luis Valley Project, Colorado: Cost-sharingcontract for Closed Basin Division.18. Miscellaneous Mandamp;I and irrigation water users in New Mexico, SanJuan-Chama Project, New Mexico-Colorado: Repayment contracts for remainingproject water allocated in 1975 or before. Contract amounts vary from 60to 5,165 acre-feet.Great Plains RegionBureau of Reclamation, P.O. Box 36900, Federal Building, 316 North 26thStreet, Billings, Montana 59107-6900, telephone (406) 657-6413.1. Individual irrigators, Mandamp;I, and miscellaneous water users, GreatPlains Region, Montana, Wyoming, North Dakota, South Dakota, Colorado,Kansas, Nebraska, Oklahoma, and Texas: Temporary (interim) water servicecontracts for surplus project water for irrigation or Mandamp;I use to provideup to 10,000 acre-feet of water annually for terms up to 5 years; long-termcontracts for similar service for up to 1,000 acre-feet of water annually.2. Nokota Company, Lake Sakakawea, P-SMBP, North Dakota: Industrial waterservice contract; up to 16,800 acre-feet of water annually; <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice published May 5, 1982, Vol. 47, page 19472.3. Fort Shaw ID, Sun River Project, Montana: Randamp;B loan repayment contract;up to $1.5 million.4. ID's and similar water user entities: Amendatory repayment and waterservice contracts; purpose is to conform to the Reclamation Reform Actof 1982 (Pub. L. 97-293).5. Oahe Unit, P-SMBP, South Dakota: Cancellation of master contract andparticipating and security contracts in accordance with Pub. L. 97-293with South Dakota Board of Water and Natural Resources and Spink Countyand West Brown ID.6. Owl Creek ID, Owl Creek Unit, P-SMBP, Wyoming: Amendatory water servicecontract to reflect reduced water supply benefits being received from AnchorReservoir.7. Green Mountain Reservoir, Colorado-Big Thompson Project: Water servicecontracts; proposed contract negotiations for sale of water from the marketableyield to water users within the Colorado River Basin of Western Colorado.8. Ruedi Reservoir, Fryingpan-Arkansas Project, Colorado: Water servicecontract; second proposed contract negotiations for sale of water fromthe regulatory capacity of Ruedi Reservoir.9. Fryingpan-Arkansas Project, Colorado: East Slope Storage system consistingof Pueblo Reservoir, Twin Lakes, and Turquoise Reservoir; Contract negotiationsfor temporary and long-term storage and exchange contracts.10. Cedar Bluff ID No. 6, Cedar Bluff Unit, P-SMBP, Kansas: Repayment contract;Amend the Cedar Bluff ID's contract to relieve it of all contract obligations.The use of the District's portion of the reservoir storage capacity hasbeen sold to the State of Kansas for fish, wildlife, recreation, and otherpurposes.11. Northern Colorado Water Conservancy District and the Municipal Subdistrict,Colorado-Big Thompson Project, Colorado: Contract for storage and conveyanceof water for the Windy Gap Project; Amendatory contract to make administrativeand technical revisions to conform the contract terms and conditions tothe Windy Gap Project as actually constructed and operated.12. Department of Natural Resources and Conservation, SRPA, Montana: Grantand loan contract for rehabilitation of Middle Creek Dam to meet requiredsafety criteria and to increase reservoir storage capacity by 1,917 acre-feetwhich will be utilized for irrigation and municipal purposes.13. Garrison Diversion Unit, P-SMBP, North Dakota: Repayment contract;Renegotiation of the master repayment contract with Garrison DiversionConservancy District to bring the terms in line with the Garrison DiversionUnit Reformulation Act of 1986. Negotiation of repayment contracts withirrigators and Mandamp;I users.14. Gray Goose ID, Gray Goose Unit, P-SMBP, South Dakota: Contract negotiationsto integrate Gray Goose ID into the P-SMBP as authorized pursuant to section1120 of the Water Resource Development Act of January 21, 1986 (Pub. L.99-662).15. Hilltop ID, Hilltop Unit, P-SMBP, South Dakota: Contract negotiationsto integrate Hilltop ID into the P-SMBP as authorized pursuant to section1120 of the Water Resource Development Act of January 21, 1986 (Pub. L.99-662).16. PacificCorp. formerly Pacific Power and Light Company, Glendo Unit,P-SMBP, Wyoming: Contract negotiations for renewal of water storage contractfor 2,000 acre-feet of nonproject industrial water.17. Corn Creek ID, Glendo Unit, P-SMBP, Wyoming: Repayment contract for10,350 acre-feet of supplemental irrigation water from Glendo Reservoir.18. City of Dickinson, North Dakota: Cancellation of contract No. 9-07-60-WR052pursuant to the Act entitled, ``Making Continuing Appropriations for theFiscal Year Ending September 30, 1988, and for Other Purposes,'' Pub. L.100-202. The contract will be replaced with a new contract for the repaymentof $1,625,000 over a period of 40 years at 7.21 percent and payment ofoperation, maintenance, and replacement costs.19. Lavaca-Navidad River Authority, Palmetto Bend Project, Taxas: Amendatorycontract to increase repayment ceiling to cover repairs to a drop structure.20. Hildalgo County ID No. 1, Lower Rio Grande Valley, Texas: SupplementalSRPA loan contract for approximately $13,205,000. The contracting processis dependent upon final approval of the supplemental loan report.21. Foss Reservoir Master Conservancy District, Washita Basin Project,Oklahoma: Amendatory repayment contract for remedial work.22. Arbuckle Master Conservancy District, Arbuckle Project, Oklahoma: Contractfor the repayment of costs incurred by the United States for the constructionof the Sulphur, Oklahoma, pipeline and pumping plant (if constructed).23. Arbuckle Master Conservancy District, Arbuckle Project, Oklahoma: Amendatorycontract for revised repayment schedule to reflect credit for project landstransferred to National Park Service under Pub. L. 94-235 for the ChickasawNational Recreation Area.24. Highland-Hanover ID, Boysen Unit, P-SMBP, Wyoming: Randamp;B loan repaymentcontract; $300,000.25. Upper Bluff ID, Boysen Unit, P-SMBP, Wyoming: Randamp;B loan repayment;$220,000.26. Board of Water Commissioners of the City and County of Denver, theColorado River Water Conservation District and the Northern Colorado WaterConservancy District, Colorado-Big Thompson Project, Colorado: Operatingagreement for substitution of water in the proposed Muddy Creek or RockCreek Reservoir for Green Mountain Reservoir water.Opportunity for public participation and receipt of comments on contractproposals will be facilitated by adherence to the following procedures:(1) Only persons authorized to act on behalf of the contracting entitiesmay negotiate the terms and conditions of a specific contract proposal.(2) Advance notice of meetings or hearings will be furnished to those partiesthat have made a timely written request for such notice to the appropriateregional or project office of the Bureau of Reclamation.(3) All written correspondence regarding proposed contracts will be madeavailable to the general public pursuant to the terms and procedures ofthe Freedom of Information Act (80 Stat. 383), as amended.(4) Written comments on proposed contract or contract action must be submittedto the appropriate Bureau of Reclamation officials at locations and withinthe time limits set forth in the advance public notices.(5) All written comments received and testimony presented at any publichearings will be reviewed and summarized by the appropriate regional officefor use by the contract approving authority.(6) Copies of specific proposed contracts may be obtained from the appropriateRegional Director or his designated public contact as they become availablefor review and comments.(7) In the event modifications are made in the form of proposed contract,the appropriate Regional Director shall determine whether republicationof the notice and/or extension of the 60-day comment period is necessary.Factors which shall be considered in making such a determination shallinclude, but are not limited to: (i) The significance of the impact(s)of the modification, and (ii) the public interest which has been expressedover the course of the negotiations. As a minimum, the Regional Directorshall furnish revised contracts to all parties who requested the contractin response to the initial public notice.<ITAG tagnum="21">Date: April 25, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">C. Dale Duvall,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Commissioner of Reclamation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-10493 Filed 5-1-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4310-09-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>