<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89612-0029 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.6-12-89.f2.A1028</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register </T4>/ Vol. 54, No. 111 / Monday, June 12, 1989 /Proposed Rules <ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVlCES</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Food and Drug Administration </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">21 CFR Part 801 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 86N-0479] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="91">RIN 0905-AC54 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Medical Devices; Labeling for Menstrual Tampons; Ranges of Absorbency;Reproposed Rule </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Food and Drug Administration, HHS.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Reproposed rule. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) is reproposingamendments to its tampon labeling regulation. The reproposed rule wouldrequire that manufacturers of menstrual tampons determine tampon absorbencyusing a test method specified in the reproposal, and, based on the resultsof that testing, express absorbency on tampon labeling by using one ofsix specified absorbency terms, each of which corresponds to a range ofabsorbency set forth in the reproposal. The reproposed rule would enableconsumers to compare the absorbency of one brand and style of tampons withthe absorbency of other brands and styles before purchasing them. Labeling of tampons to allow consumers to compare the absorbency of differentbrands and styles is important because the use of tampons is associatedwith toxic shock syndrome (TSS), a rare but serious and sometimes fataldisease, and the risk of contracting TSS increases with the use of tamponsof higher absorbency. FDA is issuing this reproposal under the FederalFood, Drug, and Cosmetic Act  (the act). FDA is also announcing its tentative final response to a citizen petitionsubmitted by the Public Citizen Health Research Group concerning absorbencylabeling for tampons.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>Written comments by August 11, 1989. The agency is proposingthat any final rule based on the reproposal become effective for packagesof tampons initially introduced or initially delivered for introductioninto commerce after December 12, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>Written comments to the Dockets Management Branch (HFA305), Food and Drug Administration, Room 4-62, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville,MD 20857.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Les Weinstein, Center for Devicesand Radiological Health (HFZ-84), Food and Drug Administration, 5600 FishersLane, Rockville, MD 20857, 301-443-4874.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Background </ITAG>In the <T4>Federal Register </T4>of September 23, 1988 (53 FR 37250) (corrected53 FR 44551, November 3, 1988, and 54 FR 1844, January 17, 1989), FDA proposedto amend its current regulation governing user labeling for menstrual tampons(21 CFR 801.430) to require uniform absorbency testing of tampons and tostandardize a method of expressing absorbency on tampon package labels.The agency proposed such testing and labeling requirements to enable consumersto make interbrand comparisons and to choose the least absorbent tamponneeded to control menstrual flow and, thus, reduce their risk of TSS. Interested persons were given until December 22, 1988, to submit writtencomments on the proposal. The agency received more than 270 comments fromtampon manufacturers, individual consumers, consumer groups, health-careprofessionals, and researchers. A summary of the comments received on theSeptember 23, 1988, proposed rule and the agency's response to them areset out in section III of this preamble. After analyzing all the comments, FDA has tentatively concluded that, withthe modifications contained in the reproposal, the absorbency test methodologyand sampling procedures in reproposed andSection; 801.430(f) are appropriate.However, after analyzing numerous comments from consumers, consumer groups,and manufacturers concerning the agency's initial proposal to use a systemof letters to represent absorbency ranges and not to standardize currentlyused terms of absorbency (e.g., regular, super, and super plus), the agencyhas decided to repropose amendments to andSection; 801.430 that would replacethe letter designations with six absorbency terms that are different fromcurrently used terms. The new terms, each of which would convey absorbencyinformation, would correspond to the six absorbency ranges in the initialproposal (53 FR 37250). FDA is also now proposing to require that the applicablenew term of absorbency be placed on the principal display panel(s) of tamponpackages, separate from and more prominent than any other information exceptthe corresponding numerical range of absorbency, if used. The agency believesthat the reproposed amendments would ensure truthful, accurate, and nonmisleadinglabeling and would facilitate interbrand comparisons of tampon absorbency.The absorbency labeling scheme set forth in the reproposal is discussedunder section II below and is based on FDA's analysis of comments on theinitial proposal. FDA believes that the changes in the initial proposalare in character with the original labeling scheme and that they are alogical outgrowth of the initial proposal and the comments on it. Accordingly,FDA believes that it could justify publishing these reproposed amendmentsas a final rule. However, neither tampon manufacturers nor consumers wereafforded an opportunity to comment on the particulars of the labeling schemeincluded in the reproposal. Publication of this document as a final ruleat this time, without further opportunity for public participation could,therefore, result in litigation challenging the rule on procedural groundsand delay promulgation of a final tampon absorbency labeling rule evenfurther. Under these circumstances, FDA believes that publication of areproposal, rather than a final rule, is the more prudent, and ultimatelythe more expeditious, course of action. The additional comment period isto ensure that all interested persons have sufficient opportunity to considerfully the feasibility of the reproposed absorbency labeling scheme andits impact on consumers and manufacturers. In addition to the comments on these revisions to the labeling, FDA isrequesting comments on the likelihood of an outcome, due to the use offixed nonoverlapping ranges, that would be inconsistent with the goal ofenabling consumers to choose the least absorbent tampon needed to controlmenstrual flow and thus reduce their risk of TSS. This request for commentsis discussed in section III B, paragraph 8 of this preamble (see also paragraph5) and concerns the effects of product reformulation on consumers. This reproposal contains information collection requirements which aresubject to review by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under thePaperwork Reduction Act of 1980. The title, description, and respondentdescription of the information collection are shown below with an estimateof the annual reporting and recordkeeping burden. Included in the estimateis the time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources,gathering and maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewingthe collection of information.<ITAG tagnum="21"><T3>Title: </T3>Medical Devices; Labeling for Menstrual Tampons; Rangesof Absorbency; Reproposed Rule. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T3>Description: </T3>The proposed regulation requires that menstrual tamponsbe labeled consistently so that purchasers can compare absorbency betweenbrands. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T3>Description of Respondents: </T3>Businesses or other for profit. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T3>Estimated Annual Reporting and Recordkeeping Burden:</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="110"><C>5,L2,tp0,i1,s25,10,9,xs42,xs42 </C>  <H1>Section </H1><H1>Annual number of respondents </H1><H1>Annual frequency </H1><H1>Average burden per response </H1><H1>Annual burden hours</H1>  <ITAG tagnum="1">801.430(e) <D>5 </D><D>0* </D><D>0 </D><D>0 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">801.430(f) <D>5 </D><D>1 </D><D>3,500 hrs. </D><D>17,500 hrs. </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">801.430(g) <D>5 </D><D>0* </D><D>0 </D><D>0</D><R>sandCx.3;</R></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="3">Total </ITAG><D>15 </D><D>1 </D><D>3,500 hrs. </D><D>17,500 hrs. </D><F>* Since tampon manufacturers are already required to provide labelingwith the device, the minor labeling changes associated with this amendmentwill not be an additional burden.</F></ITAG> FDA has submitted a copy of this reproposal to OMB for its review of theseinformation collection requirements. Send comments regarding this burdenestimate or any other aspect of these information collection requirements, including suggestions for reducing this estimated burden, to the agencyofficial designated for this purpose whose name appears in this preamble,and to the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, OMB, Washington,DC 20503. <ITAG tagnum="84">II. Contents of the Reproposal </ITAG>FDA is reproposing to amend andSection; 801.430 <T3>User labeling for menstrual tampons </T3>by revising paragraph (b),the introductory text of paragraph (d), paragraphs (d)(2), (d)(3), and(d)(4); by redesignating paragraphs (e) and (f) as paragraphs (g) and (h),respectively, and revising them; and by adding new paragraphs (e) and (f).These amendments, as reproposed, are summarized as follows:A. Introductory Information (andSection; 801.430(b)) The agency is not proposing any revisions to paragraph (b) beyond thoseincluded in the initial proposal. This  paragraph would continue to statethat data show that TSS, a rare but serious and sometimes fatal disease,is associated with the use of menstrual tampons and that to protect thepublic and to minimize the serious adverse effects of TSS, menstrual tamponsare to be tested for absorbency and labeled as required in andSection; 801.430.B. Consumer Information (andSection; 801.430(d)) On its own initiative, the agency is proposing for the first time to amendthe introductory text of paragraph (d) to remove any reference to a packageinsert or package and, instead, to refer to labeling, a term that includesall package labels as well as package inserts. (See section 201(m) of theact, 21 U.S.C. 321(m).) This revision would not affect the current provisionsthat allow the consumer information required by paragraphs (d)(1) (i) and(ii), regarding the warning signs of TSS and what to do if they appear,to be included in a package insert rather than on the package label. (Seecurrent andSection; 801.430(c).)  In response to comments and in light of new data, discussed in sectionIII A, paragraph 3 of this preamble, FDA is proposing to update the estimateof the incidence of TSS contained in andSection; 801.430(d)(2). The agencyis now proposing, and requesting comment on, a revision of the estimatedincidence of TSS to 1 to 17 (from 6 to 17) per 100,000 menstruating womenand girls per year. FDA is not proposing any revisions to andSection; 801.430(d)(3) beyond thoseincluded in the initial proposal. Paragraph (d)(3) would state the advisabilityof using tampons with the minimum absorbency needed to control menstrualflow in order to reduce the risk of contracting TSS. As discussed in section III A, paragraph 3 of this preamble, FDA is nowproposing, and requesting comment on, a clarification of current andSection;801.430(d)(4) that would remove the word ``possibly'' from the phrase ``possiblyreducing the risk of getting TSS by alternating tampon use with sanitarynapkin use during menstrual periods''. C. Absorbency Labeling (andSection; 801.430(e)) FDA had proposed requiring manufacturers to express absorbency on tamponpackage labels by the use of a letter, A-F, corresponding to one of sixranges of absorbency. The agency is now proposing, and requesting commenton, another approach. As reproposed, andSection; 801.430(e)(1) would establisha new set of standardized terms of absorbency (low absorbency, medium absorbency,medium-high absorbency, high absorbency, very high absorbency, and highestabsorbency) for each of the six ranges of absorbency included in the initialproposal, instead of the letters. FDA also is now proposing in andSection; 801.430(e)(2) to require that theapplicable new absorbency term be placed in a prominent and conspicuouslocation on the principal display panel(s), separate from any other informationon the principal display panel(s) except the corresponding numerical rangeof absorbency, if used. The reproposal would not, however, proscribe theuse of currently used or other terms of absorbency so long as the resultinglabeling were not false or misleading or otherwise in violation of section502 of the act (21 U.S.C. 352) or any other provision of the act. Reproposed andSection; 801.430(e)(3) would require that the package labelinclude an explanation of the range of  absorbency and its correspondingterm and how consumers could use that information to make interbrand comparisonsof tampon absorbency and, thereby, select tampons with the minimum absorbencyneeded to control menstrual flow in order to reduce the risk of contractingTSS. Reproposed andSection; 801.430(e)(4) would provide that if a term of absorbency(e.g., junior, regular, super, or super plus), other than that requiredby reproposed andSection; 801.430(e)(1) is used in labeling, such as on anindividual tampon wrapper, the absorbency term specified in paragraph (e)(1)must also be used. D. Absorbency Testing (andSection; 801.430(f)) The agency is not proposing any revisions to the introductory text of paragraph(f) beyond those included in the initial proposal. Thus, under the reproposal,a manufacturer would have to measure the absorbency of individual tamponsusing the test method specified in paragraph (f)(2) and calculate the meanabsorbency of a production run, lot, or batch by rounding to the nearest0.1 gram.The agency now proposes to further amend andSection; 801.430(f)(1) to requirethat a manufacturer design and  implement a sampling plan that would includecollection of probability samples of adequate size to yield consistenttolerance intervals such that the probability would be 90 percent thatat least 90 percent of the absorbencies of individual tampons within apackage would be within the range of absorbency stated on the package label.The initial proposal would have required that the probability be 95 percentthat at least 95 percent of the absorbencies of individual tampons withina brand and type were within the range of absorbency stated on the packagelabel. In response to comments on the initial proposal, andSection; 801.430(f)(2)would be further revised to specify that the condom used in the test apparatushave a tensile strength between 17 Mega Pascals (MPa) and 30 MPa, as measuredaccording to the standard procedure in the American Society for Testingand Materials (ASTM), D 3492-83, ``Standard Specification for Rubber Contraceptives(Condoms).'' FDA has also revised paragraph (f)(2) to state that the testis to be terminated when the tampon is saturated and the first drop offluid either exits the apparatus or appears in the folds of the condombelow the tampon, that the test results are to be discarded if fluid isdetected in the folds of the condom before the tampon is saturated, andthat the condom is to be replaced at the end of 10 tests or at the endof the day during which the condom is used in testing, whichever occursfirst. FDA is not proposing any revisions to andSection; 801.430(f)(3) beyond thoseincluded in the initial proposal. Paragraph (f)(3) would provide proceduresfor an alternative absorbency test method subject to prior FDA approvaland public notice of such approval. E. Vending Machines (andSection; 801.430(g)) The reproposal includes a new provision that would redesignate paragraph(e) as paragraph (g) and revise it. Revised paragraph (g) would exemptany menstrual tampon intended to be dispensed by a vending machine fromthe requirements of andSection; 801.430, except the requirement of paragraph(e)(4) of this section. Thus, under the reproposed rule, vending machinetampons would not be required to contain any absorbency labeling. If, however,a nonstandardized term were used on the individual tampon wrapper, theabsorbency term specified in andSection; 801.430(e)(1) would also be required.F. Effective Date (andSection; 801.430(h)) The reproposal also includes a new provision that would redesignate currentparagraph (f) as paragraph (h) and  revise newly designated paragraph (h).Revised paragraph (h) would require that any menstrual tampon that wasnot labeled as required by paragraphs (c), (d), and (e) of this sectionand that was initially introduced or initially delivered for introductioninto commerce 6 months after date of publication of the final rule wouldbe misbranded under sections 201(n) and 502 (a) and (f) of the act. <ITAG tagnum="84">III. Summary and Analysis of Comments </ITAG>A. General Comments 1. Almost all the comments, including those from individual consumers,consumer groups, and manufacturers, supported FDA's overall goal to ensurethat absorbency information be provided to consumers. One manufacturersupported the basic design of the proposed rule, another stated that thetime has come for a meaningful tampon absorbency labeling requirement thatwill enable consumers to make appropriate interbrand comparisons and supportedthe proposal in that regard, and a third manufacturer generally supportedthe objective to standardize absorbency labeling among tampon brands. Oneconsumer group specifically agreed with FDA's stated intentions, and theother consumer groups, and individual consumers, expressed general, overallsupport for the proposed rule. Specific suggestions included in the commentson how to improve the proposed rule to provide the most truthful, accurate,and nonmisleading information on tampon absorbency to consumers are addressedin subsequent paragraphs of this preamble. For the reasons discussed in section I of this preamble, FDA has concludedthat amendments to the regulations should be reproposed. The reproposalwould enable consumers to compare the absorbency of one brand and styleof tampons with the absorbency of any brand and style, to choose the lowestabsorbency needed to control menstrual flow, and, as a result, to reducetheir risk of TSS.2. One comment opposed any final rule on the grounds that consumers wouldnot use the information, money would be wasted in enforcement, and thecost of tampons would increase. Although the testing requirements and the labeling changes imposed by afinal rule based on the initial proposal or on this reproposal would resultin costs to manufacturers, the agency disagrees that enforcement costsor increases in the cost of tampons would be significant compared to thepublic health benefit of providing truthful, accurate, and nonmisleadinginformation about tampon absorbency to consumers. The comment containedno data or information to support any changes in the cost estimates containedin the agency's initial economic impact analysis or to support the contentionthat consumers would not use tampon absorbency information. 3. Five comments addressed the association of TSS with tampon absorbency.Two comments reviewed the data supporting that association, noting thatthere is still no scientific explanation for the association of tamponabsorbency with TSS incidence. These comments claimed that absorbency maybe a surrogate for some other risk factor, such as the introduction ofoxygen into the vaginal environment with tampon insertion, citing Ref.46 of the preamble to the initial proposal. The authors of one of thesetwo comments stated that they had recently submitted for publication apaper reanalyzing epidemiology data that  they claimed showed that TSSis more strongly linked to tampon oxygen content than to tampon absorbency.One comment noted that not all TSS cases are associated with tampon use,and wondered how such cases arise. Two other comments suggested that FDAneeds to update the estimates of the incidence of TSS (contained in currentandSection; 801.430(d)(2)) in light of new data. One of these two commentsspecifically suggested that information presented at the InternationalSymposium on TSS, held in Atlanta, Georgia on November 15-18, 1987, shouldbe used as the basis for such an update. FDA agrees that there is a lack of definitive information about the mechanismby which tampon absorbency is associated with an increased risk of TSS.FDA is unaware of any evidence that tampon oxygen content is more closelylinked to TSS risk than is tampon absorbency; Ref. 46 of the preamble tothe proposed rule merely speculates that absorbency is a surrogate forsome other factor. Neither the reanalysis of epidemiology data nor thepaper submitted for publication containing the reanalysis was providedto the agency. By contrast, and as explained in the preamble to the initialproposal, the available data (see 53 FR 37250 and 37251 and the referencescited there) demonstrate that there is a statistically significant associationbetween tampon absorbency and the incidence of TSS. Therefore, FDA continuesto believe that additional labeling is necessary to ensure that women canmake informed choices to select the least absorbent tampon needed and thusdecrease their risk of the disease. As stated in the preamble to the proposed rule (53 FR 37250), althoughthere has been a decrease in cases of TSS reported to the Centers for DiseaseControl (CDC), new cases continue to be reported to CDC, and deaths fromTSS continue to be reported to FDA's medical device reporting system. Thedecrease in reported cases could represent a decrease in actual cases ofTSS as a result of FDA-mandated labeling regarding TSS, FDA's educationefforts, and other factors; it could also reflect fewer cases being reportedto CDC. The agency is familiar with the November 1987 reference cited inthe comment. The reference is to a recently published study based on apresentation made by CDC scientists at a November 1987 scientific conferenceon TSS.The study (Ref. 1) shows that following active surveillance for TSS inLos Angeles County and in the states of Missouri, New Jersey, Oklahoma,Tennessee, and Washington a total of 83 menstrually related cases of TSSwere reported. Extrapolating from these data, the study shows that thenationwide incidence of menstrual TSS in l986 was estimated to be 1.05per 100,000 per year. FDA recognizes that the actual incidence of TSS isnot known and can be estimated only by extrapolating from the number ofreported cases. In 1982, FDA was aware of three such estimates of the actualincidence of TSS: (1) 6.2 per 100,000 menstruating girls and women peryear; (2) 17 per 100,000 menstruating girls and women per year; and (3)6.6 per 100,000 menstruating girls and women per year. (See 47 FR 26982;June 22, 1982, and the references cited there.) Using these figures, theagency concluded that a reasonable estimate of the actual incidence wasbetween 6 and 17 per 100,000 menstruating women and girls per year (47FR 26982). Because the actual incidence of TSS can only be estimated, FDAbelieved then, as it does now, that consumers must be aware of the rangein estimates. Combining this new estimate (Ref. 1) with the earlier data(47 FR 26982), FDA has tentatively concluded that a reasonable estimateof the current actual incidence of TSS is between the lowest and highestreported estimates, i.e., between 1 and 17 per 100,000 menstruating womenand girls per year. Accordingly, FDA now proposes to revise the estimatedincidence of TSS in current andSection; 801.430(d)(2) to 1 to 17 (insteadof 6 to 17) per 100,000 menstruating women and girls per year. FDA also proposes to revise andSection; 801.430(d)(4) to remove ``possibly''from the phrase ``possibly reducing the risk of getting TSS by alternatingtampon use with sanitary napkin use during menstrual periods''. Anotherrecently published study based on a presentation at the November 1987 scientificconference on TSS was a multistate case-control study of risk factors formenstrual TSS that compared 108 TSS cases in 1986-1987 with 185 controlsselected from friends of the patients and 187 telephone exchange-matchedcontrols (Ref. 2). This study confirmed that tampon use is a risk factorfor developing TSS during menstruation, and that the risk increases withincreasing tampon absorbency. The study also confirmed an earlier findingby CDC (47 FR 26986) that continuous use of tampons throughout the menstrualperiod increases the risk of TSS, and, further, demonstrated that eachday of continuous tampon use increases the risk of TSS. Beginning in 1982,FDA had required manufacturers to include the advice that women could ``possibly''reduce their risk of TSS by alternating tampon use with sanitary napkinuse, based on CDC's earlier finding (47 FR 26986). In view of the new data,the agency now proposes to revise current andSection; 801.430(d)(4) by removingthe word ``possibly'' from the phrase ``possibly reducing the risk of gettingTSS by alternating tampon use with sanitary napkin use during menstrualperiods''. 4. Several manufacturers commented on FDA's statement in the preamble tothe proposed rule (53 FR 37254) that tampons are misbranded under section502(f)(1) of the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act (the act) (21 U.S.C.352(f)(1)) because current tampon labeling does not contain any informationwith which a woman can determine the relative absorbency of different brandsof tampons. One manufacturer commented that FDA never communicated thisview to the industry in any of the several reviews done by FDA staff oftampon package and package insert labeling provided to the agency in premarketnotification submissions under section 510(k) of the act (21 U.S.C. 360(k))and Subpart E of Part 807 of FDA's regulations (21 CFR Part 807 SubpartE). Another manufacturer disagreed that the failure to provide such informationrendered tampons ``misbranded'' under current law, and argued that a productshould be considered misbranded only if it failed to comply with a labelingrule after its effective date. Yet another manufacturer expressed a similarview and sought to support its position by quoting the agency itself, ``[i]nthe absence of the regulation, however, violation of that specific authoritydoes not necessarily occur by conduct that the regulation would have covered.''(47 FR 39147 at 39154; September 7, 1982), and by citing <T3>National Nutritional Foods Ass'n </T3>v. <T3>Weinberger</T3>, 512 F.2d 688 (2d Cir.), <T3>cert. denied</T3>, 423 U.S. 825 (1975). This comment recommended that,to avoid any possible confusion and misinterpretation, the preamble toany final rule make clear that tampons currently on the market are notmisbranded, and that a tampon could not be considered misbranded for noncompliancewith a final rule unless the tampon were introduced into commerce afterthe rule became effective. Two consumer groups supported the statementin the preamble to the effect that, without the additional absorbency information,tampons are misbranded. As the agency tentatively concluded (53 FR 37254), omission of uniformabsorbency information does render tampons misbranded within the meaningof sections 201(n) and 502(a) and (f)(1) of the act (21 U.S.C. 321(n) and35z(a) and (f)(1)). But, rather than act against individual tampons toremedy the deficiency, FDA has proposed, consistent with its authority,to address the misbranding by requiring a uniform labeling system throughrulemaking. Thus, FDA stated in the preamble to the proposed rule (53 FR37254) that ``any tampon that is not labeled as required and that is initiallyintroduced * * * after the effective date of the rule <T3>would be</T3> misbranded * * *.'' (Emphasis added.) And, as providedin andSection; 801.430(h) of the reproposal, any tampon that is not labeledas required by any final rule and that is initially introduced or initiallydelivered for introduction into commerce after the effective date of thefinal rule would be misbranded under sections 201(n) and 502(a) and (f)(1)of the act. (The effective date of the final rule is discussed in sectionIII E, paragraph 17 of this preamble.) FDA advises, however, that thoseand the other device misbranding provisions of the act are self-executingand apply to all labeling of all tampons, and that compliance with thelabeling requirements of any final rule would not preclude FDA from takingaction against any tampon the labeling of which misbranded the productin any respect, or which otherwise caused the product to be in violationof the act. B. Approaches to Absorbency Labeling Many comments were received from consumers, consumer groups, and tamponmanufacturers on FDA's initial proposal to require that tampon absorbencybe expressed by a letter representing a range of absorbency rather thanas a single number.5. One consumer group and one manufacturer argued that a single numberis necessary to adequately convey tampon absorbency information to consumers.These comments claimed that the use of ranges would prevent women frombeing able to distinguish between tampon brands or styles of known absorbencyat either the low or high end of a given absorbency range. The consumergroup further claimed that the use of ranges would limit the choices availableto consumers to only three. The group also argued that single numbers aremore informative and clearer than ranges and ``will more easily facilitateinterbrand comparisons.'' The manufacturer commented that a range conceptwould be acceptable to define broad categories, but that manufacturersshould be allowed to state where in a range a product falls, using a singlenumber for absorbency derived from averaging test results from a sampleof 16 tampons. Most individual consumers who commented favored the use of nonoverlappingranges, as did three other consumer groups, and three other manufacturers.These comments generally agreed with FDA's tentative conclusion (53 FR37260) that variations in tampon production and tampon absorbency testingmake the use of ranges necessary, and that the ranges chosen by FDA wereappropriate and as narrow as possible given current production and testingcapabilities. Two consumer groups argued that the need for accurate, clear,and easily comprehensible absorbency disclosure far outweighs the theoreticaldisadvantage of limiting the variety of new formulations. As stated in the preamble to the initial proposal (53 FR 37260), FDA tentativelyconcluded that the data show that a single numerical designation does notand cannot accurately represent the contents of a given box of tampons.Because of the variations in tampons, as described in the preamble to theproposed rule (53 FR 37260 and 37261), and in the syngyna testing method,as discussed in section III C, paragraph 11 of this preamble, currentlythe only truthful, accurate, and nonmisleading representation of the contentsof a box can be that it contains tampons with absorbencies within a givenrange. A single number, representing the average absorbency of any sampleof tampons, would and could not accurately represent the absorbency ofindividual tampons. (See section III C, paragraphs 11 and 12 of this preamblefor a complete discussion of sampling.) For these reasons, FDA continuesto believe that the use of single numbers is not feasible at this time.If future advances in technology allowed the production of tampons andthe measurement of their absorbency such that only slight variations froman average absorbency were found, FDA would consider proposing amendmentsto any final rule. The reproposal would permit, but not require, a manufacturerto include on tampon labeling the numerical range of absorbency correspondingto the applicable term of absorbency (see section III B, paragraphs 7 and10 of this preamble and andSection; 801.430(e)(2) of the reproposal) wheneverthe term is used, e.g., medium absorbency (6-9 grams). Further, FDA disagrees that the use of ranges would limit the choices availableto consumers to only three: The reproposal would establish six ranges.To be sure, the initial proposal and the reproposal would limit the choicesavailable to consumers to only those brands or styles that fall withinone of six nonoverlapping ranges and would preclude marketing of any productswhich fall at or near the limits of the ranges, i.e., average absorbencyof 6, 9, 12, 15, or 18 grams. Although most currently manufactured productswould meet the requirements of this reproposal as to absorbencies and toleranceintervals, a manufacturer might have to improve its quality control orreformulate a few of its products if these products were to remain on themarket. However, based on previous studies (53 FR 37260), consumer choicein terms of currently marketed products would not be significantly decreasedby limiting the ranges to six. Although hypothetical future choices availableto the consumer could be increased by allowing overlapping ranges (53 FR37255), FDA continues to believe that if overlapping ranges were allowedthey would not provide unambiguous absorbency information (53 FR 37260). 6. Three consumers commented that single numbers would be better than ranges,one claiming that single numbers are used successfully for sunscreens,and another claiming that disadvantaged populations would have difficultyunderstanding ranges. Another consumer favored using ranges, but indicatedthat six categories are too many and recommended that there be only threecategories. Finally, one consumer suggested that the ranges be clarifiedas follows: 6 and under, over 6 to 9, over 9 to 12, over 12 to 15, over15 to 18, and over 18. FDA continues to believe that the use of single numbers to represent gramsof fluid absorbed is technically infeasible. (See section III B, paragraph5 of this preamble.) Therefore, although the agency agrees that the useof a sun protection factor is effective and appropriate in labeling forsunscreens, single numbers to indicate tampon absorbency would be misleading.As stated in section III B, paragraph 5 of this preamble, however, thereproposal would permit, but not require, a manufacturer to include ontampon labeling the numerical range of absorbency corresponding to theapplicable term of absorbency whenever the term were used. FDA disagreeswith the recommendation that the ranges of absorbency be reduced from sixto three. Such a reduction is unnecessary, and would diminish consumerchoices among currently marketed products. FDA also rejects as unnecessarilycomplex the suggestion that the word ``over'' be added to four of the numericalranges to eliminate confusion about overlap. The agency is unaware of any basis for concluding that disadvantaged personswould have difficulty understanding ranges and, therefore, rejects thiscomment. The agency intends to revise and continue its TSS education campaignto include explanations of the new absorbency information. (See also sectionIII I, paragraph 22 of this preamble.) 7. FDA received many comments on the use of letters to designate rangesof absorbency. One manufacturer, one consumer group, and several individualconsumers, opposing the use of letters, contended that their use wouldcreate confusion because consumers are accustomed to numbers, not letters,representing quantity or size, because the use of letters would requirethat consumers learn two systems (the letters and the numerical rangesto which they refer), and because consumers would not know whether ``A''were high or low. A comment from an individual consumer argued that ``A''commonly indicates ``most desirable'' and, thus, would be misinterpretedby consumers. By contrast, comments from two manufacturers, two consumergroups, and most individual consumers, supported the use of letter designations.These comments supported the use of a labeling scheme that does not usenumbers, arguing that letter designations would provide an accurate andsimple labeling approach incorporating notions familiar to most consumers,and that, because consumers are accustomed to thinking that higher numbersare better in terms of increased protection or decreased risk (as withsunscreen labeling), any final rule should use a different system, onethat would not encourage the use of higher absorbencies. Another consumergroup stated that letter designations would be easy for women to accept,noting that letters are used by the pantyhose industry. Individual consumers,also supporting the use of letter designations, claimed that most peoplewill believe that ``A'' offers the least amount of absorbency, and thata letter rating would make the categories more distinct and informativeand would influence consumers to use less absorbent tampons.Although the agency agrees that the use of sun protection factors on labelingfor sunscreens is effective and appropriate, FDA believes that this isso because the public understands that the higher the number, the greaterthe blockage of ultraviolet radiation and the greater the health benefit.In the case of tampons and TSS, the reverse would be true: the higher thenumber the higher the risk of TSS and the lower the public health benefit.FDA, therefore, believes that the analogy to sunscreen labeling is unpersuasive.Also, the agency continues to believe that the use of single numbers torepresent grams of fluid absorbed by tampons is not feasible at this time.(See section III B, paragraph 5 of this preamble.) FDA agrees, however, with the comments that the use of letters representingnumerical ranges might be confusing and that consumers might not be ableto readily ascertain which letters represented high or low absorbency.For example, if consumers assumed that the letters represented a heirarchysimilar to that commonly used in educational grading systems, consumerscould select a ``D'' thinking it was a very low absorbency product, when,in fact, it is highly absorbent. The agency has tentatively concluded,therefore, that letter designations would not provide to consumers theclear, nonmisleading absorbency information that was intended in the proposedrule, and, accordingly, has removed letter designations from the reproposal.FDA, however, also agrees that a numerical system, by itself, would posethe problems discussed in other comments. The agency has tentatively concludedthat a system in which a new set of standardized, clear, nonmisleadingterms of absorbency, corresponding to standardized nonoverlapping rangesof absorbency, would best facilitate interbrand comparison of tampon absorbenciesand selection of the least absorbent tampon needed. Accordingly, FDA nowproposes to further revise andSection; 801.430(e)(1) to require the use ofthe following absorbency terms in lieu of letters: low absorbency, mediumabsorbency, medium-high absorbency, high absorbency, very high absorbency,and highest absorbency (see section III B, paragraph 10 of this preamble),each corresponding to one of the six nonoverlapping ranges provided forin the initial proposal. The applicable term, which must be on the principaldisplay panel(s), would readily convey absorbency information to consumers.In addition, reproposed andSection; 801.430(e)(2) would permit a manufacturerto include on tampon labeling the numerical range of absorbency correspondingto the applicable term of absorbency whenever the manufacturer used a term.8. One manufacturer claimed that, if promulgated as proposed with respectto ranges of absorbency, a final rule would require the manufacturer toreformulate two of its tampon styles to increase the absorbency of oneproduct so that it would fit into the 12 to 15 absorbency range, and todecrease the absorbency of another product so that it would fit into the6 to 9 absorbency range. The comment maintained that the consequence ofincreasing absorbency would be inconsistent with the goal of encouragingthe use of less absorbent tampons, and that the consequence of reducingabsorbency could be an ineffective product, which in turn would lead consumersto switch to a more absorbent product and thus incur an increased riskof TSS. FDA recognizes that, although the reproposal would not actually requirereformulation, some manufacturers would need to reformulate to maintaina product in each of the specified ranges and to retain the diversity ofproducts comparable to their current product lines. FDA believes, however,that if two of a manufacturer's product styles were so close in absorbencyas to fall within a single range, it would be misleading to consumers toallow those products to be labeled as if there were a significant differencein absorbency, when the absorbencies of the two styles of tampons significantlyoverlapped. FDA also recognizes that reformulating could result in increasedabsorbency in some styles of tampons and decreased absorbency in others.FDA believes, however, that the risk posed by any increases in absorbencyinvolved would be outweighed by the benefits to consumers of having a truthful,accurate, and nonmisleading labeling system that allowed interbrand comparisonof tampon absorbencies and selection of the least absorbent tampon needed.FDA does not have any evidence to support the contention that a manufacturerwould actually lower the absorbency of one of its products to the pointwhere it would be ineffective for all consumers, and thereby lead consumersto shift to a higher absorbency product. FDA solicits comments on the possibility that some tampons might be reformulatedand some consumers might buy more absorbent tampons than they are currentlyusing as a result of a final rule requiring fixed nonoverlapping ranges,and on the agency's view that the benefit of truthful, nonmisleading, andaccurate labeling would outweigh the potential for product reformulationor consumer use of more absorbent tampons. 9. One manufacturer argued that the dividing point between the 9 to 12absorbency range and the 12 to 15 absorbency range should be 11.5 insteadof 12 grams of fluid, as specified in proposed and reproposed andSection;801.430(e)(1), to minimize the absorbency increase the manufacturer wouldbe required to make in one of its tampon styles that it claims is usedby about 1.5 million consumers. FDA acknowledges that some styles of currently marketed tampons have absorbenciesthat are close to the boundaries between the ranges specified in the reproposal(see section III B, paragraph 8 of this preamble), and recognizes that,if the ranges of absorbency set out in reproposed andSection; 801.430(e)(1)were included in any final rule, a manufacturer might have to make smallmodifications in composition to ensure that its products did not have asignificant number of individual tampons in a box outside the labeled range.The agency believes, however, that such small changes in composition, orin other design or production factors influencing absorbency, are routinefor the tampon industry as evidenced by the repeated changes in productabsorbency reported to FDA in premarket notification submissions, yet nevercommunicated to consumers. Consistent with the data supporting the rangesof absorbency initially proposed (see 53 FR 37260), the comments supportingthose ranges, and the purposes of the reproposal, FDA has tentatively concludedthat the 3-gram absorbency ranges represent the narrowest ranges that canbe accurately defined given current technology. The agency therefore doesnot believe that the 9 to 12 absorbency range should be narrowed or the12 to 15 absorbency range broadened.In sum, based on the data discussed and cited, and for the reasons discussed,in the preamble to the initial proposal and in section III B, paragraphs5 through 9 of this preamble, the reproposal contains no changes in theproposed ranges of tampon absorbency. 10. FDA received many comments in response to its request for comment (53FR 37260) on the need to standardize the absorbency terms currently usedby manufacturers (e.g., regular, super, and super plus). The agency received more than 250 comments from individual consumers, consumergroups, and manufacturers arguing that FDA should standardize or eliminateexisting absorbency terms. These comments contended that letter designationscombined with nonstandardized terms would be confusing, could mislead consumersas to the difference (or lack of difference) in absorbency between products,or could lead consumers to reject the letter designations in favor of thefamiliar terms. Two manufacturers, three consumer groups, and most individual consumersfavored standardizing currently used terms rather than eliminating them,because the terms are familiar and would be useful to consumers if theywere standardized. One consumer group and several individual consumerspreferred eliminating currently used terms, arguing that they are misleading.One of the two manufacturers recommended that four terms be standardizedas follows: junior, under 6; regular, 6-9; super, 9-12; and super plus,12-15, with no terms for the two top ranges. This comment also argued that,although some manufacturers would be required to change product or productionprocesses to comply with the ranges specified in the proposed rule, thosemanufacturers would not have to make any additional changes if FDA alsostandardized existing terms. One manufacturer opposed standardization of the terms_junior, regular,super, and super plus_currently used by a manufacturer whose tampons accountfor approximately 60 percent of the market. Such standardization, the commentargued, would go unnoticed by the purchasers of that manufacturer's tampons,and, therefore, would dilute the benefit the agency is striving to achieve.The comment further argued that, if any terms were standardized, the agencyshould instead adopt terminology such as extra light, light to moderate,moderate, moderate to heavy, heavy, and extra heavy, for absorbency rangesA to F, respectively. FDA has tentatively concluded, based on the comments and on its own analysis,that letter designations and nonstandardized terms would not provide consumerswith clear and nonmisleading information about the absorbency of tamponsat the time of purchase. (See section III B, paragraph 7 of this preamble.)FDA agrees with the majority of the comments that the unrestricted combinationof currently used absorbency terms with letters might confuse some consumerswho would not immediately understand the significance of the letters andwould rely instead on the nonstandardized familiar terms. To eliminatethis potential problem, the agency considered standardizing currently usedterms, but rejected that approach for two reasons. First, there are sixranges for which terms are needed and only three or four (depending onwhether junior is included) widely used terms. Second, FDA believes thatan effective labeling scheme can be established such that manufacturersmay continue to label currently marketed products with their familiar termswithout compromising the intent of the rule, which is to facilitate interbrandcomparisons. FDA has tentatively concluded that by requiring the use of new absorbencyterms, each of which conveys absorbency information, and by requiring thata new term be on the principal display panel(s), separate from, and moreprominent than any other information except the corresponding numericalrange of absorbency, the reproposal would ensure truthful, accurate, andnonmisleading labeling and would facilitate accurate interbrand comparisons.Each principal display panel would be required to contain one of the followingterms, each corresponding to a specific range: low absorbency (less thanor equal to 6  grams); medium absorbency (from 6 to 9 grams); medium-highabsorbency (from 9 to 12 grams); high absorbency (from 12 to 15 grams);very high absorbency (from 15 to 18 grams); and highest absorbency (greaterthan 18 grams). As discussed in section III F, paragraph 18 of this preamble,FDA proposes to ensure that these new absorbency terms not be confusedwith existing terminology (e.g., junior, slender, light flow, regular)by requiring that the new absorbency terms be more prominent than, andseparate from, any other information on the principal display panel exceptthe corresponding numerical range of absorbency; by requiring that consumersbe referred to the location on the package label where further explanationof the new terms and their corresponding ranges would be provided; andby not allowing any information other than the corresponding numericalrange of absorbency to be used in conjunction with the new standardizedabsorbency terms (e.g., junior, low absorbency would be prohibited).Because these new absorbency terms would be clear and nonmisleading andbecause their prominence would be ensured, FDA has tentatively concludedthat there is no need to proscribe the use of existing terminology (e.g.,junior, slender, light flow, regular). In addition, FDA believes that consumerfamiliarity with current terms and the absorbency of the products thatbear those particular terms provides a useful frame of reference for consumersthat would be eliminated if such terms were proscribed. Although the reproposal would not eliminate the use of current terms, theagency believes that consumers, including first-time users, would focuson the new absorbency information communicated by the new terms on theprincipal display panel(s), and, aided by the explanation elsewhere onthe package label and by the FDA educational campaign (see section IIII, paragraph 22 of this preamble), would rely on the new absorbency termsto make interbrand comparisons of absorbency. As stated in section IIIA, paragraph 4 of this preamble, FDA would regard a product as misbrandedif the labeling, by virtue of the use of other absorbency information inconjunction with the required terms, were false, misleading, or otherwisein violation of section 502 of the act (21 U.S.C. 352). Manufacturers mightelect to eliminate their current terms, especially after consumers becamefamiliar with the new absorbency terms. If a manufacturer chose to retainits current terms, it would have to ensure that its tampon labeling wasneither false nor misleading and was otherwise in compliance with the act.C. Absorbency Testing FDA requested comment (53 FR 37261) on whether a tolerance interval of90 percent, as opposed to 95 percent as provided in the initial proposal,would be sufficient to ensure that only a small number of tampons of aparticular style fell outside the given absorbency range for that style.Several comments addressed this and related issues.11. Four manufacturers objected to the agency's proposal on the groundthat it would not be technically feasible.The first manufacturer provided an analysis of components of variationwhich allegedly showed that the total variability in absorbency test datais due largely (85 percent) to the syngyna test rather than to productionvariability (15 percent). According to the comment, it would be feasibleto establish a 90 percent tolerance interval.The second manufacturer argued that in addition to demonstrated inherentvariability in the syngyna test methodology, there is a significant variancein the absorbent quality of the materials used to make tampons, that humiditylevels in storage and production facilities affect absorbency, and thateven small variations in the compression process used in manufacturingcould affect absorbency. This comment provided summary data on syngynatests conducted in 1988 using retail products made by its competitors.The summary data purported to show that between 22 and 48 percent of individualtampons fell outside the 2-gram range of absorbency listed on the box.The comment concluded that it was technically feasible only to requirethat the statistical confidence level be 90 percent that at least 90 percentof the individual tampons within a brand and style be within the labeledrange. The third manufacturer proposed that tolerance intervals be establishedsuch that the probability be 95 percent that no more than 5 percent ofthe tampons in a given package would exceed the upper limit and a 95 percentprobability that no more than 20 percent would be below the lower limit.The comment argued that such an approach would allow manufacturers to focusprimarily on those aspects of product design or process changes that wouldensure that the upper limit is not exceeded, while recognizing that productsbelow the low end of the range do not present as great a risk. The commentrequested that FDA, if it failed to accept this proposal, adopt a toleranceinterval such that there be a 95 percent probability that 90 percent ofthe production fell within the labeled range.The fourth manufacturer maintained that the proposed tolerance intervalof 95 percent might be practical for tampons of lower absorbency, but thatit would be difficult to routinely conform to that requirement for thetwo highest ranges because of the normally larger variability in manufacturingfor tampons of higher absorbency. This manufacturer recommended eitherbroadening the ranges for the higher categories (e.g., instead of 12 to15, use 12 to 16) or establishing a 90 percent tolerance interval.FDA has carefully reviewed the analysis of the components of variationprovided by the first manufacturer and believes that the analysis is deficientin several respects. Although a classical component of variation analysiswas provided, the manufacturer attempted to further subdivide the componentsof error to attribute 15 percent to the product and 85 percent to the testmethod. To do this, the manufacturer assumed a model for tampon absorbencythat attributed actual absorbency only to the dry weight of the fibersin a tampon. FDA believes that this model is overly simplistic becauseit ignores factors other than dry weight and test method and also assumesthat all factors operate independently. As discussed in the preamble tothe initial proposal (53 FR 37261) and in the comments summarized elsewherein this paragraph, production factors other than dry weight, e.g., compression,absorbent quality of the fiber, and humidity, can influence measured absorption.The agency has tentatively concluded that the simple model given, by ignoringthese other factors inherent in the manufacturing process and the manufacturedproduct, erroneously imparted the variation from these other factors tothe remaining uncontrolled variable, the test method. FDA, therefore, doesnot accept the numerical results purporting to show that the test methodis responsible for 85 percent of the variability.The agency also has considered the summary data provided by the secondmanufacturer on its competitors' products. In the agency's view, it isnot possible to apply these data to the proposed 3-gram absorbency ranges,because the data relate to 2-gram absorbency ranges. In addition, it isnot possible to assess these summary data as they relate to the abilityof a manufacturer to establish tolerance intervals based on sampling, becausethe raw data were not provided.Further, FDA does not believe that the suggestion to allow up to 20 percentof tampons of a particular brand or style to be below the lower limit ofa labeled range would be consistent with providing the consumer a truthful,accurate, and nonmisleading description of the individual tampons beingpurchased, either as regards the risk of TSS or product effectiveness.As stated in the preamble to the proposed rule (53 FR 37261), FDA's intentis to ensure that only a small number of tampons of a particular stylecould fall outside the given absorbency range for that style. For thatreason, the agency proposed to require the establishment of tolerance intervals.Such intervals provide limits based on the results of individual test observationsin the overall test sample.Establishing a tolerance interval requires defining both the proportionof individual observations that will be within a given range and the probabilityof that proportion occurring. A tolerance interval is necessarily widerthan the more common confidence intervals that apply to the standard deviationof the mean of the overall test sample. Thus, when the agency proposedthat there be a 95 percent probability that 95 percent of the tampons (95/95)would be within the stated 3-gram (of absorbed fluid) range, the standarddeviation of the mean of the test sample of 15 tampons could be no greaterthan 0.51. (If a manufacturer chose to use a larger sample size, the standarddeviation of the mean could be larger than 0.51, but not substantially.)For a tolerance interval such that there was a 90 percent probability that95 percent of the tampons (90/95) would be within a specified range, thestandard deviation of the mean of the test sample could be no greater than0.55. For a tolerance interval such that there was a 95 percent probabilitythat 90 percent of the tampons (95/90) would be within a specified range,the standard deviation of the mean of the test sample could be no greaterthan 0.61. For a tolerance interval such that there was a 90 percent probabilitythat 90 percent of the tampons (90/90) would be within a specified range,the standard deviation of the mean of the test sample could be no greaterthan 0.66.Using any of these approaches to establish tolerance intervals, therefore,would require that the standard deviation of the mean of the test samplebe small compared with the 3-gram range. FDA believes that this fact, coupledwith the fact that manufacturers could always target the absorbency oftheir products at or near the middle of each range, and the data discussedin the preamble to the initial proposal (53 FR 37261), establish that thelikelihood is great that only a small number of tampons of a particularstyle will fall outside of the range established for that style, whetherthe tolerance interval is 95/95, as first proposed, or 90/95, 95/90, or90/90, as three manufacturers urged. Thus, FDA has tentatively concludedthat there is no substantial difference in public health consequence betweenany of these tolerance intervals; they would all ensure that consumerswould have a high degree of assurance that the risk of TSS is uniform forall tampons of a particular style. Accordingly, there would be no significantpublic health gain in requiring a 95/95 tolerance interval.Moreover, FDA has tentatively concluded, based on the comments and on itsreevaluation of all the available absorbency test data, that there is enoughinherent variability in the syngyna test method, in the quality of thefibers used to make tampons, and in production methods and conditions,particularly in the manufacture of higher absorbency tampons, to make ittechnically infeasible for manufacturers to comply with a requirement thatthere be a 95 percent probability that 95 percent of tampons fall withinthe labeled range. Such a tolerance interval would correspond to a standarddeviation of the mean of the test sample of less than 0.51. On the otherhand, the manufacturers' comments appear to establish that a toleranceinterval is technically feasible such that there be a 90 percent probabilitythat 90 percent of the tampons fell within the labeled range. Such a toleranceinterval would correspond to a standard deviation of the mean of the testsample of less than 0.66. Because it is both adequate to ensure that fewtampons will fall outside the labeled range and is technically feasible,FDA is reproposing in andSection; 801.430(f)(1) to require manufacturersto design and implement a sampling plan to yield consistent tolerance intervalssuch that the probability be 90 percent that at least 90 percent of theabsorbencies of the individual tampons within a package were within therange of absorbency stated on the package label.12. Comments from consumers and three consumer groups argued that FDA shoulduse a sampling scheme that gives the consumer the highest degree of certainty,such as 95 percent, that the individual tampons she is using are withinthe labeled range of absorbency, because of the serious nature of TSS andthe risk of contracting the disease.FDA believes that it is important to ensure a high degree of certaintythat the individual tampon a woman uses is within the range stated on thepackage label. This certainty facilitates accurate interbrand comparisonsand minimizes overlap between distinct absorbency ranges. As discussedin section III C, paragraph 11 of this preamble, FDA has tentatively concludedthat establishing a tolerance interval such that there is a 90 percentprobability that 90 percent of the tampons fall within the specified rangeis adequate to provide such a degree of certainty and is technically feasible.As also discussed in that paragraph, FDA has tentatively concluded thatthere is no significant increase in public health protection between requiringa 95/95, 95/90, 90/95, or 90/90 tolerance interval.13. One manufacturer and several consumer groups argued that it was essentialthat consumer product testing be based on individual product unit valuesand not on averages of large numbers of units. Another manufacturer objectedto using measured values from individual tampons, arguing that it wouldunnecessarily force manufacturers to target the absorbency of their productsto the middle of each range.FDA has reconsidered the concept of using the average absorbency of a sample(of whatever size) as the basis for establishing that a brand or styleis within a labeled range. The agency believes that such an approach issimply a technique for smoothing the variation in individual test results,and cannot be used to provide a high degree of certainty to consumers regardingthe absorbency of an individual product. FDA, therefore, disagrees withthat approach because it would not adequately describe to the consumerthe range of absorbency of the individual tampons in a package of thatbrand or style. FDA recognizes that using measured values from individualtampons could require a manufacturer to target the absorbency of its productto the middle of each range. This targeting would not be a consequenceof using nonoverlapping ranges, but of inadequate quality control. A manufacturerwould not be required to target the absorbency of its products to the middleof the range if its quality control was sufficient to ensure that the absorbencyof the individual tampons in the package all fell within the same rangeof absorbency. The agency agrees with the comments that it is essentialthat tampon testing be based on the results of individual product unitvalues and not on averages of large numbers of units.14. A private citizen with a background in statistics complained that thefigures in the preamble to the initial proposal used to represent the distributionof absorbencies of tampons were not adequately labeled, that the populationtested was not described, and that the graphic technique was inappropriate.The comment also objected to the use of the word ``representative'' asan adjective to describe ``samples'' in proposed andSection; 801.430(f)(1),contending that the term ``representative'' has no meaning in that contextand urging that a suitable general term to describe such samples wouldbe ``probability.'' Finally, the comment objected to the use of the term``mean absorbency'' in proposed andSection; 801.430(f), introductory text,on the basis that ``mean'' implies an expectation of a population meanand suggested that the more proper term would be ``average absorbency.''As clearly stated in the preamble to the proposal (53 FR 37255), the figuresobjected to were not intended to convey a detailed picture of particularabsorbency data obtained by testing a given number of tampons, but ratherwere representations of the distribution of absorbencies to demonstrateFDA's concern about overlapping ranges. The agency concludes that the complaintis without merit and therefore does not require any change in the reproposal.FDA agrees that the general term ``probability samples'' is appropriateand has made that change in reproposed andSection; 801.430(f)(1). The agencydoes not agree that there is any basis for concluding that the term ``meanabsorbency'' is less proper than the term ``average absorbency'' for thepurpose of describing the sample population, and, accordingly has not changedthe reproposal in that respect.15. Comments on the method proposed to test for absorbency were receivedfrom three consumer groups and three manufacturers.Two consumer groups objected to any characterization of the proposed testmethod as having been adopted by the American Society for Testing and Materials(ASTM) tampon task force. These comments claimed that the proposed testwas developed by the tampon manufacturers in the task force subcommitteeon test methods, and that it would be correct to say only that the ASTMtampon task force attempted to develop a test method. These comments, however,supported the use of the test method for the time being, provided thatmore research be done to improve the absorbency test in light of data submittedon the validity of saline solution as a medium to measure absorbency. Athird consumer group argued that the use of saline solution to measurethe absorbency of a product that absorbs blood cannot be an accurate gaugeof absorbency and that, since absorbency is so vital a factor in the riskof TSS, a test should be required that reflects true absorbency.One manufacturer supported the use of the proposed absorbency test method,but recommended that a more complete general description of the method,as provided to FDA on April 17, 1986, by tampon manufacturers, be used.Two manufacturers submitted specific comments on the method, relating tothe need (1) to specify the condom to be used in the test, (2) to specifythe number of times the condom is to be used, (3) to terminate the testwhen the tampon is saturated and the first drop of fluid can be detectedin the folds of the condom, and (4) to discard the test result if fluidis detected in the folds of the condom before saturation of the tampon.FDA agrees that the ASTM tampon task force failed to formally approve thesyngyna test method for measuring tampon absorbency. As stated in the preambleto the initial proposal (53 FR 37253), ASTM actions regarding the testmethod were taken only at the subcommittee level. FDA notes that the commentincorrectly indicated that the subcommittee on test methods was comprisedsolely of manufacturers, since the agency also participated.FDA disagrees that a reliable and reproducible laboratory test to measurethe absorbency of a product that absorbs blood cannot be done using a salinetest solution. The scientific data linking TSS risk with syngyna absorbency_datathat FDA cited in the preamble to the proposed rule (53 FR 37250)_wereobtained using a saline solution. With respect to the need for additionalresearch regarding absorbency testing methodology, FDA does not intendto sponsor or undertake any such research of its own because the existingmethod adequately measures relative absorbencies. As FDA stated in thepreamble to the proposed rule (53 FR 37261), however, the agency will considercitizen petitions proposing alternative test methods, and reproposed andSection;801.430(f)(3) would provide for the use of such methods in certain circumstances.FDA has reviewed the detailed general description of the syngyna test methodand the specific comments on the method that were submitted and agreesthat some clarification is required. Accordingly, reproposed andSection;801.430(f)(2) would: (1) Specify that the unlubricated condom to be usedin the test is one with a tensile strength between 17 Mega Pascals (MPa)and 30 MPa as measured according to the standard procedure in the existingASTM standard for determining tensile strength of condoms (American Societyfor Testing and Materials, D 3492-83, ``Standard Specification for RubberContraceptives (Condoms)''), which is incorporated by reference in accordancewith 5 U.S.C. 552(a); (2) require that the test be terminated when thetampon is saturated and the first drop of fluid either exits the apparatusor appears in the folds of the condom below the tampon; (3) provide thatthe test result shall be discarded if fluid is detected in the folds ofthe condom before the tampon is saturated; and (4) require that the condombe replaced after 10 tests or at the end of each testing day, whicheveroccurs first. D. Ingredient Labeling16. Five consumer groups, numerous individual consumers, and two manufacturersresponded to the request for comment (53 FR 37253) on the need for ingredientlabeling.Consumer groups and some individual consumers argued that all materials,additives, and fragrances should be listed on the product label so thatconsumers can choose the products they want to purchase or avoid on thebasis of which ingredients are known to be or suspected of being hazardous,as well as which ingredients have the potential for causing allergic reactions,sensitivity, or irritation. On the other hand, several individual consumersargued against ingredient labeling, some stating that there were no dataof which they were aware suggesting the need, others maintaining that itwas simply not as important as absorbency labeling. One group of consumersclaimed that consumers probably would not use ingredient labeling becauseconcerns about ingredients were not sufficiently important.Two manufacturers argued that there was no legal requirement or currentregulatory basis for mandating ingredient labeling of tampons. These commentsnoted, however, that manufacturers, in response to consumer interest, havevoluntarily implemented an ingredient labeling system for tampons, andargued, on that basis as well, that there is no need for FDA to requiresuch labeling in any final rule.None of the comments favoring ingredient labeling cited, discussed, orsubmitted any data showing an association between any ingredient in anycurrently marketed tampon and any risk to health, including allergic reaction,sensitivity, or irritation, and FDA is unaware of any such data. Moreover,none of the comments provided any legal theory under which the agency couldrequire ingredient labeling for tampons. Absent information indicatingthat the disclosure of tampon ingredients on package labeling is necessaryfor the safe or effective use of the product, or that the omission of suchinformation is material to the safe or effective use of tampons, FDA hastentatively concluded that it does not have the authority to require tamponmanufacturers to list ingredient information on product labeling.E. Effective Date17. Several comments addressed the proposed 6-month effective date forany final rule.Three manufacturers claimed they would have difficulty meeting a 6-montheffective date because they would have to make labeling and product designchanges that would affect manufacturing, including machinery, and testingprotocols. They requested effective dates ranging from 12 to 24 monthsafter publication of any final rule. One manufacturer commented that a6-month effective date was appropriate.Consumer groups, asserting that the risk of TSS would be greatly reducedsimply by letting women know the absorbency of tampons, requested variouseffective dates ranging from 0 to 90 days.The reproposal would not require significant reformulation of tampons;most currently marketed products would fall within the nonoverlapping rangesset forth in the reproposal. (See section III B, paragraphs 5 and 6 ofthis preamble.) The agency also believes that the testing methodology requiredby the reproposal has been accepted by manufacturers and should not bea delaying factor, based on successful interlaboratory comparisons in whichmanufacturers (and FDA) participated as part of the ASTM tampon task force.In addition, because appropriate quality assurance programs have been requiredof tampon manufacturers since the device current good manufacturing practiceregulations (21 CFR 820.20) became effective in 1978, manufacturers wouldbe faced only with the modification of existing quality assurance programsand not with the creation of new ones. For these reasons, and given thepublic health importance of tampon absorbency information, FDA believesthat any time beyond 6 months would be neither necessary nor appropriatefor implementation of the provisions of any final rule based on the reproposal.Accordingly, FDA has retained in the reproposal the 6-month effective datespecified in the initial proposal.F. Placement of LabelingMany comments addressed the placement and prominence of absorbency informationon tampon labeling, with suggestions regarding size, color, and contentof the information required by any final rule.18. Six consumer groups and many individual consumers argued that all informationabout tampon absorbency should appear prominently on the front panel ofthe tampon box, and that all required safety labeling should be set offfrom promotional material in such a way as to make clear that the safetyinformation is not promotional. To ensure prominence, various commentssuggested a pictorial system, specified wording, color-codes, bold andlarge lettering, print in English and Spanish, and raised print for theblind.FDA has tentatively concluded that information about tampon absorbencyshould appear prominently on the principal display panel(s) of the tamponbox, and that this safety related information should be set off from otherdescriptive information, such as slender, super, or for medium flow. Accordingly,andSection; 801.430(e) (1) and (2) of the reproposal would require that thenew absorbency terms be on the principal display panel(s), that the newabsorbency terms be in a prominent and conspicuous location separate fromother information not required by the reproposal, and that reference bemade with the new absorbency term on the principal display panel(s) tothe location on the package of the explanation that would be required byreproposed andSection; 801.430(e)(3). Reproposed andSection; 801.430(e)(2)would allow manufacturers to include on the principal display panel(s),along with and as prominently as the new absorbency term, the numericalrange of absorbency to which the new term corresponds, but would proscribethe use of any other descriptive information placed so as to modify theterm.The agency has taken this approach before in order to avoid misleadinglabeling. For example, FDA regulations in 21 CFR 330.1(c)(2)(i) requirethat approved indications for over-the-counter drugs be placed in a ``prominentand conspicuous'' location of the labeling, and in a boxed area if usedin conjunction with the term ``APPROVED USES.''19. One manufacturer agreed with the proposed rule that the letter designationshould appear on all package panels where a term of absorbency is used,but stated that the word ``Absorbency,'' as in ``Absorbency C,'' shouldbe required only on the front panel. One consumer group argued that thephrase ``absorbency rating'' should appear before the letter designation.Another consumer group argued that one manufacturer's current labeling,which includes the following phrase: ``tampons come in a full range ofabsorbencies and it is suggested you use the lowest absorbency that meetsyour needs * * *,'' includes safety information that is not sufficientlyset off from the promotional material.In the reproposal, the agency has removed the requirement for letter designations.(See section III B, paragraph 7 of this preamble.) The agency, however,is now proposing to require that the new standardized terms that wouldbe required by reproposed andSection; 801.430(e)(2) be placed on labelingin all locations where other descriptive information is stated (andSection;801.430(e)(4)). Each term would be required to be accompanied by the word``absorbency.'' FDA believes these requirements are necessary to reinforceconsumer awareness and understanding of the new standardized terms. Onthe other hand, FDA believes that it would be inappropriate to specifythe exact wording of all the labeling that would be required by the reproposalto describe the use of the new terms and the ranges to make interbrandcomparisons. Accordingly, the reproposal would afford manufacturers flexibilityto provide the information required in reproposed andSection; 801.430(e)(3)as would befit their products. Also, in that regard, FDA does not believethat the language quoted in the comment makes the safety information lessprominent or legible.G. Vending Machines20. In the preamble to the initial proposal (53 FR 37261), FDA invitedcomment on whether to continue to exempt tampons sold in vending machinesfrom the labeling requirements of current andSection; 801.430 and on whetherto exempt such tampons from the requirements of any final rule.One consumer group and several individual consumers argued that the currentvending machine exemption regarding TSS information should be revoked.These comments maintained that, as a minimum, the TSS information requiredby current andSection; 801.430 should be on the outside of the vending machinejust as the Surgeon General's warning about smoking appears on cigarettevending machines.Six consumer groups and several individual consumers argued that tamponssold in vending machines should not be exempt from the absorbency labelingrequirements of any final rule. These comments claimed that there is aneed for wide dissemination of information about the association of tamponabsorbency and TSS, that women could use the knowledge imparted by thelabeling to decide to purchase and use a menstrual pad as opposed to atampon, and that the cost of new labeling to manufacturers would be minimal.Other comments argued that a maximum absorbency should be established fortampons sold in vending machines, while one consumer commented that therewas no need to label tampons sold in vending machines.One manufacturer urged that the current exemption for tampons sold throughvending machines be continued and extended to the absorbency informationrequired by any final rule. The manufacturer argued that tampons are purchasedfrom vending machines in individual units based on immediate need, andthat whatever product is available is selected independent of brand orabsorbency, obviating the need for additional labeling.FDA disagrees that it is appropriate to set a maximum allowable absorbencyfor tampons sold in vending machines, because no public health basis forso doing has been established. The agency has tentatively concluded thatthere would be only a minimal potential benefit to consumers in requiringthat all TSS and absorbency information required by current andSection; 801.430be provided on labeling for tampons sold through vending machines, becauseonly a small fraction of tampons are sold through such machines. On theother hand, FDA believes that it is important to provide consumers withconsistent information and, therefore, that it would be inappropriate tohave tampons sold through vending machines bear only nonstandardized labeling,such as super, that would mean different things from brand to brand. Accordingly,reproposed andSection; 801.430(g) would not exempt tampons sold through vendingmachines from the provisions of reproposed paragraph (e)(4) of this section.Thus, if a term of absorbency other than the applicable term required bythe reproposal, such as super, were used on a tampon sold through a vendingmachine, e.g., on an individual wrapper, reproposed andSection; 801.430(e)(4)would require that the new absorbency term, corresponding to the rangeof absorbency listed in paragraph (e)(1) of that section, also be usedprominently and conspicuously in a separate location. Conversely, if anonstandardized term were not used on a tampon manufactured for sale througha vending machine, then use of the new absorbency term would not be required.H. Public Citizen Health Research Group Petition21. All comments specifically addressing the August 20, 1987, citizen petitionfrom the Health Research Group (HRG) (see 53 FR 37252 and 37253) concernedissues relating to the initial proposal and have been addressed elsewherein this preamble. FDA believes that the reproposal, requiring uniform absorbencytesting and a standardized method of expressing absorbency, is both technicallyfeasible and adequate to address the need for public health protection.It would enable women to compare absorbencies between brands and stylesand to choose the lowest absorbency needed and, thus, reduce their riskof TSS. To the extent that the reproposal does not include provisions requestedby HRG in its August 20, 1987, citizen petition, the agency is tentativelydenying the petition.I. Education22. Three consumer groups and many individual consumers urged FDA to implementa public education effort to inform users of the association between tamponabsorbency and TSS risk. Specific suggestions included updating FDA's postercampaign, making public service announcements, disseminating brochures,publishing articles in women's magazines, and requiring store displays.One comment noted that any education effort should be repeated at regularintervals because there are always girls who are beginning menstruationand need the information.FDA agrees with the intent of these comments. With the promulgation ofany final rule, the agency would employ a variety of educational mechanismsto provide updated information to new tampon users, higher risk groupsfor TSS such as young women and teenage girls, and the general public.Accordingly, the agency would update and reprint its TSS poster learningunit, and target distribution of the poster to secondary school healthteachers, nurses, and special interest groups such as Girl Scouts and CampfireGirls. Additional approaches could include a video news release, and afact sheet that would be used by CDC in its Teenage Health Teaching Modules,by health editors of popular magazines and newspapers, by pharmacies, andby State maternal and child health offices. FDA believes that these informationalactivities will advise and remind women about TSS, its symptoms, what todo if symptoms appear; the advisability of using the least absorbent tamponneeded to control menstrual flow, and, assuming that it promulgates a finalrule requiring new standardized absorbency terms, how to use the new termsto select tampons and, thereby, help eliminate any consumer confusion.J. Miscellaneous23. One comment recommended that ``ounces'' be used instead of ``grams''to indicate the quantity of fluid absorbed.The purpose of the determination of the amount of fluid absorbed by a tamponis to provide a quantitative measure of absorbency that can be used inmaking interbrand comparisons. FDA does not believe that it is necessaryto use English system units (ounces) to do that, and has not adopted therecommendation in the reproposal.24. Several comments recommended that the agency require warnings aboutpossible abrasions or lacerations of the vaginal wall as a result of tamponuse, and specific labeling directing users to wash their hands, removetampons at specified time intervals, refrain from using tampons for a periodof time after giving birth, and so forth.None of these recommendations directly bears on the issue of tampon absorbency-relatedTSS risk addressed by the proposed and reproposed rules. Moreover, thecomments did not provide any evidence to support such additional labelingrequirements or to demonstrate an association between the claims underlyingthe recommendations and tampon absorbency-related TSS risk. FDA notes thatit is unaware of any data demonstrating an association between tampon useand injury to the vaginal wall. Therefore, the agency has not adopted theserecommendations in the reproposal.K. ReferencesThe following references have been placed on display in the Dockets ManagementBranch (address above) and may be seen by interested persons between 9a.m. and 4:00 p.m., Monday through Friday.1. Gaventa, S., et al., ``Active Surveillance for Toxic Shock Syndromein the United States, 1986,'' <T3>Reviews of Infectious Diseases, </T3>11 (Supplement 1):S28-S34, January-February1989.2. Reingold, A. L., et al., ``Risk Factors for Menstrual Toxic Shock Syndrome:Results of a Multistate Case-Control Study,'' <T3>Reviews of Infectious Diseases, </T3>11 (Supplement 1):S35-S42, January-February1989.<ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Environmental Impact</ITAG>The agency has tentatively determined under 21 CFR 25.24(a)(11) that thisaction is of a type that does not individually or cumulatively have a significanteffect-on the environment. Therefore, neither an environmental assessmentnor an environmental impact statement is required.<ITAG tagnum="84">V. Economic Impact</ITAG>As stated in the preamble to the initial proposal (53 FR 37262), FDA examinedthe economic consequences of the proposal in accordance with the criteriain section 1(b) of Executive Order 12291 and found that the rule is nota major rule under the Executive Order. No comments were received in responseto that statement or finding, or to FDA's assessment. Since its initialexamination of the economic consequences of the proposed rule, which estimateddirect costs of $66,000 on each tampon manufacturer, FDA has revised itsassessment to take into account changes in the proposal reflected in thisreproposal. FDA now estimates that the reproposal would impose direct costsof $75,000 on each tampon manufacturer. Therefore, the agency continuesto conclude that any final rule based on the reproposal would not be amajor rule under the Executive Order. The agency also has considered theeffect that this reproposal would have on small entities including smallbusinesses. The agency believes that only one of the affected manufacturersmeets the definition of a small entity under the Regulatory FlexibilityAct (Pub. L. 96-354), and no comments were submitted on the matter. Therefore,FDA certifies under the Regulatory Flexibility Act that the reproposalwould not have significant economic impact on a substantial number of smallentities. A further description of these new costs and the methods forestimating them can be found in the revised threshold assessment on filewith the Dockets Management Branch (address above).<ITAG tagnum="84">VI. Paperwork Reduction Act</ITAG>Section 801.430 (e), (f), and (g) of this reproposal contain informationcollection requirements. As required by section 3504(h) of the PaperworkReduction Act of 1980, FDA has submitted a copy of this reproposal to theOffice of Management and Budget (OMB) for its review of these informationcollection requirements. Other organizations and individuals desiring tosubmit comments on the information collection requirements should directthem to FDA's Dockets Management Branch (address above) and to the Officeof Information and Regulatory Affairs, OMB, Room 3208, New Executive OfficeBldg., Washington, DC 20503, Attn: Desk Officer for FDA.<ITAG tagnum="84">VII. Request for Comments</ITAG>Interested persons may, on or before August 11, 1989, submit to the DocketsManagement Branch (address above) written comments regarding this reproposal.Two copies of any comments are to be submitted, except that individualsmay submit one copy. Comments are to be identified with the docket numberfound in brackets in the heading of this document. Received comments maybe seen in the office above between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through Friday.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 21 CFR Part 801</ITAG>Incorporation by reference, Labeling, Medical devices, Reporting and recordkeepingrequirements.Therefore, under the Federal Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Act, it is proposedthat Part 801 be amended as follows:<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 801_LABELING</ITAG>1. The authority citation for 21 CFR Part 801 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Sec. 701, 52 Stat. 1055-1056 as amended (21 U.S.C.371); 21 CFR 5.10, andSection; 801.420 also is issued under secs. 201(h),(k), (m), and (n), 501(c), 502, 519, 520(e), 704, 52 Stat. 1041 as amended,1050-1051 as amended, 67 Stat. 477 as amended, 90 Stat. 564-565, 567, 575(21 U.S.C. 321 (h), (k), (m), and (n), 351(c), 352, 360i, 360j(e), 374);andSection; 801.430 is issued under secs. 201(n), 502, 701(a), 52 Stat. 1041as amended, 1050-1051 as amended, 1055 (21 U.S.C. 321(n), 352, 371(a));21 CFR 5.11.</ITAG>2. Section 801.430 is amended by revising paragraph (b), the introductorytext of paragraph (d), paragraphs (d)(2), (d)(3), and (d)(4), by redesignatingparagraphs (e) and (f) as paragraphs (g) and (h), respectively, and revisingthem, and by adding new paragraphs (e) and (f) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 801.430 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">User labeling for menstrual tampons.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(b) Data show that toxic shock syndrome (TSS), a rare but serious and sometimesfatal disease, is associated with the use of menstrual tampons. To protectthe public and to minimize the serious adverse effects of TSS, menstrualtampons shall be labeled as set forth in paragraphs (c), (d), and (e) ofthis section and tested for absorbency as set forth in paragraph (f) ofthis section.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(d) The labeling of menstrual tampons shall contain the following consumerinformation prominently and legibly, in such terms as to render the informationlikely to be read and understood by the ordinary individual under customaryconditions of purchase and use:<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(2) The risk of TSS to all women using tampons during their menstrual period,especially the reported higher risks to women under 30 years of age andteenage girls, the estimated incidence of TSS of 1 to 17 per 100,000 menstruatingwomen and girls per year, and the risk of death from contracting TSS;(3) The advisability of using tampons with the minimum absorbency neededto control menstrual flow in order to reduce the risk of contracting TSS;(4) Avoiding the risk of getting tampon-associated TSS by not using tampons,and reducing the risk of getting TSS by alternating tampon use with sanitarynapkin use during menstrual periods; and<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(e)(1) The principal display panel(s) (as defined in andSection; 801.60)of a package of menstrual tampons shall bear one of the following six absorbencyterms representing the absorbency of the production run, lot, or batchas measured by the test described in paragraph (f)(2) of this section,and a reference to the location on the package label of the informationrequired by paragraph (e)(3) of this section:<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>2,L2,tp0,i1,s25,r50</C> <H1>Ranges of absorbency in grams \1\</H1><H1>Corresponding term of absorbency</H1> <ITAG tagnum="1">6 and under<D>Low absorbency.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">6 to 9<D>Medium absorbency.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">9 to 12<D>Medium-high absorbency.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">12 to 15<D>High absorbency.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">15 to 18<D>Very high absorbency.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Above 18<D>Highest absorbency.</D><F>\1\ These ranges are defined, respectively, as follows: less than orequal to 6 grams; greater than 6 grams up to and including 9 grams; greaterthan 9 grams up to and including 12 grams; greater than 12 grams up toand including 15 grams; greater than 15 grams up to and including 18 grams;and greater than 18 grams.</F></ITAG></ITAG>(2) The absorbency term required by paragraph (e)(1) of this section shallbe more prominent than, and may not be modified by, any other descriptiveinformation on the principal display panel(s), other than its correspondingnumerical range of absorbency, and shall be in a prominent and conspicuouslocation, placed apart from any other information not required by thisparagraph except its corresponding numerical range of absorbency.(3) The package label shall include an explanation of the range of absorbencyand a description of how consumers can use the range of absorbency, andits corresponding absorbency term, to make comparisons of absorbency oftampons to allow selection of the tampons with the minimum absorbency neededto control menstrual flow in order to reduce the risk of contracting TSS.(4) If a term of absorbency other than that required by paragraph (e)(1)of this section is used in labeling, such as on an individual tampon wrapper,the absorbency term specified in paragraph (e)(1) of this section shallalso be used.(f) A manufacturer shall measure the absorbency of individual tampons usingthe test method specified in paragraph (f)(2) of this section and calculatethe mean absorbency of a production run, lot, or batch by rounding to thenearest 0.1 gram.(1) A manufacturer shall design and implement a sampling plan that includescollection of probability samples of adequate size to yield consistenttolerance intervals such that the probability is 90 percent that at least90 percent of the absorbencies of individual tampons within a package arewithin the range of absorbency stated on the package label.(2) In the absorbency test, an unlubricated condom, with tensile strengthbetween 17 Mega Pascals (MPa) and 30 MPa, as measured according to thestandard procedure in the American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM),D 3492-83, ``Standard Specification for Rubber Contraceptives (Condoms)''\1\<NOTE/> for determining tensile strength, which is incorporated byreference in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a), is attached to the largeend of a glass chamber with a rubber band (see Figure 1) and pushed throughthe small end of the chamber using a smooth, finished rod. The condom ispulled through until all slack is removed. The tip of the condom is cutoff and the remaining end of the condom is stretched over the end of thetube and secured with a rubber band. A preweighed (to the nearest 0.01gram) tampon is placed within the condom membrane so that the center ofgravity of the tampon is at the center of the chamber. An infusion needle(14 gauge) is inserted through the septum created by the condom tip untilit contacts the end of the tampon. The outer chamber is filled with waterpumped from a temperature-controlled waterbath to maintain the averagetemperature at 27andplusmin;1 anddegrees;C. The water returns to the waterbathas shown in Figure 2. Syngyna fluid (10 grams sodium chloride, 0.5 gramCertified Reagent Acid Fuchsin, 1,000 milliliters distilled water) is thenpumped through the infusion needle at a rate of 50 milliliters per hour.The test shall be terminated when the tampon is saturated and the firstdrop of fluid either exits the apparatus or appears in the folds of thecondom below the tampon. (The test result shall be discarded if fluid isdetected in the folds of the condom before the tampon is saturated.) Thewater is then drained and the tampon is removed and immediately weighedto the nearest 0.01 gram. The absorbency of the tampon is determined bysubtracting its dry weight from this value. The condom shall be replacedafter 10 tests or at the end of the day during which the condom is usedin testing, whichever occurs first.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ Copies of the standard are available from the AmericanSociety for Testing and Materials, 1916 Race St., Philadelphia, PA 19103,or available for inspection at the Office of the Federal Register, 1100L St. NW., Washington, DC. <ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4160-01-M002</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="42">Insert illustration(s) 2 960-961</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4160-01-C</ITAG>(3) The Food and Drug Administration may permit the use of an absorbencytest method different from the test method specified in this section ifeach of the following conditions is met:(i) The manufacturer presents evidence, in the form of a citizen petitionsubmitted in accordance with the requirements of andSection; 10.30 of thischapter, demonstrating that the alternative test method will yield resultsthat are equivalent to the results yielded by the test method specifiedin this section; and(ii) FDA approves the method and has published notice of its approval ofthe alternative test method in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>.(g) Any menstrual tampon intended to be dispensed by a vending machineis exempt from the requirements of this section, except for paragraph (e)(4)of this section.(h) Any menstrual tampon that is not labeled as required by paragraphs(c), (d), and (e) of this section and that is initially introduced or initiallydelivered for introduction into commerce after December 12, 1989, is misbrandedunder sections 201(n), 502 (a) and (f) of the act.<ITAG tagnum="6">Frank E. Young,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Commissioner of Food and Drugs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Louis W. Sullivan,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary of Health and Human Services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: June 3, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-13959 Filed 6-8-89; 10:39 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4160-01-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>