<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89616-0006 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.6-16-89.f2.A1005</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">40 CFR Part 52 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[FRL-3601-2] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Approval and Promulgation of Implementation Plans; Revision to theState of New Jersey Implementation Plan for Ozone </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Environmental Protection Agency.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>EPA is approving the State Implementation Plan (SIP)revisions submitted by the State of New Jersey. This revision will reduceemissions of volatile organic compounds from gasoline by limiting the ReidVapor Pressure (RVP) of gasoline sold between June 30 and September 15in 1989 and between May 1 and September 15 of each year thereafter to 9pounds per square inch. EPA is also finding that the New Jersey RVP regulationsare ``necessary to achieve'' the national ambient air quality standard(NAAQS) for ozone and are therefore excepted from preemption under section211 of the Clean Air Act. The intended effect of this action is to makenecessary progress towards attainment of the ozone standard as expeditiouslyas practicable as required under the Clean Air Act.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>This action will be effective June 30, 1989. TheAdministrator has determined that there is good cause, within the meaningof 5 U.S.C. 553(d)(3), to make this action effective less than 30 daysafter publication. The industry has been on notice since the Administratorapproved the Massachusetts RVP SIP (54 FR 19173; May 4, 1989) that theAdministrator was inclined to approve inconsistent state RVP rules to theextent necessary to provide for attainment. Making this action effectiveon the same date as the Massachusetts, Connecticut and Rhode Island RVPrules provides the industry with a uniform effective date for all the staterules limiting RVP to 9.0 psi in the northeast. In addition, postponingthe effective date beyond June 30 would undermine the State's ability toachieve the reductions in 1989 summer ozone concentrations for which theRVP program was intended.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>Copies of the State submittal are available at thefollowing addresses for inspection during normal business hours:<ITAG tagnum="15">Environmental Protection Agency, Region II Office, Air Programs Branch,26 Federal Plaza, Room 1005, New York, New York 10278. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Environmental Protection Agency, Public Information Reference Unit,401 M Street SW., Washington, DC 20460. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection, Division of EnvironmentalQuality, Bureau of Air Pollution Control, 401 East State Street, Trenton,New Jersey 08625.</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Mr. William S. Baker, Chief,Air Programs Branch, Environmental Protection Agency, 26 Federal Plaza,Room 1005, New York, New York 10278, (212) 264-2517.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Introduction </ITAG>This notice describes EPA's decision to approve revisions to the New JerseySIP which limit the volatility of gasoline from June 30 to September 15in 1989 and from May 1 to September 15 every year thereafter. The remainderof this preamble is divided into four sections. The first provides thebackground for this action, with respect to both chronology and the broadissues involved. The second section presents today's action and EPA's rationale.The third section summarizes the comments received on the proposed actionand EPA's responses to them. The final section discusses the enforceabilityof New Jersey's regulation with regard to the test methods as discussedin EPA's proposed rulemaking notice. <ITAG tagnum="84">Background </ITAG>On November 12, 1987, the Commissioners of the Northeast States for CoordinatedAir Use Management (NESCAUM) signed a Memorandum of Understanding expressingtheir intention to reduce the Reid Vapor Pressure (RVP) of gasoline to10 pounds per square inch (psi) starting in the summer of 1988 and to 9psi in the summer of 1989 and continuing every ozone season thereafter.Since there were delays in adopting necessary regulations, the 1988 limitof 10 psi was eliminated and New Jersey passed a regulation limiting theRVP of gasoline to 9 psi from May l to September 15 starting in 1989 andcontinuing each year thereafter. On January 27, 1989, New Jersey submitteda SIP revision to EPA for approval to implement this provision. On March 22, 1989, EPA published a notice (54 FR 11868) taking final actionon national regulation of RVP, to take effect this summer. The maximumallowed summertime RVP in New Jersey under the federal regulation is 10.5psi. Under section 211(c)(4)(A) of the Clean Air Act (the Act), EPA's finalaction preempted inconsistent state control of RVP, except in California.In its final action, EPA noted that states could be exempted from preemptiononly if EPA finds it is ``necessary'' to achieve the National Ambient AirQuality Standards (NAAQS) as provided in section 211(c)(4)(C) of the Act.Section 211(c)(4)(C) of the Act states: ``A State may prescribe and enforce,for purposes of motor vehicle emission control, a control or prohibitionrespecting the use of a fuel or fuel additive in a motor vehicle or motorvehicle engine if an applicable implementation plan for such State underSection 110 so provides. The Administrator may approve such provision inan implementation plan, or promulgate an implementation plan containingsuch a provision, only if he finds that the State control or prohibitionis necessary to achieve the national primary or secondary ambient air qualitystandard which the plan implements.'' In its March 22, 1989 notice, EPAmade specific note of the NESCAUM states' initiatives and the conditionsfor EPA approval of state RVP regulations. On March 28, 1989, EPA published a notice (54 FR 12654) proposing approvalof the New Jersey SIP revision. EPA also proposed to find that these revisionswere ``necessary'' to achieve the NAAQS for ozone within the meaning ofsection 211(c)(4)(C) of the Act and, thus, meet the requirements for anexception to federal preemption. <ITAG tagnum="84">Description of Today's Action </ITAG>EPA today approves revisions to the New Jersey SIP which limits gasolinevolatility to 9 psi between June 30 and September 15 in 1989 and betweenMay 1 and September 15 in each year thereafter. The New Jersey programincludes authority for the State to issue waivers to individual suppliersif necessary to avoid supply dislocations. EPA is approving the programas a whole, including any waivers the State might issue under this authority.This aspect of EPA's approval is discussed in full under section 9 of thenext portion of this notice describing EPA's response to comments. EPA is also explicitly finding that the New Jersey revisions are ``necessaryto achieve'' the NAAQS within the meaning of section 211(c)(4)(C) of theAct. This means that New Jersey's RVP regulations are not preempted bythe federal RVP regulations promulgated on March 22, 1989. EPA's rationale for this action and its effective date are presented below.In this context many issues raised by commenters on the proposal will beaddressed. The remaining comments will be discussed in the next portionof this notice.In approving the New Jersey RVP SIP revisions, EPA must consider requirementsimposed by two different sections of the Clean Air Act. As with all SIPrevisions, Section 110 provides the requirements for approval into theSIP. In this case, since EPA has promulgated federal RVP regulations, section211(c)(4)(A) preempts inconsistent state control. However, section 211(c)(4)(C)provides that the Administrator may except a state RVP control programfrom preemption if he finds it is ``necessary'' to achieve the NAAQS. Thus,the New Jersey revisions must satisfy both section 110 and section 211requirements to gain approval. EPA has concluded that the New Jersey RVP regulations are ``necessary''to achieve the ozone NAAQS. In reaching this conclusion EPA has followedthe test first articulated in approving the Maricopa County, Arizona SIP(53 FR 17413 (May 18, 1988) and 53 FR 30228 (August 10, 1988)) and laterpresented in the proposed approval of the New Jersey revisions. EPA statedthat if, after accounting for the possible reductions from all other reasonablyavailable control measures, New Jersey could demonstrate that RVP controlsare still required to achieve the standard, then RVP controls are necessarywithin the meaning of section 211(c)(4)(C). EPA will not interpret thatprovision to require a state to impose more drastic measures such as drivingprohibitions or source shutdowns before it can adopt its own fuel controlprogram. As discussed in the notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR), the record indicatesthat New Jersey needs volatile organic compound (VOC) emission reductionson the order of at least 31.9 percent from 1987 inventory levels to achievethe standard. The State reviewed approximately 22 measures suggested byEPA as reasonable in addition to RVP control to 9 psi and found they couldtogether potentially achieve a 26.4 percent reduction from 1987 levels.As indicated at proposal, while EPA's regulation of gasoline to 10.5 psireduces the emission reduction attributable to the State regulation, itdoes not affect the bottom line_a shortfall will still exist. EPA's technicalreview of the data presented in the State submission and by the commentersaffirms the conclusion that a shortfall will exist even with all reasonableState and federal measures. EPA continues to believe that the fact that the State RVP regulation mightnot by itself fill the shortfall and hence by itself achieve the standarddoes not mean the rule is not ``necessary to achieve'' the NAAQS. It issimple logic that ``necessary'' is not the same as ``sufficient.'' EPAbelieves that the ``necessary to achieve'' standard must be interpretedto apply to measures which are needed to reduce ambient levels when noother measures that EPA or the State has found reasonable are availableto achieve this reduction. Beyond such identified ``reasonable'' measures,EPA need look at other measures before RVP control, only if it has clearevidence that RVP control would have greater adverse impacts than thosealternatives. EPA has no such evidence here. Therefore, EPA can defer toNew Jersey's apparent view that RVP control is the next less costly (oris itself a reasonable) measure. Thus, EPA concludes that New Jersey'sRVP regulations are ``necessary'' to achieve the NAAQS. <ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of Public Comments and EPA's Responses </ITAG>The major issues discussed in the comments are: (1) What constitutes afinding of ``necessary to achieve'' the standard under section 211(c)(4)(C);(2) whether there has been an adequate technical demonstration that controllingRVP to 9 psi is ``necessary'' (i.e. whether the threshold for exemptionfrom preemption has been crossed); (3) the scope of EPA's discretion assuminga finding that State RVP controls are necessary to achieve the standard;(4) what effect the 9 RVP limit in New Jersey will have on the cost andsupply of gasoline in the State and the Northeast; (5) driveability andsafety concerns; (6) whether there is an ozone problem in New Jersey; (7)whether the State has an adequate enforcement program or sufficient resourcesto implement the State regulations; (8) whether the State provided ``reasonableopportunity'' for public comment; (9) what exemptions or waivers from theState regulations should be allowed; (10) the appropriate timing for makingthe State regulation effective; and (11) whether EPA should withdraw orrepropose this action or reopen the public comment period in light of EPA'srecent promulgation of federal RVP regulations and other alleged deficienciesin EPA's proposed action. Each issue is explored in detail below. 1. What constitutes a finding of ``necessary to achieve'' the standardunder section 211(c)(4)(C) of the Act? <ITAG tagnum="81">a. Making the ``Necessary'' Finding Without a Demonstration of Attainment</ITAG><T3>Comments: </T3>One group of comments questioned EPA's ability to makea finding that New Jersey's RVP regulation is necessary to attain the ozonestandard without going through the complete planning process involved inapproving a state's response to EPA's finding that the current SIP is substantiallyinadequate to achieve the standard (the ``SIP call''). Several commentsstated that EPA cannot approve New Jersey's RVP regulation as a SIP revisionwithout finding that the SIP as a whole achieves attainment of the NAAQSfor ozone. Related comments questioned EPA's ability to determine whetherNew Jersey's RVP controls are necessary without a new updated inventoryof VOC sources which EPA will require from the states with ozone nonattainmentareas as part of their response to the SIP calls. <T3>Response: </T3>Through its SIP calls, EPA has imposed on states likeNew Jersey an obligation to revise their ozone SIPs and demonstrate attainmentof the standard. The thrust of these comments is that EPA cannot make afinding of necessity without the states' first having gone through thenew planning process and developing a new demonstration of attainment.EPA does not interpret section 211(c)(4)(C) to require a complete demonstrationof attainment in order to approve a measure which will contribute to attainment.Forcing a state to demonstrate attainment before allowing it to adopt stricterfuel controls would yield perverse results. Areas with the worst ozonenonattainment problems, which have the most difficulty assembling a demonstrationof attainment, would be disabled for perhaps several years from adoptingclearly necessary controls which were stricter than the national RVP controls.Several commenters noted that New Jersey so far has not been able to identifyany combination of control measures which would bring the State into attainment.It is precisely in areas like New Jersey, with an especially difficultnonattainment problem, where the expeditious implementation of new controls,and hence the finding of necessity under section 211(c)(4)(C), is mostappropriate. Beyond that, it is reasonable for EPA to use the best information it nowhas available to determine whether New Jersey's RVP program will be necessaryto achieve the standard without having to wait for New Jersey to completeits planning response to the SIP call, including its updated inventory.As explained below, the VOC inventory and reduction figures New Jerseysubmitted to EPA were based on reasonably reliable models EPA has usedin the past. Such figures are always capable of refinement, but in theAgency's judgment the expenditure of time required to do so is not worththe marginally improved accuracy. <T3>See Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power </T3>v. <T3>N.R.D.C.</T3>, 435 U.S. 519, 554-555 (1978). EPA has not yet set a date certain by which New Jersey must attain theozone standard. Congress may address the widespread nonattainment problemin the amendments to the Act now being considered. In the meantime EPAhas also proposed its own policy for how to deal with SIP planning fornonattainment areas in the post-1987 period (52 FR 45104, November 24,1987). The air quality analysis New Jersey submitted made it clear thatRVP control beyond the federal requirements will be necessary to any attainmentplan, whether the attainment date that Congress or EPA selects is imminentor long-term. Moreover, there is widespread agreement among EPA and thestates in the Northeast that major VOC reductions, probably exceeding the31.9 percent estimated by EPA in this case, will be required to get closeto attaining the ozone standard. Nothing in the air quality data from thesummer of 1988, which have become available in quality-assured form sincepublication of the proposal, indicates that the reduction requirement projectedby the New Jersey analysis overstates the reduction necessary to achievethe standard. Beyond that, the history of ozone planning over the lastdecade makes it clear that reduction targets are seldom overestimated.Furthermore, EPA's approval of this revision now is consistent with section110(a)(2)(A) of the Act, which requires attainment ``as expeditiously aspracticable.'' Interpreting section 211(c)(4)(C) to require a completeattainment demonstration before EPA can approve (and a state can implement)a fuel control that the state has determined to be practicable and thatwould advance the attainment date would effectively put section 211(c)(4)(C)in conflict with section 110(a)(2)(A). It is doubtful that Congress intendedEPA to choose an interpretation that would create such a conflict. <ITAG tagnum="81">b. The Standard EPA has Applied to Determine Whether Fuel Controlsare Necessary Compared With Other Controls </ITAG><T3>Comments: </T3>Several commenters maintained that EPA had not adequatelyanalyzed whether there are other control strategies reasonably availablewhich New Jersey should implement before resorting to RVP controls inconsistentwith the federal regulation. EPA will address these comments in section2c below. Other comments concerned the standard that EPA should use todetermine whether RVP controls are necessary compared to other controls.<T3>Response: </T3>In the proposal for this action, EPA used the approachit first announced when approving the Maricopa County Arizona SIP (53 FR17413 (May 18, 1988); 53 FR 30228 (August 10, 1988)) to determine whetherRVP controls beyond the federal program are necessary to attain the ozonestandard in New Jersey. Under that approach, if after accounting for thepossible reductions from all other reasonable control measures, New Jerseycould demonstrate that RVP controls are still required to achieve the standard,then RVP controls are necessary within the meaning of section 211(c)(4)(C).For the reasons stated in the Arizona action and the New Jersey proposal,EPA will not interpret section 211(c)(4)(C) to require a state to imposemore drastic measures such as driving prohibitions or source shutdownsbefore it can adopt its own fuel control program. New Jersey has demonstrated to EPA that implementing all the control measureswhich EPA now believes to be reasonably available to New Jersey for VOCcontrol (including measures that the State has already adopted and is nowbeginning to implement) would not achieve compliance with the ozone standard.The roster of control measures New Jersey examined corresponds to the listof controls EPA has identified for states to implement in response to theozone SIP calls, and represents EPA's best judgment as to the controlswhich could now be reasonably implemented. See EPA's proposed post-1987ozone policy (52 FR 45104, appendix C, November 24, 1987). After examiningall controls EPA has determined to be reasonable, a state is free to makeits own determination as to what control measures should next be employed.One comment maintained that EPA's method for determining what is necessaryis too vague because it would allow EPA to approve state fuel controls``simply because alternative measures are more inconvenient, unpopular,or costly.'' As discussed in section 2c below, EPA examined reasonablealternative controls which New Jersey could implement and determined theywould not achieve enough reduction to achieve the standard. EPA also hasdetermined that remaining controls such as gas rationing, driving reductions,and source shutdowns are so drastic that the State may resort to fuel controlsfirst. This judgment concerning what is too drastic is a complicated policydetermination requiring the Administrator to weigh precisely those factorswhich the commenter would exclude from his consideration_whether the remainingalternatives are costly or unpopular. In <T3>Amoco Oil Co. </T3>v. <T3>Environmental Protection Agency</T3>, 501 F.2d 722, 740-741, the courtdistinguished between the factual foundation which EPA must provide inits administrative decisions and policy judgments which are an integralpart of the findings Congress requires the Administrator to make underthe Act:<ITAG tagnum="21">Where by contrast, the regulations turn on choices of policy, on anassessment of risks, or on predictions dealing with matters on the frontiersof scientific knowledge, we will demand adequate reasons and explanations,but not ``findings'' of the sort familiar from the world of adjudication.</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T3>Id.</T3> at 741. EPA's and New Jersey's analysis of reasonably availablecontrols is based on a factual record supported by the best analyticaltools the agencies had available to them at the time. EPA's judgment thatState fuel regulation is a less drastic course than gas rationing and otherunpopular controls so far not implemented in any SIP is clearly a matteron the frontier of air pollution control planning, and therefore cannot(and need not) be supported by the same technical record as, for example,EPA's determination that New Jersey needs at least a 31.9 percent reductionfrom its 1987 inventory to attain the standard. 2. Have New Jersey and EPA made an adequate technical demonstration thatcontrolling RVP to 9 psi is ``necessary'' to attain the NAAQS? <ITAG tagnum="81">a. Adequacy of Emission Inventory </ITAG><T3>Comments:</T3> Several petroleum industry commenters argued that theemission inventory used in the technical demonstration is inadequate. Theypointed out that EPA has already requested that New Jersey prepare a newinventory as part of its response to the SIP call. Therefore it is arguedthat New Jersey's reliance on the old inventory is inappropriate. <T3>Response:</T3> As described in EPA's Technical Support Document (TSD),the emission inventory used by New Jersey and reviewed by EPA is basedon EPA's ``Compilation of Air Pollutant Emission Factors,'' known by itsdocument number ``AP-42.'' This document and its updates are EPA's longstandingguidance for determining emissions for inventory purposes and has servedas the basis for ozone SIP inventories since the mid-1970s. Mobile sourceemissions were estimated using the then current version of EPA's mobilesource emissions model, MOBILE3, consistent with standard EPA guidance.While EPA has called for many states, including New Jersey, to update theirinventories for post-1987 SIP planning purposes, the Agency has continuedto use existing inventories in evaluating current control proposals. EPAexpects the New Jersey inventory, not due until late 1989, to show higheremissions than the current inventory since it is expected to include moresources and improved quality assurance. Thus, if the current inventoryis lacking, it understates current emissions and errs such that the likelypercentage reduction needed to attain the standard is also understated.As stated in the NPR, EPA believes that if there is an error in quantifyingthe emission reductions resulting from control to 9 psi, those reductionsare understated. If the newly released mobile source emission model, MOBILE4,which includes the effects of running losses, were used, one would expectthe reduction in tons of VOCs to increase significantly. Furthermore, contraryto the commenters' belief, the estimated emission reduction is based onreductions achieved during only the four and one-half months each yearthe regulation is effective. This approach may understate the reductionsince 9 psi fuel may be in the distribution system up to two additionalmonths on each end of the regulatory season. Also, contrary to the commenters' claims, EPA's TSD does contain an estimateof the emission reduction achieved by going from EPA's 10.5 psi limit toNew Jersey's 9 psi limit. EPA estimated a 2.3 percent reduction from the1987 inventory. This estimate does account for nonlinearity in emissionreductions with decreasing RVP limits. <ITAG tagnum="81">b. Appropriateness of the Modeling Demonstration </ITAG><T3>Comments:</T3> While some commenters agreed that modeling was necessaryto evaluate the air quality benefit of the RVP reduction, they objectedto EPA's reliance on the Regional Oxidant Model (ROM). The commenters alsoraised concerns about the appropriate hydrocarbon to nitrogen-oxides (NOx)ratios to be used in such modeling. A third modeling issue concerns NewJersey's and EPA's inability to associate a quantified increment of improvedair quality with the control of RVP to 9 psi. <T3>Response:</T3> The claim that the ROM does not provide the spatialresolution needed for accurate prediction in individual urban areas losessight of the fact that we are evaluating a statewide program. The UrbanAirshed Model suggested by the commenters is appropriate for large urbanareas but would have to be run over at least two different geographic domainsto cover the entire state. Caught between the two available model scales,it is EPA's technical judgment that the ROM is an appropriate tool to usein evaluating future reductions needed for New Jersey. EPA understands the concern that past strategies have focused almost exclusivelyon controlling VOCs instead of NO<T2>x</T2>. As indicated in EPA's proposed post-1987 ozone strategy, futurecontrol scenarios are likely to include NO<T2>x</T2>. However, it is highly unlikely that NO<T2>x</T2> control alone will suffice. The best technical information availableto EPA at this time concerning the Northeast ozone problem points to theneed for substantial VOC reductions and at least modest NOG2T2x reductionsin the future to attain the ozone standard. The last modeling issue concerned New Jersey's and EPA's inability to associatea quantified increment of improved air quality with the control of RVPto 9 psi. While such a modeling exercise would be ideal, it is unlikelythat one would have much confidence in the outcome of such a sensitivitytest. The atmosphere's response to emission reductions of ozone precursorsis highly nonlinear such that small increments of reduction may show littleor no effect on their own. However, when the reductions from the State'smany strategies are aggregated, the total impact becomes quantifiable.Thus, even though New Jersey and EPA cannot pinpoint where the air qualitywill improve by what amount on what day, we are confident that there willbe a net improvement in ozone levels if New Jersey were to decrease VOCemissions by 2.3 percent.<ITAG tagnum="81">c. Consideration of Other Alternatives </ITAG><T3>Comments: </T3>Commenters expressed concern that New Jersey and EPAhave failed to consider other significant alternative control measuresthat could lead to attainment, including Stage II vapor recovery systems,controls on municipal landfills, source categories that are listed in EPA'sproposed post-1987 strategy and a host of transportation control measures(TCMs). Other comments inquired as to how New Jersey and EPA arrived atthe reductions for the control strategies that were presented in the NPRand TSD. <T3>Response: </T3>EPA believes that sufficient alternatives were considered.EPA and the State have considered the emission reduction potential of 22different point and area source categories corresponding to most of thosesuggested by EPA in its proposed post-1987 ozone policy (52 FR 45104, appendixC, November 24, 1987). Not surprisingly, some of the source categoriesare not applicable (as noted in the TSD) because there are no major sourcesin those categories in New Jersey or because the State has already adoptedcontrols for those categories. As noted in the NPR, most of the relevantcategories have potential reductions that are very small and, when combined,total less than 0.6 percent of the 1987 inventory. While, as one commenternoted, some of EPA's proposed post-1987 categories were not evaluated bythe State (such as traffic maintenance paint), based on EPA's experiencewith these categories in other states, it is anticipated the contributionfrom them would be significantly less than one percent. As mentioned inthe NPR, other strategies previously identified by the State as havingthe greatest potential for significant future VOC reductions that havenot been fully implemented would produce emission reductions on the orderof 25.8 percent, for a combined total reduction of 26.4 percent in conjunctionwith the minor categories mentioned above. This would still leave a shortfallof 5.5 percent. Two commenters noted that the proposal did not account for the emissionsreductions from Stage II vapor recovery systems or from controls on emissionsfrom municipal landfills. New Jersey adopted Stage II controls on February22, 1988 and controls on emissions from municipal landfills on June 1,1987. Since both regulations have been submitted to EPA as SIP revisionrequests and are currently being implemented by the State, the shortfalldiscussed in the NPR was calculated above and beyond the reductions attributableto these controls. It is true that New Jersey has not implemented the types of TCMs suggestedby EPA in its proposed post-1987 ozone strategy. However, based on EPA'sexperience with the implementation of these measures in other areas, weexpect that New Jersey would only achieve an additional 2.0 percent reductionby adopting similar strategies. New Jersey would still have an estimatedshortfall of approximately 3.5 percent. While EPA recognizes that other TCMs may be needed in New Jersey, the remainderare difficult to quantify, yield small reductions individually, and, asevidenced by the public reaction to the EPA-promulgated implementationplans containing such measures in the 1970's (see H.R. Rep. No. 95-294,95 Cong. lst Sess., reprinted in 4 Legislative History of the Clean AirAct Amendments of 1977, at 2748-55 (1978)), generally can be expected tohave more significant adverse effects on the public as a whole than RVPcontrols would. To be sure, if there were sufficient evidence for EPA toconclude that the state's RVP controls would result in significantly moresevere impacts than other measures that neither EPA nor the state has yetidentified as ``reasonable'' for the state to implement, then it mightwell be appropriate for the Agency to account for the emission reductionsthat those other measures would achieve before determining the shortfallagainst which to judge the RVP controls. The Agency does not believe, however,that the State's RVP control would produce significantly more severe effectsthan such alternatives (e.g., than a trip reduction ordinance of the typethat Arizona found reasonable for application in Phoenix and Tucson). The shortfall demonstration presented in EPA's NPR and TSD was the outcomeof a comprehensive review of the air quality and State Implementation Plansfor the ozone and carbon monoxide nonattainment areas of New York and NewJersey which was performed by the Air and Waste Management Division ofEPA Region II. This review, entitled ``An Evaluation of the Programs toAttain the Ozone and Carbon Monoxide Standards in New Jersey and New York,''examined air quality data for the period 1981 through 1986, modeling studies,and SIP commitments to determine air quality trends and predict the abilityof each state to attain the standards. In sum, New Jersey and EPA have indeed examined a broad range of potentialemission reduction strategies and have still identified a significant shortfallin the level of emission reductions likely to be needed to achieve theozone standard. 3. What is the scope of EPA's discretion assuming a finding that StateRVP controls are necessary to achieve the standard? <ITAG tagnum="81">a. Permissible Bases for EPA's Decision To Approve State RVP Controls</ITAG><T3>Comments: </T3>Several commenters asserted that even where EPA hasdetermined that state fuel controls are necessary to achieve the standard,EPA may nevertheless disapprove those controls if EPA determines that theeconomic or fuel supply impacts of the state's regulation are unreasonable.These commenters suggested that EPA may give significant considerationto costs because section 211(c)(4)(C) provides that the Administrator ``may''approve a SIP revision imposing state fuel controls once he makes the findingof necessity. Conversely, other commenters maintained that EPA may notdisapprove the New Jersey SIP revision based on economic grounds, onceEPA has made the finding of necessity.<T3>Response: </T3>EPA believes that it must consider cost to some limitedextent whenever the Administrator decides whether to make a finding undersection 211(c)(4)(C) that a fuel measure is ``necessary'' for attainment.As discussed above, to determine whether state fuel controls are necessary,EPA must look first at whether other measures that it determines are reasonable(and, perhaps, other measures the state has adopted) will by themselvesachieve timely attainment. Arguably, an alternative measure is ``reasonable''only if its effects are less drastic than the effects of the fuel controls.Clearly the cost and supply impact of the state fuel controls will be afactor in any such judgment. EPA does not interpret the use of ``may'' in section 211(c)(4)(C) to givethe Administrator unfettered discretion to disapprove the SIP revisionon economic grounds once he has made the finding that state fuel controlsare necessary to achieve the standard. Section 211(c)(4)(C) must be readin the context of the preemption created in section 211(c)(4)(A), whichprohibits states from adopting inconsistent fuel controls in their SIPs,or anywhere else, for air pollution control purposes. In the face of thisprohibition, the sole effect of the ``may'' in section 211(c)(4)(C) isto authorize the Administrator to overcome a provision (section 211(c)(4)(A))that would otherwise bar him from approving the SIP revision. The use of``may'' in section 211(c)(4)(C) does not eliminate the obligation thatsection 110(a)(3)(A) places on the Administrator to approve the SIP revision,provided it meets the requirements of section 110(a)(2). <T3>See Train </T3>v. <T3>Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., </T3>421 U.S. 60, 98 (1975).Section 110(a)(2) requires the Administrator to approve a SIP revisionif, among other things, it may be necessary to insure attainment and maintenanceof the standard. Section 110(a)(2)(B). EPA may not consider the economicimpact of a necessary SIP revision under section 110(a)(2); under thatprovision, it is for the state to determine what economic costs are appropriateto achieve the standards. <T3>Union Electric Co. </T3>v. <T3>E.P.A., </T3>427 U.S. 246, 256-258 (1976). Beyond that, it would beincongruous for Congress to give EPA more discretion to reject a SIP revisionfor reasons unrelated to the goal of achieving the standard as quicklyas possible precisely where EPA has determined that a SIP revision is necessaryto achieve the standard. Therefore, once EPA makes the finding that statefuel controls are necessary to achieve the standard, a finding which includesa determination that such fuel controls are more reasonable than otheravailable measures, EPA may not reject a state's SIP proposal simply foreconomic reasons. One commenter cited <T3>Motor Vehicle Manufacturers Association </T3>v. <T3>E.P.A., </T3>768 F.2d 385, 389-390 (D.C. Cir. 1985), for the propositionthat the use of ``may'' under section 211 commits the decision to the discretionof the Administrator. In <T3>MVMA </T3>the court was examining EPA's decision to grant a waiverunder section 211(f)(4) of the Act for the use of fuel additives not substantiallysimilar to those in the fuel EPA uses to certify the emissions from automobiles.The court was not examining section 211(c)(4)(C), which allows EPA, uponmaking a particular finding not mentioned in section 211(f)(4), to acton a SIP revision submitted by a state after full hearing at the statelevel and subject to the requirements of sections 110 (a)(2) and (3)(A).<ITAG tagnum="81">b. Intent of Federal Preemption Under Section 211 </ITAG><T3>Comments: </T3>Several commenters insisted that EPA should disapproveNew Jersey's RVP controls because Congress intended to avoid a patchworkof different state fuel controls in favor of a uniformly regulated nationalmarket for fuels. These commenters expressed concern that the exceptionin section 211(c)(4)(C) to the rule of preemption under section 211(c)(4)(A)would eventually swallow the rule. Several comments urged EPA not to actinconsistently with its decision not to limit gasoline to 9 psi in 1989in the federal RVP control program. On the other hand, several comments were aimed at urging EPA to supportthe regional approach to RVP control that the NESCAUM states are undertaking.One commenter pointed out that where Congress has not acted to addressthe ozone nonattainment problem, it is reasonable to let the states doall they can to attain. <T3>Response: </T3>It is clear that section 211(c)(4)(A) indicates thatCongress desired to maintain a nationally regulated market for fuels. Itis equally clear that section 211(c)(4)(C) indicates Congress recognizedthat there will be states where the air quality problem is so severe thatthe interest in a nationally regulated market must bow to the need foradditional state controls on fuel content. EPA has not been able to findany legislative history which illuminates with any detail beyond the languageof the Act how EPA should strike this balance. It is reasonable to infer that Congress was aware that the air qualityneeds of particular states might create varying fuel content requirements,and that Congress accepted that risk in favor of protecting the publichealth. Several commenters cited <T3>Exxon Corp. </T3>v. <T3>City of New York, </T3>548 F.2d 1088 (2d Cir. 1977), as precedent thata uniformly regulated fuel market is the overriding purpose behind section211(c)(4). In <T3>Exxon </T3>the court, however, was not faced with a claim for an exceptionto preemption under section 211(c)(4)(C), and specifically left it to EPAto determine whether such an exception is appropriate:<ITAG tagnum="21">The Act sensibly provides for an exception from its comprehensivepreemption of local regulation of motor vehicle fuels only when such regulationis a provision in a state implementation plan approved by the Administratorwho has the competence to make the needed professional engineering andenergy conservation decisions.</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T3>Id. </T3>at 1096. Once EPA has made a finding of necessity under section211(c)(4)(C), it is reasonable for EPA to interpret the Act to place paramountimportance on protecting public health and achieving the standard. EPA believes that the oil industry's concern that the exception will swallowthe rule is overstated. As described above, EPA will approve inconsistentstate fuel controls only where the state can demonstrate that exhaustingall other reasonable alternatives will not achieve the standard, takingcosts into account in determining reasonableness. This demonstration isnot a trivial hurdle, and it is highly unlikely that every state with anozone nonattainment area could make such a showing. Furthermore, a stateis unlikely to burden its citizens with the potentially higher cost oflower RVP fuel unless the air quality needs are compelling. Finally, regionalinitiatives such as NESCAUM's help avoid a wide variety of state controls.In this case, the New Jersey RVP program is virtually identical to theRVP programs already approved for Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Connecticut,and, thus, provides supply requirements consistent with other Northeaststates. EPA also believes that its decision not to impose a limit of 9 psi by 1989in EPA's RVP control program does not preclude EPA from approving New Jersey'sSIP revision. When developing its federal RVP control program, EPA imposedcontrols across the nation, and had to determine the level of RVP controlwhich supply sources for the entire continental United States could reasonablymeet. Further, although EPA was able to make this determination as to particularregions within the country, EPA did not intend to account for the particularair quality needs of each state. 4. What effect will the 9 RVP limit in New Jersey have on the cost andsupply of gasoline? <T3>Comments:</T3> Several commenters stated that New Jersey's regulationwould strain the distribution system and could cause some significant supplydislocation and cost increases. Several stated that even if refiners hadthe capacity to produce 9 psi gasoline, there would be logistical problemsrequiring the need for additional storage tanks for the gasoline and excessbutane. Other comments suggested that foreign imports at 9 psi might notbe available. Most of the oil company commenters stated that there willbe some need for capital improvements at refineries to meet the 9 psi standard.Several commenters stated that there will likely be a cost impact to theNew Jersey standard and other commenters stated that they were concernedabout the increased cost. One other comment stated that the estimates ofincreased cost do not reflect the extra cost increase that could accompanya significant supply disruption. Proponents cited two studies as support for the position that supply isnot a problem. <T3>Response:</T3> The potential supply problems arise out of two factors.First, decreasing the volatility of gasoline requires increased refinerycapacity. It is certain that implementation of 9 psi volatility in theNESCAUM states will create a refining capacity reduction in the amountof gasoline capable of being produced at each refinery. This is true ofboth domestic and foreign suppliers. Second, the problem may be furtherexacerbated by the expected increased demand for gasoline in the summermonths. Various studies have been conducted to determine how much refining capacitywill be lost from implementation of 9 psi volatility in the NESCAUM states,how much demand for gasoline is likely to increase in the summer of 1989,and what effect these factors will have on gasoline supply capabilities.The two studies done for NESCAUM and the one done for EPA are inconclusive.There appear to be numerous factors which make precise prediction of theseeffects impossible. However, under the EPA study (Sobotka study), estimatesindicate that the volatility standard may be feasible without serious supplyproblems. The Sobotka study cites the Department of Energy (DOE) as predicting thatdemand for gasoline should increase only in the range of 1 to 1.5 percentthis summer. This estimate is also supported by other studies includingone reported at a National Petroleum Refiners Association conference. Thestudy also estimates that approximately a five percent refining capacityshortfall will occur at domestic refineries because of the volatility regulationsin the Northeast states. The study estimates that with a 1.2 percent increasein demand for gasoline in the summer, U.S. refineries would be able tomake up for a five percent domestic shortfall, and a ten percent importshortfall, without construction of new facilities or installation of additionalequipment. Although various factors make it impossible to accurately predictthe refining shortfall of imported gasoline, there is no strong evidenceindicating that it will exceed ten percent. Thus, the Sobotka study suggeststhat it is likely that the resulting refinery capacity shortfalls froma 9 psi standard in 1989 should not result in supply shortfalls. In the unlikely event of unforeseen supply disruptions, the State of NewJersey has assured EPA that they have the authority to take immediate stepsto provide needed waivers or exceptions to the program. The State has committedto carefully monitor the supply situation this year and take appropriateaction, as may be necessary, to ensure that supply problems do not occuras a result of its State RVP control program. See also the response tosection 9 later in this notice for more discussion of State waivers orexceptions.5. What effect will 9 RVP gasoline have on driveability in cold weatherand on vehicle safety? <T3>Comments: </T3>Several commenters expressed concern that the 9 RVPfuel would cause hard starting, hesitation, and stalling in automobilesduring the early spring and late fall. They stated that gasoline will haveto enter the distribution system in March and will not be out until Octoberin order to comply with the regulation. Other comments, including severalfrom automobile manufacturers, indicated that there should be no adverseeffect from the use of 9 RVP fuel. <T3>Response: </T3>We believe that the nature of the gasoline distributionsystem makes it very unlikely that 9 RVP fuel will be available to consumersin March or early April, even if the blending-down process by that timehas begun to reduce RVP. Continued availability of low-RVP fuel is evenless likely by late October because the blending-up process will occurrapidly at the close of the control period. Nevertheless, the experienceof California, which has required 9 RVP fuel for many years, appears todemonstrate that widespread driveability or fuel safety problems will notoccur in the Northeast. We know of no evidence of extensive problems inCalifornia, despite significant operation at cool temperatures and highelevations. As further evidence of this conclusion, one can compare the true vaporpressure (TVP) experienced in fuel tanks at different times during theyear. For example, when corrected for elevation, gasoline in Billings,Montana at its January 1988 average RVP of 13.6 psi and at the historiclow January temperature of ^30 degrees Fahrenheit would result in a truevapor pressure of 1.0 psi. Similarly, for New Jersey, the analogous RVPand temperature of 10.0 psi RVP and ^12 degrees F. would also result ina TVP of 1.0 psi. In contrast, 8.5 psi RVP fuel at an analogous New Jerseytemperature of 18 degrees F. would result in a TVP of 1.8 psi, 80 percenthigher than the winter figure. We conclude from this that if low-volatilityfuel were to reach consumers during very low temperature weather, any degradationin driveability would be no greater (and would likely be less) than thatexperienced currently during the winter. Conversely, low-volatility fuel should improve vehicle driveability invery hot weather by reducing the occurrence of such conditions as vaporlock and fuel foaming. 6. Is there really a severe ozone problem in New Jersey or the Northeast?<T3>Comments: </T3>A number of industry commenters, in urging EPA to disapprovethe SIP revision, claimed that the air is really becoming cleaner and cleanerover time and that the ozone standard is being met more than 99% of theyear. Environmental groups countered these claims with data from 1987 and1988 which show a worsening of the ozone problem since 1986. They notedthat 1988 was one of the worst ozone seasons on record across the Northeast.<T3>Response: </T3>EPA is firmly convinced that there is a serious ozoneproblem in the Northeast. EPA's conviction was evidenced by last year'sSIP calls to New Jersey and most other Northeast states. This SIP callwas based on 1985-1987 ozone monitoring data which ranked New Jersey amongthe worst ozone nonattainment areas in the country. EPA's concern is furtherheightened by the 1988 ozone season. The ozone standard was exceeded morefrequently, at more sites, and at higher levels in 1988 than in 1987. 7. Has New Jersey demonstrated that it has an adequate enforcement programor adequate resources to implement the RVP regulation, as required by section110 of the Act? <T3>Comments: </T3>One commenter questioned whether New Jersey has developedan adequate program for enforcement of the regulation. Another commenternoted that New Jersey is the only NESCAUM state that would enforce itsregulation at the retail level. <T3>Response: </T3>EPA does not agree with the commenters' enforcementconcerns. The state's decision to extend its RVP enforcement program downto the retail level reflects a concern that there may be the opportunityto increase the RVP of gasoline that has already left the refinery or bulkterminal by blending the gasoline with a higher RVP fuel before it reachesthe retailer. This is a reasonable concern for the state since it is borderedby two states (Delaware and Pennsylvania) which will have different RVPfuel requirements. Opportunities to blend the differing RVP gasoline enroute to the retailer to yield a noncomplying fuel would exist. In fact,EPA concluded in its national rulemaking that testing at all points inthe distribution system would provide the ``best safeguard'' against distributionof noncompliant gasoline and would result in the ``greatest likelihood''of achieving environmental results. Further, in comments submitted on EPA'sproposed approvals of the Massachusetts, Connecticut and Rhode Island 9RVP regulations (none of which enforce at the retail level), several petroleumindustry commenters argued that an enforcement program that reaches theretail level is a minimum standard for the effective enforcement of RVPlimits. EPA does not believe that the state's regulation will have a significanteconomic effect on retailers since they will not be required to test eachshipment of gasoline received. Under the state's regulation, retailersare required only to keep complete and accurate records of all gasolineshipments, which is not an undue burden. New Jersey has stated that it has adequate resources to conduct an enforcementprogram in support of the rule. The New  Jersey Department of EnvironmentalProtection (NJDEP) has developed an enforcement protocol which includesa prescribed schedule of announced and unannounced inspections. EPA mustnote that in the comparable arena of enforcement through Delayed ComplianceOrders (DCOs), courts have held that EPA may not second guess the state'schoice of enforcement mechanisms so long as the chosen system is a reasonableone. <T3>Bethlehem Steel Corp. </T3>v. <T3>U.S. E.P.A.</T3>, 638 F.2d 994, 1005-1006 (7th Cir. 1980); appealed,<T3>Bethlehem Steel </T3>v. <T3>Gorsuch</T3>, 726 F.2d 356 (7th Cir. 1984), reh. den., en banc, vacatedon reh., 732 F.2d 97 (7th Cir. 1984), withdrawn and appealed, 742 F.2d1028 (7th Cir. 1984). Furthermore, even if New Jersey's enforcement scheme was inadequate tosupport a finding, ultimately, that the state's eventually complete ozoneSIP update meets all of the requirements in section 110(a)(2), EPA couldstill approve the rule under section 110(a)(3). That is because, even withan inadequate enforcement program, the rule would still strengthen thepre-existing SIP and hence, under the rationale in <T3>Michigan </T3>v. <T3>Thomas</T3>, 805 F.2d 176, 186 (6th Cir. 1986), be approvable for thatlimited purpose.8. Has New Jersey Satisfied the Act's Public Notice and Hearing Requirements?<T3>Comments:</T3> Several comments received questioned whether the NewJersey SIP revision was adopted after ``reasonable notice and public hearing.''While acknowledging that public hearings were held, they alleged that thedecision to limit RVP to 9 psi was actually made by NESCAUM some time beforepublic hearings on the New Jersey RVP regulation, and that therefore anyhearing nominally provided was substantively inadequate. On the other hand,NESCAUM commented that ozone pollution problems, especially in the Northeast,are clearly regional problems and must therefore be dealt with throughconsistent regulations. Other comments questioned whether notice and hearing was provided on theSIP revision or just a State regulation. They believe it was unclear fromthe public notices and materials available before the hearing that theRVP rule was actually intended to be submitted as a revision to the SIP.<T3>Response: </T3>As to the first claim, EPA's TSD provides the date thatthe public notice was published and contains an itemization of the publichearing dates. Although there is no summary statement that the public participationrequirements for hearing and notice were met, the record does speak tothat effect. EPA finds concerns that the public hearings were largely meaningless andthus not ``reasonable'' to be misplaced. It is inferred that New Jerseyand the other NESCAUM states had predetermined the outcome of the hearingsbefore and without regard to the hearings held in those states. EPA isnot at all convinced that the process was predetermined. If the commenterswere aggrieved on this matter we would have expected them to challengethe state's proceedings under state law, as API has done in New York. However,no party challenged New Jersey's proceedings. EPA acknowledges that New Jersey did initiate rulemaking on RVP controlpursuant to an agreement on RVP control with the other Northeast states.However, having initiated the rulemaking on that basis, the state thenproceeded to promulgate the regulations through its full administrativeprocess, giving adequate notice and opportunity for public hearing on theproposed regulations. As a policy matter EPA agrees that the ozone problem in the Northeast isa problem of regional magnitude and has held several meetings with topEPA and state environmental officials in EPA Regions I, II, and III todetermine what concerted efforts the states could take on their own todeal with issues of regional, but not necessarily national, scope. ThereforeEPA believes that it is appropriate for the northeastern states to regulateozone precursors in a consistent fashion. However, each state must providefor adequate public participation in the promulgation of individual regulations,including assessing and responding to all submitted comments, as New Jerseyhas done in connection with its RVP regulations. As discussed more fullybelow, EPA reviewed the state's public participation procedures and determinedthat the state provided adequate opportunity for public input in connectionwith development of the RVP rules. A commenter argued specifically that the state's hearing procedures werenot adequate to comply with section 110 of the Act or EPA's hearing regulationsat 40 CFR section 51.102. The operative language in both the statute andthe regulation is ``reasonable notice and public hearing.'' The commenterasserted that New Jersey predetermined its final decision on RVP regulationand thus the hearing provided was not reasonable. However, EPA interprets the language of both the statute and the implementingregulations as requiring the state to provide, first, reasonable noticeof a public hearing, and second, a public hearing. EPA does not believethat the law requires the Agency to review the hearing record and determinewhether the hearing provided was itself ``reasonable.'' EPA's interpretation of the hearing requirement is clearly reflected inthe regulations at 40 CFR 51.102. The regulations go into substantial detailon the manner in which states must provide notice of a hearing in orderfor that notice to be considered reasonable. See 40 CFR 51.102(d); seealso 40 CFR 51.102(g)(2). However, the regulations make absolutely no mentionof specific requirements for conduct of public hearings. The state needonly certify that it in fact held a public hearing, which New Jersey clearlydid, and need not provide any detailed information on the conduct of thehearing. This is appropriate because the reasonableness of public notice can beassessed objectively by reviewing the amount and variety of notice methodsused. Assessing the reasonableness of a hearing on the other hand wouldbe a highly subjective determination done retrospectively that would unnecessarilyinfringe on the state's discretion in conducting its hearings. Of course,if EPA received concrete evidence that the hearing did not provide adequateopportunity for public participation, it could find that the hearing didnot meet the intent of EPA's regulation. EPA has, however, received nosuch evidence. The commenters further claimed that a state must specifically identifya proposed regulation as a future SIP revision prior to scheduling a publichearing on the regulation. However, neither the statute nor EPA's regulationscontain any such explicit requirement. The purpose of a public hearingis to receive public input on the substance of proposed regulations, noton whether the state may or may not submit the regulations as a SIP revision.For years EPA has approved SIP revisions with no analysis of whether thestate had publicly announced its intent to eventually submit a proposedregulation as a SIP revision at the state public hearing stage. Generally it should be totally irrelevant to public commenters whethera regulation with which they will be required to comply as a matter ofstate law might also become an aspect of federal law. At the time New Jerseyheld its public hearings on the RVP rules, prior to federal preemption,commenters should similarly have had no concern as to whether the proposedState rule would eventually become federal law as well. Only where a stateregulation would otherwise be preempted by existing federal law and thereforeunenforceable would the public have a need to know that the state intendedto seek federal approval of the regulation for purposes of preemption waiverin preparing comments at the state hearing level. This was not the caseat the time of the state hearing on the New Jersey RVP rule. Moreover,given EPA's then outstanding proposal to regulate RVP and thus preemptstate RVP regulation, it should have been apparent to commenters at thetime of the public hearing that New Jersey would submit the rule as a SIPrevision to insure enforceability in the event of EPA final RVP regulationand preemption. 9. Should Waivers or Exemptions From the State Regulations be Granted toSuppliers who Cannot Provide 9 RVP Gasoline? <T3>Comments: </T3>Commenters expressed concern with potential inequitiesresulting from supplier-specific requests for waivers. They stated thatthe use of supplier-specific waiver provisions could diminish the calculatedbenefits of the rule by allowing higher RVP gasoline into the system, andfinancially disadvantage those companies which are able to comply. Theyalso expressed concern that the use of waivers and exemptions introducesuncertainties about whether the volatility regulations will be appliedfairly and equitably to all gasoline suppliers.The commenters concluded that if waivers or exemptions are to be used,they must apply to all suppliers and significant penalties should be attached.In addition, one commenter noted that EPA has to consider how it will respondto supplier-specific waiver requests; and EPA ``is urged to adopt a policyon waivers which is consistent with its own RVP regulatory program.'' Response: EPA is aware that New Jersey intends to grant waivers to individualsuppliers if necessary to avoid serious supply dislocations during theinitial stages of its RVP program. Although EPA did not focus on this aspectof the program in its NPR, commenters were also aware of the State's intentionsand the issue was fully aired in the public comments. EPA is approvingthe New Jersey RVP program as a whole, which includes the ability of thestate to issue waivers as appropriate. EPA is in essence pre-approvingany waivers that New Jersey might grant as part of the overall RVP programbeing approved into the New Jersey SIP today. New Jersey will not be requiredto submit each waiver to EPA as a SIP revision before it may take effect.EPA is currently able to pre-approve any waivers that New Jersey may grantbecause the RVP program is a discretionary program that the state has submittedto generate additional emission reductions and move the state closer toattainment of the ozone NAAQS. EPA is not pre-approving waivers from afederally required program or a program to which EPA has already assignedspecific emission reduction credits as part of an overall attainment demonstration.EPA could not pre-approve waivers in such situations because they wouldconstitute SIP relaxations. Here, whatever emission reductions New Jerseyobtains from the RVP program, even after any waivers have been granted,will tighten the existing SIP and improve air quality. EPA notes that its pre-approval of any waivers New Jersey may grant underthe RVP program differs dramatically from approval of a generic permittingprogram such as a new source review or bubble program. In those cases,EPA authorizes states to approve relaxations of otherwise applicable SIPrequirements provided that the state follows SIP approved procedures calculatedto insure that all such waivers are accounted for in the SIP attainmentdemonstration and are issued using replicable evaluation techniques. Here,since EPA is not currently relying on the New Jersey RVP program for anydefined emission reduction credit toward an approved attainment demonstration,EPA need not now analyze the criteria by which New Jersey will issue anywaivers. New Jersey is free to issue waivers on the basis of its own statecriteria, consistent with any requirements of its state administrativeprocedures act. When New Jersey does submit its completed post-1987 attainment demonstration,EPA will assign specific emission reduction credits to the RVP program,taking account of any supplier-specific waivers the state may have issuedby that time. Once EPA has approved the New Jersey post-1987 SIP, it willtake whatever rulemaking action is necessary to ensure that any furtherwaivers under the RVP program, which at that point would be consideredSIP relaxations, would be submitted to EPA for approval as individual SIPrevisions. Finally, EPA notes that any suppliers who receive waivers from New Jerseymust still comply with the federal RVP limit of 10.5 psi. 10. How soon after the date of final approval of the New Jersey revisionsshould the RVP regulations be made effective? Comments: A great deal of the comments received commented on the timingof EPA's final action. Those favoring EPA approval of the SIP revisiongenerally favored EPA acting quickly to make the regulations effectiveby their May 1 starting date or as close to that as possible. These commentersnote that the Colonial Pipeline, which supplies 20 percent of the Northeast'sgasoline, has been shipping 9 RVP fuel to the Northeast since March 1,1989. They also pointed out that those suppliers who have made a good faitheffort to comply with the May 1st date would be at a competitive disadvantagerelative to those with cheaper, higher volatility gasoline if the dateis extended. Those opposing EPA approval of the SIP revision generally asked that ifwe did approve it we must provide the petroleum industry with realisticand sufficient lead-time to enable 9 psi gasoline to be distributed throughoutthe distribution system. These commenters cited EPA's allowing 70 and 100days for the recently promulgated national regulations to become effectiveat the terminal and retail level respectively as precedent for such a decision.A third path, suggested by one commenter, would be for EPA to make itsfinal approval conditional on the state's deferral of the compliance datefor its regulation. Response: The timing issue is one of the most difficult ones posed by thisaction. Since EPA has had control of the timing of the final federal RVPaction, the decision on the previously granted Massachusetts, Rhode Island,and Connecticut RVP SIP revisions, and the decision on the New Jersey RVPrevision, it is important that we insure that both the federal and stateprograms start with a maximum likelihood of success and a minimum possibilityof supply disruption. EPA must consider several issues in deciding when to make the rule effective.The first issue is when the industry was put on notice that it would haveto supply 9 psi gasoline to New Jersey. Since the New Jersey rule was passedin 1988, the industry was on notice since then of the State's intentionto control RVP to 9 psi. However, the New Jersey rule was preempted onMarch 22, 1989 by the promulgation of the federal volatility requirements.Another issue to consider is the lead-time that would be necessary to enable9 psi gasoline to get through the distribution system. The record indicatesthat the industry thought that it would take from 60 to 70 days to achievecompliance at the terminals in New Jersey. The record also indicates thatthe Colonial Pipeline, which supplies at least 20 percent of the gasolinein the Northeast, has been shipping 9 psi gasoline since March 1, 1989.The final issue involves the air quality consequences of delaying the effectivedate. EPA should not delay action on a SIP revision in such a manner aswould thwart the State's intent in requesting the SIP revision. New Jersey'ssubmittal of the RVP SIP revision in January was clearly aimed at gettingits regulatory program in place for the 1989 ozone season. Thus, it isimportant to have the effective date as early as possible in order to maximizethe air quality benefits of the program in 1989. In deciding to make this action effective on June 30, 1989, EPA has attemptedto balance these competing interests. EPA believes that this effectivedate will both minimize possible difficulties the industry might encounterwith a shorter lead-time and provide citizens in the Northeast as muchrelief as is practical during most of the 1989 ozone season. Although somesuppliers may have made a good faith effort to comply with the May 1 effectivedate specified in the New Jersey proposal, they were under no obligationto do so once EPA preempted the New Jersey requirement by promulgatingfederal RVP controls on March 22, 1989. The Agency cannot, therefore, selectan earlier effective date for all suppliers based on the voluntary actionof a few, especially considering that the time between the March 22 federalrulemaking and today's publication is critical to the refiner/supplierplanning and implementation process regarding fuel delivery for the comingsummer. However, because refiners have already begun to prepare for the sale of9 RVP fuel as a result of EPA's approval of the Massachusetts, Rhode Island,and Connecticut RVP SIPs and in light of the fact that these states sharemany links in the gasoline distribution network with New Jersey, the Agencydoes not believe that an additional 60 to 70 days lead-time is warranted.This starting date in New Jersey, therefore, mirrors the starting datein Massachussets, Rhode Island, and Connecticut. 11. Should EPA reopen the comment period or withdraw and repropose thisSIP revision in light of EPA's final action on the national RVP regulationand other alleged defects in the March proposal? <T3>Comments: </T3>EPA received divergent comments on the appropriate processfor and timing of a final action on New Jersey's SIP revision. Severalcommenters argued that EPA should take final action as soon as possible.On the other hand, other commenters felt that because of numerous allegedlyunresolved issues raised in their substantive comments, EPA should at aminimum repropose action on the revision to deal with these issues beforeproceeding to final action. <T3>Response: </T3>EPA concludes that given its interpretation of the relevantlaw and the seasonal nature of the New Jersey revisions, the Agency shouldproceed expeditiously to final action based on the record currently beforeit. EPA is unpersuaded by the claim that circumstances have so changedsince the proposed approval of the New Jersey revisions that we shouldreopen the comment period or withdraw and repropose this action. EPA'sNPR for the New Jersey RVP program explicitly discussed EPA's final actionon the national RVP program relevant to final action on the State program.EPA clearly presented the path which EPA proposed to follow and the conclusionswhich we proposed to reach in light of the final promulgation of federalRVP regulations. Furthermore, in the final <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice on the national RVP program, EPA explicitlydiscussed consideration of different state RVP control programs. In this case EPA concludes that it is not necessary to issue a reproposalprior to taking final action. EPA believes that it has adequately respondedto all of the substantive comments raised by commenters in the substantivediscussions presented above. Obviously, additional analysis on such technicalissues could always be conducted. However, administrative agencies generallyhave the discretion to determine when issues have been aired sufficientlyand to close the record and proceed to final action, consistent of coursewith the need to act in a reasoned, non-arbitrary fashion (<T3>Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power</T3> v. <T3>N.R.D.C.,</T3> 435 U.S. 519, 554-555 (1978)). Further, EPA should not delay action on a SIP revision in such a mannerthat would thwart the State's intent in requesting the SIP revision. Inthis case, New Jersey has submitted a seasonal requirement that since currentlypreempted must be approved in a timely fashion in order to effectuate thestate's intent that the regulations provide emission reduction benefitsin the upcoming summer ozone season. Therefore, EPA should make best effortsto act on the information available to it now to the extent that it isadequate or else the agency would thwart the State's intent with regardto the 1989 ozone season. Since EPA has concluded that the existing recordis sufficient, EPA can proceed to final action at this time based on thatrecord.<ITAG tagnum="84">Enforcement </ITAG>EPA's proposed approval of the New Jersey SIP revision indicated that therewas a problem with the test method section. The regulation required thattesting be performed in accordance with the American Society for Testingand Materials (ASTM) method D-323. EPA stated that the State must reviseits test method section to include the EPA recognized methods containedin EPA's national volatility rule which are based on an ASTM proposed modificationto D-323 known as Annex 2. On April 27, 1989, EPA received comments fromthe NJDEP which indicated that the State cannot amend its RVP rule throughnormal legislative procedures in time for this year's volatility controlperiod. The New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection stated thatit will adhere to D-323 (which is still a valid ASTM testing procedureand is being used by other NESCAUM states) for the 1989 control periodand committed to amend its test methodology to cite the EPA recognizedmethods in 1990 and subsequent years. EPA finds that its concerns relatedto the test methods were addressed sufficiently by the State and that thetest methods section is approvable. <ITAG tagnum="84">Final Action </ITAG>EPA is approving this revision to the New Jersey Ozone State ImplementationPlan to control gasoline volatility, including any waivers New Jersey maygrant under the program. EPA has also made the finding that the New JerseySIP revision meets the requirements of section 211(c)(4)(C) of the Actfor an exception to federal preemption. The Office of Management and Budget has exempted this rule from the requirementsof section 3 of Executive Order 12291. Under section 307(b)(1) of the Act, petitions for judicial review of thisaction must be filed in the United States Court of Appeals for the appropriatecircuit within 60 days of publication. This action may not be challengedlater in proceedings to enforce its requirements [See section 307(b)(2)].<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 40 CFR Part 52 </ITAG>Air pollution control, Hydrocarbons, Ozone, Incorporation by reference.<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note: </T4>Incorporation by reference of the State Implementation Planfor the State of New York was approved by the Director of the Federal Registeron July 1, 1982.</ITAG>EPA is today approving the New Jersey SIP revision pertaining to its Stategasoline volatility program.<ITAG tagnum="21">Date: June 6, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">William K. Reilly, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator.</ITAG>For the reasons set forth in the preamble, Part 52 of Chapter I of Title40 of the Code of Federal Regulations is amended as follows:<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 52_[AMENDED] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart FF_New Jersey </ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 52 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>42 U.S.C. 7401-7642.</ITAG>2. Section 52.1570 is amended by adding new paragraph (c)(45) to read asfollows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.1570 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Identification of Plan. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(c) * * *(45) Revisions to the New Jersey State Implementation Plan (SIP) for ozonesubmitted on January 27, 1989 by the New Jersey State Department of EnvironmentalProtection (NJDEP) for its state gasoline volatility program, includingany waivers that may be granted under the program by the state. In 1989,the control period will begin on June 30. (i) <T3>Incorporation by reference: </T3>Subchapter 25 of Chapter 27, Title7 of the New Jersey Administrative Code entitled ``Control and Prohibitionof Air Pollution by Vehicular Fuels,'' adopted on January 27, 1989 andeffective on February 21, 1989. (ii) <T3>Additional material: </T3>April 27, 1989 letter from Christopher Daggett,NJDEP, to William Muszynski, EPA Region II. 3. Section 52.1605 is amended by adding a new entry Subchapter 25 underTitle 7, Chapter 27 in numerical order as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.1605 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">EPA-approved New Jersey State regulations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="110"><C>4,L1,tp0,i1,s100,10,r50,r50</C>  <H1>State regulation</H1><H1>State effective date</H1><H1>EPA approved date</H1><H1>Comments</H1> <ITAG tagnum="22"> </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="28">*    *    *    *    * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Title 7, Chapter 27<D>2/21/89</D><D>[FR date and citation of this document] </D><D>Effective date 6/30/89.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="22"> </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="28">*    *    *    *    *  </ITAG>Subchapter 25, ``Control and Prohibition of Air Pollution by VehicularFuels''.<ITAG tagnum="22"> </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="28">*    *    *    *    *</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-14227 Filed 6-15-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6560-50-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>