<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89127-0071 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.1-27-89.f2.A1070</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Record of Decision on Special Isotope Separation Project, Idaho NationalEngineering Laboratory</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Department of Energy DOE.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Record of Decision, Special Isotope Separation Project(SIS).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The DOE has decided to proceed with the constructionand operation of the SIS production facility using the Atomic Vapor LaserIsotope Separation (AVLIS) technology and to select the Idaho NationalEngineering Laboratory (INEL) as the location for the SIS. The DOE hasprepared this Record of Decision (ROD) pursuant to regulations of the Councilon Environmental Quality (40 CFR Part 1505) and Implementing Proceduresof the Department of Energy (52 F.R. 47662, Dec. 15, 1987).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Dr. Ralph G. Lightner, SIS ProgramOffice, DP-7, U.S. Department of Energy, Washington, DC 20545.<ITAG tagnum="84">Decision</ITAG>The DOE has decided to proceed with the construction and operation of theSIS production facility using the AVLIS technology and to select the IdahoNational Engineering Laboratory (INEL) as the location for the SIS. TheINEL is located approximately 45 miles west of the City of Idaho Falls,Idaho. Site preparation activities for the SIS production facility willbe initiated as soon as practical; however, significant physical constructionof the SIS production plant will not be initiated until successful resultsof AVLIS plant performance verification testing at the Lawrence LivermoreNational Laboratory (LLNL) are obtained.<ITAG tagnum="84">Basis for Decision</ITAG>In determining to proceed to construct and operate the AVLIS SIS facility,DOE has, in compliance with the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA)and its implementing regulations, weighed the programmatic need for theSIS facility against its environmental and other costs. DOE has considered:(1) The technology and production alternatives to the SIS Project; (2)the potential environmental consequences of constructing and operatingthe SIS Project at alternative sites; and (3) No Action, i.e., to not constructthe SIS facility. Note that present practice for the production of weapon-gradeplutonium would continue irrespective of whether or not the SIS facilityis constructed and operated.During the period between January and March 1986, DOE conducted a processreadiness review for the purpose of designating a preferred laser isotopeseparation technology for the SIS facility. This culminated a several yearprocess in which DOE investigated potential non-reactor based processesto adjust isotopic contents of plutonium. Subsequent to a NEPA review,DOE selected the AVLIS process as the preferred technology because it wasthe only technology ready to proceed to the definitive plant design phase.Development of AVLIS technology is proceeding at an acceptable pace atLLNL.Regarding production alternatives, only the SIS production facility canprovide the necessary contingency, technological diversity, and flexibilityin meeting approved needs for nuclear defense materials. None of the weapon-gradeplutonium production alternatives to the SIS Project was considered a reasonablealternative to the Proposed Action, as none would, either separately orin combination, provide the required contingency, technological diversity,and flexibility.The DOE had previously designated the INEL as the preferred site for theSIS production facility because it would provide diversification of plutoniumprocessing sites and a favorable labor climate. In deciding to proceedwith the selection of the INEL for the SIS facility, DOE has consideredand evaluated in the FEIS the potential environmental consequences of locatingthe project at each of three locations: the INEL; the Hanford Site nearRichland, Washington; and the Savannah River Plant (SRP) near Aiken, SouthCarolina. The primary differences in potential environmental consequencesassociated with locating the SIS Project at the alternative locations arerelated to factors that include the geographic and demographic area surroundingeach location and the origins, destinations, and transport distances forSIS materials and wastes. While quantitative differences in potential exposuresand risks do exist, none was found to be clearly superior from an environmentalperspective. The FEIS indicates that operation of the plant at any of thethree alternative sites will not pose serious threats to the environmentor public health and safety, nor give rise to significant adverse socioeconomicconsequences.The No Action alternative does not meet programmatic requirements as itrequires a continued exclusive dependence for new nuclear defense materialson production reactors that are more than 35 years old, whose continuedoperation at high power and availability cannot be assured. While the presentpractice of recycling and recovery of weapon-grade plutonium form retirementsor scrap will continue to be a major source of recycled weapon-grade material,it does not provide a contingent capability for the production of new material,if required.<ITAG tagnum="84">Background</ITAG>The DOE, in accordance with the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended,and in subsequent legislation, is responsible for developing and maintainingthe capability to produce special nuclear material and other materialsrequired for defense programs of the United States. The nation's stockpileof weapon-grade plutonium physically resides in weapons held by the Departmentof Defense or in DOE inventories associated with nuclear material and nuclearweapons production, processing, and storage. Annually, the President approvesa document entitled the Nuclear Weapons Stockpile Memorandum (NWSM) whichtakes into account the inventory of existing special nuclear material andother nuclear materials, including weapon-grade plutonium, and sets forththe future composition of the nuclear weapons stockpile required to defendthe United States. The approval of the NWSM by the President and the subsequentauthorization and appropriation of funds by Congress constitute the legalauthority and mandate for DOE to produce the specified types and quantitiesof nuclear defense materials and weapons and to maintain the facilitiesand capabilities to do so.To fulfill its responsibilities, DOE requires contingency in its productioncapability, technological diversity, and flexibility. Contingent capabilityor capacity is essential to ensure that approved needs for defense nuclearmaterials can be met without being dependent on any single facility. Theage of the present DOE facilities requires that a prudent level of contingentproduction capability be initiated now so that future approved requirementscan be met. Technological diversity will help ensure production capabilitythat is not dependent on a single technology which would be susceptibleto interruption or foreclosure by generic issues associated with that technology,such as those incurred by DOE's current total reliance on reactors forproducing nuclear defense materials. Flexibility in DOE's production ofdefense nuclear materials is also required to provide an alternative sourceof weapon-grade plutonium when there are competing demands for tritiumand plutonium production from the same production reactors or when approvedrequirements for weapon-grade plutonium may increase rapidly and extendbeyond the capability of the existing sources. During the last several years, the DOE has investigated potential nonreactor-basedprocesses to adjust the isotopic content of plutonium which does not meetweapon-grade specifications (e.g., fuel-grade plutonium) to provide plutoniummeeting weapon-grade specifications. In accordance with the ConferenceReport for FY 1987 Energy and Water Development Appropriations Acts (PublicLaw 99-141), DOE reviewed the AVLIS process being developed by LLNL andthe Molecular Laser Isotope Separation (MLIS) process under developmentat the Los Alamos National Laboratory to establish the readiness of thesetwo processes for deployment and to select the more suitable process fora possible production facility. In March 1986, DOE prepared an EnvironmentalAssessment (DOE/EA-0298) to evaluate the differences in potential impactsbetween the AVLIS and MLIS technologies. DOE's Finding of No SignificantImpact issued in April 1986 concluded that although there were quantitativeand qualitative differences between the processes, no significantly differentenvironmental impacts existed between the two processes and thus, selectionof an SIS process for focusing development, demonstration, and design ofa potential production plant was not a major Federal action significantlyaffecting the environment. Following this review, DOE selected the AVLISprocess as the preferred technology for the SIS Project, and in October1986, published its Notice of Intent to prepare an EIS for siting, constructingand operating a proposed SIS plant based on the AVLIS process technology[51 FR 39765]. As to follow-up to the technical readiness review conducted in early 1986,DOE initiated a decision-making process that included a site evaluationteam to identify a preferred site for SIS plant design considerations.The site evaluation team considered such criteria as project cost and schedule;environmental, safety, and health impacts; human resources and workload;and socioeconomic considerations. Based on the findings of the site evaluationteam, DOE designated the INEL as the preferred site. DOE conducted an extended public scoping process (Oct. 1986 to March 2,1987) and held two public scoping hearings during this scoping period (69oral commentaries, 44 exhibits, and 99 written submittals were receivedby DOE). A <T3>Draft Environmental Impact Statement, Special Isotope Separation Project,Idaho National Engineering Laboratory, Idaho Falls, Idaho </T3>(DOE/EIS-0136D)was issued and a Notice of Availability was published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>on February 19, 1988 [53 FR 5032]. More than1500 copies of the Draft EIS were distributed to members of Congress, stateand Federal agencies, and concerned individuals. DOE provided a 60-daypublic review period on the Draft EIS, between February 19, 1988, and April21, 1988, that included six days of public hearings and generated 504 oralcommentaries, 803 exhibits and 30 written submittals. DOE then issued anddistributed more than 2100 copies of the Final EIS in early December 1988.The EPA Notice of Availability of the Final EIS was published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>on December 16, 1988 [53 FR 50568]. DOE has consideredand responded to the concerns of the public, state and federal officialsthat were raised throughout these public review periods by making changesor providing additional detail to relevant portions of Vol. 1 of the FEISand/or making specific responses in Vol. 2, Public Comments and Responses.In addition, DOE has considered all comments received on the Final EISin the preparation of this Record of Decision. DOE will continue to coordinatewith interested members of the public and state and federal officials throughoutthe implementation of its decision.<ITAG tagnum="84">Alternatives Considered </ITAG>As described in the <T3>Final Environmental Impact Statement, Special Isotope Separation Project,Idaho National Engineering Laboratory, Idaho Falls, Idaho </T3>(DOE/EIS-0136),November 1988, DOE's preferred alternative is to construct and operatethe SIS facility at the INEL. DOE has considered: (1) The technology andproduction alternatives to the SIS Project; (2) the potential environmentalconsequences of constructing and operating the SIS Project at alternativesites; and (3) No Action, i.e., to not construct the SIS facility. Presentpractice for the production of weapon-grade plutonium would continue irrespectiveof whether or not the SIS facility is constructed and operated. In formulating the Proposed Action, DOE considered two major categoriesof alternatives. These categories of alternatives were technology alternativesto AVLIS and production alternatives for weapon-grade plutonium. The recoveryand recycling of existing weapon-grade plutonium from retired weapons andacceleration of scrap recovery, while not true alternatives to production,were also evaluated.  Because of fundamental technical considerations, cost, or the need to carryout extensive research and development programs, only the MLIS processmerited further consideration as an alternative to the AVLIS process. Asdiscussed under ``Background'' in this Record and Decision, subsequenttechnical evaluations in response to a Congressional request concludedthat only the AVLIS process was technically ready to proceed to the definitiveplant design phase. None of the weapon-grade plutonium production alternatives to the SIS Projectwas considered a reasonable alternative to the Proposed Action, as nonewould, either separately or in combination, provide the required contingency,technological diversity, and flexibility. The production alternatives consideredin the FEIS included increased blending, use of a new fuel lattice in thereactors at the SRP, restart of the N-Reactor at the Hanford Site, conversionof the Washington Nuclear Project Unit 1, and construction and operationof a New Production Reactor. The Special Isotope Separation Project would process DOE owned fuel-gradeplutonium into weapon-grade plutonium using the AVLIS and supporting chemicalprocesses. The AVLIS process uses precisely tuned visible laser light toselectively ionize, or excite, specific plutonium isotopes into a vaporstream. The ionized plutonium isotopes are then separated from the plutoniumisotope of interest. Chemical processes are required to (1) prepare theAVLIS plutonium feed for processing, remove americium-241, and cast plutoniummetal into forms that meet AVLIS processing requirements; (2) recover and,if required, purify the AVLIS plutonium products; and (3) recover and processthe AVLIS separated byproducts. Construction and operation of the SIS production facility at any of thethree alternative sites would require a Laser Support Facility which wouldhouse the laser system, a Plutonium Processing Building, a stand-alonestorage vault, and other support facilities. Construction and operationof the SIS Project would be integrated with existing support and wastemanagement facilities at the alternative sites considered. The atmosphericemissions, liquid effluents, and solid radioactive and nonradioactive wastesresulting from operation would be essentially the same at each of the alternativesites. Operation of the SIS Project at any of the alternative sites consideredwould require the transport of plutonium feed and product material andthe transport of TRU waste and, potentially, SIS generated by-product material.The quantities of material to be transported would all be the same exceptfor the transport of plutonium feed material that would vary based on theamount of feed material already located at each of the alternative sitesconsidered. Although there are different distances involved in the transportof materials and different distances with respect to the release pointof SIS radiological emissions to the atmosphere relative to offsite populations,neither the total transport risks nor the potential offsite populationexposures are significantly different among alternative SIS sites.The use of land areas for the project would neither impact critical ecologicalhabitats and habitats of endangered and threatened species nor impact knownarchaeological or historic resources. All atmospheric releases during constructionand operation would be well below prescribed environmental standards andwastes generated during construction and operation would be minimized andmanaged in accordance with applicable environmental requirements. In additionto a spectrum of potential high-consequence accidents which were analyzed,a severe facility accident was considered in the EIS. The severe facilityaccident, which is considered to be a bounding impact analysis meetingthe CEQ criteria stated in 40 CFR 1502.22, has a estimated probabilityof occurrence of less than 1andmultiply;10-6 per year. Calculated offsiteconsequences for the severe accident are only a small fraction of the 25rem criteria used by the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission in the sitingof commercial nuclear reactors (10 CFR 100).The No Action alternative is a continuation of present DOE weapon-gradeplutonium practice which includes the production of weapon-grade plutoniumthrough blending of fuel-grade plutonium with newly produced plutoniumof higher than weapon-grade plutonium and the continuation of recoveryand recycle of existing weapon-grade plutonium. These practices would continueirrespective of whether or not DOE constructs and operates the SIS Project.<ITAG tagnum="84">Environmentally Preferable Alternative</ITAG>The No Action alternative is considered the ``environmentally preferablealternative.'' Extensive analysis of the environmental consequences associatedwith the No Action alternative is presented in other EISs which are referencedin the SIS FEIS, sections 2.4 and 4.4. The environmental consequences associatedwith the construction and operation of the SIS Project would not occurwith the No Action alternative. Consequences of the construction and operationof the SIS Project, although well within all applicable environmental requirements,would include utilization of previously disturbed and undisturbed landareas, habitat and wildlife loss or displacement, and small unavoidablepopulation and occupational exposures to radioactive and nonradioactivematerials. Although the No Action Alternative is the environmentally preferablealternative, it does not meet programmatic requirements for technologicaldiversity, contingency, and flexibility in meeting approved needs for nucleardefense materials. For the three siting alternatives for the constructionand operation of the SIS facility, the analysis in the FEIS indicated thatnone was clearly environmentally superior to the others.<ITAG tagnum="84">Mitigation</ITAG>DOE has considered all practicable means to avoid or minimize environmentalharm from construction and operation of SIS at the INEL. In proceedingwith the construction and operation of the SIS production facility, DOEis committed to complying with all applicable state and Federal environmentalrequirements and to mitigation measures required by DOE policy, law orregulation, as discussed in the EIS. For example, DOE will replace theFreons used in the laser electronic packages with other acceptable dielectriccoolants as soon as they are available from commercial manufacturers inorder to minimize impacts on stratospheric ozone depletion. Until suchsubstitutes are available, ongoing engineering development to further reduceemissions, such as chillers and condensation systems to reduce Freon evaporationduring refurbishments and vapor recovery systems for recycling will beemployed.Definitive design and operation will continue to emphasize waste minimizationpractices and ensure the segregation of mixed and hazardous wastes. Definitivedesign and administrative controls will also ensure that only nonradioactiveand nonhazardous liquid effluents are discharged to the environment. TheINEL will take all necessary measures to ensure that SIS hazardous andmixed wastes are handled and managed in accordance with all applicablerequirements of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA) and theIdaho Hazardous Waste Management Act. Best management practices to reducefugitive dust emissions and erosion (such as utilization of road base materialand application of suppressants, routing of surface water runoff to temporaryholding basins), and spill prevention measures during construction (includingadherence to a Spill Prevention, Control and Countermeasures (SPCC) planand provision for washdown areas surrounded by berms or channels for controlof inadvertent runoff) will be implemented. Adherence to an SPCC plan andcompliance with all applicable requirements of RCRA and the Idaho HazardousWaste Management Act will also be ensured during operation of the SIS productionfacility.Periodic inspections of excavations by a professional paleontologist willalso be implemented to determine the significance of any paleontologicalresources encountered and any need for potential mitigation measures. Disturbedareas not affected by SIS operation would be revegetated. Administrativemeasures intended to mitigate environmental consequences include independentmonitoring agreements funded by DOE between DOE and the State of Idahoand DOE and Idaho State University as a means of verifying DOE's environmentalmonitoring data; DOE's safety analysis program conducted in accordancewith DOE Orders; monitoring programs to demonstrate compliance with radiationprotection standards and DOE policies; and emergency preparedness planning,training and coordination with state and local officials to respond toemergencies on or outside the INEL.<ITAG tagnum="84">Conclusion</ITAG>The DOE has weighed the programmatic need to proceed with the constructionand operation of the SIS facility against its potential environmental consequencesand, after consideration of the benefits and impacts of alternatives asanalyzed in the Final EIS, comments received on the EIS, and the anticipatedbenefits and costs associated with the proposed action and its alternatives,has decided to proceed with the construction and operation of the SIS facilityat the INEL. To ensure that the environmental consequences of the SIS Projectare minimized, DOE has committed to pursue mitigation measures during constructionand operation that have been or will be incorporated into project planning,and will continue its interactions with Federal and State of Idaho regulatoryagencies to ensure that actions are implemented in accordance with thisRecord of Decision and in compliance with all applicable regulatory requirements.<ITAG tagnum="21">Issued at Washington, DC, this 19th day of January, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Donna Fitzpatrick,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Under Secretary, U.S. Department of Energy.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-1982 Filed 1-26-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6450-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>