<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89201-0080 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.2-01-89.f2.A1079</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">Health Care Financing Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[ORD-61-N]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Medicare and Medicaid Programs; Health Care Financing Research andDemonstration; Availability of Funds for Cooperative Agreements and Grants</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA), HHS.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>General notice.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This notice announces the availability of HCFA fundingunder cooperative agreements and grants for projects which will focus onmajor issues in the financing and delivery of health care under the Medicareand Medicaid programs. This notice contains information about the subjectareas for cooperative agreements and grants that will be given priority,project requirements, application procedures, and other pertinent information.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>Closing dates for submission of letters of intent and cooperativeagreement and grant applications are presented in sections IV and VII,respectively, of this preamble.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES:</T2><ITAG tagnum="15"/><T3>Application Kits: </T3>Standard application forms and related instructionsare available from, and must be formally submitted to: Paul McKeown, HealthCare Financing Administration, Office of Budget and Administration, Divisionof Procurement Services, Room 364 East High Rise, 6325 Security Boulevard,Baltimore, Maryland 21207-5187, (301) 966-5157.Mr. McKeown is also available to answer questions and to provide guidanceconcerning the completion of the application forms.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Michael Spodnik, Health Care FinancingAdministration, Office of Research and Demonstrations, Research and DemonstrationProgram Support Branch, 2-D-6 Oak Meadows Building, 6325 Security Boulevard,Baltimore, Maryland 21207-5187, (301) 966-6637.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>Payments for health care services,primarily through the Medicare and Medicaid programs, constitute one ofthe largest single segments of Federal and State budgets. Because of increasesin expenditures, the Federal Government must reassess current methods ofpayment for publicly-financed health care programs and look for innovativemethods for paying for health care services in the future, while ensuringaccess to medically necessary and effective care. HCFA supports the conduct of research and demonstration projects principallythrough two award mechanisms: procurements (contracts) and assistance awards(grants and cooperative agreements). This notice solicits applicationsfor projects that will be awarded as grants and cooperative agreements.Announcements of planned procurement awards are made through notices publishedin the Commerce Business Daily. The purpose of the projects being solicitedunder this notice will be to advance knowledge in health care delivery/financingand quality/effectiveness of care, and to develop ways of applying thatknowledge to improve the administration of health care programs and toensure access to quality and effective health care. We believe this assistancewill have a long term and vital public purpose: to increase the efficiencyand effectiveness of the entire health care system by improving the waysin which health care is financed, reimbursed, and delivered. The notice describes the application procedures, general policy considerations,criteria to be used in reviewing applications, and selection criteria forHCFA cooperative agreements and grants. This notice replaces the noticepreviously published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>on September 10, 1987 (52 FR 34304). HCFA is also requiring a letter of intent, 30 days prior to closing dates,from all organizations intending to submit an application in response tothis solicitation (see section IV.A Application Procedures). This statement reflects our current priorities and emphasizes our primaryinterest in the following six areas: 1. Continued access to quality care under Medicare and Medicaid and improvedmethods for measuring quality and effectiveness of care; 2. Refinement of the current Medicare physician payment methodology throughthe study of the causes for the growth in Medicare outlays for physicianservices and the development of cost-effective approaches to controllingsuch growth; 3. Increased competition and consumer choice and continued growth of Medicarecapitated systems; 4. Continued improvement to the current Medicare hospital prospective paymentsystem, and the study of the outpatient delivery system; 5. Analysis of other Medicare and Medicaid program services and issuesleading to increased efficiency in health care delivery and financing,particularly in program areas that have a significant impact on programand beneficiary expenditures (high-cost, high-volume services), includingsuch areas as clinical laboratories, home health and long-term care (LTC),and treatment of acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS); and 6. Refinement of the current long-term care delivery and payment systemsunder Medicare and Medicaid. We will be continuing our efforts in response to specific congressionally-mandatedstudies in these and other priority areas. We also are interested in expandingour current efforts in each of these areas as they relate to the financingand delivery of care in rural and urban inner city areas. This notice differs in several respects from previous general solicitationsfor HCFA-sponsored research and demonstrations. First, while one of ourhighest priorities is in the area of refining the current physician paymentsystem, particularly under Medicare, previous solicitations for applicationsin this area have generally not resulted in the submission of a large numberof quality applications focusing on the major problems and issues facingthe Medicare programs in controlling the escalating expenditures for physicianservices. Our goal has been to stimulate the development of new and innovativeresearch efforts designed to help us better understand and address themajor factors influencing the growth in Medicare outlays for physicianservices and to encourage new organizations to develop expertise in thisarea and submit applications to us. Given the importance of these issuesto the efficient and effective operation of the health care system, weare reassessing our current process for soliciting applications in thisarea. We intend to announce in the near future our specific project needsin this area. In the current notice, we have stated general areas of researchinterest. We would strongly encourage organizations with new and innovativeapproaches to addressing these issues to submit applications in responseto this notice. Second, we published in the December 14, 1988 <T4>Federal Register </T4>(53 FR 50293) a notice soliciting applicationsto respond to the series of congressional mandates in the recently enactedMedicare Catastrophic Coverage Act of 1988 (Pub. L. 100-360). One of theprincipal areas included in that solicitation was long-term care. We areexamining currently our needs for additional research on long-term careissues not reflected in the December 14, 1988 notice. Therefore, as inthe case of physician payment research, we are strongly encouraging organizationswith new and innovative approaches to addressing the long-term care issueswe have identified to submit applications in response to this notice. Based on our examination of research needs in the long-term care area,we may issue a separate solicitation focusing specifically on long-termcare issues. Section 4403 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987 mandatesthat HCFA target 10 percent of its research budget in each of fiscal years1988-1990 for projects substantially or exclusively related to rural healthcare issues. In response to that mandate, we have expanded our emphasison rural research issues in this solicitation. We also convened on October27 a panel of experts on rural health care issues. Papers prepared by theseexperts will be used to formulate a future rural research and demonstrationagenda for HCFA. This notice also announces the new closing dates for cooperative agreementsand grants for FY 1989. (While we have retained a separate waiver-onlycycle, we reserve the right to defer consideration of applications receivedfor this cycle until the next general solicitation for grant and cooperativeagreement applications.) The schedule is as follows:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">April 3, 1989 (Close of Business (C.O.B.)): Waiver-only applicationsand applications requesting discretionary funds.<ITAG tagnum="15">Monday, August 7, 1989 (C.O.B.): Waiver-only applications.</ITAG>You should be aware that, in the future, the mailing list which the Officeof Research and Demonstrations maintains of organizations interested inreceiving announcements of solicitations for grants and cooperative agreementswill serve as the principal mechanism for targetting such solicitations.Therefore, any organization not currently included on this mailing listbut wishing to be notified of future solicitations for grant/cooperativeagreements should submit a letter stating this desire and identifying anyspecific areas of topical interest. This letter should be addressed asfollows: ORD Mailing List (GRANTS), Health Care Financing Administration,Office of Research and Demonstrations, 2-E-6 Oak Meadows Building, 6325Security Boulevard, Baltimore, Maryland 21207-5187. <ITAG tagnum="84">I. Current Priorities for HCFA Funding of New Grants and CooperativeAgreements </ITAG>The statement of fiscal year 1989 funding priorities for HCFA researchand demonstration grant and cooperative agreement applications is as follows:A. Quality and Effectiveness of Care The Social Security Amendments of 1983 (Pub. L. 98-21) mandated that westudy and report on the impact of the hospital prospective payment systemon Medicare beneficiaries. A major aspect is the impact of prospectivepayment on the quality of care provided to beneficiaries. The decreasedinpatient hospital resource utilization resulting from this system hasraised concerns as to whether the quality of care provided has been adverselyaffected; or whether access to needed levels of care has been limited.The rapid changes in other Medicare and Medicaid program areas make iteven more critical that we ensure that the level of care provided underMedicare and Medicaid is a high quality. <ITAG tagnum="81">1. Effectiveness Initiative </ITAG>One major area in which we will be placing increased effort is the EffectivenessInitiative. This initiative was undertaken in response to a growing concernon the part of HCFA and the Department, the Congress, organized medicine,and the beneficiary population about the need to structure a system thatfacilitates the development of knowledge about the effectiveness of servicesprovided to Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries. A multi-year agenda isbeing designed to build upon current efforts and coordination underwaywithin HCFA and the Public Health Service. Overall, the goal of this coordinatedagenda is to move toward a more rational, scientific, and empirically-basedprocess for determining which treatments and surgical procedures are effectiveat improving the health status of Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries.Specifically, the objectives are to improve our current monitoring systemsfor examining outcomes and effectiveness of care received by beneficiaries,and to use the results of this enhanced monitoring system to identify neededstudies of effectiveness to improve the overall quality of care providedunder the Medicare and Medicaid programs. The planned agenda builds on the efforts begun in 1987-88 (the Medicarehospital mortality data release, the expanded reseach effort designed todevelop other valid quality of care outcome measures, and the conveningof experts in the quality and effectiveness of care field to help shapethe future agenda of this area). In fiscal year 1989, we are specifically interested in projects which developand refine methodologies for examining the safety, efficacy, and cost-effectivenessof specific medical or surgical interventions (such as bypass surgery,carotid endarterectomy) for the Medicare population. We are particularlyinterested in studies which use or combine routinely collected Medicaredata, or investigate methods of combining these data with other primaryor secondary clinical data.The Health Care Financing Administration has used a variety of administrativedata for quality of care research and demonstrations. However, administrativedata are limited with regard to beneficiary health and socio-demographiccharacteristics. Other data sets, supported by private and public initiatives,may have the potential, at low cost, to enhance HCFA's data bases, especiallyif they can be linked to administrative data. We are, therefore, interestedin receiving proposals that would carry out epidemiologic and other qualityof care and effectiveness research using linked administrative data sets.We are also interested in proposals that would develop methodologies tocollect and maintain risk factor information, as well as, health and functionalstatus information on beneficiaries. Because of the large cost often associatedwith data collection, we are primarily interested in proposals that takeadvantage of data that could be collected and maintained on an ongoingbasis for a relatively low cost. <ITAG tagnum="81">2. Alternative Outcome Measures and Their Use </ITAG>Little advancement has been made in the development of additional measuresof patient outcomes that can be used in quality of care studies. Most studiescurrently use mortality or rehospitalization rates. Research is neededto develop reliable and valid measures of patient outcome that are sensitiveto variations in the quality of care. Of critical interest are projectsthat directly test the relationships between the process of medical careand the resultant outcomes of care. Such studies are needed to understandthe usefulness of outcome data for quality of care monitoring. <ITAG tagnum="81">3. Quality Issues in Long Term Care, Physician Care, Ambulatory Care,and Capitated Systems </ITAG>We are interested in developing and refining reliable and valid qualityof care measures for different payment systems and different treatmentsettings. Therefore, we are interested in the following: a. Projects that develop, demonstrate, and evaluate quality of care outcomemeasures and monitoring systems for nursing homes, outpatient care, andphysician services. b. Projects that develop an overall approach to quality standards, monitoring,and improvement in the area of ambulatory care (including both surgicaland non-surgical services). Such an approach should be designed to movetoward minimum quality standards applicable across the various ambulatorycare settings and across various payment mechanisms. We are interestedin projects that also focus on specific issues related to the quality ofambulatory care, including the appropriateness of services provided forspecific conditions. c. Development and demonstration of monitoring systems and outcome measuresfor assessing the quality of care in managed care and capitated paymentenvironments. <ITAG tagnum="81">4. Hospital Care </ITAG>We continue to be interested in studies that address the issue of accessto hospital care and the quality of care while in the hospital. Proposedstudies in these areas should emphasize how they expand upon current workunderway in these areas. a. <T3>Access to hospital care. </T3>The reduction in Medicare and Medicaidoverall admissions has put pressure on providers to cut back on availablebeds, consolidate resources and in some cases may even result in hospitalclosings. In terms of the entire health care system, these changes probablyreflect improvements in efficiency. However, it is possible that certaingroups of beneficiaries may have difficulty in getting needed inpatientcare. We are interested in studies examining the extent to which beneficiaryaccess to hospital care may have changed as a result of the prospectivepayment system, particularly whether there has been a differential impacton access in rural versus urban area hospitals, and what the impact isof hospital closures on access to care and health status of the populationin the hospital catchment area. b. <T3>Quality of care while in the hospital. </T3>Quality of inpatient carecould be greatly affected by prospective payment system incentives, particularlyin light of shortened lengths of stay, personnel reductions, and incentivesto reduce ancillary services. We are interested in studies addressing thefollowing:(1) Any measurable changes or trends in the structural characteristicsof hospitals, such as staffing or other inputs, that are attributable toprospective payment and the impacts of these changes on quality of care.(2) The many changes taking place in the provision of medical care thatare outside of the hospital setting, yet could impact on the assessmentof quality of care in the hospital. One is the movement of many surgicalprocedures to the outpatient setting. A second is a trend toward movingterminal patients from a hospital setting into LTC facilities and homesettings (for example, hospices). Studies are needed that examine the impactsthese and other health care delivery trends have on the provision of inpatientcare and the assessment of that care.B. Physician PaymentProgram expenditures continue to climb at double-digit rates, despite numerouslegislative, regulatory and administrative endeavors for containment ofpayments for physician services, Hence, we are interested in conductingprojects designed to identify, explain, develop or test effective refinementsor alternative payment approaches to counteract the rising costs of physiciancare, while maintaining access to a high quality of care.Previous solicitations for applications in this area have generally notresulted in the submittal of a large number of high quality applicationsfocusing on topics of major interest to us. Our goal has been to stimulatethe development of new and innovative research efforts designed to helpus better understand and address the major factors influencing the growthin Medicare outlays for physician services and to encourage new organizationsand individuals to develop expertise in this area and submit applicationsto us. Given the importance of these issues to the efficient and effectiveoperation of the health care system, we are expanding our current approachesfor soliciting applications/proposals in this area. We intend to announcein the near future our specific project needs in this area, as well asthe award mechanism we will be using (for example, contract or grant/cooperativeagreement).Listed below are the general areas of current research interest. Whilethe solicitation planned for announcement in the near future will likelyfocus on the same general set of issues outlined below, that announcementwill discuss specific types of projects HCFA needs to have conducted. Thepurpose of the current solicitation is to encourage innovative and newthinking on the part of individuals and organizations about the types ofresearch that should be conducted to address these major program issues.Therefore, we would strongly encourage individuals and organizations withnew and innovative approaches to addressing these issues to submit applicationsin response to this notice.Submission of grant/cooperative agreement applications in response to thecurrent notice does not preclude individuals and organizations from respondingto the planned solicitation when it is announced.Major areas of research interest include the following:andbullet; Analyze the causes and forces driving expenditure increases forphysician services.andbullet; Identify and quantify the behavioral responses of physicians tochanges in payment levels, methods, requirements, or volume controls whichare intended to constrain program expenditures or patient out-of-pocketcosts.andbullet; Develop new conceptual groupings of physician procedures and servicesthat might serve as a practical basis for determination of payments forphysician care.andbullet; Examine private sector approaches for controlling physician servicevolume and intensity to determine their effectiveness and their potentialfor use by Medicare or Medicaid. C. Alternative Payment Systems Our overall goal is to identify, develop, demonstrate, and evaluate effectivealternative health care delivery or payment systems to control costs andoffer expanded consumer choices under the Medicare and Medicaid programs.At the same time, we wish to ensure continued access to quality healthcare and to move towards payment systems based on capitation and competitionin the marketplace. In general, projects should have the prospect of reducingcosts in either the short or long term; at a minimum, they must be budgetneutral. As part of this effort, we are interested in supporting research and demonstrationprojects that develop and test payment systems that provide incentivesto Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries to be more informed purchasers ofhealth care plans and services, including payment systems based on capitationand competition in the marketplace. We also are interested in consumerinformation projects that support such systems. Specific examples of thesetypes of projects are as follows: 1. Alternative Provider Arrangements We are interested in projects that examine the applicability of private-sectorpractices to control health care costs, with emphasis on selected highvolume/cost Medicare services and areas, while also ensuring quality ofcare. Such projects should focus on private-sector initiatives that usealternative market-oriented methods of pricving and/or utilization managementfor hospital or physician services. Both research and demonstration projectsare encouraged. We are particularly interested in projects that examinethe cost-effectiveness and feasibility of applying these alternative providerarrangements in a fee-for-service setting for Medicare beneficiaries. Demonstration applications should delineate provider and beneficiary incentivesfor participation, as well as the structured elements which would generatesavings for the Medicare trust funds. Individual beneficiary participationmust be voluntary. However, these alternative provider arrangements mayreduce or waive coinsurance and deductible requirements or offer otheracceptable incentives (such as increased benefits or reduced Medigap premiumrates) to encourage beneficiary participation. Potential demonstration applicants should be aware that HCFA previouslyissued separate solicitations for demonstration projects of Part B preferredprovider organizations and designated heart bypass centers, and is pursuingdevelopment of the concept of designated cataract providers. Therefore,we strongly recommend that you contact HCFA before submitting and application.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Long-Term Effects on Competition </ITAG>It has been argued that competition among health plans will reduce cost.However, lack of understanding of the effects of patient switching amongplans, of possible biased selection of low cost plans by healthy persons,and of exactly how HMOs/CMPs achieve their savings, makes it difficultto estimate the long-term effects of competition. We are interested inanalyses of the competitive process among health plans to understand betterwhat a competitive environment might lead to in terms of costs, providerbehavior, organization of health services, and impact on Medicare and Medicaidbeneficiaries. For example, we are interested in economic analyses of thebehavior of health plans within the context of the local market for healthcare. Competitive behavior in terms of pricing, benefits, marketing, expansion,and mergers also are areas of interest. <ITAG tagnum="81">3. Medicaid Capitation Rates </ITAG>Capitated arrangements are becoming more prevalent as a mechanism for Statesto purchase or finance health care under the Medicaid program. Such arrangementsmay be with counties, health insuring organizations, or other prepaid organizations.One area of particular interest is coverage of joint Medicare and Medicaidbeneficiaries under Medicare-qualified capitated HMOs and CMPs. The equityof the rate-setting methodology is critical, particularly as more capitationarrangements are established. A variety of rate-setting methodologies havebeen employed, and we are interested in discerning the factors and themethodologies that result in fair and accurate capitation rates. We alsoare interested in testing refinements in the capitation payment modelsdeveloped by States. <ITAG tagnum="81">4. Impact of State Systems </ITAG>A number of States have implemented managed care programs which restrictbeneficiaries' nominal freedom to choose their physicians. The desirabilityand impact of limiting beneficiaries' choice of physicians is a major issueassociated with such systems, particularly section 1915(b) programs. Considerationof this policy issue would be facilitated with information that would allowus to assess, through an operational measure, the actual availability ofan access to physicians and physician services under mandatory managedcare programs versus fee-for-service systems, across geographic settings.D. Hospital Payment  During the past few years, the Medicare prospective payment system forinpatient services has undergone continuous adjustment through regulatoryand legislative changes. Other areas of hospital reimbursement, includingreimbursement for capital costs and reimbursement for care provided inexcluded units, also have been changed through regulatory and legislativeaction. We will be giving particular priority to studies of the factorsunderlying variations in changes in wages indices and further analysesof medical education payments to hospitals. To the extent that they offernew or innovative contributions to our knowledge, we also are interestedin studies and demonstration projects to improve the system of inpatienthospital payment under Medicare, along with studies of the potential forpaying for other services (for example, outpatient services) under a prospectivepayment method.  <ITAG tagnum="81">1. PPS Impact  </ITAG>In 1985, HCFA awarded a 3-year contract to evaluate the impact of PPS onbeneficiaries, providers, and other segments of the health care deliveryand financing system. A follow-up contract to extend this area of researchwas awarded in 1988. We have continued to augment the work of these contractswith grants and cooperative agreements that focus on particularly importanttopics and that bring particular expertise to the study of these topics.Applications submitted in this area should emphasize how the proposed researchexpands upon the work previously done or currently underway in this area. a. <T3>Financial Impact of the Prospective Payment System and Other PayorSystems on Hospitals.</T3> We are interested in studies of the financialstatus of hospitals prior to and during the implementation of the prospectivepayment system. The studies should address the impact of the Medicare prospectivepayment system on different types of hospitals with the analysis usingsuch variables as hospital size, market share, occupancy rates, rural/urbanstatus, teaching status, and disproportionate share status. We also areinterested in studies analyzing the impact of the prospective payment systemon hospital revenues and any resultant cost-shifting dynamics, particularyas they relate to the incidence and cost of administratively necessarydays, facility conversions, patient transfers to swing beds or excludedunits, and business arrangements of provider affiliations. Such analysisalso should consider the effect that private and other public (non-medicare)payors have on a hospital's financial status. To the extent possible, non-inpatientservices revenues and costs should be included in the study.  b. <T3>Analysis of the Determinants of Hospital Costs Under Prospective Paymentand the Components of Hospital Cost Increases.</T3> Public debate aboutthe appropriate annual update for the PPS payment level often centers onthe rate of increase in hospitals' costs. Many hospitals maintain thatPPS pays too little to cover their Medicare costs. Others argue that therate of increase in costs is unjustifiable. However, the PPS payment levelmay influence hospital strategies that affect the level of costs that areincurred. For example, it has been argued that under PPS hospitals haveconcentrated on expending services to enhance market share rather thanadopting measures to control costs. We are interested in research thataddresses the circumstances under which hospitals will pursue cost controlstrategies and the factors that determine the success of such strategies. c. <T3>Analyses of Hospital Case-Mix.</T3> HCFA has supported research anddemonstration projects that would improve case-mix measurement and testalternative case-mix measurement systems for prospective payment of inpatienthospital care or other health care providers and test alternative case-specificpayment systems for Medicare or other payors. We are especially interestedin examining the impact of care-mix growth variation on different typesof hospitals (for example, urban/rural hospitals, teaching hospitals, andlarge/small hospitals).  d. <T3>Analysis of Rural and Urban Inner City Hospital Issues.</T3> In general,we are interested in developing a better understanding of how rural andurban inner city hospitals function, what can be done to assist them, andwhether new types of facilities or services should be developed to replaceor supplement them. Some areas of particular interest to us are:  (1) Studies to examine the impact of the prospective payment system onaccess to care in rural and urban inner city areas. In particular, studiesthat examine changes in occupancy rate, diagnosis-related group (DRG) use,hospital referrals, patient transfers, and posthospital care since theinception of the prospective payment system.(2) Studies to examine the financial status of various classes of ruraland urban inner city hospitals to identify those that have done well underthe prospective payment system and those that have not and to determinethe factors contributing to both.(3) Studies to examine the impact on population health status (particularlyfor the elderly and poor) where rural and urban inner city residents mayhave limited access to care. The analysis of utilization patterns acrossproviders in areas in which, or near which, a hospital has closed is alsoof great interest.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Prospective Payment System Refinement</ITAG>a. <T3>Refinement of Specific Prospective Payment Factors.</T3> We are interestedin studies that address refinement of the current prospective payment system,such as the outlier payment policy, systems that examine severity of illnesswithin a given DRG, and other areas of potential refinement (such as developmentof alternative non-labor input price adjustment).b. <T3>Hospital Capital Payments.</T3> We plan to continue to study capitalinvestment patterns of different types of hospitals. We are interestedin better understanding the capital positions and investent patterns (includingan analysis of interest, principal, and depreciation) of different hospitals(by type, region, size, ownership, occupancy level, and utilization level).In addition, we are intested in studies to identify which capital investmentshave the most positive impact on operating margins, occupancy rates, andutilization. We are intrested also in analysis of the amount other insurerspay for hospital capital expenditures, and in understanding how hospitalsfinance different types of capital investments.c. <T3>Analysis of Medical Education Payments.</T3> We are interested in betterunderstanding the underlying factors that relate to the indirect medicaleducation (IME) adjustment factor and its interaction with other Medicarepayment adjustments. We are interested particularly in analysis which assistus in assessing the justifiability of an indirect medical education add-on,and the extent to which all teaching hospitals need IME payments to maintainfinancial viability and the quality of their medical education programs.Also of interest is a study of the extent to which services of residentsand interns substitute for care and services of other physicians.d. <T3>Analysis of Factors Wage and Other Input Costs.</T3> We are interestedin economic analyses designed to assist in better understanding the factorsunderlying the cross-section variations and changes over time in wagesand other input costs. We particularly are interested in studies that wouldexamine potential refinements to the hospital wage index and the hospitalmarket basket index.e. <T3>Prospective Payment Systems for Excluded Hospitals.</T3> We remaininterested in projects directed at developing an implementable prospectivepayment system for categories of excluded hospitals: Rehabilitation, psychiatric,and children's hospitals. Such applications should build upon work donepreviously in these areas and should address units of service, bundlesof services, levels of payment, implementation problems for providers andpayors, data adequacy, secondary effects, etc.<ITAG tagnum="81">3. Outpatient Care</ITAG>a. <T3>Analysis of Hospital Outpatient Care.</T3> We are interested in projectsthat will help us better understand the rapid growth in hospital outpatientcosts. Specifically, we are interested in the following:(1) Analyzing the increase in the volume of procedures provided in outpatientdepartments prior to and during the prospective payment system, with emphasison clinical laboratory, radiology, and ambulatory surgical procedures.(2) Studying the shift of Medicare cases from inpatient to outpatient departmentsprior to and during prospective payment system. (3) Examining the business arrangements between hospital outpatient departmentsand health practitioners and suppliers who deliver care or goods used inhospital outpatient departments. b. <T3>Alternative Payment Methodolgies for Outpatient/Ambulatory Services.</T3>We are interested in projects that will assist us in working towardprospective payment for ambulatory services provided in hospital outpatientand other ambulatory care settings. Although we currently have severalprojects that are working toward the development of prospective paymentfor ambulatory surgery, we would consider additional innovative projectsthat might propose new and innovative concepts in this area. We are particularly interested in projects that address nonsurgical services(such as emergency services, general medical services, and other clinicservices typically utilized by Medicare patients) provided in a hospitaloutpatient setting. Among the issues that need to be addressed are: Refinementand application of existing patient classification system; the possibilityof applying payment limits; determining the appropriate bundles of servicesfor payment; identification of justifiable cost differences between hospitalsand across all ambulatory care settings for similar care; and innovativeprospective payment methodologies. E. Program Efficiencies, Analyses, and Refinements In the past few years, several legislative and regulatory changes havebeen implemented that were directed at improving the effectiveness andefficiency of the Medicare and Medicaid programs. In other sections ofthis grants solicitation, the major programmatic changes in the hospitaland physician sector have been treated as priority areas. In this prioritysection, we address certain other facets of the Medicare and Medicaid programsthat have undergone change. <ITAG tagnum="81">1. Acquired Immunodeficiency Syndrome (AIDS) </ITAG>We are interested in studies to determine the implications of AIDS forMedicare and Medicaid outlays. Specifically, we are interested in studiesof the incidence and prevalance of AIDS among Medicare and Medicaid patients,and the utilization and cost of services for the treatment of beneficiarieswith AIDS. <ITAG tagnum="81">2. Home Health and Skilled Nursing Facility Services </ITAG>We are interested in analyses that examine changes in Medicare and non-Medicarepayments and utilization in the home health care and skilled nursing facilitymarkets. Utilization and expenditures for these services vary widely acrossStates. We are interested in exploring the differences in Medicare paymentand utilization by geographic area, and how differences in market characteristics(demographics, numbers and types of providers, etc.) influence utilizationof these services. Studies in this area should include time series analysesof Medicare's market share for these services. <ITAG tagnum="81">3. International Health Care Systems Studies </ITAG>We are interested in studies to develop and analyze data to assist in evaluatingfinancing and delivery arrangements found in other countries, where thesearrangements have relevance and potential application for the United States.These studies should permit the analysis of disaggregate and comparableinternational data, and should focus on the following areas of prioritydiscussed elsewhere in this notice: a. Systems and methodologies to measure and monitor quality and effectivenessof care. b. Payment systems for physician services. c. Innovative payment systems that promote competition and provide opportunitiesfor consumer choice. d. Alternative systems for the financing and delivery of long-term careservices.<ITAG tagnum="81">4. Managed Care Studies</ITAG>We are interested in a study of private sector approaches to managed healthcare; specifically, how the private sector:a. Manages and treats high-cost cases; b. Selects, monitors, evaluates, and compensates providers;c. Reviews and controls utilization and costs;d. Provides incentives (to both patients and providers); ande. Evaluates and measures the cost-effectiveness of private sector managedcare programs and their effect on patient and provider behavior and qualityof care.We are also interested in studies to develop methodologies for rigorousassessment of the cost-effectiveness of managed care interventions, suchas case-management for high-cost cases and utilization management controls.F. PreventionSection 4071 of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987 (Pub. L.100-203) mandated the conduct of a demonstration program to determine thecost-effectiveness of including influenza vaccine as a covered serviceunder the Medicare program. In response to that mandate, the Center forDisease Control, Public Health Service, under funding from HCFA, solicitedand awarded sites in 1988 to participate in the demonstration. Unfortunately,there was an insufficient number of awarded sites to be able to fully respondto the congressional mandate. HCFA, therefore, plans to be soliciting shortlyfor additional sites to participate in the demonstration project as partof the 1989 flu season. Eligible applicants will be the official publichealth agencies of States, political subdivisions of States, the Districtof Columbia, the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico, and any other public or nonprofitprivate entity. Entities interested in receiving the program announcementsoliciting applications to participate in this demonstration should notifyHCFA in writing by February 10 in order to be included on the mailing listto receive application materials.Information may be obtained on this demonstration by contacting John Meitl,Office of Demonstrations and Evaluations, Office of Research and Demonstrations,Health Care Financing Administration, Room 2306 Oak Meadows Building, 6325Security Boulevard, Baltimore, Maryland 21207, (301) 966-6617.Potential applicants should direct their requests to be placed on the mailinglist to the above address.G. Sub-Acute and Long Term Care<ITAG tagnum="81">Medicare Long-Term Care Issues</ITAG>HCFA published in the December 14, 1988 <T4>Federal Register </T4>(53 FR 50293) a notice soliciting applicationsto respond to the series of congressional mandates in the recently enactedMedicare Catastrophic Coverage Act of 1988 (Pub. L. 100-360). One of theprincipal areas included in that solicitation was long-term care. We areexamining currently our needs for additional research on long-term careissues not reflected in the December 14, 1988 notice. We have identifiedbelow our general areas of current research interest. We are interestedin new and innovative thinking on the part of individuals and organizationsabout the types of research that should be conducted to address these majorprogram issues. Therefore, we would strongly encourage individuals andorganizations with new and innovative approaches to addressing these issuesto submit applications in response to this notice.Based on our examination of research needs in the long-term care area,we also may issue a separate solicitation focusing specifically on long-termcare issues.andbullet; Analyses that examine geographic variations between Medicare andnon-Medicare payments and utilization in the home health care and skillednursing facility markets.andbullet; Studies that assess the impact of recent Medicare coverage policyclarifications for skilled nursing facility services.andbullet; Examination of cost-effective alternative approaches to the deliveryand payment for sub-acute care.<ITAG tagnum="81">Medicaid Long-Term Care Issues </ITAG>Medicaid is a principal source of funding for long term care in the UnitedStates. Between 1973 and 1984, long term care expenditures under Medicaidincreased from $3.0 to $17.5 billion. This growth rate is the fastest forany health service area and is expected to continue to increase in thefuture, due in part to demographic trends. The Medicaid program is operatedand funded in part by States. The Federal Government shares in the fundingof the Medicaid program through the Federal matching percentage rate establishedfor each State. Since we share in the financing of this program, and inview of the anticipated growth in costs, we share the States' interestin projects that would provide a better understanding of the current longterm care delivery and financing systems under Medicaid, the subpopulationsserved by the program, and projects that would design and test alternativesto these systems. We have identified below our general areas of current research interest.We are interested in new and innovative thinking on the part of individualsand organizations about the types of research and demonstrations that shouldbe conducted to address these major program issues. Therefore, we wouldstrongly encourage individuals and organizations with new and innovativeapproaches to addressing these issues to submit applications in responseto this notice. Major areas of interest include the following: andbullet; Examine innovative, alternative approaches to cost-effective deliveryof and payment for long term care services, including innovative managedcare systems. andbullet; Better understand the factors affecting State and local area variationsin patient utilization of long term care services and how these factorsand variations affect total expenditures for long term care services underMedicaid. andbullet; Develop more sensitive predictors (including functional assessmentmeasures) of future need for and use of nursing home and sub-acute services,particularly among the disabled elderly.<ITAG tagnum="84">II. Agreements and Grants</ITAG>A. General A review of the requirements for existing projects and our expected FY1989 budget indicates that approximately $1.5 million may be availableto HCFA's Office of Research and Demonstrations to fund new cooperativeagreements and grants for research and demonstration projects in the priorityareas listed in section I. Applications for cooperative agreements and grants may be submitted toHCFA by private or public non-profit agencies or organizations, includingState agencies that administer the Medicaid program. Private for-profitorganizations may apply for cooperative agreements and grants (discretionaryfunds) under section 1110(a)(1) of the Social Security Act, section 402(a)(1)of the Social Security Amendments of 1967 (Pub. L. 90-248), as amended,and section 222(a) of the Social Security Amendments of 1972 (Pub. L. 92-603),as amended.B. Authorities Our authority for making these awards is based on the following:1. The Social Security Act, section 1110, 42 U.S.C. 1310, ``CooperativeResearch or Demonstration Projects'' and section 1115(a), 42 U.S.C. 1315(a),``Demonstration Projects''; 2. The Social Security Act, section 1875, 42 U.S.C. 139511, ``Studies andRecommendations''_for cooperative agreements only_and section 1881(f),42 U.S.C. 1395rr(f), ``End Stage Renal Disease Experiment and Pilot Projects'';3. Section 402 of the Social Security Amendments of 1967 (Pub. L. 90-248),as amended, 42 U.S.C. 1395b-1, ``Experiments and Demonstration Projects'';and 4. Section 222(a) of the Social Security Amendments of 1972 (Pub. L. 92-603),as amended, 42 U.S.C. 1395b-1 (note), ``Experiments and Demonstration Projects''.In the discussion below, we refer to the Social Security Act simply as``the Act''.C. Regulations General policies and procedures that govern the administration of all Departmentof Health and Human Services (HHS) cooperative agreements and grants arelocated in Title 45 of the Code of Federal Regulations (CFR), Parts 74and 92. Applicants are urged to review the requirements contained in thoseregulations.D. Number and Size of Projects Most awards range from $75,000 to $300,000 per year. We also may awardsome projects for larger amounts. The number of cooperative agreementsand grants depends on the availability of funds; needs of projects thatare continuing from prior years; priority interest areas established byHCFA; and technical quality of applications.E. Duration of Funding We fund projects for a period of one year at a time and may continue fundingon a non-competitive basis, generally for up to three years, if we madethe original award as a multiple year project. Continuation funding iscontingent on the availability of future year funds, the applicant's abilityto meet prior year project objectives, and the continued relevance of theproject to HCFA. We treat applications that seek to continue a project for a longer periodof time than that stated in the original award as new projects. Thus, theymust compete for available funds, and we will review these applicationscompetitively along with all other new applications.<ITAG tagnum="84">III. Cooperative Agreements and Grants Subject Matter</ITAG>A. General Considerations The cooperative agreements and grants we award are intended to assist inthe resolution of major health financing issues or in developing new methodsfor the administration of HCFA programs. The HCFA cooperative agreement and grants program focuses primarily onanalyses, experiments, pilot projects and demonstrations that provide informationuseful for the Medicare and Medicaid programs. For FY 1989, we have identifieda number of areas where specific information or operational experienceis necessary to improve program effectiveness or guide decisions anticipatedin the near future. A detailed description of these priority areas is setforth in section I. Applications for priority area cooperative agreements and grants shouldbe limited to one priority. Applications that fit one of the priority areaswill be considered as solicited.B. Cooperative Agreements and Grants The principal purpose of HCFA's cooperative agreements and grants programis to stimulate and support statutorily authorized research and demonstrationprojects. All cooperative agreements will include an explicit statement of the nature,character, and intent of anticipated Federal programmatic involvement toensure that the responsibilities of both parties are understood. Each cooperativeagreement will incorporate the requirements of 45 CFR Part 74 or 92 orboth, as applicable, among its terms and conditions.Cooperative agreements will not be awarded to a State Medicaid agency forsection 1115 projects in which only waivers of Federal regulations or costsnot otherwise matchable under section 1115(a)(2) are approved to carryout a demonstration. The instrument to be used for such an award will bea grant (without discretionary funds) of waivers and cost authorized undersection 1115(a)(2).Cooperative agreements may be awarded for section 1115 projects with discretionaryfunds, even if waivers and costs under section 1115(a)(2) also are involved.In such cases, the cooperative agreement conditions will apply to the entireoperation and management of the project. Cooperative agreements may beused for projects awarded under all other authorities listed in sectionII.B.HCFA may suspend or terminate any cooperative agreement or grant in whole,or in part, at any time before the date of expiration, whenever it determinesthat the awardee has materially failed to comply with the terms of thecooperative agreement or grant. HCFA will promptly notify the awardee inwriting of the determination and the reasons for the suspension or terminationtogether with the effective date. In addition, HCFA reserves the rightto withdraw waivers at any time if it determines that continuing the waiverswould no longer be in the public interest. If a waiver is withdrawn, HCFAwill be liable only for normal close-out costs.C. WaiversResearchers who wish to conduct demonstrations that would require Medicaidrules to be waived must coordinate their applications with the appropriateState Medicaid agency. State of private agencies that wish to aks for Medicaidof Medicare waivers are strongly encouraged to coordinate with researchersof research firms in order to ensure that the experimental design and evaluationprotocol are of the highest quality.1. Section 1115(a) Projects. Under section 1115(a)(1) of the Act, compliancewith statutory Medicaid State plan requirements (section 1902 of the Act)may be waived in order to enable a State Medicaid agency to carry out ademonstration project that will further the general objectives of the Medicaidprogram.Under section 1115(a)(2) of the Act, we may consider costs a section 1115(a)project that otherwise would not properly be included as expenditures underthe State plan and thus subject to Federal financial participation.Unless they are specifically waived, all requirements of the Act, the Codeof Federal Regulations, and other issuances that pertain to the Title XIXprogram apply to a project approved under section 1115(a).If a State Medicaid agency applies for a section 1115(a) project, it shouldgive special attention to the preparation of the budget. The agency mustprovide estimates of the cost or savings attributable to the demonstrationproject, contrasted with the normal Federal program costs. That is, theagency must furnish the estimated yearly cost before waivers, and afterwaivers, for both service costs and administrative costs. These budgetsare substantially more extensive than the budget for other applications(see HCFA-PGX-11A, Instructions for Completion of Federal Assistance Application,for HCFA-PG-11). (See paragraph 3 below for methodology for estimatingcosts.)If the application is approved, the quarterly expenditures must be reportedto the Office of Research and Demonstrations (ORD), HCFA, in the form tobe designated in the special terms and conditions of approval. 2. Other Waivers. Waivers of the requirements of titles XVIII and XIX ofthe Act, and of corresponding HCFA regulations, may be requested for projectconducted under section 222(a) of the Social Security Amendments of 1972,as amended, and section 402 of the Social Security Amendments of 1967,as amended. The waivers requested must relate to an experimental or demonstrationproject that involves changes in the benefit package or method of payment.In applying for these waivers or changes in reimbursement or Federal financialparticipation, the applicant must provide sufficient budgeting informationto permit estimates of the likely cost or savings of the project comparedto the normal Federal program costs. That is, the application must furnishthe estimated yearly cost, before waivers and after waivers, for both programand administrative costs. (See paragraph 3 below for methodology for estimatingcosts.) If the application is approved, the awardee must furnish quarterly expendituresin the manner designated by ORD, HCFA in the special terms and conditionsof the cooperative agreement or grant. 3. Methodology for Estimating Gross Cost of Projects Involving Waivers.HCFA will define the methodology to be used in estimating gross and netwaiver costs. A description of this methodology may be obtained by contactingthe individuals named at the beginning of this notice. This methodologyis subject to change and applicants are therefore instructed to ensurethey are using the most current methodology for future solicitations.<ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Application Procedures</ITAG>A. Letter of Intent To receive full consideration, potential applicants must submit a letter,stating their intent to file an application, 30 days prior to the closingdate of each cycle (see VII, Closing Date and Times). At a minimum, thisletter must contain each of the following:<ITAG tagnum="16">1. Identification of the priority area to which the application responds.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">2. Title of the project.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">3. A 2-3 page abstract summarizing the objectives of the proposal,the hypotheses and the data to be used.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">4. A statement as to whether waivers will be required.</ITAG>Failure to submit a letter of intent may result in the application receivingless than full consideration.B. Application Forms Each application must be limited to one priority area. The applicationmust include, in the project title block, the priority area title to whichthe applicant is responding. The priority area designation also must beclearly marked on the outside of the package or envelope. If we determinea different priority area is a more appropriate area for considerationof a proposal, HCFA reserves the right to change priority area designationwithout notifying the applicant.C. Criteria for Screening and Reviewing Applications <ITAG tagnum="81">1. Screening Requirements </ITAG>In order for an application to be in conformance, it must meet all of thefollowing requirements: <T3>a. Length. </T3>The applicant should provide a brief (1 or 2 paragraph)abstract summarizing the objectives of the proposal. A summary, not toexceed 5 pages, of the proposed project must be included. This summaryshould discuss the project objectives, hypotheses to be examined, datato be used and its source(s), model type(s) and structure(s) to be usedin analyses, resources available to conduct the project, and amount andduration of support requested. The narrative portion of the applicationshould be typewritten single-sided, double-spaced, and should not exceed50 (for a research proposal) or 80 (for a demonstration proposal) double-spacedpages, exclusive of resumes, forms, etc. Applications should neither beunduly elaborative nor contain voluminous or unnecessary documentation.<T3>b. Number of copies. </T3>An original signed application and 14 copiesmust be submitted. Medicaid State agencies are required to submit an originalsigned application and 2 copies. <T3>c. HCFA Priorities: </T3>Those projects which specifically addressa priority area/topic stated in this announcement will receive preference.Applications which are determined by the review panel to be unrelated tothe announced HCFA priorities will not generally be considered for funding.<T3>d. Title XIX Demonstration Proposals: </T3>Demonstration proposalsinvolving the Medicaid program must be submitted by the single State agencyresponsible for administration of the Medicaid program in that State. Applications that do not meet these screening requirements will not beconsidered for funding/approval by the review panels. <ITAG tagnum="81">2. Evaluation Criteria </ITAG>Applications which meet the screening criteria will be reviewed by a technicalreview panel composed of at least three individuals. Reviewers will scorethe applications, basing their scoring decisions and approval recommendationson the following criteria. Relative weights are shown in parentheses. a. <T3>Project Methodology/Design: (40 Points). </T3>The application describesspecific plans for conducting the project in terms of the tasks to be performed.It includes relevant information about: (i) Hypotheses to be tested (ifapplicable); (ii) concise and clear statement of goals and measurable/achievableobjectives; (iii) what the project will do and how it relates to similarwork done in the area; (iv) how the project will be conducted; (v) datato be collected (including specification of data sources); (vi) plan fordata analysis; (vii) milestones/phases in the progress of the project.Specifically, the proposal should contain the following:(1) A clear, quantifiable statement of the project goals and objectives.(2) An explicit description of the research design, including the questionsto be addressed and the methods and data to be used. The methodology mustbe well defined and scientifically valid. (3) If the project is a demonstration proposal, the applicant should includeseparate sections on both the research design and the evaluation design.The research design section should include a detailed description of thereimbursement methodology and other programmatic changes. The evaluationsection should provide an indication of the applicant's understanding ofthe evaluation issues and the various approaches to them. Should an awardbe made, the applicant may be required to collect data in a standardizedmanner to facilitate evaluation efforts. HCFA will have the option of determiningwhether the applicant or HCFA will be responsible for the evaluation. (4) Demonstrations must contain a phase-down/phase-out plan that: (a) Ensuresthat Medicare and Medicaid beneficiaries, as well as any other projectparticipants, are phased out of any special programs which were initiatedand exist as reimbursable or covered health services only under the auspicesof the project, or ensures that plans are in effect to provide other carefor the project participants by the date the project is scheduled to end;and (b) ensures that any new payment methods initiated by the project willcease to apply at the scheduled end of the project, (that is, the projectin and of itself cannot commit the Medicare or Medicaid programs to anindefinite use of the payment methodology beyond the scheduled end of theproject). (5) The tasks and milestones must clearly described and schedules and mustinclude a schedule of reports to be submitted to HCFA.<ITAG tagnum="20">(Progress and Financial Reports as required by 45 CFR Parts 74 and92) </ITAG>(6.) The application must contain information specifying the availabilityof the data to be used, if data are to be collected. The discussion mustdescribe the nature of the data sought, the sample design and size, controlsand comparisons (if any), and the problems that might be encountered incollection. Data that are collected under a HCFA cooperative agreementor grant must be available to HCFA or its agents. However, the applicantmust ensure the confidentiality of any personally identifiable informationcollected under the auspices of any HCFA cooperative agreement or grant.The application must contain detailed plans to protect the confidentialityof all information that identifies individuals under the project. The planmust specify that such information is confidential, that it may not bedisclosed directly or indirectly except for purposes directly connectedwith the conduct of the project, and that in all cases where disclosuretakes place, the informed written consent of the individual must be obtained.(7.) Projects that require waivers (for example, those under section 1115(a)of the Act, section 222(a) of the Social Security Amendments of 1972, asamended, and section 402(a), of the Social Security Amendments of 1967,as amended) must define the services, list the waivers, discuss the implicationsif such waivers are granted, and state the effect on Federal, State, andlocal laws as well as the effect (beneficial or adverse) on individualsenrolled in the project. If the project involves both Medicare and Medicaid waivers, a request forMedicaid waivers from the State agency administering the Medicaid programmust be included with the application. Applicants should contact HCFA forfurther information if questions arise in these cases. b. <T3>Knowledge/Experience/Capability in Area: (20 Points).</T3> The applicationdescribes the applicant's prior experience in the area, or in related areas.The principal investigator and other key staff are qualified and possessthe experience in this or related areas and the variety of skills requiredto produce final results that are readily comprehensible and usable. Theapplication should provide evidence of understanding and knowledge of priorand ongoing work in the area. Specific information also must be providedconcerning how the personnel are to be organized in the project, to whomthey will report, and how they will be used to accomplish specific objectivesor portions of the project. c. <T3>Level of Effort: (20 Points).</T3> The resources that will be neededto conduct the project are specified, including personnel, time, budget,and facilities. The staffing pattern clearly links responsibilities/levelsof efforts to project tasks. The project's costs are reasonable in viewof the anticipated results. Any collaborative effort (including subcontracts)with other organizations is clearly identified and written assurances included.A description by category (personnel, travel, consultants, etc.) of thetotal of the Federal funds required is included. Funds are specified foreach budget period. Specifically, the application should contain the following: (1) Information specifying the availability of adequate facilities andequipment for the project or clearly state how these are to be obtained.(2) The budget must be developed in detail with justifications and explanationsfor the amounts requested. The estimated costs must be reasonable consideringthe anticipated results. (3) Applicants are expected to contribute towards the project costs. Generally,5 percent of the total costs is considered acceptable. No demonstrationproject will be awarded that covers 100 percent of the project's costs.The budget may not include costs for construction or remodeling, or forproject activities that take place before the applicant has received officialnotification of HCFA approval of the project. (4) For demonstration projects involving waivers, budget estimates forthe administrative and service costs must be prepared in accordance withthe methodology specified in III.C.3.Waiver-only applications also must contain estimates, prepared in accordancewith the methodology specified in section III.C.3. of this notice, of theamount of program and administrative expenditures that will occur underthe waivers and a comparison of these expenditures to those that are projectedto occur in the programs in the absence of the waivers.(5) Each application must include a statement that if the project is awarded,the awardee will furnish quarterly expenditures for administrative andprogram costs (and, for demonstration projects involving waivers, for servicecosts) for the project within the approved budget, in the format to bespecified under special terms and conditions in the cooperative agreementor grant.d. <T3>Project Objectives and Expected Outcomes:</T3> <T3>(20 points).</T3> How closely do the project objectives fit those ofthe solicitation? What is the intrinsic merit of the research/study? Theneed for the project is discussed in terms of the importance of the issuesto be addressed and the particular project proposed, as well as how theproposed project builds on and expands previous work in the area. The potentialusefulness of the anticipated results and expected benefits to HCFA andother target groups. the application should discuss plans for utilizationof the project's results.<ITAG tagnum="84">V. Other Consideration</ITAG>A. Selection Criteria for Funding New ProjectsAlthough the recommendations of the technical review panels are a majorfactor in making the decision about an application, review scores and recommendationsare not the only factors. The compatibility of applications to HCFA prioritiesas judged by HCFA Senior Staff, the availability of HCFA resources, andthe comments of other HCFA and Department staff are considered in makingfunding decisions.B. Other Requirements1. While HCFA does not require review under Executive Order 12372, IntergovernmentalReview of Federal Programs (published on July 16, 1982, 47 FR 30959), allapplicants must, nevertheless, determine whether review by the appropriateState and area-wide clearinghouse is required.2. Applications approved by HCFA for funding will contain a specific setof special terms and conditions that must be approved by the applicantas a condition of award. These include the following:a. The HCFA Project Officer shall be notified prior to formal presentationof any report or statistical or analytical material based on informationobtained through this cooperative agreement. Formal presentation includespapers, articles, professional publications, speeches, and testimony. Inthe course of this research, whenever the Principal Investigator determinesthat a significant new finding has been developed, he or she will immediatelycommunicate it to the HCFA Project Officer before formal disseminationto the general public.The final report of the project may not be released or published withoutpermission from the HCFA Project Officer within the first 4 months followingthe receipt of the report by the HCFA Project Officer. The final reportwill contain a disclaimer that the opinions expressed are those of theawardee and do not necessarily reflect the opinions of HCFA.b. At any phase of the project, including the project's conclusion, theawardee, if requested by HCFA, must submit the analytic data file(s), withappropriate documentation, representing the data developed/used in end-productanalyses generated under the award. The analytic file(s) may include primarydata collected, acquired or generated under the award and/or data furnishedby HCFA. The content, format, documentation, and schedule for productionof the data(s) will be agreed upon by the principal investigator and theHCFA Project Officer. The negotiated Format(s) could include both file(s)that would be limited to HCFA internal use and file(s) which HCFA couldmake available to the general public. c. At any phase of the project, including at the project's conclusion,the awardee, if so requested by HCFA, must deliver to HCFA any materials,systems, or other items developed, refined or enhanced in the course ofor under the award. The awardee agrees that HCFA shall have royalty-freenonexclusive and irrevocable rights to reproduce, publish or otherwiseuse and to authorize others to use the items for Federal Government purposes.d. Additional specific project requirements may be included in specialcooperative agreement or grant solicitations. <ITAG tagnum="81">3. Final Reports </ITAG>When a project is completed, the awardee must submit a final report. Asa minimum, the report must contain the following: a. Identification of the project director, principal investigator, cooperativeagreement or grant number, awardee, and title of the project. b. Acknowledgement of the support received from HCFA, and a disclaimerto the effect that the findings do not necessarily reflect the opinionsor policies of HCFA. c. An executive summary (one or two pages) that provides an overview ofthe project and highlights significant findings. d. A description of the initial hypotheses, objectives, and scope of theproject. e. An explanation of the study methodology. f. A discussion of significant findings and demonstration or research results(and the implications of these results, if any). On a semi-annual basis during the course of the project, the awardee mustprovide a list and copies of all papers presented, and of all articles,reports, and other types of publications that result from the project,for inclusion in a subject bibliography system maintained by the ORD, HCFA.It is further requested that the awardee continue to provide the updatedinformation for 2 years after the project's completion. The ORD Author's Guidelines for Cooperative Agreements, Grants, and Contractsshould be used in preparing the final report. This document is availableon request from the ORD Publications Coordinator, Room I-C-9 Oak Meadows,6325 Security Boulevard, Baltimore, MD, 21207, (301) 966-6585. C. Multiple Applications The applicant must indicate when the same or a similar application is submittedto another HHS agency; for example, the Social Security Administration,the Office of Human Development Services, or to one of the Public HealthService programs. D. Cooperative Agreement and Grant Policies Projects are funded through a competitive process and chosen from amongthe applications submitted in response to this notice. In the case of demonstrationprojects, all awardees are expected to share directly in the costs of theprojects. Normally, this sharing must be at least 5 percent of the totalproject costs. For section 1115(a) projects, the amount that the singleStates agency will be expected to provide generally must be at least 5percent of the special Federal project funds. This amount may not be in-kindcontributions. If, following review of a proposed activity, HCFA determines that a researchor demonstration project presents a danger to the physical or mental well-beingof a participant of the project, then Federal funds will not be made availablefor that project without the written, informed consent of each participant.Other policies including responsibilities, awarding and payment procedures,special provisions, and assurances may be found in 45 CFR Parts 74 and92. It is a national policy to place a fair share of purchases with small,minority-owned, and woman-owned business firms (45 CFR Part 74, appendicesG and H). DHHS is strongly committed to the objectives of this policy andencourages all recipients of its cooperative agreements and grants to takeaffirmative steps to ensure such fairness. In particular, recipients should_<ITAG tagnum="16">1. Place small, minority-owned, and woman-owned business firms onbidders' mailing lists; </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">2. Solicit these firms whenever they are potential sources of supplies,equipment, construction, or services; </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">3. Where feasible, divide total requirements into smaller needs, andset delivery schedules that will encourage participation by these firms;and </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">4. Use the assistance of the Monority Business Development Agencyof the Department of Commerce, the Office of Small and Disadvantaged BusinessUtilization, DHHS, and similar available State and local governmental agencies.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">VI. Review of Applications</ITAG>An independent review will be conducted by a panel of not less than threeexperts. The panel will include experts from both DHHS and the privatesector.In some cases, there will be at least one independent review panel foreach priority area. An ORD chairperson will coordinate the panel's reviewbut will not vote. The chairperson will also prepare the panel's recommendation(summary statement) to the Director, ORD. The panel's recommendation willcontain numerical ratings (based on the rating criteria specified in sectionIV), ranking of all applications, and a written assessment of each application.These will be summarized in a ranking and approval list and a matrix willbe prepared for each application. Where the panel determines that an applicationis unrelated to the announced funding priorities, numerical ratings willnot generally be assigned to the application, and the application willgenerally not be considered for funding. Applicants may request in writing a copy of the summary statement on thereview of their application after they have received from HCFA the letterannouncing approval or disapproval. Summary statements will be made availablesubject to the applicable limitations of the Freedom of Information Act(5 U.S.C. 552), the Federal Advisory Committee Act (5 U.S.C. App. I.),the Privacy Act (5 U.S.C. 552a), and 45 CFR Parts 5, 5b, and 11. <ITAG tagnum="84">VII. Closing Date and Times </ITAG>We will process cooperative agreement and grant applications once a yearand make award announcements approximately five to six months after theclosing date. (While we have retained a separate waiver-only cycle, wereserve the right to defer consideration of applications received for thiscycle until the next general solicitation for grant/cooperative agreementapplications.) The following closing dates apply for cooperative agreementand grant applications:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">April 3, 1989. (C.O.B.)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">(Waiver-only and discretionary funds awards)<ITAG tagnum="15">Monday, August 7, 1989 (C.O.B.): Waiver-only applications</ITAG>Applications mailed through the U.S. Postal Service or a commercial deliveryservice will be ``on time'' if they are received on or before the closingdate, or sent on or before the closing date and received in time for submissionto the independent review group (see section VI, Review of Applications).Applicants are cautioned to request a legible U.S. Postal Service postmarkor to obtain a legibly dated receipt from the commercial carrier or theU.S. Postal Service. Privately metered postmarks will not be acceptableas proof of timely mailing. Applications that do not meet the above criteria will be considered lateapplications. Those submitting late applications will be notified thatthe applications were not considered in the current competition.<ITAG tagnum="20">(Sec. 1110, 1115(a), 1875, and 1881(f) of the Social Security Act(42 U.S.C. 1310, 1315(a), 1395ll, 1395rr(f); section 222(a) of the SocialSecurity Amendments of 1972, as amended (42 U.S.C. 1395b-1 (note)); section402 of the Social Security Amendments of 1967, as amended (42 U.S.C. 1395b-1);section 603 of the Social Security Amendments of 1983 (Pub. L. 98-21);section 605(b) of the Social Security Amendments of 1983 (42 U.S.C. 1395x(v)(1)(E)(note))</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance Programs No. 13,766 HealthFinancing Research, Demonstrations and Experiments)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: January 25, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">William L. Roper,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator, Health Care Financing Administration. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-2243 Filed 1-31-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4120-01-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>