<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89213-0108 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.2-13-89.f2.A1107</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[AAG/A Order No.28-89] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Privacy Act of 1974; New System of Records </ITAG>Pursuant to the Privacy Act of 1974 (5 U.S.C. 552a), notice is given thatthe Department of Justice, Justice Management Division (JMD) proposes toestablish a new system of records entitled ``Debt Collection ManagementSystem, JUSTICE/JMD-006.'' This system is established to enable JMD toprovide automated litigation support to and administrative management ofa program which will allow the U.S. Attorneys (USAs) and contract privatecounsel to pursue the collection of indebtedness owed the United States.A separate system of records entitled ``Debt Collection Enforcement System,JUSTICE/USA-015,'' is being established to cover the records maintainedby the USAs and contract private counsel. Notice of the establishment ofthe Debt Collection Enforcement System is also published in today's <T4>Federal Register. </T4>Title 5 U.S.C. 552a(e)(4) and (11) provide that the public be provideda 30-day period in which to comment on the routine uses of a new system;the Office of Management and Budget (OMB), which has oversight responsibilitiesunder the Act, requires that it be given a 60-day period in which to reviewthe system. Therefore, please submit any comments by March 15, 1989. The public, OMB,and Congress are invited to send written comments to Robert N. Ford, DeputyAssistant Attorney General, Debt Collection Management, Justice ManagementDivision, Department of Justice, Room 1121, Washington, DC 20530. In accordance with Privacy Act requirements, the Department of Justicehas provided a report on the proposed system to OMB and the Congress.<ITAG tagnum="21">Date: February 3, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Harry H. Flickinger, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Attorney General for Administration. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="66">JUSTICE/JMD-006 </ITAG>System Name: Debt Collection Management System, JUSTICE/JMD-006 System Location: Department of Justice, Justice Management Division (JMD), Central IntakeFacility (CIF), 1110 Bonifant Street, Suite 220, Silver Spring, Maryland.Categories of Individuals Covered by the System: Persons indebted to the United States who have allowed their debts to becomedelinquent and whose debts have been sent by client Federal agencies tothe Department of Justice for settlement or enforced collection throughlitigation. Categories of Records in the System: This system of records contains records relating to the negotiation, compromise,settlement, and litigation of indebtedness owed the United States. Recordswill consist of an automated support data base and temporary custody ofcase files. Case files are assigned promptly to a U.S. Attorney (USA) orcontract private counsel to undertake enforced debt collection action.This system describes case files during the period which they are in thepossession of the JMD, CIF. Upon assignment of a case file to the USA orcontract private counsel, the case is covered by the Debt Collection EnforcementSystem, JUSTICE/USA-0l5. The client agency case file includes such documents as the Claims CollectionLitigation Report; Certificate of Indebtedness; any partial payment records,status reports, correspondence, and any other documentation developed duringthe negotiation of the indebtedness. The automated data base contains data extracted from the case file andany data generated or developed to support the administrative operationsof the debt collection program. Information may include personal data,e.g., name, social security number, date of birth, and locator information;claim information, e.g., type of claim such as benefit overpayment, loandefault, bankruptcy, etc.; payment demand information, compromise offered,etc.; account information, e.g., debtor payments including principal, penalties,interests, and balances, etc.; information regarding debtor's employment,ability to pay, property liens, etc.; value of claim, name of source agencywhich provided the loan or benefit; information on the status and dispositionof cases at various intervals of time; and any other information relatedto the negotiation, compromise, settlement, or litigation of indebtednessowed the United States, or to the administrative management of the debtcollection program.Authority for Maintenance of the System: The Federal Debt Recovery Act of 1986, 31 U.S.C. 3718(b). Purpose of the System: The Federal Debt Recovery Act authorizes the Attorney General to contractwith private counsel to assist the USAs in the collection of consumer andcommercial debts owed the United States on a pilot project basis. Accordingly,the Department is participating in a pilot program in ten judicial districtsand has established this system of records to provide automated litigationsupport to and administrative management of a debt collection program whichallows the assignment of client Federal agency case files to USAs and contractprivate counsel to pursue the collection of indebtedness owed the UnitedStates. A separate system of records entitled ``Debt Collection EnforcementSystem, JUSTICE/USA-015'' has been established to cover records maintainedby the USAs and contract private counsel in support of debt collectionactivities. Routine Uses of Records Maintained in the System, Including Categoriesof Users and the Purposes of Such Uses: In the course of its collection and enforcement activities, the Departmentwill release client Federal agency case files to the CIF to conduct theadministrative operations of the debt collection program. Through the administrativeoperations of the CIF, the Department will release the case files and anyrelated records or information created by the CIF to the contract privatecounsel to negotiate, settle, and litigate indebtedness owed the UnitedStates. The Department may also disclose records or information from this systemas follows: (a) To client agencies who have referred debt collection cases to the Departmentfor settlement or litigation and enforced collection to notify such agenciesof the status of the case or of any decision or determination that hasbeen made, or to make such other inquiries and reports as are necessaryduring the processing of the case. (b) To a Federal agency in response to its request and in connection withhiring or retention of an employee, the issuance of the required securityclearance, the reporting of an investigation of an employee, the lettingof a contract, or the issuance of a license, grant, or other benefit bythe requesting agency, to the extent that the information relates to therequesting agency's decision on the matter. (c) In a proceeding before a court or adjudicative body before which theDepartment or contract private counsel who are authorized to appear whenany of the following is a party to litigation or has an interest in litigationand such records are determined by the Department or contract private counselto be arguably relevant to the litigation: (1) The Department, or any subdivisionthereof, or contract private counsel, or (2) any employee of the Departmentor contract private counsel in his or her official capacity or (3) anyemployee of the Department or contract private counsel in his or her individualcapacity where the Department of Justice has agreed to represent the employee,or (4) the United States, where the Department or contract private counseldetermines that the litigation is likely to affect the Department or anyof its subdivisions. (d) To volunteer student workers and students working under a college work-studyprogram as is necessary to enable them to perform their function; (e) To employees or to contract personnel to access the records for PrivacyAct training purposes. (f) To (1) a Federal agency which employs the individual to enable theemploying agency to offset the individual's salary; (2) a Federal, State,local or foreign agency, an organization, including a consumer reportingagency, or individual to elicit information to assist the Department inthe settlement or effective litigation and enforced collection of the overduedebt; and (3) the Internal Revenue Service (IRS) to enable that agencyto offset the individual's tax refund. Records provided to the IRS maybe used in a computer matching program to identify individuals who areentitled to refunds against which such offset for overdue debts would beappropriate. (g) To the news media and the public pursuant to 28 CFR 50.2 unless itis determined that release of the specific information in the context ofa particular case would constitute an unwarranted invasion of personalprivacy. (h) To a Member of Congress or staff acting upon the Member's behalf whenthe Member or staff requests the information on behalf of and at the requestof the individual who is the subject of the record.(i) To the National Archives and Records Administration and to the GeneralServices Administration in records management inspections conducted underthe authority of 44 U.S.C. 2904 and 2906.Policies and Practices for Storing, Retrieving, Accessing, Retaining, andDisclosing of Records in the System:Storage:Case files are stored in locked rooms; automated data is stored on magnetictape.Retrievability:Data is retrieved by name of debtor.Safeguards:Access to records is restricted to those personnel who must have accessto perform their duties and is limited to those cases assigned. Case filesare maintained separately in locked rooms during non-duty hours. Accessto automated data requires the use of the proper password and user identificationcode.Retention and Disposal:Paper records in this system will be returned to client Federal agenciesfor disposition; automated information will be erased ten years after therelated case files reported in the Debt Collection Enforcement System,JUSTICE/USA-015 have been closed. (Pending approval of the National Archivesand Records Administration.)System Manager and Address:Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Debt Collection Management, JusticeManagement Division, Department of Justice, Washington, D.C. 20530.Notification Procedure:Address inquiries to Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Debt CollectionManagement, Justice Management Division, Department of Justice, Washington,D.C. 20530.Records Access Procedures:Address requests for access to Deputy Assistant Attorney General, DebtCollection Management, Justice Management Division, Department of Justice,Washington, D.C. 20530. Clearly mark the envelope ``Privacy Access Request.''Include in the request the debtor's name, date of birth, address, and anyother identifying information which may be of assistance in locating therecord, e.g., name of the case or Federal agency to whom the debtor isindebted. In addition, include notarized signature of the debtor as wellas the name and address of the individual to receive the information ifother than the debtor.Contesting Records Procedures:Address requests to Deputy Assistant Attorney General, Debt CollectionManagement, Justice Management Division, Department of Justice, Washington,D.C. 20530. State clearly and concisely the information being contested,the reasons for contesting it, and the proposed amendment to the information.Records Source Categories:The individuals covered by the system; client agencies of the Departmentto whom the individual is indebted; an attorney or other representativefor the debtor and/or payor; any Federal, State, local, foreign, privateorganization or individual who may have information relating to the debt,the debtor's ability to pay or any other information relevant and necessaryto assist in the settlement or effective litigation and enforced collectionof the debt.Systems Exempted from Certain Provisions of the Act:None.<ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-3231 Filed 2-10-89; 8:45am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4410-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>