<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89607-0073 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.6-07-89.f2.A1072</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Office of the Secretary</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Child Support Enforcement; Applications for Grants </ITAG>Pursuant to section 1110A of the Social Security Act, the Assistant Secretaryfor Planning and Evaluation (hereafter the Assistant Secretary) is seekingapplications for research in the area of income security policy from States,public, non-profit, and for-profit organizations. <ITAG tagnum="84">A. Type of Application Requested </ITAG>This announcement seeks applications for projects to develop and conducta program of research relating to national policy concerns in the areaof child support enforcement. The following paragraphs describe this generalarea of interest in greater detail by enumerating high priority researchareas. The questions they contain are intended to illustrate specific concerns.Applications should be for projects that will address one or more of thepriority areas discussed below; other, closely related issues may alsobe included if they are shown to be relevant to the general area of interest.A broad range of methodologies are acceptable for the purpose of this grantcompetition. However, all proposed projects should embody a sound theoreticalbase upon which new and original empirical work, employing the most usefuland relevant data bases, is built. Applicants must demonstrate knowledgeof past and current research relating to the priority area under consideration.They must also demonstrate access to data adequate to conduct the proposedstudy. Several national survey data sets are available for child support researchand have been used in the past. Among them are the Current Population Survey(CPS), the Survey of Income and Program Participation (SIPP), the PanelStudy of Income Dynamics (PSID), the Natonal Longitudinal Study of theHigh School Class of 1972 (NLS-72), High School and Beyond (HSB), and theNational Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY). The April CPS surveys for 1979, 1982, 1984, and 1986 had supplemental alimonyand child support questions. As a result of the CPS sample design, (a rotatingsample is used that has roughly three-fourths of the respondents for thecurrent month participating in the survey the following month) the responsesof a majority of the April participants could be matched with their responsesto the annual income supplemental survey given each March. These March/Aprilmatch files have become a primary informational source for child supportresearch. The SIPP is a relatively new longitudinal survey that asks respondentsto provide detailed information concerning monthly income and welfare programparticipation. The first panel of interviews was begun in 1984. All ninewaves of that panel are now available for analysis. In general, interviewsare conducted every four months for 32 or 36 months. Along with core questionsasked at each interview, various supplemental surveys are conducted. Supportgiven for persons outside the current household, and the receipt of alimonyand child support are among the additional questionnaire topics. The PSID has tracked a high percentage of the members of the original 5,000survey households since 1968 with annual follow-up interviews. Over thattime two generations of households and families have formed and dividedto provide researchers with extensive data on changes in family formation.The National Longitudinal Study of the High School Class of 1972 (NLS-72)and the High School and Beyond (HSB) survey, similar to the PSID, havefollowed several thousand members of the 1972 high school graduation classand high school sophomores and seniors in 1980, respectively, with interviewsevery two or three years. These data sources provide information throughthe participants' early adulthood, the time when most persons are makingfamily formation changes through marriage, child bearing, and divorce.The National Longitudinal Survey of Youth (NLSY) began in 1979 with a sampleof 11,000 respondents age fourteen through twenty-one. The data set currentlycontains about 25,000 variables on anti-social behavior, fertility, child-careemployment, training, and education over nine straight years. Unique tothe NLSY is its information provided by the male respondents about theirexperience fathering children both in and out-of-wedlock, and their paymentof child support. Several other national surveys, while not having been used extensivelyfor child support research, may also provide opportunities for examiningsome of the issues we present below. The National Survey of Consumer Financesof 1983 and the follow-up in 1986 contain detailed data about householdaccumulation of assets and debts. The 1986 follow-up asked in-depth aboutchanges in the marital status of the household members since the firstsurvey. Individuals were asked about court-ordered alimony, child supportand health care, and the division of assets and debts as a result of themarital break-up. This information can be linked with employment and incomeresponses from both surveys to examine, for example, the labor force responseto changes in the family. The National Survey of Children began in 1976 by interviewing childrenage seven through eleven in 1976. Since then two follow-up interviews havebeen conducted, wave 2 in 1981 and wave 3 in 1987. The recently completedthird wave investigated the impact of early pregnancy and parenthood onthe lives of teenage parents. The National Survey of Families and Householdsprovides information about childhood family living arrangements, homeleavingexperiences, marital and cohabitational experiences, and employment, educational,and fertility histories for adults in 13,000 households. With these surveys,questions concerning parenting outcomes for teenagers can be examined fromthe standpoint of the environment in which they grew up. The National Survey of Family Growth, in its third cycle in 1982, interviewed7,969 women between the ages of 15 and 44. While the first two surveysexcluded never-married childless women, the third interviewed women regardlessof their marital status. The surveys investigate the fertility historiesof women from a family planning standpoint. Applicants may also propose projects that utilize data bases other thannational data sets. The Federal Office of Child Support Enforcement collectsdata from the states and publishes it in their <T3>Annual Report to Congress. </T3>The latest report was the twelfth annual.Applicants are encouraged to obtain copies of these reports by writingto The National Child Support Enforcement Reference Center, 370 L'EnfantPromenade, SW., Washington, DC 20447, or by telephoning the Reference Centerat 202-252-5430. While data collected by the Federal Office of Child Support Enforcementare generally not available in computer readable form, a public use datatape of the statistics published in the Annual Reports is under development.Applicants are encouraged to refer to the data published in the reportswhen developing their proposals, but to assume the data will be availablein computer readable form by the time they are to begin their projects.  Researchers are also encouraged to approach state Child Support Enforcementoffices to discuss what data may be available at the state and local level.For some issues state data bases may contain more data than are submittedto the Federal enforcement office. Other small scale data collection projectsare likewise welcomed. Demonstration projects, however, will not be funded.<T3>1. The high priority research areas for which applications for a proposedresearch program are most desired are as follows:</T3> <T3>a. Financing State Child Support Enforcement. </T3>Legislation in 1975authorized Federal matching funds to states for enforcing child supportobligations. Along with enforcement services, the local child support enforcement(CSE) offices assist in locating absent parents, establishing paternity,and obtaining child and spousal support awards. The role of the FederalGovernment is to fund, monitor, and evaluate state programs, provide technicalassistance, and in certain instances give direct assistance in locatingabsent parents and obtaining support payments from them. Basic responsibilityfor administering the program is left to the states. The program requires the provision of child support enforcement servicesfor both welfare and non-welfare families. Parents receiving benefits underthe Aid to Families with Dependent Children (AFDC) program, the federallyassisted foster care program, or the Medicaid program automatically receiveservices, and are required to work with the local child support enforcementagency to establish and enforce a child support order unless it is determinednot to be in the best interest of the child. Non-AFDC families may applyfor the same services available to the AFDC families. Non-AFDC familiesmay, however, be charged an application fee of up to 25 dollars. Federal financing arrangements for state child support enforcement activitiesare very generous_a 68 percent reimbursement rate for state administrativecosts, 90 percent reimbursement for state ADP system and genetic testingcosts, incentive payments to the state of six to ten percent of all childsupport collections, plus the return to the state of its share of all collectionsmade on behalf of AFDC recipients. In fiscal year 1987, states received$349 million more in collections and Federal financing and incentive paymentsthan they spent in state funds to administer the program. However, despitesupport collections made through these offices of almost $4 billion, thenet loss to the Federal government was the largest in the history of theprogram, $327 million. We have no evidence that the current Federal-state financing structureof the program is related to program effectiveness as measured by collectionsor other important program measures such as rates for paternity or supportaward establishment. With significant increases each year in Federal expendituresfor child support enforcement, and annual increases in the amount of childsupport collected through the CSE program, the annual aggregate amountof child support collected nationally (as reported on the Current PopulationSurvey) has remained relatively stable over the last decade. Is the Federalgovernment paying for child support activities that would have been paidfor by the states and/or families in the absence of the Federal program?We would also like to know the effect of the CSE program on various aspectsof child support enforcement given the current Federal-state financingstructure. What effect have public enforcement services had on the enforcementof child support awards? What effect have they had on the size of the paymentsbeing made and the frequency of the payments? Does the effectiveness ofpublic support enforcement vary between the AFDC population that is requiredto work with the local CSE office and the non-AFDC population that voluntarilyseeks public support enforcement assistance? <T3>b. Paternity Establishment: </T3><T3>The First Step to Receiving Child Support. </T3>It is now a widelyaccepted fact that lacking child support is a contributing factor to thehigh poverty and welfare dependency rates among households headed by unmarriedmothers. Overall, of the 8.8 million women with children who do not havea father living in the home, sixty-one percent have child support awards.Never-married women, however, are substantially less likely to have awardsthan women who have been married. Only 18 percent of all never-marriedmothers have child support orders compared to 82 percent of the divorcedwomen. Paternity establishment is the first crucial step to obtaining child supportfor children of never-married mothers. Yet, paternity establishment isthe area where we know the least. We do not even know for all childrenborn out-of-wedlock how many have paternity established. Paternity data are generally not available. At the center of the data issueis a very legitimate privacy concern. How does one collect paternity establishmentinformation, especially information about fathers of children born out-of-wedlock,when legal paternity has yet to be established? Case studies of states or local communities are potential research directions.Baseline data for the number of children born out-of-wedlock to mothersbeing assisted by the state CSE offices, and the number of them that havepaternity established should be available in July, 1989, from the FederalOffice of Child Support Enforcement. Do states or particular local jurisdictionsdiffer in measurable ways in their paternity establishment practices sothat meaningful comparisons about outcomes can be made? How do CSE paternityestablishment procedures vary across jurisdictions with regard to law,process, activities, success, and costs? Do local CSE paternity establishmentactivities and paternity establishment rates for CSE clients differ forAFDC and non-AFDC cases? Does the paternity establishment rate for CSEclients vary with the local CSE caseload or the size of the CSE staff?We are also interested in specific CSE techniques or activities that resultin higher rates of paternity establishment for some CSE offices. Does therate of voluntary paternity establishment vary with the time after birth?Does the speed with which a case is acted on affect the success or costof establishing paternity for the case? Can paternity rates be increasedby actively involving local social service workers or nurses in the hospital?The Family Support Act of 1988 requires beginning in 1991 the disclosureof both parents' social security numbers (SSN) at the time of the child'sbirth to assist in establishing paternity and child support orders. Severalstates already require SSN's. As of April 1989, Alabama, Connecticut, Florida,Georgia, Hawaii, Illinois, Kentucky, Maryland, Michigan, Mississippi, NewYork excluding New York City, Virginia, and West Virginia required bothSSN's at the time of birth. To more smoothly implement the requirementsof the Family Support Act we need to know what problems these states haveencountered in obtaining the father's SSN in out-of-wedlock births. Havethe local CSE agencies found the SSN helpful in establishing paternityor in other enforcement activities?   <T3>c. The Relationship Between Guidelines, Awards, and Reviews. </T3>Manychild support experts have argued that the amount of support awarded womenfor their children is too low. Congress, partially in response to theseclaims, required states as part of the 1984 Child Support Enforcement Amendmentsto develop award guidelines to be considered in determining support obligations.The Family Support Act of 1988 went further to require judges and otherofficials to use the state guidelines when determining award amounts unlessthey find that applying the guidelines would be unjust or inappropriatein a particular case.These are three basic conceptual child support guideline models.*<NOTE/> First, the income sharing model is based on the concept thatthe child should receive the same proportion of parental income he or shewould have received if the parents lived together. The specific proportioncan vary with the number and ages of the children being ordered support,parental income levels, the definition of income being considered, whois given responsibility for child care and medical expenses, who is givencustody, the number of other dependents in each household, and the currentspouse's income. Second, the cost sharing model apportions between theparents the estimated dollar cost of providing the child with a minimumstandard of living. The division of the burden is usually based on theparents' respective incomes. Third, the income equalization model intendsto equalize the standards of living between the separate households. Theincome of each parent is allocated between the households based on thenumber of persons in each.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>* Much of this discussion is taken from Part II of the ``Developmentof Guidelines for Child Support Orders: Advisory Panel Recommendationsand Final Report.'' Part II was prepared by Robert Williams for grant No.18-P-20003 given to the National Center for State Courts by the Officeof Child Support Enforcement, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services,to the National Center for State Courts. A copy of the final report isavailable from the ASPE Policy Information Center, Room 438-F, Hubert H.Humphrey Building, 200 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, DC 20201,or by calling Carolyn Solomon at 202-245-6445.Most guidelines being implemented by the states fall under the broad rubricof income sharing models. Examples of income sharing formulas that havebeen in use for several years inclue the Washington State Uniform ChildSupport Guidelines, the Wisconsin Percentage of Income Standard, the MinnesotaChild Support Guidelines, and the Illinois Child Support Guidelines. Examplesof more recently implemented income sharing guidelines are the ColoradoChild Support Guideline and the New Jersey Child Support Guidelines. TheIncome Shares Model recommended by the National Advisory Panel on ChildSupport Guidlines has so far been adopted by Colorado, Maine, Michigan(in modified form), Nebraska, New Jersey, and Vermont.We would like to know if mandatory guidelines, when implemented, increasethe size of the awards being established or modified, or merely increasethe equity across awards. Preliminary results in Wisconsin indicate thattheir guidelines have not increased award amounts. This outcome, however,may be the result of Wisconsin having established guidelines at or nearthe average award level prior to the implementation of the guidelines.Experiences may differ in other states. There may be different outcomesfor the AFDC and non-AFDC cases handled by the local CSE office. Likewise,award amounts set using guidelines may vary between cases handled privatelyand cases serviced through the CSE agency. Of interest, as well, are whysome cases have award amounts that significantly deviate (either high orlow) from the award guideline amount.The Family Support Act of 1988 also calls for periodic reviews of supportorders already in effect beginning in October 1993. Currently, a supportorder is reviewed only when one of the parents or the local Child SupportEnforcement Office requests it. What events lead to an award review? Whatare the obstacles to a modification? How do award reviews vary across statesand local jurisdictions regarding frequency and procedure? Do the factorsthat affect the amount of the initial award differ from those that affectan award modification? How does the mandatory use of guidelines affectaward reviews? Are there interstate obstacles to establishing an awardor modifying an award due to varying jurisdictional laws and practices?Examination of individual cases within and across jurisdictions may bethe appropriate approach to addressing these important issues.<T3>d. Child Support Payment: Who are the Fathers Paying Child Support?</T3>One of the activities of local child support enforcement offices isto enforce support orders. Yet, in 1985, according to custodial mothersless than half (48 percent) of the 4.4 million women owed child supportpayments received the full amount. Twenty-six percent of these women receivedless than they were owed, and 26 percent received no payment at all. Theaverage amount of child support received for all women due payments was$1,640. If the full amount had been paid, the average child support paymentwould have been $2,500. Of the $10.9 billion in child support due in 1985,$3.7 billion went uncollected.While we know about child support receipt, we have not been able to isolatenon-custodial fathers, especially the fathers of children born to low-incomemothers. Until recently, national surveys only asked custodial motherswhether their child support payments were being received regularly andin full. Now we have more surveys asking fathers about their support payments.In the SIPP survey, for example, non-custodial fathers are asked how muchthey pay in child support, but, unfortunately, not how much they are supposedto pay.We would like to understand the non-custodial father's ability and/or willingnessto pay child support. Generally, non-custodial fathers report paying morein support for their children than custodial mothers report receiving.Perhaps case studies or national surveys that allow the matching of atleast a small number of parents' responses (e.g. NLS-72, the National Surveyof Children, and the Consumer Expenditure Survey) can provide some information.2. <T3>Products. </T3>The applicant should present a schedule for deliveryof interim progress reports and a final report. For any project which significantlyenhances a data base in the course of the work, a well-documented publicuse file should also be prepared.3. <T3>Potential users. </T3>Potential users of the research include policymakers at Federal, State, and local levels of government, as well as professionalsin social services, demography, economics, sociology, social work, andrelated fields. Because many of those who will be interested in this researchlack advanced technical training, it is important that the results of projectsbe presented in a fashion accessible to such an audience. This will involvethe submission of a separate, non-technical executive summary.4. <T3>Types of projects excluded. </T3>In consideration of the intent ofthis announcement, applications concentrating on narrow programmatic orpolicy issues, or not directed to concerns of national interest, will notbe considered for funding.In addition, this announcement seeks empirical analyses founded on a soundtheoretical bases. Applications that are limited to theoretical development,or involve new demonstrations will not be considered.5. <T3>Content and organization of the applications. </T3>The applicationmust begin with a cover sheet, followed by the required application forms,and an abstract of the application (of not more than two pages). Failureto include the abstract may result in delays in processing the application.Each application should include a discussion of the relevant literature,a description of the models to be analyzed, the data sources to be used,and the methodologies proposed to test the models. Resumes of staff shouldbe included, as should a full budget and a schedule of tasks for the proposedprojects.<ITAG tagnum="84">B. Applicable Regulations</ITAG>1. ``Grants Programs Administered by the Office of the Assistant Secretaryfor Planning and Evaluation'' (45 CFR Part 63), <T3>Code of Federal Regulations, </T3>revised October 1, 1987.2. ``Administration of Grants'' (45 CFR Part 74), <T3>Code of Federal Regulations, </T3>revised October 1, 1987.<ITAG tagnum="84">C. Effective Date and Duration</ITAG>1. The grants awarded pursuant to this announcement are expected to bemade in September and October 1989; however some may be made subsequentto this date.2. In order to avoid unnecessary delays in the preparation and receiptof applications, this notice is effective immediately. The closing datesfor applications are specified in Section F and G below.3. It is expected that projects will be completed within a twelve- to eighteen-monthperiod. Longer projects will not be considered.<ITAG tagnum="84">D. Statement of Funds Available</ITAG>1. $200,000 has been allocated for grants as a result of this announcement.$100,000 is to be awarded in Fiscal Year 1989, which ends September 30,1989, and $100,000 is to be awarded in Fiscal Year 1990, which begins October1, 1989. Applications may be for any amount, but it is expected that mostawards will be for single projects of no more than $75,000, though projectsproposing major data collection will not be limited to $75,000.Applicants are encouraged to seek additional funds from other sources forthis project. Applicants should discuss any commitments, plans, or hopesfor additional funds, including size and sources, in their application.When it is judged that successful completion of a proposed project dependson outside funding, this office's funding commitment will be made contingenton complete demonstration of that outside funding.2. Funds may be obligated fully at the time of award of these grants orincrementally.3. The government reserves the right to select for funding more than oneapplication in a given priority area. Further, the selection of the priorityareas from the entire set for which awards will be made, will be made inaccordance with the quality of all proposals received. However, nothingin this application should be construed as committing the Assistant Secretaryto make any awards.<ITAG tagnum="84">E. Application Processing</ITAG>1. Applications will be screened initially for relevance to the needs definedin section A (as well as additional areas of interest persuasively shownto be relevant by the applicant). If judged relevant, the application willthen be reviewed by a government review panel, possibly augmented by outsideexperts. Three (3) copies of each application are required. Applicantsare encouraged to send an additional seven (7) copies of their applicationto ease processing, but applicants will not be penalized if these extracopies are not included. Applicants should clearly indicate on their coversheet into which of the priority topics listed above their applicationfalls, or if none, indicate ``OTHER''.2. Applications will be judged as to eligibility, quality, and relevance,according to the criteria set forth in item 5 of this section.3. An unacceptable rating on any individual criterion may render the applicationunacceptable. Consequently, applicants should take care to ensure thatall criteria are fully addressed in the application.4. Applications should be as brief and concise as is consistent with theinformational requirements of the reviewers. Applications should be limitedto 25 doubled-spaced typed pages, exclusive of forms, abstract, resumes,and proposed budget; they should neither be unduly elaborate nor containvoluminous supporting documentation.5. <T3>Criteria for Evaluation.</T3> Evaluation of applications will employthe following criteria. The relative weights are shown in parentheses.a. <T3>Usefulness.</T3> The potential usefulness of the objectives and anticipatedresults of the proposed project for providing individuals and organizationsconcerned with the issues discussed in section A above with improved basesfor making decisions about these issues. The potential usefulness of theproposed project for the advancement of science. (25 points)b. <T3>Clarity and Understanding.</T3> Understanding and knowledge of priorwork in the area. The cost effectiveness of the proposal and the clarityof statement of objectives, methods, and anticipated results. (15 points)c. <T3>Research Design.</T3> The appropriateness and soundness of methodology(which may include an interdisciplinary approach), including overall researchdesign, statistical techniques, modeling strategies, choice of data, andother proposed procedures. Probability of successful completion of thestudy. (40 points)d. <T3>Experience and Qualifications of Personnel.</T3> Principal Investigator'sand other key staff's experience in this or related areas and indicationsof innovative approaches and creative potential. Indication of the abilityof key staff to produce publishable quality reports or articles. (20 points)<ITAG tagnum="84">F. Applications Sent by Mail</ITAG>Applications may be sent by either the U.S. Postal Service or a commercialcarrier. Applications sent by U.S. Postal Service will be considered tobe received on time by the Grants Officer if the application was sent byfirst class, registered or certified mail not later than July 21, 1989,as evidenced by the U.S. Postal Service postmark on the wrapper or envelope,or on the original receipt from the U.S. Postal Service. Applications sentby a commercial carrier will be considered to be received on time by theGrants Officer if sent not later than July 21, 1989, as evidenced by areceipt from the commercial carrier.<ITAG tagnum="84">G. Hand-Delivered Applications</ITAG>An application to be hand-delivered must be taken to the Grants Officerat the address listed in section I of this announcement. Hand-deliveredapplications will be accepted daily between 9: 00 am and 4:30 pm, Washington,DC time, except Saturdays, Sundays, or Federal holidays. Applications willnot be accepted after close-of-business on July 24, 1989.<ITAG tagnum="84">H. Disposition of Applications</ITAG>1. <T3>Approval, disapproval, or deferral.</T3> On the basis of the reviewof the application, the Assistant Secretary will either (a) approve theapplication as a whole or in part; (b) disapprove the application; or (c)defer action on the application for such reasons as lack of funds or aneed for further review.2. <T3>Notification of disposition.</T3> The Assistant Secretary will notifythe applicants of the disposition of their application. A signed notificationof grant award will be issued to the contact person listed on the checklistof the application.<ITAG tagnum="84">I. Application Instructions and Forms</ITAG>Copies of applications should be requested from and submitted to: GrantsOfficer, Office of the Assistant Secretary for Planning and Evaluation,Department of Health and Human Services, 200 Independence Avenue, SW.,Room 426F, Hubert H. Humphrey Building, Washington, DC 20201, Phone (202)245-1794. Questions concerning the preceding information should be submittedto the Crants Officer at the same address. Neither questions nor requestsfor application should be submitted after July 7, 1989. <T3>Important_</T3>Application for Federal Assistance (Standard Form 424)must be the new form revised 4/88.<ITAG tagnum="84">J. Federal Domestic Assistance Catalog </ITAG>This announcement is not listed in the Federal Domestic Assistance Catalog.<ITAG tagnum="84">K. Intergovernmental Review of Federal Programs </ITAG>This program is not subject to Executive Order 12372, ``IntergovernmentalReview of Federal Programs'' or its implementing regulations 45 CFR Part100.<ITAG tagnum="84">L. Cost Sharing </ITAG>All applicants responding to this notice are required to share some partof the total cost of their proposed project. The amount to be shared isto be determined by the organization submitting the application. Applicationsreceived without some amount of cost sharing will not be considered foraward.<ITAG tagnum="21">Date: May 25, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-13422 Filed 6-6-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4150-04-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>