<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89621-0070 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.6-21-89.f2.A1069</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. R-0668] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="91">RIN 7100-AA76 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Proposals To Modify the Payments System Risk Reduction Program; Pricing,Overdraft Measurement, and Caps </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>agency: </T2>Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>action: </T2>Request for comment.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>summary: </T2>The Board is requesting comment on proposed changes toits payments system risk reduction program. The proposals would providefor a fee of 25 basis points, phased in over three years, for average dailyconsolidated funds and book-entry Fedwire overdrafts in excess of a deductibleof 10 percent of risk-based capital. To accommodate pricing and reducethe administrative burden to depository institutions, the Board is alsoproposing various changes to the procedures used for measuring daylightoverdrafts and the current cap structure. These proposals are being issuedin conjunction with the other requests for comment and policy statementsregarding the payments system risk reduction program published elsewherein today's <T4>Federal Register.</T4> </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>dates: </T2>Comments must be submitted on or before November 17, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>addresses: </T2>Comments, which should refer to Docket No. R-0668,may be mailed to the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,20th and C Streets, NW., Washington, DC 20551, Attention: Mr. William W.Wiles, Secretary; or may be delivered to Room B-2223 between 8:45 a.m.and 5:00 p.m. All comments received at the above address will be includedin the public file and may be inspected at Room B-1122 between 8:45 a.m.and 5:15 p.m. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>for further information contact:</T2>Edward C. Ettin, Deputy Director,Division of Research and Statistics (202/452-3368); Bruce Summers, AssociateDirector (202/452-2231) or Florence Young, Assistant Director (202/452-3926),Division of Federal Reserve Bank Operations; Oliver I. Ireland, AssociateGeneral Counsel (202/452-3625) or Stephanie Martin, Attorney (202/452-3198),Legal Division; for the hearing impaired only: Telecommunications Devicefor the Deaf, Earnestine Hill or Dorothea Thompson (202/452-3544). </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>supplementary information: </T2>This is one of three proposals regardingpayments system risk that the Board is issuing for public comment today.The others concern daylight overdrafts related to book-entry securitiestransfers (Docket No. R-0669) and the daylight overdraft policy for foreignbanks with U.S. branches and agencies (Docket No. R-0670). The Board encouragesall interested parties to comment on each of these proposals. The Boardurges that, in filing comments on these proposals, commenters prepare separateletters for each proposal, identifying the appropriate docket number oneach. This procedure will facilitate the Board's processing and analysisof the comments on these proposals by ensuring that each comment is quicklybrought to the attention of those responsible for analyzing each specificproposal. In addition, the Board encourages entities that plan to submitidentical comments, such as affiliated institutions within a holding company,to consolidate their efforts; the Board will give equal consideration toone letter signed by a number of commenters as it would to numerous identicalletters submitted by those commenters. Comments are due November 17, 1989,and the Board does not intend to extend the comment period beyond thatdate. In addition to its requests for comment, the Board is also issuing todaythree risk-related policy statements regarding private delivery-against-paymentsystems (Docket No. R-0665), offshore clearing and netting systems (DocketNo. R-0666), and rollovers and continuing contracts (Docket No. R-0667).<ITAG tagnum="84">Background </ITAG>The Board has been concerned for some time about the risks associated withlarge-dollar payments systems. The Federal Reserve Banks would face directrisks of loss in the event that Fedwire users are unable to cover theirintraday overdrafts by the end of the business day. Moreover, on a privatelarge-dollar network that permits its participants to transmit paymentmessages throughout the day with settlement of net positions at the endof the day, the inability or unwillingness of a participant to settle itsnet debit position would expose the banking system to systemic risk. Systemicrisk occurs when institutions unable to settle on private large-dollarpayments networks cause their creditors on those networks, in turn, tobe unable to settle their own commitments. As a result, serious repercussionscould spread to other participants in the network, to other depositoryinstitutions not participating in the private network, and to the nonfinancialeconomy generally. In such circumstances, the Federal Reserve would bearan indirect risk if it sought to avoid or limit this systemic risk. Finally,on both private wire systems or Fedwire, depository institutions will facerisk by permitting their customers, including other depository institutions,to make transfers against uncollected or insufficient balances in anticipationof their coverage before the end of the day. In April 1985, the Board adopted a policy to reduce the risks that large-dollarpayments systems, including Fedwire, present to the Federal Reserve, tothe depository institutions using them, to the banking system, and to othersectors of the economy (50 FR 21120, May 22, 1985). This policy, in effect,established a maximum amount of intraday funds overdrafts, or intradaycredit extensions, that depository institutions and other entitites, suchas Edge corporations and foreign banks with U.S. branches and agencies(hereafter ``depository institutions'') are permitted to incur over bothFedwire and private large-dollar payments systems. The maximum, or cap,is a multiple of a depository institution's adjusted primary capital andis based on the depository institution's self-evaluation of its own creditworthiness,credit policies, and operational controls. The guidelines for performingthe self-evaluation were established by the Board, and the documentationsupporting each depository institution's rating is reviewed by the institution'sprimary supervisory agency examiners. In July 1987, the Board adopted anumber of modifications to its daylight overdraft policy, including a two-step,25 percent reduction in the cross-system net debit caps, thus reducingthe maximum daylight overdraft permitted to an individual depository institution(52 FR 29255, August 6, 1987).  The Board's policy was designed to be binding only on depository institutionswith the largest overdrafts, and, even after the reduction of caps thatwas effective in 1988, the use of intraday credit by virtually all depositoryinstitutions remained generally unconstrained. Only a very small numberof the depository institutions required to file a cap incur overdraftsthat amount to as much as 80 percent of their caps. However, overdraftlevels have remained relatively stable, and overdrafts as a percentageof the dollars transferred over Fedwire have declined. Moreover, managementof individual depository institutions and the Board's Large Dollar PaymentsSystem Advisory Group have indicated that, as a result of the Board's policy,senior managers of depository institutuions have focused on intraday creditrisks. Reportedly, they have taken steps to eliminate many of the paymentpractices that had presented risk to depository institutions, the FederalReserve, and the banking and payments systems in general.  In 1987, the Board's Payments System Policy Committee requested two studiesto assist in its consideration of future payments system risk reductionpolicies. The Board's Large Dollar Payments System Advisory Group was specificallyasked to propose policy recommendations, and a Federal Reserve System stafftask force was asked to review options but to make no policy recommendations.Both reports were published by the Board in August 1988.\1\<NOTE/>    <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\<T3>A Strategic Plan for Managing Risk in the Payments System: Report ofthe Large Dollar Payments System Advisory Group to the Payments SystemPolicy Committee of the Federal Reserve System</T3> (Washington, 1988)and <T3>Controlling Risk in the Payments System: Report of the Task Force onControlling Payments System Risk to the Payments System Policy Committeeof the Federal Reserve System</T3> (Washington, 1988) are available fromthe Secretary of the Board at the address noted above or from the DaylightOverdraft Liaison Officer of each Federal Reserve Bank.To test the impact of pricing, posting rules, and cap changes, the Boardused data from a survey for the two weeks ending February 10, 1988. Thissurvey provided detailed transactions data for all depository institutions.Cap multiples in force in 1989 were applied to survey cap categories. Thenormal data flow for monitoring daylight overdrafts is reported only fordepository institutions incurring overdrafts under present daylight overdraftmeasurement procedures and includes only summary level information on transactionsprocessed. During the comment period, the Reserve Banks will provide individualdepository institutions with information on their own overdraft profilesunder both the current and proposed posting procedures as well as informationon any fees that would be assessed to that each depository institutioncan determine for itself how the proposals would affect its position. After reviewing the Advisory Group's and the staff's reports as well asthe survey data, the Board developed a series of proposals to reduce theaggregate level of payments system risk further. These proposals assumeprivate sector systemic risk will be reduced by the implementation of settlementfinality on the New York Clearing House's Clearing House Interbank PaymentsSystem (``CHIPS'') network and that other sources of systemic risk willbe controlled by policy statements regarding private-sector delivery-against-paymentsystems and offshore netting and clearing arrangements (see Docket Nos.R-0665 and R-0666, elsewhere in today's <T4>Federal Register</T4>). Against this background, the Board's proposalsseek to shift a higher proportion of risk to the private sector, reducingthe share of such risk borne by Reserve Banks. Presented in this docketare proposals to establish a program for pricing the daily average valueof all Fedwire overdrafts in excess of a deductible, to facilitate pricingby revising the defintion and measurement of daylight overdrafts, to exemptfrom caps those depository institutions with relatively small overdrafts,and to exclude from the cross-system net debit cap net debits on CHIPSafter settlement finality is adopted on CHIPS.  Other proposals issued for comment today would apply the existing cap structureto all overdrafts, including Fedwire book-entry overdrafts, and would requirecollateral for all Fedwire overdrafts for (1) any depository institutionwhose total Fedwire overdrafts frequently and materially exceed its Fedwirecap solely because of book-entry overdrafts and (2) any foreign bank witha U.S. agency or branch whose Fedwire overdrafts exceed its cap multipletimes its U.S. capital equivalency. (See Docket Nos. R-0669 and R-0670,elsewhere in today's <T4>Federal Register</T4>.)  As indicated above, all of these proposals should be evaluated in the contextof settlement finality on CHIPS and the adoption of systemic risk-reducingpolicies on private-sector delivery-against-payment systems for securitiesactivity, netting arrangements, and offshore dollar clearing systems. Moreover,proposed revisions in the rules on finality for automated clearing house(``ACH'') transactions processed by the Reserve Banks should also be considered(see the Board's request for comment on ACH finality, 54 FR 8822, March2, 1989). Proposals regarding daylight overdraft pricing, posting, andcaps are discussed in detail below.<ITAG tagnum="84">Pricing Fedwire Overdrafts</ITAG>The Board is requesting public comment on a change in its payments systemrisk reduction policy that would provide for a fee of 25 basis points,phased in over three years in increments of 10, 10, and 5 basis points,for average daily consolidated funds and book-entry Fedwire overdraftsin excess of a deductible of 10 percent of risk-based capital. Explicitfees or charges for Fedwire daylight credit are expected to create incentivesfor depository institutions to reduce Fedwire overdrafts, thereby reducingdirect Federal Reserve risk and contributing to economic efficiency. TheBoard expects that payments system participants as a result of the marketincentives established by the combination of Fedwire daylight overdraftpricing and settlement finality on CHIPS, will lower the level and moreefficiently allocate the distribution of Fedwire and private sector intradaycredit flows.\2\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ The Board believes that settlement finality and otherrisk-constraining steps on existing and evolving U.S. and offshore clearingand settlement systems will partially offset pricing-induced shifts ofpayments away from Fedwire and will reduce overall systemic risk. See DocketNos. R-0665 and R-0666 elsewhere in today's Federal Register.<T3>Application of Pricing to Total Fedwire Overdrafts.</T3> The Boardis proposing that pricing apply to book-entry related overdrafts as wellas funds overdrafts. The Board is requesting comment in a separate docketon the inclusion of book-entry securities in the total measure of overdrafts(see Docket No. R-0669). As in the case of funds overdrafts, pricing book-depositoryinstitutions to reduce these overdrafts. Moreover, failing to price book-entryoverdrafts while pricing funds overdrafts would create incentives to avoidcharges for funds overdrafts through manipulation of book-entry transfers.For example, depository institutions in funds overdraft could deliver book-entrysecurities to another depository institution in order to receive a creditfrom the Federal Reserve to offset their priced funds overdrafts. If book-entryoverdrafts were not priced, the receiver of the securities would incura book-entry overdraft that is free (but, perhaps, requiring the postingof collateral with the Reserve Bank) and could charge the sender of thesecurities any rate below the Federal Reserve charge on funds overdrafts.The loan could be secured by the securities being transferred.Pricing of book-entry overdrafts is unlikely to disrupt the U.S. governmentsecurities market, to constrain open market operations, or to increasethe cost of Treasury financing. Each 10 basis points of overdraft chargeamounts to only $2.70 per million per day, and, on average, each dollarof book-entry overdrafts is associated with six or seven dollars of transfers.The increase in the cost of the average transfer of less than $10 millionis thus consideably smaller than the traditional minimum market bid-askspread for Treasury securities, which is 1/64th of a percentage point orabout $165 per million dollars transferred.<T3>Average Overdrafts. </T3>The Board is proposing that pricing be appliedto the average level of total Fedwire overdrafts. Overdrafts would be measuredat equally-spaced intervals throughout the day, and the average overdraftwould be the sum of all of the overdraft measurements divided by the numberof intervals.\3\<NOTE/> Average overdraft pricing more closely reflects the FederalReserve credit actually used during the day by individual depository institutions.Average overdraft pricing is also likely to induce depository institutionsto focus on managing their overdraft positions more or less continuouslyover the day rather than concentrating on only the time periods when overdraftsare at or close to their peak. Average overdraft pricing also permits moreflexibility to the depository institution in managing overdraft levels,a particularly important advantage if book-entry related overdrafts arepriced because the overdrafting depository institution will not be ableto control when securities are delivered and when such overdrafts occurwith the same precision as is possible with funds overdrafts.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\ Currently, overdraft values are measured at 15-minuteintervals for both average and peak overdrafts. Federal Reserve staff isreviewing the feasibility of measuring overdrafts at shorter intervals(e.g., by second or minute) and whether the averaging period should befixed (e.g., the ``normal'' hours over which Fedwire is open) or the actualperiod Fedwire is open at each Reserve Bank.The Board considered but decided against pricing peak rather than averageoverdrafts. Peak pricing would levy a fee on the Reserve Banks' maximumexposure and would also be consistent with the debit caps applied to peakoverdrafts. Peak pricing, however, would be unlikely to provide incentivesfor depository institutions to reduce their overdraft levels once the peakhas been reached, depending on the dynamics of other depository institutions'responses to pricing. In addition, if fees were assessed only for the peakoverdraft, the duration of the Reserve Banks' exposure would not be considered.The Board believes that average overdraft pricing is, on balance, superiorto peak overdraft pricing and proposes that the Reserve Banks assess dailyfees for average total intraday Fedwire overdrafts. Daily and two-weekaverage debit caps would continue to apply to peak intraday values of suchoverdrafts in excess of $10 million and 20 percent of capital (as discussedbelow).<T3>Deductible.</T3> The Board proposes that the amount of overdrafts subjectto pricing be decreased by a deductible of 10 percent of risk-based capital.The deductible amount would be subtracted from the average intraday totalFedwire overdraft (funds and book-entry) each day to determine the amountof such overdrafts subject to pricing. An important purpose of the deductiblewould be to provide a certain amount of free Fedwire overdrafts to offset,partially or in full, those overdrafts incurred due to circumstances beyondthe control of the depository institution. The deductible would providesome liquidity to the payments mechanism and would address the inevitablelack of synchronization of payments in a complex economy.The deductible would also offset, in part, the Fedwire charge for overdraftsthat may be beyond the control of the depository institution because ofa computer problem at a Reserve Bank. The downtime associated with suchproblems can artificially affect the overdraft of a depository institutionas payments cannot be sent or received. Reserve Bank operating problemsaffect the distribution of daylight overdrafts among institutions, benefittingsome and harming others. A fixed deductible, as proposed, provided eachday to address unpredictable downtime would likely overcompensate on somedays and undercompensate on others. Depository institutions benefittingfrom a deductible on some days may have to absorb any downtime effectson other days for which a charge might be levied. The Board believes that,on average, depository institutions would not be unfairly charged and thatReserve Banks could make adjustments in exceptional circumstances. TheBoard proposes that Reserve Banks be permitted to adjust the amount ofoverdrafts subject to pricing for individual depository institutions ona <T3>ad hoc </T3>basis to deal with unusual circumstances, such as extendedoperational difficulties. In general, however, the Reserve Banks shouldassume that the deductible is sufficient to offset all but very lengthyoperating outages at Reserve Banks and other unusual events.The deductible would also offset some of the impact on individual depositoryinstitutions of the loss of opening-of-day non-wire net credits under thenew posting rules (see discussion below). For example, a deductibe couldoffset the end-of-day Federal Reserve recognition of credits for checksand commerical ACH, the proceeds of which depository institutions may berequired to make available to their customers at the opening of the businessday according to the provisions of Regulation CC (12 CFR Part 229) or theguidelines of the National Automated Clearing House Association (``NACHA'').Regulation CC requires depository institutions to make the proceeds ofcertain categories of checks deposited by 2:00 p.m. available to theircustomers for withdrawal at the opening of business on the business dayfollowing the banking day of deposit. These ``next-day availability'' checksinclude Treasury checks, Postal money orders, checks drawn on Federal ReserveBanks and Federal Home Loan Banks, cashier's, teller's, and certified checks,and state and local government checks. Similarly, NACHA guidelines encouragedepository institutions to make ACH credit transactions available to consumersfor withdrawal by opening of business on the settlement day.Under the posting proposal, discussed below, depository institutions generallywould not receive credit for overdraft measurement pruposes for ``next-dayavailability'' checks or for commercial ACH credit transactions by thetime that the funds should be available to their customers for withdrawalunder Regulation CC and NACHA guidelines. Consequently, these depositoryinstitutions may incur an overdraft. The Board believes that these typesof overdrafts would be rare, in view of the fact that most of the withdrawalsof the proceeds of ``next-day availability'' checks and commercial ACHcredits are likely to be by check or by cash withdrawal. Check withdrawalswould not affect a depository institution's intraday balance because thedebits for the check presentments would be recognized after the close ofFedwire. Furthermore, cash withdrawls would not affect a depository institution'sintraday reserve balance. The proposal would cause depository institutionsto incur overdraft costs for these checks and ACH credits only if the proceedswere wired out on the settlement day. For most depository institutions,these overdraft costs would be covered by the deductible.Another reason for a deductible is to exclude from pricing the large numberof mainly smaller depository institutions that incur <T3>de minimis </T3>overdrafts. Among the over 5,000 depository institutionsthat incurred overdrafts on at least one day during the final quarter of1988 (measured by the current posting rules), over 90 percent of totalFedwire (funds and book-entry) average overdrafts were incurred by thelargest 50 overdrafters. The Board believes that the burden of imposingcharges on the 4,500 to 5,000 depository institutions that present ony1 or 2 percent of the risk exceeds the benefit of reducing this small amountof risk.Depository institutions that choose to access Fedwire through multipleaccounts would be required to allocate their deductible in the same proportionas the allocation of their caps. One administering Reserve Bank would stillhave overall risk management responsibility, even though each Reserve Bankwould administer the charges for each overdrafting account.The Board considered the impact of various deductibles (based on capital)during the test period. If there were no deductible, all 5,040 depositoryinstitutions incurring overdrafts in the test period would have been subjectto pricing on their total average overdrafts, which amount to $37.3 billion.(During the same period, these depository institutions' daily peak overdraftsamounted to $120 billion.) A deductible of 10 percent would exempt 4,821depository institutions from pricing, and only 219 would have been subjectto pricing. These 219 depository institutions would have had $34.0 billionof average overdrafts but would have paid fees on only $25.5 billion ofoverdrafts, the difference being overdrafts at depository institutionssubject to pricing that would be exempted by the deductible. The 4,821totally exempt depository institutions would have incurred $3.3 billionof average overdrafts.As the deductible rises, the number of depository institutions subjectto pricing falls as do both the aggregate overdrafts at depository institutionssubject to pricing and the amount of overdrafts actually priced. At a 20percent deductible, for example, only 118 depository institutions wouldhave been subject to pricing in the test period; these depository institutionswould have accounted for almost 80 percent of all average overdrafts, butfees would have been assessed on only 50 percent of all average overdrafts.The pricing deductible would be independent and separate from the testfor exempotion from filing for a cap (discussed below). The cap exemptiondeals with intraday peak values and determines which depository institutionswould be exempt from filing for a Fedwire net debit cap. The pricing deductibledetermines the amount of daily average intraday overdrafts subject to fees(if any) by Reserve Banks. A depository institution could be subject toa cap and operate close to its cap level for part of the day and not besubject to fees, depending on its intraday overdraft pattern. Similarly,a depository institution could conceivably be exempt from filing for acap, but be subject to pricing because it had overdrafts for most of theday above the 10-percent-of-capital pricing deductible, even though itspeak overdraft remained below the 20 percent of capital exemption-from-filing-for-caplevel.The Board specifically requests comment on whether deductible schemes otherthan the one proposed would be appropriate. In addition, the Board requestscomment on whether there are any additional actions that could be takenby Reserve Banks or depository institutions to alleviate the problems causedby overdrafts beyond the control of depository institutions. For example,would it be feasible to accelerate lthe posting time, for overdraft measurementpurposes, of those ``next-day availability'' checks that bear unique routingnumbers, such as Treasury, Federal Reserve Bank, and Federal Home LoanBank checks and U.S. Postal Service money orders?<T3>Size of Charge</T3>. The Board is proposing an initial Fedwire overdraftcharge of 25 basis points (annual rate) to be phased-in over three years,with the effective initial date 12 to 18 months after the Board's finaladoption of a program to price Fedwire overdrafts.\4\<NOTE/> The Board intends to implement pricing three to six monthsafter new procedures for measuring daylight overdrafts are effective (seebelow). In setting the level of the Federal Reserve charge for priced Fedwireoverdrafts, the Board seeks a price that is high enough to induce risk-reducingchanges by depository institutions and their customers. The price shouldnot be so high, however, as to slow payments flows or drastically increasethe public's cost of making payments.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\4\ The Federal Reserve will retain its current penalty forovernight overdrafts of 10 percent or the federal funds rate plus 2 percentagepoints, whichever is higher.According to data collected during the test period, a fee of 25 basis pointsfor daily average Fedwire overdrafts in excess of a 10 percent of capitaldeductible, before any response on the part of depository institutionsto reduce their overdrafts, would result in the 15 largest overdrafterspaying almost 90 percent of the total charges. (Sixty percent of the feeswould have been levied against the four largest book-entry securities clearingbanks.) By the 100th largest overdrafter, the annual fee would be lessthan $3,000 and by the 150th it would be about $400.The Fedwire overdraft price will be applied only on business days; theactual annual cost to a depository institution of an explicit price isonly a fraction of the annual percentage rate. The number of business daysvaries each year, but the fraction is approximately 251/365, or about 30percent lower than an annual rate that levies fees for all calendar days.The actual rate each day is 1/365 of the annual rate fee. The Board requestscomment on the level of the proposed fee as well as on the three-step phase-inschedule.<ITAG tagnum="84">Defining Overdrafts and Application of Caps</ITAG>Measuring OverdraftsThe Board's daylight overdraft pricing proposal would give funds an intradayvalue and, therefore, would require precision in measuring intraday overdrafts.Such precision requires fixing the time at which all payment transactionsby Reserve Banks are recognized to have occurred for daylight overdraftmeasurement purposes. The Board proposes that, for purposes of measuringdaylight overdrafts, a depository institution's opening balance at theReserve Bank be adjusted by (1) credits for U.S. Treasury and governmentagency book-entry securities interest payments; (2) credits for U.S. Treasuryand government agency book-entry securities redemption proceeds; (3) creditsfor U.S. Treasury ACH recurring credit transactions; and (4) debits fornew issues of U.S. Treasury book-entry securities. During the day, thisadjusted opening balance would be adjusted for Fedwire funds and book-entrysecurities transactions as they occur. At 2:00 p.m. local time of the ReserveBank, Treasury direct and special direct investment credits would be reflected.After the close of Fedwire, all non-wire and commercial ACH transactionswould be included, regardless of whether the net of those transactionswere a credit or A debit.\5\<NOTE/> This overdraft measurement proposal would apply equally toall depository institutions with Reserve Bank accounts, including U.S.chartered banks, foreign banks with U.S. agencies and branches, thrifts,bankers' banks, limited purpose trust companies, nonbank banks, \6\ andany other such entities.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\5\ Generally, credit for, and repayment of, discount windowloans for healthy depository institutions would be included among the non-wiretransactions posted for daylight overdraft measurement purposes at theend of the day. This treatment would assure that the discount window loanswere not used to fund same-day daylight overdrafters and would make thediscount rate a price for a 24-hour credit and, hence, more relevant formonetary policy purposes in conjunction with a 24-hour federal funds rate.<ITAG tagnum="28">\6\ The posting changes would not affect the overdraft restrictionsfor nonbank banks established by the Competitive Equality Banking Act of1987.</ITAG>The precise measurement of daylight overdrafts requires a set of rulesto determine when during the day debits and credits to a depository institution'saccount at a Reserve Bank are determined to have occurred. ``Posting''for the purpose of measuring daylight overdrafts is not necessarily synonymouswith the time at which payments become final or the time at which the currentrights to receive funds accrue, although finality of payment is one ofthe criteria the Board used to develop the daylight overdraft measurementrules. The actual timing of entering transactions on the Reserve Banks'books varies depending on operational procedures. Fedwire transactions,whether funds or book-entry transfers, are debited or credited as theyare processed and are considered to be final payments when the receiverof funds is advised by the Reserve Bank of the credit. Rules governingnon-wire payments transafers, however, generally are provisional for someperiod of time and refer to a particular ``day'' as the measuring unitof availability, without indicating the time during the day at which paymentparticipants are either entitled to the use of the funds received or havebeen relieved of their payments obligation to the Federal Reserve.Even if the Federal Reserve were not contemplating pricing Fedwire overdrafts,it would be desirable to clarify the time at which the debtor-creditorrelationship between a depository institution and its Reserve Bank changesas the result of the recognition of a payment. Independent of overdraftpricing or cap policies in the United States, technology and the globalizationof financial instruments and transactions are increasingly causing money,securities, and capital markets to operate on a 24-hour basis. In suchan environment, trading in dollar instruments and dollar payments in onepart of the world occurs while U.S. markets and Reserve Banks are closedand vice versa. In a 24-hour global market, depository institutions inthe United States and abroad need to know more precisely the time of daythat dollar payments are recognized to have occurred by the Federal Reserve.Even if such global developmetns were not in progress, a clarificaitonwould permit depository institutions to ascertain their intraday rightsand responsibilities vis-a-vis Reserve Banks and to evaluate their risksaccordingly.Under the current definition of daylight overdrafts, all non-ACH, non-wiretransactions are netted at the end of the banking day; if the net is acrewdit, and if that net is a debit, the debit is deducted from the end-of-dayposition. The net of all ACH transactions is posted as if the transactionsoccurred at the opening of business, regardless of whether the net is adebit or a credit. This <T3>ex post</T3> measure thus allows a depository institution to use allof its non-wire net credits to offset any wire debits during the day, butpostpones the need to cover non-wire, non-ACH net debits until the closeof the day.The current, transitional, system of posting debits and credits for daylightoverdraft measurement purposes gives the benefit of the doubt to depositoryinstitutions. Two drawbacks of this system are that it creates intradayfloat in the measurement of daylight overdrafts in that depository institutionswith net credits can use them before those with net debits are chargedand many depository institutions are unable to monitor their overdraftlevels effectively during the banking day. Because the Board's paymentssystem risk reduction program is reaching maturity, the Board believesthat the initial transaction posting procedures must be modified now.In developing a proposal to establish the time at which non-wire transactionswould be recognized for daylight overdraft measurement purposes (hereinafter referred to as ``posting changes''), the Board was guided by a desireto eliminate intraday float and to keep the posting rules simple and easyto use. The Board believes that measurement procedures shoud not provideintraday float to payments system participants. Thus, the processing ofa payment transaction should not result in a reduction of one depositoryinstitution's measured overdraft (or an increase in its credit balance)before another depository institution's overdraft is increased (or itscredit balance reduced).The principle of eliminating aggregate Federal Reserve intraday float isindependent of the credit risk arising from the transactions. For example,there may be only minimal Federal Reserve risk resulting from grantingearly-in-the-day credit for checks collected through the Federal Reserve,even though the Reserve Banks do not charge paying institutions until lateon the presentment day. However, by providing early-in-the-day credit tothe collecting institution without an offsetting debit to the paying institution,the Federal Reserve would be permitting the collecting institution to useFederal Reserve credit without regard to that depository institution'scap, deductible, or any Reserve Bank fee. Furthermore, if explicit feesfor overdrafts are adopted, and if the timing of debits and credits foreach transaction were not nearly simultaneous at Reserve Banks, depositoryinstitutions would have an incentive to create float by writing each otherchecks to create free overdraft capacity. As intraday credit begins tohave value, either through pricing or the evolution to 24-hour global markets,intraday Federal Reserve float becomes a taxpayer subsidy. Similar concernswere one reason that the Congress mandated, in Section 11A of the FederalReserve Act, that Federal Reserve Banks should charge for float.In addition, the new daylight overdraft measure should be simple to understandand to use in controlling intraday overdrafts. If depository institutionsare to be charged a fee for incurring a Fedwire overdraft, the proceduresfor measuring overdrafts should facilitate their ability to control theirpositions and determine their intraday balances accurately. Measures thatwould include transactions retroactively after the transaction day is completedo not meet this test.\7\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\7\ The Large Dollar Payments System Advisory Group notedthat the inability of depository institutions to control their overdraftpositions accurately would be inconsistent with a program of either bindingcaps or overdraft pricing.<T3>Treasury transactions</T3>. The proposed opening-of-day credits anddebits for certain U.S. Treasury transactions reflect Treasury obligationsand the mechanics of the book-entry system. Interest and redemption paymentson the debt are due at the opening of business on the payment date. Similarly,institutions purchasing Treasury securities receive title to the securitiesat the opening of business on the settlement date and should pay for thesecurities upon receipt.Treasury Department regulations for recurring ACH payments require depositoryinstitutions to make federal government direct deposit ACH payments availableto consumers at the opening of business on the payment date, and the Boardhas provided for such credits to depository institutions in the proposal.Reserve Banks would modify their accounting systems to separate Treasuryand commercial ACH credit transactions. Because the Treasury's accountwill be debited for ACH credit transactions at the same time that depositoryinstitutions will be credited for those transactions, this posting rulewill not create intraday float. Treasury ACH payments can be distinguishedfrom certain next-day availability checks, discussed above, which are alsorequired by regulation to be made available for withdrawal by the openingof business. Unlike the Treasury ACH payments, posting the next-day availabilitycheck credits at the opening of the day would create intraday float becausethe checks will not have been presented to the paying institutions theopening of the day.Under the Treasury's direct and special direct investment programs, excessbalances are placed with designated depositories that pay interest on thedeposits to the Treasury from the day of receipt until the day of withdrawal.Because depository institutions must pay interest from the transfer date,they should receive credit for the transafer early enough to be able toinvest the funds that day without incurring an overdraft. Some depositoriesare advised of direct investments the day before the deposits are received,and others are advised on the day of deposit. While it might be feasibleto grant credit for deposits known in advance at the opening of business,it is generally not possible to grant credit for same-day deposits until2:00 p.m. local time. Because one posting time would be less complex andshould not disadvantage depository institutions, the Board believes thecredits for Treasury direct and special direct investments should be postedat 2:00 p.m. local time of the Reserve Bank. The repayment of these investmentsis effected by Treasury calls, and the Board proposes that debits for callsbe posted after the close of Fedwire on the day of the Treasury call. Toensure that no intraday float is created, the Treasury's account wouldbe debited or credited for book-entry, ACH, and direct investment transactionsat the same time that depository institutions receive the correspondingdebit and credit entries in their accounts.<T3>Other Non-wire Transactions</T3>. For purposes of measuring daylightoverdrafts, the Board proposes that all other non-wire and commercial ACHtransactions be posted simultaneously, which eliminates the creation ofintraday float, after the close of Fedwire. In addition to eliminatingfloat, posting non-wire transactions at the end of the day would assurethat the depository institutions on either side of a transaction wouldhave complete information as to the amount and account to be debited orcredited and that depository institutions would not incur daylight overdraftssubject to charges and caps that are due to debits that are only provisionaland may not be binding if the institution fails.The Board considered and rejected various other arguments for posting non-wiredebits and credits earlier in the day. For example, although commercialACH credit transactions are generally known in advance of settlement dayand both the debit and credit for these transfers could be posted at theopening of business, the Board did not propose such a rule, in part becausethe opening-of-day debit might disadvantage originators that no longerobtain opening-of-day net credit for other non-ACH, non-wire transfers.Moreover, consumers typically withdraw cash or write checks on the proceedsof commercial ACH credit payments on settlement day, which, unlike fundstransfers, would not affect a depository institution's intraday reservebalance. Thus, crediting receiving depository institutions at the closeof Fedwire should not create significant costs.Posting check transactions to the collecting and paying depository institutions'accounts after the close of Fedwire on the availability date is consistentwith the elimination of intraday float and providing banks with informationto enable them to manage their accounts. Although Reserve Banks presentmost checks to paying depository institutions in the morning, they presentsome checks as late as 2:00 p.m. for same-day payment. If an earlier postingtime were established, paying depository institutions in the western timezones (Alaska, Hawaii, and the West Coast) might be debited before checkswere presented to them and, therefore, before they were aware of the amountof the debit. Further, to avoid intraday float, if check debits and creditswere to be recorded earlier than after the close of Fedwire, the time establishedmust be a standard time nationwide. If the timing of the credits and debitswere based on the local time of the Reserve Bank holding the depositoryinstitution's account, float would be created due to time zone differences.In addition, it is not operationally feasible to credit some checks, i.e.,those that have been presented to paying depository institutions, earlierthan other checks that are presented later in the day.In addition, the Board believes it is important to establish a time atwhich a paying depository institution becomes obligated for a debit. RegulationJ (12 CFR Part 210) requires a depository institution to pay for checkspresented by a Reserve Bank by the close of the banking day on which thechecks are presented. Debiting the paying depository institution for checkspresented at an earlier time during the day might require a depositoryinstitution to pay for checks before they have been presented and beforethe depository institution has had an opportunity to verify the charge.Moreover, private sector collecting depository institutions are often notable to obtain same-day payment for checks presented to paying depositoryinstitutions without payment of a presentment fee; in some cases they areunable to do so even if presentment fees are offered. For these reasons,the Board does not believe that debiting institutions for checks presentedearlier than the close of business would be an equitable solution for eitherpaying or collecting depository institutions.\8\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\8\ In April 1988, the Board published for comment a same-daypayment concept, which would enable private sector collecting depositoryinstitutions to receive payment for checks presented to paying depositoryinstitutions prior to 2:00 p.m. in same-day funds, without the impositionof presentment fees. Adoption of the concept would provide private collectingdepository institutions with the same presentment abilities Reserve Bankscurrently have (53 FR 11911, April 11, 1988). Board staff is currentlyanalyzing the comments received and reviewing alternatives suggested byseveral commenters. If a viable alternative is developed and proposed forpublic comment, it could incorporate payment options, chosen at the discretionof the paying depository institution, that would provide for payment tothe collecting bank after the close of Fedwire on the day of presentment.Thus, paying depository institutions would not be obligated to pay forchecks presented by private collecting depository institutions earlierin the day than they would be debited for checks presented by Reserve Banks.The Board could also propose a similar change to Regulation CC regardingthe timing of payment by a depositary bank for returned checks.The new posting rules are intended to facilitate pricing of Fedwire overdraftsby allowing depository institutions to determine with certainty their accountbalance at the Reserve Bank at any time during the day. The Board doesnot anticipate that these posting rules will significantly increase thepricing burden on depositor institutions, particularly given the deductibleequal to 10 percent of risk-based capital, which will provide some compensationfor overdrafts directly caused by the new positing rules.The Board recognizes that it is common practice for depository institutionsto extend credit to creditworthy corporate customers by permitting themto use non-wire credits, such as check credits, on the availablility/settlementdate to cover funds transfers during the day. In such cases, depositoryinstitutions have determined that their customers are sufficiently creditworthyto recover any funds should the non-wire transactions be returned or notpaid. Under the proposal, most depository institutions will have the optionto continue their current practices of providing credit to customers inanticipation of later cover or collection of final funds. A small numberof depository institutions, however, may incur a cost in the form of aFederal Reserve fee on average overdrafts above a deductible amount forusing intraday Federal Reserve credit to finance the transactions. As discussedabove, given the 10 percent pricing deductible proposed by the Board, theincidence of that higher cost is likely to extend to very few depositoryinstitutions.In view of the lack of finality of most non-wire payments and the goalsto eliminate Federal Reserve float and to provide depository institutionswith an accurate measurement of their overdraft position throughout theday, the Board requests comment on whether it would be desirable to postcertain non-wire transactions, such as commercial ACH, local clearinghouse,or other transactions earlier in the day.Application of CapThe Board is proposing that the current cap system continue, with certainmodifications that would exempt small depository institutions from therequirement to file for a cap and make the <T3>de minimis cap </T3>more useful for some larger institutions. In addition,the Board proposes that CHIPS net debits be excluded from the cross-systemdebit cap once settlement finality is implemented on CHIPS. These changesare intended to facilitate compliance with the Board's overall risk policy.In a related proposal issued for comment today (see Docket No. R-0669 elsewherein today's <T4>Federal Register</T4>) the Board has proposed that book-entry overdraftsbe included within the current debit caps. While the Board believes thatpricing should reduce Fedwire overdrafts significantly, until more experienceis gained, it would be premature to remove caps or the self-evaluationprocess for depository institutions.<T3>Exemption of small overdrafters. </T3>The Board proposes that depositoryinstitutions that only very rarely incur daily total peak Fedwire (fundsand book-entry) overdrafts in excess of the lesser of $10 million or 20percent of their risk-based capital be excused from performing self-evaluationsor filing board-of-director's resolutions with their Reserve Banks. Thisexemption would, however, be granted at the discretion of each ReserveBank. Reserve Banks would be expected to take the necessary steps (e.g.,coordination and consultation with supervisory personnel within the ReserveBank and at other agencies) to limit their risk exposures to those depositoryinstitutions under financial duress or in any other way presenting unusualrisk to the Reserve Banks. This risk-exposure control could include real-timemonitoring and imposition of lower caps or zero caps. Depository institutions,of course, would continue to be free to file for a cap if they chose todo so and would be required to do so if they began to exceed the exemptionlimits.Currently, a depository institution that incurs Fedwire funds overdraftsinfrequently is only required to file an annual board-of-directors resolutionwith the Reserve Bank authorizing the depository institution to incur occasionalFedwire overdrafts up to $500,000 or 20 percent of capital, whichever isless (the <T3>de minimis </T3>cap). All other depository institutions wishing toincur Fedwire overdrafts must conduct an annual self-evaluation, basedon Federal Reserve criteria, obtain their board's resolution of approval,and maintain supporting files for examiner review. These procedures havefocused director and senior management attention on the risks of daylightcredit exposure and the need to adopt prudential internal control proceduresand policies. A number of observers within and outside the Federal ReserveSystem, however, have questioned the need to apply the policy to all overdrafters.The Board does not believe it would be prudent to excuse depository institutionswith a small absolute level of overdrafts from the limits of the overdraftpolicy if the overdrafts are large relative to the depository institution'scapital. Similarly, from a Federal Reserve risk perspective, large overdraftsshould not be excluded from the policy just because such overdrafts area small portion of the depository institution's capital. Both the prudentialand Reserve Bank risk concerns could be addressed by a dual test that consideredboth the size of the overdraft and its relationship to the capital positionof the depository institution incurring the overdraft.Of the 5,040 depository institutions that would have incurred an overdraftunder the proposed posting procedure in the February 1988 test period,about 4,600 had overdrafts that were both less than $10 million and 20percent of the depository institution's capital. These overdrafts wereneither large relative to the depository institution's capital nor to therisk exposure of Reserve Banks. These 4,600 depository institutions accountedfor only $1.7 billion of Fedwire overdrafts, less than 1.5 percent of thetotal.\9\<NOTE/> This exemption greatly reduces the administrative burdenof the Board's payments system risk reduction policy, with only marginalincreases in potential direct Federal Reserve risk.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\9\ Indicative of the large number of very small overdrafters,the number of depository institutions does not change significantly asthe $10 million overdraft threshold is increased to $25 million (4,635),or decreased to $5 million (4,544). Similarly, changing the capital ratiohas modest impact at the same dollar level: at a $10 million overdraftlevel, a 10 percent overdraft-to-capital ratio would exempt 4,383 depositoryinstitutions and a 50 percent ratio would exempt 4,708 depository institutions.<T3>De Minimis Cap. </T3>Under the current <T3>de minimis </T3>cap, a depository institution may incur overdraftsup to the lesser of 20 percent of adjusted primary capital (or ``U.S. capitalequivalency'' for foreign banks' overdrafts on Fedwire) or $500,000, solong as the institution does not incur daylight overdrafts on a regularbasis. The depository institution must file a board-of-directors' resolutionwith its Reserve Bank approving its use of a <T3>de minimis </T3>cap but need not engage in a full self-evaluation process.The Board is proposing a new <T3>de minimis </T3>cap category with no frequency or dollar-limit tests,but still requiring a board-of-directors' resolution to obtain the 20 percentof capital cap.A small number of depository institutions would benefit if the existing<T3>de minimis </T3>cap were modified to remove the $500,000 limit andthe frequency test, retaining only the 20 percent of capital constraint.This modified cap category would differ from the exempt category in twoways: (1) While retaining a 20 percent of capital constraint, it wouldhave no $10 million limit, and, hence, would be of value only to largerdepository institutions; and (2) it would, like the present <T3>de minimis </T3>cap, require board-of-director filing, but not a self-evaluation.The modified <T3>de minimis </T3>cap would be a useful transition grouping for largerdepository institutions between the proposed exempt-from-cap-filing categoryand the lowest cap requiring self-evaluation and board-of-directors' resolutions.<T3>Exclusion of CHIPS Net Debits. </T3>Provided that settlement finalityis implemented on CHIPS, the Board proposes that the cross-system sendernet debit cap be eliminated, with the current cap multiples applied onlyto total Fedwire overdrafts. Under current procedures, Fedwire caps arereduced by any net debit on CHIPS. When these procedures were adopted,they were intended to control not only the use of Federal Reserve intradaycredit, but also to serve as a check on systemic risk. With reasonablemeans of assuring settlement finality, the system risk associated withthe potential failure of a CHIPS participant to settle should be reducedsignificantly. Each participant would have an increased incentive to becautious in setting bilateral net credit limits for other participants.Moreover, shifts of Fedwire payments to CHIPS to avoid Fedwire overdraftfees would be likely to result in expanded exchanges of payments amongthe few largest CHIPs participants. If this assumption is correct, netdebit positions subject to cross-system caps should not change significantlyas participants both receive and send more on CHIPS. Finally, eliminationof the cross-system cap would be consistent with the policy statement onprivate book-entry systems that the Board issued today (see Docket No.R-0665, elsewhere in today's Federal Register), which does not impose thecross-system cap on those systems that adhere to the policy statement onrisk control and settlement finality.CHIPS serves almost 140 participating banks. Twenty-two of these participantsare settling banks, i.e., at the end of the day, they settle the day'stransactions on a net basis both for their own account and as correspondentsfor non-settling participants. Settlement is effected at the end of theday when Fedwire payments by those settling depository institutions indebit position are made to a settlement account at the New York ReserveBank, followed by Fedwire transfers from the settlement account to allsettling depository institutions in net credit position.The payments volume on CHIPS, more than three-quarters of which is associatedwith foreign exchange and Eurodollar transfers, is somewhat larger thanFedwire funds transfers (about $700 versus about $660 billion per day inthe fourth quarter of 1988). However, the average aggregate peak intradaynet debit position on CHIPS is smaller than Fedwire funds daylight overdrafts(about $45 billion per day versus $60 to $65 billion per day). Althoughless than Fedwire, the net daylight credit exposure on CHIPS still representsa potential major systemic risk should a CHIPS participant be unable tosettle its net debit position.To reduce the systemic risk on CHIPS, the Board in recent years has encouragedthe NYCH to adopt risk-reducing measures. Thus, in 1984, the NYCH implementeda system of network bilateral credit limits, and in 1985 established CHIPS-specificsender net debit caps. The former requires each participant to make anassessment of the creditworthiness of its counterparty, and the latterestablishes a limit on the total exposure any one bank can create on CHIPS.Despite these steps, if a participant is unable to settle its debit positionat the end of the day, the CHIPS rules provide that payments to and fromthat participant be ``backed out'' of the settlement and new net positionscalculated for the remaining participants; the calculation of the new netpositions could continue until settlement is achieved. Despite this potentialfor revised settlement, participants permit most of their customers touse credits for CHIPS payments during settlement day, while reserving theright to charge back such credits if the transferring bank does not settleits CHIPS position. Simulations of the impact of a CHIPS participant'sinability to settle suggest that such failures to settle could drasticallychange the net position of other participants, inducing a series of failuresto settle by them. Thus, the current CHIPS rules and the practices of participantscould lead to the systemic failure of depository institutions and/or pressureon the Federal Reserve to provide liquidity assistance while losses andsolvency problems are determined.The Federal Reserve has encouraged the NYCH to adopt settlement finalityfor CHIPS. Settlement finality would assure that CHIPS payments will besettled each day, even if one large, or several smaller, participants areunable to settle. Thus, liquidity pressures will be dealt with immediately,while allocation of losses can be resolved at a later time. In responseto these concerns, the NYCH has developed a plan to implement settlementfinality in late 1990 or early 1991 based on the netting of payments anda formula for sharing the risk of the remaining uncovered net debits.Settlement finality on CHIPS does not eliminate private direct credit risk.Under the NYCH plan, specified CHIPS participants must cover the net debitof the failed participant, but that share is of a size unlikely to causethe failure of any one of them. Although the NYCH plan would provide forsettlement finality on the day of a participant's failure to settle, thereis some uncertainty as to whether the calculated multilateral net positionsare legally binding obligations. The Federal Reserve is encouraging theNYCH to explore means of assuring that certainty, but even with uncertainty,the proposed CHIPS settlement finality will produce a substantial reductionof systemic risk.In addition, because of the added settlement obligation aspects of theNYCH plan for settlement finality on CHIPS, CHIPS bilateral credit limitsmay be reduced and some small participants can be expected to withdrawfrom CHIPS. The number of transactions and the dollar volume of paymentson CHIPS is likely to decline only moderately after settlement finality,as long as those depository institutions leaving CHIPS can find correspondentswilling to conduct business for them. In fact, volume could increase withshifts from Fedwire if Fedwire overdrafts are priced.The exclusion of CHIPS net debits from caps would benefit the 35 CHIPSparticipants that have large net debits on that system. Elimination ofthe cross-system cap would increase their ability to conduct Fedwire activitywithin their cap. The CHIPS activity of the remaining 105 participantsdoes not generally result in a high cross-system cap utilization rate,and thus elimination of the cross-system cap would not affect these institutions.The approximately 50 foreign banks that incur net debits on CHIPS wouldbe virtually unaffected by the elimination of cross-system caps. Currently,foreign banks are allowed to incur Fedwire overdrafts up to the amountof their Fedwire cap (based on U.S. capital equivalency), regardless ofCHIPS debits. Foreign banks cross-system debit caps are based on world-widecapital, and they are permitted to incur Fedwire overdrafts above theirFedwire caps (up to their cross-system caps) by posting collateral forthe amount of such overdrafts in excess of their Fedwire caps. Under theproposed revisions to the foreign bank overdraft policy, however, foreignbanks exceeding their Fedwire cap woudl have to collateralize the entireamount of their Fedwire overdraft, not just the amount over their Fedwirecap. Under the proposal, foreign banks could have Fedwire overdrafts upto the amount of their cap multiplied by their world-wide capital if allof those overdrafts were collateralized. (See Docket No. R-0670, elsewherein today's <T4>Federal Register</T4>.)CapitalThe Board proposes, for the purpose of determining caps, that all domesticdepository institutions use the same definition of ``capital'' that banksupervisors will require U.S. commercial banks to use for meeting theirrisk-based capital requirements. Depository institutions that choose toaccess Fedwire through multiple accounts would continue to be requiredto allocate their capital for debit cap purposes to each Reserve Bank atwhich they incur overdrafts; one administering Reserve Bank would stillhave overall risk-management responsibilities.If CHIPS overdrafts are excluded from caps, foreign banks would be relievedof reportiing worldwide capital for the purpose of computing their cross-systemdebit cap. Under the proposal, the only foreign bank overdrafts subjectto cap would be Fedwire overdrafts based on U.S. capital equivalency. If,however, the foreign bank overdraft policy is changed as discussed above,foreign banks would be required to report their wordwide capital if theywished to incur collateralized Fedwire overdrafts, which would be limitedto their cap multiplied by their world-wide capital. In that case, thoseforeign banks whose home countries participated in the Basle Accord might,in the name of reduced burden, be given the option of reporting eithertheir lower (but easier to report) world-wide equity capital for cap purposesor their capital in accordance with the Basle Accord as applied by homecountry supervisors.The ``capital'' concept that has been used in the payments system riskreduction policy to determine the maximum permissible overdrafts (the capmultiple times capital) is primary capital less certain intangible assets.This ``adjusted'' primary capital concept for commercial banks is refinedfor other types of depository institutions to be consistent with the bankconcept, given any special institutional characteristics of these depositoryinstitutions.\10\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\10\ ``Primary'' capital for commercial banks is common stock,perpetual preferred stock, surplus, undivided profits, contingency andother capital reserves, cumulative foreign currency transaction adjustments,qualifying mandatory convertible instruments, allowance for possible loansand lease loses (exclusive of any allocated transfer risk reserves), andminority interest in equity accounts of consolidated subsidiaries. Intangibleassets are subtracted from this total to obtain ``adjusted'' primary capital.(Equity capital of Edge corporation subsidiaries is also subtracted fromthe parent's capital if the parent permits the subsidiary to incur itsown overdrafts).<ITAG tagnum="28">For savings and loan associations and federal savings banks, ``primary''capital is composed of perpetual preferred stock, permanent reserves orguaranty stock, contributed capital, qualifying mutual capital certificates,net worth certificates, income capital certificates, retained earnings,and all general valuation allowances. From this total are deducted deferrednet losses on loans and other assets sold, goodwill, and other intangibleassets to obtain ``adjusted'' primary capital. Mutual savings banks' capitalmeasures are similar.</ITAG>In the past year, the U.S. bank supervisory agencies have adopted new risk-basedcapital requirements consistent with the Basle Accord. (See 54 FR 4186,January 27, 1989.) The new requirements will be phased in from 1990 through1992. For consistency, it would be desirable if the capital base used forthe Board's daylight overdraft policy were the same as that used for certainother supervisory purposes, such as the computation of risk-based capital.The new international risk-based capital standard divides capital intotwo tiers. Tier I is composed of ``pure equity'' less goodwill.\11\<NOTE/> Tier I alone would be smaller than adjusted primary capitalfor all depository institutions. Tier II (which cannot exceed Tier I) iscomposed of certain forms of hybrid capital, preferred stock, subordinateddebt (up to 50 percent of Tier I capital), and loan loss reserves (up to1.25 percent of risk-weighted assets).\12\<NOTE/> For most banks, the sum of the two tiers exceeds their adjustedprimary capital, as the inclusion of subordinated debt and hybrid capitalin Tier II exceeds the reduction due to the limited inclusion of loan reservesnow fully included in primary capital. The ratio of estimated risk-basedcapital to adjusted primary capital at the 286 U.S. chartered banks that,in the February 1988 test period, had overdrafts of sufficient size torequire filing for a cap suggests, on average, that risk-based capitalfor U.S. banks incurring overdrafts subject to cap would be about 15 to25 percent higher than adjusted primary capital, increasing maximum permissibleoverdrafts by that amount.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\11\ Common Stock, surplus, undivided profits, capital reserves,cumulative foreign currency translation adjustments, and the minority interestin consolidated subsidiaries. While goodwill is deducted, in general, mortgageservicing rights and other identifiable intangible assets are not.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\12\ More specifically, hybrid capital is the sum of net equitycontract notes and equity commitment notes; preferred stock must be noncumulativeperpetual preferred, subordinated debt is the sum of limited life preferredand subordinated notes and debentures, and loan loss reserves must be generalprovisions and not for specific assets.The Administration's proposal to address the thrift problem and to modifythe regulatory structure of the thrift industry would apply bank capitalstandards to thrift institutions, other than credit unions, by 1991. Inthe test period, only 13 thrifts (excluding credit unions) incurred overdraftsabove the exemption level. As might be expected, some of these entitieswould face larger increases in capital requirements than banks. About halfof them, however, would have no increase in capital for overdraft purposesbecause most of the regulatory accounting adjustments are already eliminatedfrom adjusted primary capital for thrifts.\13\<NOTE/> In the aggregate, the 60 thrifts (including credit unions)with Fedwire overdrafts in excess of the exemption level incurred onlyabout $300 million of overdrafts in the February 1988 test period, about0.2 percent of total Fedwire overdrafts.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\13\ Deferred net losses on loans and assets sold and goodwillare deducted from both current and proposed capital; risk-based capitalwould generally permit the inclusion of mortgage servicing rights and otherintangibles (existing goodwill is grandfathered through 1992, and thenexcluded), while all forms of intangibles are now excluded from adjustedprimary capital; net worth and income capital certificates are includedin adjusted primary capital but would be excluded from the new capitalstandard; FSLIC and FDIC notes could serve to raise capital under bothstandards.Impact of Proposal on Cap UtilizationAccording to the data collected during the February 1988 survey, underthe current posting procedure, excluding book-entry overdrafts and withno exemptions or exclusions, 3,414 depository institutions with $92.7 billionof intraday peak overdrafts subject to cap would be covered by the currentdaylight overdraft policy. If book-entry overdrafts were added to the amountsubject to cap assuming the current overdraft measurement methodology andno exemptions of small overdrafters or exclusions of CHIPS net debits,the number of overdrafters would have risen by only 100 or so depositoryinstitutions, but the amount of overdrafts subject to cap could have increasedby over $40 billion to $133.6 billion. The proposed modification of postingprocedures would have raised the total number of depository institutionswith overdrafts by almost 1,600 depository institutions to 5,097,\14\<NOTE/> and would have raised the aggregate level of overdrafts anadditional $17 billion to $150.8 billion. This latter increase in overdraftsand overdrafters reflects the shift of non-wire net credits from opening-of-dayto close-of-day posting for about 2,700 depository institutions that hadsuch credits in the test period. It is this shift in posting that accountsfor the large increase in the number of overdrafters. However, the inclusionof book-entry overdrafts accounts for two-thirds of the dollar increasein overdrafts.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\14\ During the test period, about 2,100 depository institutionsincurred overdrafts under the posting proposal that would not have doneso under the current policy, but over 400 would have ceased overdraftingunder the proposal because their current opening-of-day ACH debits and/orlate afternoon non-wire net debits would not be posted until after theclose of Fedwire.If CHIPS net debits were removed from overdraft calculations and then smalleroverdrafters were excused from filing for the Fedwire cap, the number ofdepository institutions that would have had to file for either a <T3>de minimis </T3>or other cap in the test period would fall to lessthan 450. However, the total Fedwire overdrafts at depository institutionssubject to caps would have fallen only from $120.2 billion to $118.4 billion.Thus, with the small overdrafter exemption and the CHIPS exclusion, mostdepository institutions would not be directly affected by the change inthe posting rules, and the amount of Fedwire overdrafts subject to thepolicy would be reduced by only a small amount.One hundred forty-three depository institutions would have exceeded theircap during the test period under the proposed rules. Most of the overdraftsabove cap are at a small number of depository institutions that exceedtheir caps because of book-entry overdrafts. In fact, the four major book-entryclearers accounted for virtually all of the overdrafts in excess of cap.As discussed in Docket No. R-0669, the Board is proposing that such depositoryinstitutions be permitted to exceed their cap, provided they post collateral.Thus, the cap per se is not a constraint for these depository institutions.Most of the remaining overdrafts at depository institutions that wouldhave exceeded their cap in the test period where at six large banks thatwould have exceeded their caps due to the proposed posting change. Aboutone-half of the overdrafts at these six banks, and an even larger amountat other depository institutions (including some of the major book-entryclearers) was related to the settlement for maturing commercial paper.\15\<NOTE/> The Depository Trust Company (``DTC``) is expanding its existingsame-day settlement system to include book-entry processing for commercialpaper. Both the proposed posting procedures and pricing for overdraftsshould accelerate this effort. The DTC book-entry system will virtuallyeliminate Fedwire overdrafts associated with commercial paper issuance,transfers, and redemption, removing a substantial part of the overdraftsabove cap associated with the posting proposal.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\15\ Maturing commercial paper is presented to paying agentdepository institutions by custodian or collecting depository institutions.New York Clearing House members settle such paper, net, as part of theNew York Clearing House net settlement on the books of the Federal ReserveBank of New York. Those depository institutions in a net credit positionon the net settlement now receive that credit at the opening of the day.Under the proposal, this credit would be received after the close of business.In addition, issuing agent depository institutions often provide the issuerswith proceeds of new issues before investors have transferred funds tothe issuing agent depository institution.During the test period, a significant part of the remaining overdraftsabove cap, as well as those at a small number of other depository institutionswith high cap utilization rates, were at correspondent banks that had onlymodest overdrafts under the current posting procedure. These depositoryinstitutions now benefit from opening-of-day posting of net credits forchecks they collect on their own behalf and for respondents through theFederal Reserve and/or through local clearinghouses that settle on thebooks of the Reserve Banks. These credits would be recognized at the endof the day under the proposal.Eighty-seven depository institutions incurred a modest level of overdraftsthat exceeded their proposed 20-percent-of-capital <T3>de minimis </T3>caps because of the new posting rules. Some of thesedepository institutions could file for non-<T3>de minimis </T3>caps and operate with the new posting procedures.Bankers' banks cannot avoid the impact of the posting proposal by filingfor a cap. Bankers' banks are exempt from reserve requirements and, hence,do not have access to the discount window. Depository institutions withoutsuch access may not incur Fedwire overdrafts because they may, in somecircumstances, have no other way to cover a daylight overdraft at the endof the day. Some bankers' banks may choose to become member banks in orderto gain access to the discount window and thus avoid a restriction on thesize of deposit a member bank may place with the bankers' bank.\1\\6\<NOTE/> However, Congress intended that discount window access beavailable only to a depository institution that is subject to reserves.\1\\7\<NOTE/> A bankers' bank eligible to become a member may have accessto the discount window upon approval provided it agrees to maintain reserves.Nine bankers' banks have done so. Because the Board has ruled that creditunions may not become member banks, this access to the discounty windowis not available to corporate credit unions.\1\\8\<NOTE/> Thus, bankers' banks organized as credit unions may not incurdaylight overdrafts on Fedwire so long as they qualify as bankers' banks.They would have access, and would be subject to reserve requirements, ifthey fail to qualify as bankers' banks. For example, it may be possiblefor credit unions organized as bankers' banks to amend their charter soas to become depository institutions eligible for Federal Reseve credit.The Board requests comment on the effect of the risk proposals on bankers'banks and possible solutions to any problems.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\\6\ Section 19(e) of the Federal Reserve Act provides thatnomember bank shall keep on deposit with any depository institution withoutaccess to the discount window under section 10(b) of that Act a sum inexcess of 10 percent of the member bank's capital and surplus.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\\7\ Colloguy of Congressmen St. Germain and Wirth, 126Cong. Rec. H2291 (March 27, 1980).<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\\8\ See letter from Secretary of the Board to Federal ReserveBank of Minneapolis, S-540, August 6, 1942.During the test period, 43 bankers' banks, virtually all of which werecorporate credit unions, incurred overdrafts under the proposal, mainlyas the result of the loss of opening-of-day net credits for non-wire transactions.While none incurred an overdraft as high as $50 million, the total overdraftsof such depository institutions were $200 million. Only three of the depositoryinstitutions could have met the exemption proposal if they were eligiblefor it. Relative to capital, their overdrafts under the proposed measuringprocedure would in virtually all cases not permit them to operate withinany cap constraint, if they were permitted to have a cap. Bankers' bankswould thus, under the proposal, have to hold larger balances, reduce theirfederal funds sales, or take similar actions to reduce their wire paymentsrelative to their wire inflows and balances.In view of the proposal's impact on the overdraft level of various typesof institutions, the Board requests comment on alternative approaches tothe treatment of Fedwire overdrafts over cap. For example, should somelevel of overdrafts in excess of cap continue to be permitted in extraoridinarycases at the discretion of the Fedeal Reserve Bank? Further, some overdraftsare readily secured and generally self-liquidating. For example, underthe terms of Section 4-208 of the Uniform Commercial Code, depository institutionshandling a check for collection may have a security interest in the checkuntil payment is received. Overdrafts in excess of cap incurred in anticipationof check credits would be paid routinely when the credit is posted. Shouldsuch readily secured, self-liquidating overdrafts, or other secured overdrafts,in excess of cap be permitted? Who should bear the cost of maintainingcollateral if collateralized overdrafts in excess of cap were permitted?Would permitting collateralized ovedrafts in excess of cap increase risksto other creditors of overdrafting depository institutions?<ITAG tagnum="84">Federal Reserve Operational Modifications for Pricing</ITAG>Federal Reserve operating outages could affect intraday liquidily in thebanking system and thereby contribute to measured overdrafts at individualdepository institutions. Therefore Fedwire's operating reliability is criticalto the success of the payments system risk reduction program. To assuregreater Fedwire reliability, the Federal Reserve Banks are improving overallFedwire processing performance and developing and implementing disasterrecovery capabilites for Fedwire operations.Fedwire's reliability is high and has been improving steadily. The timeFedwire was unavailable during business hours, decreased sharply in 1988.Funds transfer downtime decreased by almost 50 percent and securities transferdowntime decreased by approximately 40 percent from the 1987 levels. In1988, the funds transfer and securities transfer systems achieved 99.59percent and 99.41 percent availability, respectively.Hardware and software systems that will reduce the likelihood of Fedwireoutages and facilitate more rapid recovery from operations problems arebeing implemented to improve reliability further. In addition, the FederalReserve is strengthening its disaster recovery capabilities to minimizethe likelihood of a prolonged service disruption. The New York ReserveBank has demonstrated, in disaster recovery simulations at its dedicatedcontingency site, the ability to recover Fedwire operations, reconcilefunds and securities transfers, and resume processing of new transferswithin four hours of a disaster. The Chicago and San Francisco ReserveBanks also currently have, or are in the process of establishing, dedicatedbackup sites for Fedwire processing. The remaining Reserve Banks sharea disaster recovery site located in Culpeper, Virginia.Federal Reserve pricing for daylight overdrafts will require that reliableinformation be made available to depository institutions by their ReserveBanks regarding the depository institutions' payment activity affectingtheir reserve or clearing accounts during the day. The Reserve Banks havedeveloped an Account Balance Monitoring System (``ABMS''), which will enabledepository institutions to obtain their current account balance duringthe day. The ABMS will reflect the depository institution's opening balance,funds and securities transfers as they occur, and selected non-wire transactionsthat would be posted to the monitor periodically during the day consistentwith this proposal. While some institutions may rely on ABMS exclusively,other institutions may use it in conjunction with their own internal monitoringsystems. ABMS will be available to depository institutions before any pricingscheme in implemented.<ITAG tagnum="84">Proposed Implementation Schedule</ITAG>The Board proposes that the new payments system risk reduction policy beimplemented in a series of staggered effective dates. As indicated on DocketNo. R-0669, Fedwire debit caps would be applied to total Fedwire overdrafts(funds and book-entry), with collateral required for total Fedwire overdraftsexceeding the Fedwire cap because of book-entry securities transfers, inthe second quarter of 1990. As indicated in Docket No. R-0670, the effectivedate for requiring collateral of all Fedwire overdrafts of foreign bankswith Fedwire overdrafts exceeding their cap based on U.S. capital equivalencywould also be in the second quarter of 1990.The Board proposes that the use of risk-based capital to compute debitcaps as well as the other cap and daylight overdraft measurement proposalsbecome effective in late 1990 or early 1991. CHIPS settlement finalityis also expected to occur within this time frame, and thus CHIPS net debitswould be excluded from the cross-system net debit cap in late 1990 or early1991.Approximately three months after adoption of the overdraft measurementchanges, Reserve Banks would begin sending mock bills to depository institutionsas if pricing were being applied. The Board proposes that, by mid-1991,Reserve Banks would begin assessing the first 10 basis points of the 25basis point charge. The second 10 basis points would be applied in mid-1992and the final 5 basis points in mid-1993. The Board reserves the rightto accelerate or extend the phase-in period, depending on market responses.The Board also reserves the right to terminate the phase-in at a lowerprice than 25 basis points or to continue the phase-in to a higher price,depending on market responses.<ITAG tagnum="21">By order of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,June 15, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">William W. Wiles,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary of the Board.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-14636 Filed 6-20-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6210-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>