<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89414-0169 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.4-14-89.f2.A1168</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="52">Revision to Circular No. A-125, ``Prompt Payment''  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Office of Management and Budget.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Proposed circular and request for comments.    </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This notice proposes a revision of OMB Circular No. A-125,``Prompt Payment,'' originally published on August 19, 1982, to implementprovisions of the Prompt Payment Act, Pub. L. 97-177. This revision isbeing made to:  andbullet; Implement changes made by Pub. L. 100-496, the Prompt PaymentAct Amendments of 1988; and  andbullet; Clarify and reorganize existing provisions of the circular.  The revisions will strengthen OMB Circular No. A-125 and provide for equitabletreatment of vendors who provide necessary goods and services to the FederalGovernment.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>Unless otherwise noted, the Act is effective for paymentsunder contracts awarded, contracts renewed, and contract options exercisedon or after April 1, 1989. Two provisions are effective with respect toall obligations incurred on or after January 1, 1989 including:  andbullet; Application of the Prompt Payment Act to the United States PostalService; and  andbullet; Requirements for payments to farm producers.  Effective for payments under contracts awarded on or after October 1, 1989,agencies must notify vendors of the amount of interest penalty, rate ofinterest and period for which the penalty was computed.  This circular will be effective 30 days after publication of the finalcircular.  Comments will be accepted until May 30, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>Send comments to Credit and Cash Management Branch, Officeof Management and Budget, 725 Seventeenth Street NW., Washington, DC 20503.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Marvin Saunders, (202) 395-3066.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>Since implementation of the PromptPayment Act in 1982, Federal agencies have made significant improvementsin their bill paying performance. Reports by agencies, the General AccountingOffice, the Inspectors General, and the contracting community documentthese improvements. Nevertheless, much remains to be done to fulfill theintent of the original legislation. In 1987, legislation was introducedto assist agencies to improve payment practices. On June 9, 1987, revisionsto OMB Circular A-125 were published to incorporate as much of the proposedlegislation as possible. On October 14, 1988, the President signed intolaw the Prompt Payment Act Amendments of 1988. The new legislation clarifiesthe Prompt Payment Act and provides new guidance for improving timelinessof payments to vendors. The revised circular implements the legislationand reorganizes the circular to clarify its provisions. Additional changesare made to respond to questions raised by agencies and contractors.  Changes made in response to the new legislation are as follows:  andbullet; The 15-day grace period has been eliminated effective April 1,1989. The grace period was originally included to protect agencies fromthe potentially substantial administrative burden and expense of payinglarge numbers of small interest penalties resulting from short delays inmaking payment. Agencies have had ample time to improve their bill payingsystems. Testimony suggested continuing abuse of the grace periods; agencieshave used the grace periods routinely to extend the payment periods.  andbullet; For the purpose of calculating whether timely payment has beenmade, acceptance is considered to have been made on the seventh day afterdelivery of goods or performance of service or on the date of acceptanceif acceptance occurred before the seventh day after delivery of goods orperformance of service, or at the conclusion of a longer period for acceptanceif specified in the solicitation and included in the contract. The circularpublished June 9, 1987, adopted a similar provision from then pending legislation,with a period of five days after delivery of goods or performance of service. This provision does not require the Government to pay for goods or servicesthat it has not had the opportunity to inspect and actually accept. Thecontract payment and any accrued interest penalties would still be duenormally only after actual acceptance and receipt of a proper invoice.The seven-day period is to be used only to limit the time period duringwhich payment may be made without incurring late payment interest penalties.Clearly, agencies must be aware of the importance of sending acceptancepapers to the payment office as quickly as possible. Warehousing of invoicesshould occur only at the payment office which can assure timely payment. The legislative history indicates that agencies are to include longer acceptanceperiods in contracts only when the longer period is necessary to permitproper Government inspection and testing of goods or services, not as aroutine practice. Commercial items and services should not be subject toextended acceptance periods. Longer acceptance periods may not be includedin contracts for brand-name commercial items purchased for authorized resale.Items which Government inspectors approve prior to shipment should generallybe eligible for acceptance on delivery or shortly thereafter.  andbullet; Receipt of invoice has been clarified. The date of receipt mustbe the date on which the invoice is first received by the place or persondesignated by the agency in the contract. This clarification is intendedto prevent agencies from holding invoices before sending them to the paymentcenter without counting the holding period in the 30-day payment period.The legislative history indicates that the intent is that if a contractrequires the invoice to be delivered to a nongovernmental entity, thatentity is the designated agent of the Government for receipt of the invoice. andbullet; If an agency fails to note on the face of an invoice the dateof its actual receipt, the legislation requires that the date placed onthe invoice by the contractor will be considered the date of receipt forthe purpose of determining the payment due date.  andbullet; Calculation of the rate at which interest shall be paid is clarified.To avoid uncertainty about the rate to be used when rates fluctuate, theamendments require that the rate be the interest rate in effect at thetime the payment became late, not at the time the payment was made.  andbullet; A new provision requires agencies to notify contractors of theamount of an interest penalty payment, the interest rate used to calculatethe penalty, and the period of time to which the penalty applies. Underthe prior circular, agencies were required to notify contractors of theamount of an interest penalty payment. Contractors had no way of verifyingthe accuracy of agency calculation of penalties. This change is effectivefor payments made for contracts awarded on or after October 1, 1989. Thelegislative history recognizes the need for additional time to make necessarychanges to agency payment systems.  andbullet; An additional penalty is now required when the agency owes a latepayment interest penalty, fails to pay the penalty within 10 days aftermaking the late payment and if the contractor makes a written request nolater than 40 days after the date of the payment. The additional penaltydoes not apply to payment of utility bills because such penalties are determinedthrough the rate-setting process. The Prompt Payment Act Amendments passed by the Senate required paymentof an additional penalty equal to twice the amount of the original penalty.The legislative history indicates that the House of Representatives Committeeon Government Operations found that the double interest penalty could potentiallyresult in windfalls to contractors; the legislation therefore requiresOMB to establish a percentage for the interest penalty and set a cap forthe total such additional penalty which an agency would be required topay. The Committee expressed the expectation that OMB would balance theneed for a sufficiently high percentage to focus the attention of agencyofficials on paying penalties due with the need for good stewardship oftaxpayer funds. In FY 1988, the 20 major agencies reported paying $20,569,000 in interestpenalties. The number of penalty payments reported was 522,487 and theaverage payment was $39. Agencies reported that they failed to make interestpenalties on 130,193 payments where interest was due but not paid. Thetotal amount of unpaid interest reported was $1,584,000; the average unpaidinterest amount was $12. To create a strong incentive to agencies to instituteautomatic payment of penalties due, OMB has set the additional penaltyat 100 percent of the amount of the original unpaid late payment interestpenalty beginning October 1, 1989. To give agencies an opportunity to makethe significant changes required by the amendments, we have establishedthe amount of additional penalty at 50 percent of the original unpaid interestfor the period April 1 through September 30, 1989. OMB expects that agencieswill rarely be required to pay this additional penalty. No data are currentlyavailable to permit calculation of an appropriate cap for the additionalpenalty payments. OMB will ask agencies to submit data on the distributionof interest penalties by size of payment and, on that basis, will amendthe circular to establish a cap. In the meantime, there will be no upperlimit on the dollar amount of an additional penalty. OMB invites submissionof data at this time by interested parties. andbullet; Prior to the new legislation, the Prompt Payment Act specifiedpayment dates for meat products and perishable agricultural commoditiesin accordance with industry practice. The new legislation adds a 10 daypayment period for dairy products and edible fats and oils. andbullet; Agencies are required to pay interest penalties even if timelypayments are prevented by temporary unavailability of funds. When fundsbecome available, the contractor is entitled to payment and late paymentinterest penalties. andbullet; The new legislation extends the protection of the Prompt PaymentAct to the support programs of the Commodity Credit Corporation and establishesspecific payment dates for farm program payments. andbullet; Under a contract that does not prohibit periodic payments, a contractorwho furnishes goods or services, accepted by the agency or determined bythe agency to conform to the terms and conditions of the contract, wouldbe entitled to a late payment interest penalty if the agency failed tomake payment in accordance with the terms of the contract or within 30days. While the new legislation reiterates established policy, clarificationwas needed because of testimony by the communications industry concerningthe total failure of some Government agencies to pay portions of theirbills for requirements-type (open-ended) service contracts. The legislativehistory indicates that agencies have experienced problems with employeemisuse of services and have failed to pay bills for such misuse. The intentof Congress is that agencies bear the obligation to monitor use and notattempt to shift the responsibility to the contractor providing the services.Under cost reimbursement contracts interim payments are not covered bythe interest provisions of the circular unless they are defined by thecontract as partial payments for deliverable property or services. andbullet; The new legislation requires that construction contract progresspayments be paid within 14 days after the Government first receives a paymentrequest from the contractor. Within that time the agency is required todetermine the adequacy of the payment request (in light of the new certificationand substantiation requirements), made any necessary inspections to verifythe contractor's estimate of the percentage of work performed, and actuallymake payment. The government has the right to specify a longer paymentperiod in the contract solicitation. The legislative history indicatesthat congressional intent is that longer payment periods be used judiciouslyby agencies to avoid reduced competition and increased costs. Extendedpayment periods would not be appropriate for simple repair or alterationcontracts, for the mere convenience of Government employees, or to avoidany possibility of making a late payment. If the agency determines that a construction contract progress paymentrequest is defective and that payment cannot be made, the agency must returnthe payment request to the contractor within seven days identifying thedefects that prevent payment.  Agencies may not pay progress payment requests without contractor substantiationof the amounts requested and certification that amounts were expended inaccordance with the contract, subcontractors and suppliers have been paidfrom previous payments and will be paid promptly from the payment requested,and that the prime contractor's payment request does not include any amountsto be withheld or retained from a subcontractor. The House Committee onGovernment Operations report suggested that contractor substantiation ofthe amount requested include an itemization of amounts requested relatedto the elements of work required by the contract and copies of paymentrequests submitted by subcontractors and suppliers and incorporated intothe contractor's payment request. The Committee intended this requirementto deter false valuation of progress payment requests and to deter primecontractors from diverting funds from subcontractors. The circular requiressubstantiation to include the itemization of amounts requested in relationto elements of work required. Because of concern at the Department of Defenseabout the potentially heavy paperwork burden, the circular does not requirecopies of subcontractor payment requests.  andbullet; The new legislation extends the Act's payment protections to subcontractorsand suppliers under Federal construction contracts. It does so principallyby specifying the minimum standards for a payment clause (including interestpenalties for late payments) to be included in the subcontract agreementbetween the Federal construction prime contractor and its various subcontractorsand suppliers. The payment clause is to be repeated in the agreements amongall tiers of subcontractors. Additional protections are accorded subcontractorsas well as the Government by the specification of various notice requirements,by requiring that amounts to be withheld or retained from subcontractorsremain in the possession of the Government, and by conditioning paymentsby the Government to its contractors on the submission of documentationsubstantiating the amounts requested and a certification regarding paymentsto subcontractors and suppliers.  andbullet; Agencies must review all invoices and return defective ones tothe contractors within seven days identifying the defects that preventpayment. If the agency fails to return the defective invoice within sevendays the number of days available for an agency to make a timely paymentafter receipt of the corrected invoice will be reduced by the number ofdays in excess of seven that the agency took before returning the defectiveinvoice to the contractor.  andbullet; The new legislation authorizes payments to be made up to sevencalendar days prior to the due date. This change was enacted because ofconcerns raised by a 1986 General Accounting Office study which suggestedthat agencies were holding payment data too long in order to avoid makingpayments early. The seven-day payment window is intended to compensatefor delays in the mail when agencies forward payment data to distant paymentcenters and for processing delays at the payment center. The legislativehistory indicates congressional concern that agencies balance the needto make timely payments to contractors with the need to reduce costs tothe taxpayer from unjustified early payments. The House Committee on GovernmentOperations report asks the agencies to experiment to determine the mostappropriate timing for release of their payment authorizations so thatinvoices are paid as close as possible to the due date without exceedingit. OMB has added to its reporting requirements a request for informationon agency experience in releasing payment authorizations. The legislationalso permits agencies to authorize early payments on a case-by-case basiswhen in the government's best interest.  andbullet; The period during which an agency may take a discount has beenclarified. The 1986 GAO report found that, in a four month period, agenciestook about 146,000 discounts amounting to $2 million after the discountperiod had expired. To address this unfair practice the new legislationrequires that the discount period be counted beginning with the date placedon the invoice by the contractor.  andbullet; The new legislation revises the reporting requirements slightly.Additional data will be required on the number and dollar value of invoicesfor which interest or other late payment penalties were paid. The legislativehistory expressed congressional dissatisfaction with measurement of agencyperformance based solely on the criteria in the Act and indicates thatcongressional oversight will require a more accurate and complete pictureof agency compliance with the Act. The legislative history emphasizes thatthe Act does not preclude OMB from collecting additional information neededto gain a more accurate picture of agency performance. Additional changesto the reporting requirements are discussed below.  andbullet; The new legislation mandates coverage of the Act in the FederalAcquisition Regulation (FAR) and specifies the minimum items to be covered. andbullet; The United States Postal Service (USPS) is explicitly includedin the Act and circular. The Postmaster General is authorized to implementthe Act through USPS's own procurement regulations. USPS is exempted fromthe reporting requirements but must maintain its own data on bill payingperformance and cash management.  andbullet; The new legislation creates a mechanism to quickly and effectivelyresolve complaints of small businesses about invoices submitted to theagencies. The Offices of Small and Disadvantaged Business Utilization (SADBU)will assist small business contractors to obtain payments, penalties, andinformation.  A number of significant changes to the Act are effective for contractsawarded, contracts renewed, and contracts options exercised on or afterApril 1, 1989. These changes benefit the contractors. Any agency whichwishes to apply the new provisions to payments under contracts awarded,renewed or for which options were exercised before April 1, 1989, may doso.  The circular has been reorganized significantly. The following new sectionshave been added:<ITAG tagnum="15">andbullet; Application</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">andbullet; Required documentation</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">andbullet; Required notices to contractors</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">andbullet; Interest penalties due farm producers</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">andbullet; Interest penalties under construction contracts</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">andbullet; Payment without evidence that supplies have been received</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">andbullet; Relationship to other laws</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">andbullet; Reporting requirements</ITAG>The material on progress payments has been deleted because it duplicatesmaterial in the FAR and is not concerned with the payment process. Thisdeletion does not change Federal policy.The following changes have been made in response to questions raised bycontractors and agencies:andbullet; Contracts with foreign contractors for work performed outsidethe United States are not covered by the circular. The Prompt Payment Actdoes not specifically address the question of geographic coverage. In theabsence of clear congressional intent, the general principle, articulatedby the Supreme Court, is that statutes can only operate upon persons andthings within the territorial jurisdiction of the law making power. Inaddition, a number of requirements of the Act, reflecting domestic industrypractice, either have no counterparts overseas or are in conflict withindustry practice abroad. Interest rates vary widely among countries sothat application of the Act in foreign countries would result in windfallsto contractors in some countries and would undercompensate vendors in others.Further, some vendors overseas do not willingly accept application of U.S.law.andbullet; The circular has been changed to refer throughout to ``contractor''rather than to business concern, contractor, and vendor.andbullet; The definition of ``Day'' has been clarified to include explicitlyweekends and holidays. The exception to this definition occurs when thepayment date falls on a weekend or legal holiday. In a Comptroller Generalopinion dated October 31, 1985, the General Accounting Office held that``It is a well-established rule of Federal contract law that when an actis to be performed within a certain number of days and the last day fallson a Sunday or a legal holiday, performance on the following day is proper.''Where Government offices are open, on Inauguration Day or local holidays,payments must be made on the holiday if due. In accordance with that opinionand priviate sector practice, the circular has been clarified as follows:<ITAG tagnum="15">_Payments due on Saturday or Sunday may be paid on Monday, or thenext working day, without penalty; and</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Payments due on a legal holiday which falls on a weekday, includinga Friday, may be paid on the next working day without penalty.</ITAG>andbullet; The new legislation deems payment to be made on the date a checkfor payment is dated or an electronic fund transfer (EFT) is made. Basedon a recommendation by the Treasury Department's Financial Management Servicethe circular further specifies that the date an electronic fund transferis made is the date the payment is received in the contractor's financialinstitution. This definition is intended to establish an unambiguous datefor payment in an electronic environment. The definition is also intendedto create an incentive for contractors to agree to accept payment throguhEFT rather than by check because they should have use of the funds somewhatsooner. OMB recognizes that agencies may view the definition of the EFTpayment date as creating an incentive to them to continue making paymentby check. OMB believes that the advantages to the Government of convertingfrom labor and paper-intensive processes to electronic disbursement areso great that agencies should immediately adopt EFT. If a contractor givesthe agency incorrect information so that the EFT transmission cannot becompleted, the agency is not liable for an interest penalty for the periodof time taken to correct the information.andbullet; The reporting requirements, summarized in the prior circular,are included in the revised circular. OMB will also issue the reportingrequirements to the agencies as a form. The due date for agency reportsto OMB has been changed from November 30 following the end of a fiscalyear to November 15. This change will permit OMB to submit the annual reportto Congress with the President's Budget. OMB encourages agencies to usestatistical sampling techniques to collect data. The following items havebeen added to the reporting requirements:<ITAG tagnum="15">_Number and dollar value of invoices paid after the due date;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Number and dollar value of additional late payment penalties paid;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Description of actions taken during the fiscal year to correct problemsidentified;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Description of agency experience in determining the most appropriatetiming for release of payment authorization so that invoices are paid asclose as possible to the due date without exceeding it;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Updated description of agency quality control system; and</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Updated list of agency contacts for assistance in determining statusof invoices.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">To: The Heads of Executive Departments and Establishments</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">Subject: Prompt Payment</ITAG>1. <T3>Purpose.</T3> The circular prescribes policies and procedures to befollowed by executive departments and agencies in paying for property andservices acquired under Federal contracts pursuant to the Prompt PaymentAct of 1982, as amended, and for entitlement payments under the AgriculturalAct of 1949 (7 U.S.C.1421 <T3>et seq</T3>).2. <T3>Background.</T3> The Prompt Payment Act (the Act), as amended, (Chapter39 of title 31 United States Code) requires Federal agencies to pay theirbills on time, to pay interest penalties when payments are made late, andto take discounts only when payments are made by the discount date. Section3903(a) of the Act requires the Director of the Office of Management andBudget to issue implementing regulations. Implementation will result intimely payment, better relationships with contractors, improved competitionfor Government business, and reduced costs to the Government for goodsand services. Implementation must be consistent with sound cash managementpractices, related Treasury regulations (in the Treasury Financial Manual,I TFM 6-8000, section 8040), and the Federal Acquisition Regulation (48CFR, 32.9 and 52.232).The Act, originally enacted as Pub. L. 97-177, May 21, 1982, was amendedby Pub. L. 100-496, enacted October 17, 1988.3. <T3>Policy. </T3>Agencies will make payments under contracts as prescribedin the Act and circular but not later than the due date, or if appropriate,the discount date. Payment will be based on receipt of proper invoicesor progress payment requests and satisfactory performance of contract terms.Agencies will take discounts only when payments are made by the discountdate; when agencies take discounts after the discount date or fail to maketimely payment, interest penalties will be paid. Checks will be mailedand electronic fund transfers made on or about the payment date. Agencieswill pay interest penalties automatically, without contractors requestingthem, and will absorb interest penalty payments within funds availablefor the administration or operation of the program for which the penaltywas incurred. Temporary unavailability of funds to make a timely paymentdoes not relieve the agency from the obligation to pay interest penalties.For contracts awarded after October 1, 1989, agencies shall pay an additionalpenalty under specified circumstances.4. <T3>Definitions. </T3>For the purposes of this circular, the followingdefinitions apply:a. <T3>Acceptance</T3>_acknowledgement by the Government that property andservices received conform with the requirements of the contract.b. <T3>Agency</T3>_has the same meaning as the term ``agency'' in Section551(1) of Title 5, United States Code, which includes each authority ofthe United States Government, whether or not it is within or subject toreview by another agency, and excludes the Congress, the United Statescourts, governments of territories or possessions, the District of Columbiagovernment, and courts martial, and military commissions, military authorityexercised in the field in time of war or in occupied territory. Agencyalso includes any entity (1) that is operated exclusively as an instrumentalityof such an agency for the purpose of administering one or more programsof that agency, and (2) that is so identified for this purpose by the headof such agency. The term agency includes military post and base exchangesand commissaries. The Prompt Payment Act exempts the Tennessee Valley Authorityfrom coverage by this circular. The Act exempts the United States PostalService (USPS) from the reporting requirements of the Act and circular.The Postmaster General is responsible for issuing the implementing procurementregulations, solicitation provisions, and contract clauses for the USPS.c. <T3>Agency payment office</T3>_the office or employee responsible for schedulinginvoices for payment.d. <T3>Applicable interest rate</T3>_the interest rate established by theSecretary of the Treasury for interest payments under Section 12 of theContract Disputes Act of 1978 (41 U.S.C. 611) which is in effect on theday after the due date, except where the interest penalty is prescribedby other governmental authority (e.g., tariffs). The rate established underthe Contract Disputes Act is referred to as the ``Renegotiation Board InterestRate,'' and is published semiannually in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>on or about January 1, and July 1.e. <T3>Contract</T3>_any enforceable agreement, including rental and leaseagreements, purchase orders, delivery orders, requirements-type (open ended)service contracts, and blanket purchase agreements between an agency anda contractor for the acquisition of property or services. Contracts mustmeet the requirements of section 8.a. of this circular.f. <T3>Contractor</T3>_any person, organization, or business concern engagedin a profession, trade, or business and any not-for-profit entity operatingas a contractor (including State and local governments but excluding Federalentities).g. <T3>Day</T3>_calendar day(s), including weekends and holidays, unless otherwiseindicated.h. <T3>Designated billing office</T3>_the office or employee_governmentalor non-governmental_designated in the contract to first receive invoices.i. <T3>Discount date</T3>_the date by which, if payment is made, a specifiedinvoice payment reduction, discount, can be taken.j. <T3>Due date</T3>_the date on which Federal payment should be made. Determinationof such date is discussed in section 7 of this circular.k. <T3>Partial payment</T3>_payment made for partial delivery of acceptedproperty or partial performance of accepted services. Under cost reimbursementcontracts, periodic or interim payments are not covered by the interestprovisions of the circular unless they are defined by the contract as partialpayments for deliverable property or services.l. <T3>Payment date</T3>_the date on which a check for payment is dated orthe date of an electronic fund transfer (EFT) payment (settlement date).Payments made by EFT mechanism will be made so as to be received by thecontractor's financial institution by the established due date. Agenciesshould contact their Treasury Regional Finance Center (RFC) to establishthe necessary delivery time needed to process payments.m. <T3>Proper invoice</T3>_a bill or written request for payment providedby a contractor for property or services rendered. This includes requestsfor progress payment under construction contracts. A proper invoice mustmeet the requirements of section 8.b. of this circular.n. <T3>Receipt of invoice</T3>_for the purposes of determining a payment duedate and the date on which interest will begin to accrue, an invoice shallbe deemed to be received:(1) On the later of:_The date a proper invoice is actually received by the designated billingoffice if the agency annotates the invoice with date of receipt at thetime of receipt; or_The seventh day after the date on which the property is actually deliveredor performance of the services is actually completed; unless:i. The agency has actually accepted the property or services before theseventh day (in which case the acceptance date shall substitute for theseventh day after the delivery date); orii. A longer acceptance period is specified in the solicitation and includedin the contract to afford the agency a practicable opportunity to inspect,test, and accept the property or evaluate the services (in which case thedate of acceptance shall substitute for the seventh day after the deliverydate. Note that extended acceptance periods should not be a routine agencypractice but should be included only when necessary to permit proper Governmentinspection and testing of the goods delivered or services rendered) or(2) On the date placed on the invoice by the contractor, in any case wherethe agency fails to annotate the invoice with date of receipt at the timeof receipt and where such invoice is a proper invoice.andbullet; <T3>Receiving report</T3>_written evidence of acceptance of property orservices by a Government official. Receiving reports must meet the requirementsof section 8.c. of this circular.5. <T3>Application.</T3>a. This circular applies to all types of Federal contracts (except as notedin section 4.k.) awarded by:(1) All executive branch agencies except:_The Tennessee Valley Authority which is subject to the Prompt PaymentAct but is not covered by this curcular; and_Agencies specifically exempted under 5 U.S.C. 551(1).(2) The United States Postal Service, except for the reporting requirements.The Postmaster General is responsible for issuing implementing procurementregulations, solicitation provisions, and contract clauses for the UnitedStates Postal Service.(3) The Commodity Credit Corporation pursuant to section 4(h) of the Actof June 29, 1948 (15 U.S.C. 714b(h)).b. This circular does not apply to contracts awarded to foreign contractorsdealing outside the United States for work performed outside the UnitedStates.c. For effective dates see section 19.6. <T3>Responsibilities. </T3>Each agency head is responsible for:a. Assuring timely payments and the payment of interest penalties whererequired;b. Issuing internal instructions, as necessary, to implement this circular.Such instructions will include provisions for determining the causes ofany interest penalties incurred, taking necessary corrective or disciplinaryaction; reporting accurately each year to OMB; and dealing with inquiries.c. Assuring that effective internal control systems are established andmaintained as required by OMB Circular A-123, ``Internal Control Systems,''to provide reasonable assurance that administrative activities requiredunder Circular A-125 are effectively and efficiently carried out. In particular,internal management controls over receipt and acceptance should be strengthened.d. Assuring that Inspectors General and internal auditors periodicallyreview implementation, as they and the agency head deem appropriate. Thiswill include establishment of a quality control program to assess performanceof payment systems and provide a reliable way to estimate payment performance.Copies of reports on audits and reviews should be provided to OMB uponissuance.e. Publishing lists of designated agency contacts within their paymentcenters or finance offices to provide contractors assistance in determiningthe status of their invoices.7. <T3>Standards for Prompt Payment. </T3>Agency payment practices shall conformto the following standards:a. <T3>Documentation. </T3>Agencies will maintain documentation required insection 8. Copies of awarded contracts will be forwarded to the agencypayment office immediately upon award.b. <T3>Review of invoices. </T3>Agencies will use the following proceduresin reviewing invoices:(1) Invoices received by the designated billing office will be stampedor otherwise annotated with the date received in that office;(2) Each invoice will be reviewed as soon as practicable after receiptto determine that the invoice is a proper invoice as defined in section4 of this circular;(3) Any invoice determined not to be a proper invoice shall be returnedas soon as practicable, but not later than seven days (three days for meator meat food products and five days for perishable agricultural commodities,dairy products, and edible fats and oils) after receipt, identifying thedefects that prevent payment; and(4) The number of days available to an agency to make a timely paymentof an invoice without incurring an interest penalty shall be reduced bythe number of days by which an agency exceeds the requirement to returnthe defective invoice in seven days.c. <T3>Receipt and acceptance. </T3>Agencies will ensure that receipt andacceptance are executed as promptly as possible. Receiving reports willbe forwarded in time to be received by the agency payment office by thefifth working day after acceptance, unless other arrangements are made.Receiving reports and invoices will be stamped or otherwise annotated withthe date upon receipt in the agency payment office.d. <T3>Starting the payment period. </T3>The period available to an agencyto make a timely payment of an invoice without incurring an interest penaltyshall begin on the date of receipt of invoice as defined in section 4.n.(except where no invoice is required, e.g., some periodic lease payments).e. <T3>Determining the payment due date. </T3>Unless otherwise specified,the payment is due either:(1) On the date specified in the contract; or(2) If a payment due date is not specified in the contract, 30 days afterthe start of the payment period as defined in paragraph 7d.f. <T3>Determining the payment due date for certain commodities. </T3>Thepayment due dates are as follows:(1) For meat or meat food products, as defined in section 2(a)(3) of thePackers and Stockyard Act of 1921 (7 U.S.C. 182(3)), including any ediblefresh or frozen poultry meat, any perishable poultry meat food product,fresh eggs, and any perishable egg product, payment will be made as closeas possible to, but not later than, the seventh day after the date of delivery.(2) Payment for perishable agricultural commodities, as defined in section1(4) of the Perishable Agricultural Commodities Act of 1930 (7 U.S.C. 499a(4)) will be made as close as possible to, but not later than, the 10thday after the date of delivery, unless another date is specified in thecontract.(3) For dairy products (as defined in section 111(e) of the Dairy ProductionStabilization Act of 1983 (7 U.S.C. 4502(e) and including, at a minimum,liquid milk, cheese, certain processed cheese products, butter, yogurt,and ice cream), edible fats or oils, and food products prepared from ediblefats or oils (including, at a minimum, mayonnaise, salad dressings, andother similar products) payment will be made not later than 10 days afterthe date on which a proper invoice for the amount due has been receivedby the agency acquiring such dairy products, fats, oils, or food products.When questions arise about coverage of a specific product, prevailing industrypractices should be followed in specifying a contractual payment due date.g. <T3>Determining the payment due date when making certain payments to farmproducers. </T3>Payment due dates shall be determined as specified in section12. b.h. <T3>Determining the payment due date when discounts are taken. </T3>Whena time discount is taken, payment will be made as close as possible to,but not later than, the discount date. The period for taking the discountis calculated from the date placed on the proper invoice by the contractorto the discount date.i. <T3>Determining the payment due date for progress payments under constructioncontracts. </T3>Payment due dates shall be determined as specified in section13.j. <T3>Late payment. </T3>When payments are made after the due date interestwill be paid automatically in accordance with the requirements in sections10, 11, 12, and 13 of this circular.k. <T3>Timely payment. </T3>An agency shall make payments no more than sevendays prior to the payment due date, unless the agency head or designeeof such officer has determined, on a case-by-case basis for specific payments,that earlier payment is necessary. This authority must be used cautiously,weighing the requirement to make timely payment against the good stewardshipinherent in effective cash management practices. Agencies are encouragedto experiment with the timing for release of their payments so as to payproper invoices as close as possible to the due date without exceedingit.l. <T3>Taking discounts. </T3>An agency offered a discount by a contractorfrom an amount due under a contract for property or services in exchangefor payment within a specified time may pay the discounted amount onlyif payment is made within the specified time. Discounts will be taken whenevereconomically justified, but only after acceptance has occurred. (See I<T3>Treasury Financial Manual </T3>6-8040.30.) If the agency takes thediscount after the end of the specified time and does not repay it beforethe payment due date (as defined in paragraph 7.e), the agency shall payan interest penalty on any amount remaining unpaid as prescribed in section10.a.(6).m. <T3>Making the payment. </T3>Checks will be mailed or transmitted on orabout the same day for which the check is dated. Whenever possible, agenciesshould seek to enter into agreements with contractors for transmissionof payments by electronic funds transfer (EFT). On Saturdays, Sundays,and legal holidays, when Federal government offices are closed and governmentbusiness is not expected to be conducted, payments falling due may be madeon the following business day without incurring late payment interest penalties.n. <T3>Partial payments. </T3>Agencies shall pay for partial delivery of suppliesor partial performance of services unless specifically prohibited by thecontract.o. <T3>Paying interest penalties. </T3>Agencies shall pay an interest penalty,without a request from the contractor, for late payments and improperlytaken discount payments. Agencies shall use the procedures for paying penaltiesas prescribed in sections 10, 11, 12 and 13.p. <T3>Other regulations. </T3>Agencies will make payments consistent withTreasury regulations (I Treasury Financial Manual 6-8040) and with theFederal Acquisition Regulation (48 CFR subparts 32.9 and 52.232).8. <T3>Required Documentation. </T3>Agencies are required to ensure that thefollowing documentation is established to support payment of invoices andinterest penalties:a. The following information must be included in contracts:(1) Payment due date(s);(2) If partial payments are not to be made under the contract, a contractualprovision that partial payments for partial deliveries or periodic performanceare not authorized. This includes partial payments authorized for partialdeliveries of accepted goods or partial performance of accepted servicesunder supply and service contracts;(3) For construction contracts, payment due dates for approved progresspayments or milestone payments for completed phases, increments, or segmentsof the project;(4) If applicable, a statement that the special payment provisions of thePackers and Stockyard Act of 1921 (7 U.S.C. 182 (3)) or the PerishableAgricultural Commodities Act of 1930 (7 U.S.C. 499 a(4)) apply;(5) Where considered appropriate by the agency head, a stated acceptanceperiod following delivery to inspect and/or test property furnished orto evaluate services performed. This does not apply to contracts for procurementof brand-name commercial items for authorized resale;(6) Name (where practicable), title, phone number, and complete mailingaddress of officials of the Government's designated billing office andof the contractor receiving the payments;(7) Where appropriate, contracts should provide for payment of multipleinvoices for multiple deliveries during the same contract performance periodwith one payment; and(8) Reference to requirements under the Prompt Payment Act including thepayment of interest penalties on late invoice payments (including progresspayments under construction contracts).b. The following information must be included in proper invoices:(1) Name of contractor and invoice date.  (2) Contract number, or other authorization for delivery of property orservices.  (3) Description, price, and quantity of property and services actuallydelivered or rendered.  (4) Shipping and payment terms.  (5) Other substantiating documentation or information as required by thecontract.  (6) Name (where practicable), title, phone number, and complete mailingaddress of responsible official to whom payment is to be sent.  c. The following information must be included in receiving reports:  (1) Contract or other authorization number.  (2) Product or service description.  (3) Quantities received, if applicable.  (4) Date(s) property or services delivered and accepted.  (5) Signature, printed name, title, phone number, and mailing address ofthe receiving official.  d. The following information must be included in each request for a progresspayment under a construction contract:  (1) Substantiation of the amount(s) requested including, at a minimum anitemization of the amounts requested related to the various elements ofwork required by the contract, and  (2) Certification by the prime contractor, to the best of the contractor'sknowledge and belief, that:  _The amounts requested are only for performance in accordance with thespecifications, terms, and conditions of the contract;  _Payments to subcontractors and suppliers have been made from previouspayments received under the contract, and timely payments will be madefrom the proceeds of the payment covered by the certification, in accordancewith their subcontract agreements and the requirements of Chapter 39, title31, U.S.C.; and  _The application does not include any amounts which the prime contractorintends to withhold or retain from a subcontractor or supplier in accordancewith the terms and conditions of their subcontract.  9. <T3>Required Notices to Contractors. </T3>This section summarizes noticeswhich agencies are required to provide to contractors:  a. <T3>Notice of interest penalty. </T3>When an agency pays a late paymentinterest penalty, the payment must be accompanied by a notice of the amountof the interest penalty included in the payment, the rate used by the agencyto compute the penalty, and the number of days used by the agency to computethe penalty. The contract and invoice numbers should also be included inthe notice to assist the contractor in reconciling the payment.  b. <T3>Defective invoices. </T3>When an agency determines that an invoiceis not a proper invoice suitable for payment (using criteria in section8.b.) the agency must return the invoice to the contractor as soon as practicable,but not later than seven days after receipt, specifying the reasons whythe invoice is not a proper invoice.  10. <T3>Late Payment Interest Penalties.  </T3>a. <T3>Calculation. </T3>Agencies will use the following procedures in calculatinginterest due on late payments:  (1) Interest will be calculated at the interest rate applicable on theday after the due date (the date the agency incurred the obligation topay an interest penalty).  (2) Interest will be computed from the day after the due date through thepayment date.  (3) Adjustments will be made for errors in calculating interest.  (4) When an interest penalty that is owed is not paid, interest will accrueon the unpaid amount until paid. Interest penalties remaining unpaid forany 30-day period will be added to the principal, and interest penalties,thereafter, will accrue monthly on the total of principal and previouslyaccrued interest.  (5) Interest penalties under the Prompt Payment Act will not continue toaccrue:  _after the filing of a claim for such penalties under the Contract DisputesAct of 1978; or  _for more than one year.  (6) When an agency takes a discount after the discount date, the interestpayment will be calculated on the amount of the discount taken, for theperiod beginning the day after the specified discount date through thepayment date.  (7) When an agency fails to make notification of a defective invoice withinseven days (three days for meat and meat food products, and five days forperishable agricultural commodities, dairy products, edible fats or oils,and food products prepared from edible fats or oils), the number of daysallowed for payment of the corrected, proper invoice will be reduced bythe number of days between the seventh day (third day for meat and meatfood products, and fifth day for perishable agricultural commodities, dairyproducts, edible fats or oils, and food products prepared from edible fatsor oils) and the day notification was transmitted to the contractor. Calculationof interest penalties, if any, will be based on an adjusted due date reflectingthe reduced number of days allowable for payment.(8) Interest penalties of less than one dollar need not be paid.(9) When an agency cannot complete transmission of payment to a contractorby electronic funds transfer because of incorrect account information providedby the contractor, the agency is exempted from payment of interest penaltiesfor the period between the date of attempted transmission and the dateon which the contractor supplies correct information to the agency, providedthat the contractor has been given notice of the defective account informationwithin seven days.(10) The applicable interest rate may be determined by calling the Financeand Funding Branch, Department of the Treasury, telephone number 202/566-5651.b. <T3>Payment. </T3>Agencies will meet the following requirements in payinginterest penalties:(1) Interest may only be paid after acceptance has occurred;(2) Late payment interest penalties shall be paid without regard to whetherthe contractor has requested payment of such penalty;(3) The temporary unavailability of funds to make a timely payment duefor property or services does not relieve an agency from the obligationto pay these interest penalties or the additional penalties required undersection 11;(4) Each payment for which a late payment interest penalty is requiredto be paid shall be accompanied by a notice stating the amount of the interestpenalty included in the payment, the rate by which the penalty was computed,and the number of days used in calculating the penalty; and(5) Agencies shall pay late payment interest penalties under this circular(and any additional penalties required under section 11) out of amountsmade available to carry out the program for which the penalty is incurred.The Prompt Payment Act does not authorize the appropriation of additionalamounts to pay penalties.c. <T3>Penalties Not Due. </T3>Interest penalties are not required when:(1) Payment is delayed because of a disagreement between a Federal agencyand a contractor over the amount of the payment or other issues concerningcompliance with the terms of a contract (Claims concerning disputes, andany interest that may be payable with respect to the period while the disputeis being settled will be resolved in accordance with the provisions inthe Contract Disputes Act of 1978 (41 U.S.C. 601 <T3>et. seq.</T3>)); or(2) Payments are made solely for financing purposes, payments are madein advance, or for a period when amounts are withheld temporarily in accordancewith the contract.11. <T3>Additional penalties.</T3>a. A contractor shall be entitled to an additional penalty payment whenthe contractor:(1) Is owed a late payment interest penalty by an agency;(2) Receives a payment after the payment due date which does not includethe interest penalty also due to the contractor;(3) Is not paid the interest penalty by the agency within 10 days afterthe date on which such payment is made; and(4) Makes a written demand, not later than 40 days after the date on whichsuch payment is made, that the agency pay such a penalty.b. The additional penalty shall be equal to:(1) Fifty (50) percent of the original late payment interest penalty forthe period April 1, 1989 through September 30, 1989, and(2) One hundred (100) percent of the original late payment interest penaltybeginning October 1, 1989.c. The additional penalty does not apply to the payment of utility billsbecause late payment penalties for these bills are determined through therate-setting process.12. <T3>Interest Penalties Due Farm Producers. </T3>In the case of a paymentto which producers on a farm are entitled under the terms of an agreemententered into under the Agricultural Act of 1949 (7 U.S.C. 1421 <T3>et. seq.</T3>):a. An interest penalty shall be paid to the producers if the payment hasnot been made by the required payment or loan closing date. The interestpenalty shall be paid:(1) On the amount of payment or loan due;(2) For the period beginning on the first day beginning after the requiredpayment or loan closing date and ending on the date the amount is paidor loaned; and(3) Out of funds available under section 8 of the Act of June 29, 1948(15 U.S.C. 714f).b. Payments to farm producers under such agreements shall be made as closeas possible to the required payment or loan closing date which is:(1) For a purchase agreement, the 30th day after delivery of the warehousereceipt for the commodity subject to the purchase agreement;(2) For a loan agreement, the 30th day beginning after the date of receiptof an application with all requisite documentation and signatures, unlessthe applicant requests that the disbursement be deferred;(3) For refund of amounts received greater than the amount required torepay a commodity loan, the first business day after the Commodity CreditCorporation receives payment for such loan;(4) For land diversion payments (other than advance payments), the 30thday beginning after the date of completion of the production adjustmentcontract by the producer;(5) For an advance land diversion payment, 30 days after the date the CommodityCredit Corporation executes the contract with the producer;(6) For a deficiency payment (other than advance payments) based upon a12-month or 5-month period, 91 days after the end of such period; or(7) For an advance deficiency payment, 30 days after the date the CommodityCredit Corporation executes the contract with the producer.c. Provisions relating to the Contract Disputes Act of 1978 (41 U.S.C.601<T3> et seq</T3>.) in section 10.a.5. do not apply.13.<T3> Interest Penalties Under Construction Contracts.</T3>a. In construction contracts agencies will pay interest on:(1) A progress payment request (including a monthly percentage-of-completionprogress payment or milestone payments for completed phases, increments,or segments of any project) that is approved as payable by the agency pursuantto section b below and remains unpaid for:_A period of more than 14 days after receipt of the payment request bythe designating billing office or_A longer period, specified in the solicitation, if required to affordthe Government a practicable opportunity to adequately inspect the workand to determine the adequacy of the contractor's performance under thecontract and(2) Any amounts which the agency has retained pursuant to a prime contractclause providing for retaining a percentage of progress payments otherwisedue to a contractor and that are approved for release to the contractor,if such retained amounts are not paid to the contractor by a date specifiedin the contract or, in the absence of such a specified date, by the 30thday after final acceptance.(3) Final payments, based on completion and acceptance of all work (includingany retained amounts), and payments for partial performances that havebeen accepted by the agency if such payments are made after the later of:_The 30th day after receipt by the designated billing office of a properinvoice; or_The 30th day after agency acceptance of the completed work or services.Acceptance shall be deemed to have occurred on the effective date of contractsettlement on a final invoice where the payment amount is subject to contractsettlement actions. For the purpose of computing interest penalties, acceptanceshall be deemed to have occurred on the seventh day after work or servicesare complete in accordance with the terms of the contract.b. An agency may not approve a request for progress payment under sectiona(1) above unless the application includes:(1) Substantiation of the amounts requested meeting the requirements ofsection 8.d. and(2) Certification by the prime contractor, to the best of the contractor'sknowledge and belief, that:_The amounts requested are only for performance in accordance with thespecifications, terms, and conditions of the contract;_Payments to subcontractors and suppliers have been made from previouspayments received under the contract, and timely payments will be madefrom the proceeds of the payment covered by the certification, in accordancewith their subcontract agreements and the requirements of this chapter;and_The application does not include any amounts which the prime contractorintends to withhold or retain from a subcontractor or supplier in accordancewith the terms and conditions of their subcontract.c. The certification by the prime contractor is not to be construed asfinal acceptance of the subcontractor's performance.d. The agency shall return any such payment request which is defectiveto the contractor within seven days after receipt, with a statement identifyingthe defect.e. A contractor is obligated to pay interest to the Government on unearnedamounts in its possession from:(1) The eighth day after receipt of funds from the agency until the datethe contractor notifies the agency that the performance deficiency hasbeen corrected or the date the contractor reduces the amount of any subsequentpayment request by an amount equal to the unearned amount in its possession,when the contractor discovers that all or a portion of a payment receivedfrom the agency constitutes a payment for the contractor's performancethat fails to conform to the specifications, terms, and conditions of itscontract with the agency, under 31 U.S.C. 3905(a); or(2) The eighth day after the receipt of funds from the agency until thedate the performance deficiency of a subcontractor is corrected or thedate the contractor reduces the amount of any subsequent payment requestby an amount equal to the unearned amount in its possession, when the contractordiscovers that all or a portion of a payment received from the agency wouldconstitute a payment for the subcontractor's performance that fails toconform to the subcontract agreement and may be withheld, under 31 U.S.C.3905(e).f. When a contractor is obligated to pay interest on unearned amounts tothe Government under 31 U.S.C. 3905(a)(2) or 3905(e)(6), as described inparagraph e, the interest shall:(1) Be computed at the rate of average bond equivalent rates of 91-dayTreasury bills auctioned at the most recent auction of such bills priorto the date the contractor received the unearned amount;(2) Be deducted from the next available payment to the contractor; and(3) Revert to the Treasury.14. <T3>Grant Recipients.</T3> Recipients of Federal assistance may pay interestpenalties if so specified in their contracts with contractors. However,obligations to pay such interest penalties will not be obligations of theUnited States. Federal funds may not be used for this purpose, nor mayinterest penalties be used to meet matching requirements of federally-assistedprograms.15. <T3>Payment without evidence that supplies have been received.</T3>a. In limited situations, payment may be made without evidence that supplieshave been received. Instead, a contractor certification that supplies havebeen shipped may be used as basis for authorizing payment. These paymentprocedures may be employed only when all of the following conditions arepresent:(1) Individual orders do not exceed $25,000 (except that heads of executiveagencies may permit a higher limit on a case-by-case basis);(2) Deliveries of supplies are to occur where there is both a geographicalseparation and a lack of adequate communications facilities between Governmentreceiving and disbursing activities that make it impracticable to maketimely payments based on evidence of Federal acceptance;(3) Title to the supplies will vest in the Government upon delivery toa post office or common carrier for mailing or shipment to destinationor upon receipt by the Government if the shipment is by means other thanPostal Service or common carrier; and(4) The contractor agrees to replace, repair, or correct supplies not receivedat destination, damaged in transit, or not conforming to purchase requirements.b. Agencies shall promptly inspect and accept supplies acquired under theseprocedures and shall ensure that receiving reports and payment documentsare matched and steps are taken to correct discrepancies.c. Agencies shall ensure that specific internal controls are in place toassure that supplies paid for are received.16. <T3>Relationship to other laws.</T3>a. Relationship to the Contract Disputes Act of 1978 (41 U.S.C. 605):(1) A claim for an interest penalty not paid under this circular may befiled under section 6 of the Contract Disputes Act.(2) An interest penalty under this circular does not continue to accrueafter a claim for a penalty is filed under the Contract Disputes Act orfor more than one year. This does not prevent an interest penalty fromaccruing under section 12 of the Contract Disputes Act after a penaltystops accruing under this circular. A penalty accruing under section 12of the Contract Disputes Act may accrue on an unpaid contract payment andon the unpaid penalty under this circular.(3) This circular does not require an interest penalty on a payment thatis not made because of a dispute between the head of an agency and a contractorover the amount of payment or compliance with the contract. A claim relatedto such a dispute and interest payable for the period during which thedispute is being resolved is subject to the Contract Disputes Act. b. Relationship to the Small Business Act (15 U.S.C. 644(k)). This Acthas been amended to require that any agency with an Office of Small andDisadvantaged Business Utilization must assist small business concernsto obtain payments, late payment interest penalties, or information dueto the concerns. 17. <T3>Reporting Requirements. </T3>The Act requires the Director of OMB toreport to Congress by the 120th day after the end of each fiscal year (January28) summarizing agency reports and analyzing progress made. In addition,OMB submits the annual prompt payment report to Congress with the President'sbudget. Each Federal agency will report annually to the Director of OMBby November 15th the following information for the proper fiscal year:a. Invoices subject to the Prompt Payment Act and OMB Circular A-125: (1) Dollar value of invoices. (2) Number. b. Invoices paid after due date: (1) Dollar value of invoices (2) Number (3) Interest penalties paid: _Dollar amount _Number _Relative frequency (4) Other late payment penalties paid: _Dollar amount _Number _Relative frequency (5) Reasons why interest or other late payment penalties were incurredin order of frequency of occurrence. _Delay in paying office's receipt of: Receiving report, Proper invoice,Purchase order of contract. _Delay or error by paying office in: Taking discount, Notifying contractorof defective invoice, Computer or other system processing. (6) Interest and other late payment penalties which were due but not paid(Use interest rate in effect on the date obligation accrues): _Total: Interest dollars, Number. _Because no obligation was incurred: Interest dollars, Number, Specifyreasons. _For other reason: Interest dollars, Number, Specify reasons. c. Invoices paid 1-15 Days After Due Date: (1) Dollar Amount (Total): <ITAG tagnum="14">_1-7 days. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="14">_8-15 days. </ITAG>(2) Number (Total): <ITAG tagnum="14">_1-7 days. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="14">8-15 days. </ITAG>(3) Relative frequency (Total) <ITAG tagnum="14">_1-7 days. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="14">_8-15 days. </ITAG>d. Invoices paid 8 days or more before due date, except where cash discountstaken: (1) Dollar amount. (2) Number. (3) Relative frequency. e. Discounts: <ITAG tagnum="14">(1) Number available. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="14">(2) Number taken. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="14">(3) Reasons for failing to take discounts. </ITAG>f. For each payment center: (1) Number of payments subject to the Act and the circular. (2) Number and dollar amount of interest penalties paid. g. Description of agency payment practices. h. Description of progress made, problems identified, and corrective actionstaken during the fiscal year in implementing the provisions of the Actand OMB Circular A-125. Include a description of agency experience in determiningthe most appropriate timing for release of payment authorization so thatinvoices are paid as close as possible to the due date without exceedingit. i. Updated description of agency quality control system. j. Updated list of designated agency contacts within payment centers orfinance offices to provide assistance in determining the status of invoices.In order to minimize the cost of reporting, statistical sampling may beused to derive the information above. Agency reports to OMB must be certifiedby the agency official with line authority over both procurement and paymentprocesses. 18. <T3>Additional Provisions. </T3>Additional procurement guidelines and requirementsare set forth in applicable acquisition regulations (48 CFR sections 32.9and 52.232). 19. <T3>Effective Dates. </T3>Unless otherwise specified, this circular iseffective 30 days after final publication. a. Effective for obligations incurred on or after January 1, 1989, theUnited States Postal Service (except for reporting requirements) and theCommodity Credit Corporation are explicitly covered by the Act and circular.b. Effective for payments made under contracts awarded on or after October1, 1989, payments requiring a late interest penalty must be accompaniedby a notice stating the amount of the penalty included in the payment andthe rate by which and period for which the penalty was computed. c. Certain requirements of the Prompt Payment Act Amendments of 1988 areeffective for payments under contracts awarded, contracts renewed, andcontract options exercised on or after April 1, 1989. The requirementsinclude:   (1) Rules governing the date an invoice is deemed to be received (section4.n.);  (2) Definition of the payment date as the date an electronic fund transferis made (section 4.l.);  (3) Clarification of the date from which the interest payment is calculated(section 10.a.(1));  (4) Elimination of the grace period (section 7.e.);  (5) Due dates for payments for dairy and other products (section 7.f.(3)); (6) Periodic payments under property and service contracts (section 7.n.); (7) Interest penalties on progress payments and retained amounts underconstruction contracts (section 13);  (8) Review and return of invoices (section 7.b.(2), (3), and (4));  (9) Authority to make payments before the due date (section 7.k.);  (10) Calculation of interest owed by contractors (section 13.e.);  (11) Limitations on discount payments (section 7.h.);  (12) Payment provisions relating to construction contracts (section 13); (13) Assistance to small businesses (section 16.b); and (14) Payment due date for poultry and egg products (section 7.f.(1)). 20. <T3>Inquiries.</T3> Questions or inquiries concerning this circular maybe directed to the Credit and Cash Management Branch, Financial ManagementDivision, Office of Management and Budget, Washington, DC 20503, telephonenumber 202/395-3066. Inquiries concerning the applicable interest ratemay be directed to the Finance and Funding Branch, Department of the Treasury,telephone number 202/566-5651. Questions concerning delinquent paymentsshould be directed to the designated billing office. Questions about disagreementsover payment amount or timing should be directed to the contracting officerfor resolution. Small business concerns may obtain additional assistanceon payment issues by contacting the agency's Office of Small and DisadvantagedBusiness Utilization.  21. <T3>Sunset Review Date.</T3> This circular will have an independent policyreview to ascertain its effectiveness three years from the date of issue. <ITAG tagnum="6">Frank Hodsoll,  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Executive Associate Director.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-9062 Filed 4-13-89; 8:45 am]  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3110-01-M   </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>