<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89628-0026 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.6-28-89.f2.A1025</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="52">7 CFR Parts 1126 and 1106</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket Nos. AO-231-A56 and AO-210-A48; DA-88-110]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Milk in the Texas and Southwest Plains Marketing Areas; RecommendedDecision and Opportunity To File Written Exceptions on Proposed Amendmentsto Tentative Marketing Agreements and to Orders</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY:</T2> Agricultural Marketing Service, USDA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION:</T2> Proposed rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY:</T2> This decision recommends the denial of proposals to amendthe producer-handler definitions of the Texas and Southwest Plains Federalmilk marketing orders. The decision concludes that there is insufficientevidence at this time to warrant the adoption of proposals intended tofully regulate any relatively large producer-handler unless such personlimits his distribution of milk to home delivery routes and to sales froma store located on the same premises as his processing plant. The decisionis based on the record of a public hearing held September 7-8, 1988, atIrving, Texas.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>Comments are due on or before July 28, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES:</T2> Comments (five copies) should be filed with the HearingClerk, Room 1083, South Building, United States Department of Agriculture,Washington, DC 20250.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2> John F. Borovies, Marketing Specialist,USDA/AMS/Dairy Division, Order Formulation Branch, Room 2968, South Building,P.O. Box 96456, Washington, DC 20090-6456, (202) 447-2089.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2> This administrative action is governedby the  provisions of sections 556 and 557 of Title 5 of the United StatesCode and, therefore, is excluded from the requirements of Executive Order12291.The Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601-612) requires the Agency toexamine the impact of a proposed rule on small entities. Pursuant to 5U.S.C. 605(b), the Administrator of the Agricultural Marketing Servicehas certified that this rulemaking proceeding will not have a significanteconomic impact on a substantial number of small entities since no changesin the rules are being adopted.Prior documents in this proceeding:<T3>Notice of Hearing:</T3> Issued June 10, 1988; published June 16, 1988(53 FR 22499).<T3>Notice of Rescheduled Hearing:</T3> Issued July 14, 1988; publishedJuly 19, 1988 (53 FR 27174).<ITAG tagnum="84">Preliminary Statement</ITAG>Notice is hereby given of the filing with the Hearing Clerk of this recommendeddecision with respect to proposed amendments to the tentative marketingagreements and the orders regulating the handling of milk in the Texasand Southwest Plains marketing areas. This notice is issued pursuant tothe provisions of the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937, asamended (7 U.S.C. 601-674), and the applicable rules of practice and proceduregoverning the formulation of marketing agreements and marketing orders(7 CFR Part 900).Interested parties may file written exceptions to this decision with theHearing Clerk, U.S. Department of Agriculture, Washington, DC 20250, bythe 30th day after publication of this decision in the <T4>Federal Register.</T4> Five copies of the exceptions should be filed.All written submissions made pursuant to this notice will be made availablefor public inspection at the office of the Hearing Clerk during regularbusiness hours (7 CFR 1.27(b)).The decision on the proposed amendments set forth below is based on therecord of a public hearing held at Irving, Texas, on September 7-8, 1988,pursuant to notices of hearing issued on June 10, 1988 (53 FR 22499) andJuly 14, 1988 (53 FR 27174).The material issues on the record of hearing relate to:1. The producer-handler definition;2. The producer definition; and3. Whether emergency marketing conditions exist with respect to issue numberone.<ITAG tagnum="84">Findings and Conclusions</ITAG>The following findings and conclusions on the material issues are basedon evidence presented at the hearing and the record thereof:1. The Producer-Handler DefinitionNo changes should be made to the producer-handler definitions of the Texasand Southwest Plains orders. The record does not demonstrate the existenceof disorderly marketing conditions that warrant the adoption of proposalsintended to fully regulate any relatively large producer-handler unlesssuch person limits his milk distribution to home delivery and sales froma store on the premises of his plant.Currently, producer-handlers are exempt from the pricing and pooling provisionsof the orders. Generally, both orders define a  producer-handler as a personwho operates both the milk production and plant processing facilities asone enterprise, and who has route disposition of fluid milk products inthe marketing area. The Texas order permits a producer-handler to purchasethe lesser of five percent of his Class I disposition or 10,000 poundsper month from pool plants. The Southwest Plains order does not providea limit on the pounds of milk that a producer-handler can purchase frompool plants and other order plants. Both orders do not permit a producer-handlerto purchase milk from dairy farmers or to dispose of other source milkas Clsss I milk, with limited exceptions. Also, both orders specify thata producer-handler is a person who provides proof satisfactory to the marketadministrator that the care and management of the dairy farm and otherresources necessary for own-farm production and the management and operationof the processing plant are the personal enterprise and risk of such person.Three cooperative associations (Associated Milk Producers, Inc., Mid-AmericaDairymen, Inc., and Southern Milk Sales, Inc.) that represent a substantialproportion of the producers who supply the markets proposed that the currentproducer-handler definitions be revised. The proposals for the two orderswould establish additional requirements to qualify as a producer-handlerfor those fluid milk processors that sell more milk than is produced onan average size farm. Under the original proposal, any handler that hadmonthly route disposition of 150,000 pounds or less under the Texas order,or 100,000 pounds or less under the Southwest  Plains order, would be exemptfrom the pricing and pooling provisions.  At the hearing, the proposalwas modified to provide under each order for a 300,000-pound per monthlimitation, which would apply only to producer-handlers rather than allhandlers. As a result of the modification, there is some ambiguity as tothe criteria that would apply in defining producer-handlers. However, themajor emphasis of the proposal was to differentiate between producer-handlerson the basis of size with additional proposed requirements being applicableto relatively larger operations. Under the proposal, larger operations that had both production and processingfacilities would be limited to disposing of fluid milk products directlyto consumers through home delivery retail routes or through a retail storelocated on the same property as the milk processing plant in order to qualifyas a producer-handler. Any other type of distribution would result in adisqualification of producer-handler status, which proponents claimed wouldrecognize those points in the marketing channel where a pricing advantageover regulated handlers contributes to disorderly marketing. In addition,the proposal would prohibit a producer-handler from having a financialinterest in any other handler or dairy farm operation. It also would requirethat any producer-handler who loses such stetus meet all the conditionsfor such status for a period of one month before re-acquiring producer-handlerstatus. The purpose of these conditions is to preclude a producer-handlerfrom changing its regulatory status to fit sales conditions or change itsorganizational structure to gain benefits at the expense of others. Basically,the proposed conditions are a more  specific statement of factors thatwould be reviewed by a market administrator in administering the ``solerisk'' criteria contained in the current producer-handler definitions ofboth orders. The proposed definitions would limit a producer-handler's purchase of fluidmilk products from pool plants to the lesser of five percent of Class Idisposition or 5,000 pounds per month. In addition, the proposals wouldrequire that producer-handlers pay the administrative assessment that isapplicable to handlers. The proposals of the cooperative associations were supported by the MilkIndustry Foundation, a national trade association of processors and distributorsof fluid milk and fluid milk products. Also, three handlers who operateplants that are regulated under the orders supported the adoption of theproposals. Basically, all of the proponents contend that producer-handlerswho are large enough to have a significant commercial impact on the marketshould be regulated to maintain orderly marketing conditions. They contendthat producer-handlers, as a result of their exemption from the pricingand pooling provisions, have a substantial competitive advantage in thecost of milk over fully regulated handlers who are required to pay minimumorder prices for milk on the basis of its use. They contend that full regulationof such operations would promote a greater degree of equity among all handlersas well as among all producers, who would be protected from a loss of ClassI sales because of unfair competition. One producer-handler under the Texas order and two producer-handlers underthe Southwest Plains order opposed the restriction to the types of salesfor larger producer-handlers. They also suggested increasing the size limitationfor exemption to 500,000 or 700,000 pounds per month. One of these producer-handlersrequested that the proposal for the Southwest Plains order be dismissedsince there was no evidence offered to suggest that producer-handlers currentlyoperating under that order were causing disorderly marketing conditions.One other producer-handler who recently acquired such status under theTexas order, the Pure Milk and Ice Cream Company, presented testimony inopposition to the implementation of any part of the proposals. Basically,Pure Milk contends that the implementation of the proposals would be inconsistentwith the longstanding policy of the Department and Congressional intentto exempt producer-handlers from full regulation. In addition, Pure Milkcontends that it does not have a competitive advantage over fully regulatedhandlers and that there is no evidence of the existence of disorderly marketingconditions as a result of its acquiring producer-handler status. A number of producer-handlers under other Federal orders filed briefs inopposition to the proposals. These producer-handlers contend that the adoptionof the proposals would set a precedent to be followed under other Federalorders that would result in the full regulation of operations that arecurrently exempt from pricing and pooling provisions. These producer-handlerscontend that adoption of the proposals would represent a deviation of policy,contrary to Congressional intent, to exempt producer-handlers who haveno demonstrated advantage over regulated handlers as a result of the costsassociated with maintaining the reserve supplies of milk that are necessaryto balance fluid milk needs. They further contend that  disorderly marketingconditions have not resulted in other markets where  a relatively largenumber of producer-handlers compete with regulated handlers for fluid milksales. In their brief, the proponent cooperative associations indicated that theywould not be opposed to a reliance on only a pound limitation as was suggestedby various parties at the hearing, rather than their original proposal,as long as such limitation was low enough to fully regulate Pure Milk andother producer-handlers who are large enough to have a disruptive impactin the market. In its brief, one other handler also suggested that a poundlimit should be adopted that would exempt smaller operations but regulatelarger operations. The handler suggested that the limit should be relatedto the smallest size handler that could have an efficient and consistentsupply relationship with producers or a cooperative association. The sizelimit, above which producer-handlers would be regulated without regardto any other criteria, would be equivalent to a handler who is large enoughto receive a tanker load of milk every other day. A significant proportion of proponent's testimony was centered on the legislativehistory of the Act as it relates to the authority to regulate handlerswho sell fluid milk products derived solely from own-farm production. Proponentscontend that it was the intent of Congress to fully regulate such typeof handlers who are large enough to have an impact in the marketplace andthat only relatively small operations were intended to be exempt from regulation.Proponents testified that the purpose of the Act, which they contend isto stabilize marketing conditions for producers, is primarily accomplishedby establishing classified pricing and by the pooling of returns from thesale of milk among all producers. They further testified that, to the extentthat unpriced milk is free to enter the regulatory scheme, the objectiveof the Act_to promote orderly marketing_is frustrated. Furthermore, theycontend that a failure to regulate large producer-handlers results in nonuniformprices to handlers, which they claim also is contrary to requirements ofthe Act. Thus, they conclude that inequities exist between fully regulatedhandlers and exempt producer-handlers, which they contend caused the verysame market disruption that is intended to be rectified by Federal regulation.Proponents maintain that the proposals are consistent with the intent ofCongress in that relatively small operations would continue to be exemptfrom full regulation. Also, producer-handlers, however large they mightbe, would also be exempt from full regulation if their sales of fluid milkproducts were not in direct competition with those of regulated handlers.Proponents testified that disruptive competition would not result to theextent that sales of large producer-handlers are restricted to home deliveryand to sales from a plant store on the same premises as the processingplant. Proponents contend, however, that to the extent that sales are madein the same commercial channels used by regulatad handlers, the same regulatoryprovisions should apply to producer-handlers as to handlers. Otherwise,proponents contend, producer-handlers who have a significant pricing advantagecan disrupt the marketing of milk to the detriment of regulated handlersand to the producers who supply the milk requirements of the market.Proponents testified that it is necessary, as a result of changes in marketingconditions, to alleviate the potential for market disorder that may resultbecause of unfair competition between regulated handlers and exempt producer-handlers.Proponents contend that with the trend towards fewer and larger producersand handlers, there is an increasing potential for the vertical integrationof production and processing operations of sufficient size to be disruptivefactors in these Federal order markets. With respect to the Southwest Plainsorder, proponents testified that no such larger operations exist. In fact,proponents testified that it was not the intent of the proposals to regulateany of the currently existing producer-handlers because, in their view,no disorderly marketing conditions have resulted from competition betweenhandlers and producer-handlers. However, proponents expressed major concernsover the existence of one relatively large handler (Braums Dairy) who hasa substantial amount of own-farm production. In proponents' view, suchhandler has the potential to avoid full regulation by becoming a producer-handler.Thus, proponents contend that the proposal should be adopted to preventsuch a possibility. With respect to the Texas order, proponents directed their concern towardsthe Pure Milk and Ice Cream Company (Pure Milk), which acquired producer-handlerstatus in July of 1988. Proponents testified that Pure Milk had been afully regulated handler under the Texas order for a long period of time.Producer-handler status was achieved as a result of the purchase of thePure Milk fluid milk plant at Waco, Texas, by Gore, Inc., a family corporationthat, as a producer, operated seven dairy farms under the Texas order.Proponents testified that during May 1988, when  Pure Milk was a fullyregulated handler, production of the seven farms was in excess of fivemillion pounds while the plant received about 4.4 million pounds of milk,3.4 million of which was for fluid use. Proponents claim that as a resultof acquiring producer-handler status, Pure Milk has a significant competitiveadvantage over regulated handlers. Basically, proponents contend that theadvantage is equivalent to the difference between the order Class I price,which is the minimum price that regulated handlers must pay, and the orderblend price, which is what Gore, Inc., would receive as a producer underthe order. On this basis, proponents contend, Pure Milk has as much asa 14-cent per gallon advantage over regulated handlers. On the basis ofPure Milk's May 1988 utilization, proponents testified that Pure Milk reducedits cost for milk by almost $34,000 by operating as a producer-handler,equivalent to 77 cents per hundredweight of milk received at the plant.Proponents testified that cost differences of such magnitude, when outletschange hands for a fraction of a cent, represents a disorderly marketingcondition in and of itself. In addition, proponents testified that theacquisition of producer-handler status also resulted in a loss of incometo dairy farmers by the removal of Class I sales from the market. Furthermore,proponents maintain that an operation the size of Pure Milk, which suppliessupermarkets, institutions, restaurants and military bases, is clearlynot the type of operation that was intended to be exempt from regulation. In its testimony and brief, Pure Milk argues that the proposal to regulateproducer-handlers on the basis of either size or method of distributionwould be inconsistent with a longstanding policy of the Department. Furthermore,Pure Milk contends that the legislative criteria for regulation is notbased on size itself, but rather on whether producer-handlers (independentlyor in the aggregate) represent so large a portion of sales in a Federalorder market as to disrupt the operation of the order to the detrimentof other dairymen in the market. In this context, Pure Milk argues thatit is not a significant factor in the market because its production representsabout one percent of producer milk and that its status as a producer-handlerrepresents a loss to order producers of about one-half of one percent oftotal revenue. Thus, Pure Milk concludes that it represents a far lesserproportion of sales and has a lesser impact on producers than producer-handlersin other markets where similar proposals to fully regulate producer-handlerswere denied. Pure Milk argues that it would be inappropriate and inconsistentfor it to be fully regulated when producer-handlers representing from sixto 20 percent of Class I sales in other markets were not found to be sufficientlylarge as to be disruptive. Pure Milk also contends that it would not be an economically viable operationif it were fully regulated. Basically, Pure Milk contends that it doesnot have a competitive advantage over regulated handlers with its currentproducer-handler status. Pure Milk testified that it does not have a pricingadvantage equal to the difference between the order Class I and blend priceas testified by proponents since its plant utilization is not taken intoconsideration. Pure Milk testified that its plant utilization of milk reflectsa blend price value that exceeds the order blend price by only 90 centsper hundredweight since an 80 percent Class I utilization must be maintainedto balance its fluid milk needs. Also, Pure Milk contends that such figuredoes not include the costs associated with disposing of its reserve milksupplies or the offsetting value that accrues to the pool on its surplusmilk that is allocated to Class I use at the regulated plant that purchasesPure Milk's surplus production. In addition, Pure Milk argues that theblend price or the plant utilization value has nothing to do with the costof producing milk. Pure Milk testified that its cost of production exceedsthe order blend price by about one dollar per hundredweight, which is aprimary reason that producer-handler status was sought. Furthermore, PureMilk argues that since the cost of raw milk represents about 43.5 percentof the cost of finished fluid milk products, there are sufficient opportunitiesfor cost reductions from increased efficiencies by larger operations tocompete with smaller operations that may have a lower raw product cost.Pure Milk also argues that even if it had a pricing advantage as suggestedby proponents, other factors associated with the nature of its businesswould render the advantage meaningless. Basically, Pure Milk contends thatany pricing advantage could not be exploited in the marketplace since itssource of supply is limited to its own-farm production. Even increaseddistribution as a result of sales by Pure Milk's customers result in highercosts associated with additional hauling of partial loads of milk fromits farms to meet additional milk needs, according to Pure Milk. In addition,Pure Milk contends that should it have some milk with quality problemsit cannot replace this  milk with milk from the open market as can be doneby a regulated handler. Moreover, Pure Milk testified, for a handler nomore than a load of milk is lost. For Pure Milk, it is argued, the loadis lost and it also faces additional costs of full regulation if supplementalmilk must be purchased. Pure Milk further argues that a large proportionof its income must be spent in quality assurance at the farm as well asat the plant. Pure Milk also argues that there is no evidence of disorderly marketingconditions that might warrant adoption of the proposal. Pure Milk claimsthat producers are not materially affected by Pure Milk's producer-handlerstatus and there is no significant evidence of a loss of accounts by anyhandlers. Also, there is no pattern of bids on sales to institutions, schools,military bases or prisons to suggest an unfair competitive advantage byPure Milk. Furthermore, Pure Milk argues that there is no evidence of thetrend towards vertical integration of production and processing functionsas was indicated by proponents. Pure Milk testified that many factors areinvolved in this, such as the location of the plants and farms, the sizeof the farms compared to the size of plants, the availability of a plant,the economic viability of the plant, and the desire or ability to incurthe additional management load and risk. In addition, Pure Milk contendsthat it must pursue a conservative marketing practice because of the substantialrisks involved in being both a processor and a producer, including thethreat of full regulation if supplemental supplies must be purchased.The purpose of Federal milk marketing orders is to establish orderly marketingconditions for producers who are the regular suppliers of milk. In itssimplest terms, this is accomplished by establishing minimum prices formilk in accordance with its use and providing for the pooling or equalsharing of the proceeds from the sale of milk in all uses among all dairyfarmers supplying the market. Any time that milk is sold within a Federal order marketing area and suchmilk is not priced by the order, the ability of the order to maintain orderlyand stable marketing conditions for milk may be impaired. When milk ofa producer-handler is sold in a Federal milk marketing area, such milkis not priced by the order. In such case, the order does not provide uniformregulated pricing among competing handlers since fully regulated handlersmust pay the minimum order Class I price for milk in fluid uses while producer-handlersare not required to do so. This raises the potential for competitive inequitiesamong handlers. Furthermore, thare is not an equal sharing among all dairyfarmers in the market of the returns from the sale of all milk in all usessince producers whose milk is being priced under the order do not sharein the Class I sales of producer-handlers. Although the marketing of milk by producer-handlers has the potential ofcreating disorderly marketing conditions, it has not been found necessaryto regulate fully this type of operation. In fact, the policy has beento exempt such types of operations. Such policy has been based, generally,on findings in regulatory proceedings that producer-handlers have no significantadvantage in the market in their capacity as either handlers or producersas long as they are solely responsible for their production and processingfacilities and assume essentially the entire burden of balancing theirproduction with their fluid milk requirements. Although producer-handlers have not been fully regulated as a general practice,the Act provides the authority to regulate handlers of milk to carry outthe purposes of the Act. With respect to producer-handlers, guidelinesfrom the legislative history indicate that there is authority to regulatesuch operations if they are so large as to disrupt the market for producers.However, on the basis of the overall history of the treatment of producer-handlers,a size consideration, in and of itself, is not particularly relevant tothe issue. Even large operations in relation to the markets they servehave continued to be exempt from full regulation. Consequently, any decisionto fully regulate a producer-handler type operation must be supported bysubstantial evidence of the existence of disorderly marketing that is adirect result of producer-handler activity. Although the size of an operationobviously leads to concern, since relatively greater quantities of unpricedmilk are involved, it does not in itself provide a basis for full regulation.The existence of large producer-handler operations merely implies thatthe conditions for disorderly and disruptive marketing conditions may exist.Seven producer-handlers operate under the Southwest Plains order. Combined,they represent less than one-half of one percent of the fluid milk productsdistributed in the marketing area. Also, such operations do not restricttheir sales to home delivery or to sales from a store on the same premisesas the plant. They basically compete in the same marketing channels withhandlers who are fully regulated ``under the order. There is no evidence of market disorder as a result of competition betweensuch producer-handlers and fully regulated handlers. In addition, the proponentsof the proposal did not intend that any of the existing producer-handlersbe fully regulated as they are currently operating. In fact, the proposedexemption level was increased to accommodate two of the producer-handlerswho testified at the hearing. The proposal was intended to prevent theacquisition of producer-handler status by a relatively large handler whohas own-farm production. Such concern over the potential of a large handlerwho may have the ability to become a producer-handler does not providea sufficient basis for a regulatory change. In the Texas market, there are three producer-handlers who have route dispositionin the marketing area. The point of concern, however, was directed onlyto Pure Milk. There is no evidence concerning the proportion of fluid milksales in the Texas marketing area by Pure Milk or the three producer-handlerscombined. However, other information clearly indicates that Pure Milk isa rather significant operation, size wise, in the Texas market. Pure Milk was a fully regulated handler under the Texas order for a numberof years. However, following the purchase of the milk plant by Gore, Inc.,a producer who supplied the market for a long pariod of time, the entireoperation was qualified as a producer-handler under the order in July 1988.The plant at Waco, Texas, is primarily a fluid milk operation, with someClass II use, that processes in excess of four million pounds of milk permonth. The plant has a wide distribution area that covers about 16 countieswith sales to supermarkets, institutions, restaurants, and military basesin direct competition with fully regulated handlers. The milk supply forthe plant is produced on seven dairy farms in Comanche and Brown Countiesthat are located about 100 miles from the plant. Milk production averagesabout 4.6 million pounds per month, and ranges from about 4.2 to in excessof 5 million pounds per month. Milk production that is in excess of theplant's needs is shipped to a fully regulated distributing plant locatedin Wichita County, Texas. Such milk is normally allocated to the lowestclass uses at the regulated handler's plant, with any allocation to ClassI use requiring a payment to the producer-settlement fund by the regulatedhandler at the difference between the order Class I and Class III prices.Proponents' contention that the plant continues to be operated in competitionwith regulated handlers, and that only an ownership change has resultedin the producer-handler's ability to avoid paying class prices for milk,is essentially correct. However, as a result of the ownership change, anumber of different conditions apply. First of all, the plant is no longerin competition with other handlers for a supply of milk. Also, Pure Milknow bears the entire risk and cost of balancing its own supply of milk,whereas such burden was formerly borne by all producers who supply themarket. Also, Gore, Inc., has now assumed all risks associated with theoperation of the plant in addition to all the risks associated with theproduction of milk. Proponents' major contention is that Pure Milk has a significant competitiveadvantage over regulated handlers in the sale of fluid milk products sinceit is not subject to classified pricing. The maximum advantage contendedis the difference between the Class I price that fully regulated handlersmust pay and the blend price, which is the alternative, or opportunitycost, that Gore, Inc., could receive as a producer. In terms of the plant'sutilization, relative to that of the entire market, cost advantages of77 to 90 cents per hundredweight are computed for its Class I sales relativeto regulated handlers. However, such advantages do not reflect the coststhat may be associated with disposing of production that is surplus toPure Milk's needs. For example, the fact that Pure Milk would have beenable to avoid about a $34,000 pool obligation by operating as a producer-handlerin May 1988 does not include the lost revenue or costs associated withdisposing of the additional 600,000 pounds of milk production that wassurplus to the needs of, or receipts of, milk at the Pure Milk plant. Thus,the amount of the avoided pool obligation is not a measure of Pure Milk'seconomic advantage over regulated handlers since it does not encompassthe entire operation. It would appear logical that there must be some economic incentive forPure Milk to operate as a producer-handler rather than as a handler. Otherwise,the action to attain producer-handler status would not have been taken.In fact, Pure Milk admits that it would not be economically viable forit to operate as a regulated handler. Basically, Pure Milk has decidedto give up the blend price on all of its production (well in excess of$600,000 per month at the blend price) to avoid a pool obligation as ahandler on its Class I sales (less than $34,000 per month) and to retainall of the proceeds from the sale of finished fluid milk products. However,this does not necessarily mean that Pure Milk as a producer-handler hasan advantage over regulated handlers. It may merely mean that Pure Milkis expected to be competitive only as a producer-handler, but without anyclearly demonstrated advantage. In conclusion, the degree of any cost orpricing advantage cannot clearly be determined. The justified concern of proponents over the potential for unfair and disorderlymarketing conditions has not manifested itself with any demonstrable evidenceof disorder in the Texas market. This may be a result of the nonexistenceof any pricing advantage or it may well be that not sufficient time haselapsed between the time that Pure Milk acquired producer-handler statusand when the hearing was held. Consequently, in view of insufficient evidenceof market disorder attributable to producer-handler operations, there isno basis for adopting the proposal to regulate relatively large producer-handlers.A refinement of the current producer-handler provisions to set forth inmore specific detail those factors that bear on the ``sole risk'' requirementof the order also does not appear to be necessary at this time. There wasno demonstration on the record of attempts by Pure Milk, or other producer-handlers,to transfer the costs or risks of operating to others. Pure Milk has qualifiedas a single entity. There is no indication that Pure Milk has attemptedorganizational changes (such as splitting off some of the milk productionfacilities) to take advantage of the benefits (keeping the Class I sales)and to share the costs (burden of the surplus) with others. Also, thereis no evidence that Pure Milk intends to follow a practice of shiftingfrom exempt status to full regulation to meet changed circumstances, whichwould also amount to transferring costs and risks to others. Thus, in termsof the current situation, the current provisions have not been abused orcircumvented in a way that could provide s basis for either clarificationor modification of the current regulations. Proponents, in conjunction with their proposal to revise the producer-handlerdefinition, proposed that the administrative assessment that is appliedto other handlers also apply to all producer-handlers. Proponents contendthat it is unfair to other handlers to incur an administrative assessmentas a result of costs that are incurred in determining whether certain operationsshould be qualified as producer-handlers and, thus, be exempt from thepricing and pooling provisions. Basically, proponents contend that producer-handlersshould pay their pro rata share of at least the administrative costs involvedin determining and monitoring their exempt status. Proponents contend thathandlers should not have to bear such cost since they do not benefit fromthe producer-handler exemption.Currently, the administrative assessment is applied to handlers on theirreceipts of producer milk and on other receipts on which there is a poolobligation. Producer-handlers on the other hand, who have no receipts ofproducer milk or any pool obligation, are not subject to an administrativeassessment. Contrary to proponents' views, handlers do derive a benefit from the administrativeexpense that they incur. To the extent administrative costs are incurredin administering the producer-handler provisions, handlers are assuredthat producer-handlers continue to operate in the manner provided underthe order. As previously stated, this insures that producer-handlers arenot able to transfer the costs and risks of their operation to others and,consequently, are not able to gain a demonstrable advantage relative toproducers or handlers. In addition, the producer-handler exemption fromthe administrative assessment is similar to the exemption of the assessmenton other handlers for receipts of other source milk that is allocated toother than Class I use. Such receipts affect the administrative costs andcomplicate the verification process involved in determining the utilizationof producer milk. There is no indication that orderly marketing has sufferedfrom the restriction of the application of administrative assessments toproducer milk and other milk on which there is a pool obligation. Therefore,the proposal to apply an administrative assessment to producer-handlersis denied. 2. The Producer Definition No changes should be made to the producer definition.Proponents, in conjunction with their proposal to fully regulate certainproducer-handlers, and exempt others, proposed a conforming amendment tothe producer definition. The proposal would prohibit a dairy farmer frombeing a producer if such dairy farmer delivered milk to or received milkfrom a producer-handler. Proponents contend that if producer-handlers areto be exempt from the pricing and pooling provisions, it would not be fairfor a producer-handler to receive milk from other dairy farmers or fora producer-handler to ship excess milk to a dairy farmer that could thenreceive the blend price under the order. Basically, proponents contendthat such a situation would amount to a transfer of risks and costs associatedwith the maintenance of the reserve supplies of milk to others. In addition, the proposal would exclude as a producer, any dairy farmerwho disposes of more than 110 pounds of milk per day directly to consumers.Proponents contend that such dairy farmers should not share in the proceedsof Class I sales under the order since they maintain a portion of fluidmilk sales for themselves. Proponents contend that since such dairy farmersdo not operate plants, and thus cannot be regulated as handlers, they shouldat least be prevented from being producers under the orders. The current producer-handler provisions provide that producer-handlerscannot receive milk from other dairy farmers. If milk were received froma dairy farmer, producer-handler status would be lost and full regulationwould apply. Thus, the dairy farmer supplying the handler operating theregulated plant would be eligible for producer status. As a result, itis not necessary to specify that a dairy farmer who supplies a producer-handlercould not be a producer, since such a situation is not permissible. Also,there is no indication on the record to suggest that any producer-handlerhas attempted to circumvent the ``sole risk'' standard of the current provisionsby attempting to pool surplus milk production through another producer.Also, there is no indication of the extent to which dairy farmers may beinvolved in selling unprocessed milk directly to consumers. There is noevidence to suggest a problem of sufficient degree to warrant further restrictionsthrough Federal milk order regulation at this time. 3. Whether Emergency Marketing Conditions Exist With Respect to Issue NumberOne  The request for emergency action is denied since proposals to modify theproducer-handler provisions are denied for reasons previously stated. <ITAG tagnum="84">Rulings on Proposed Findings and Conclusions </ITAG>Briefs and proposed findings and conclusions were filed on behalf of certaininterested parties. These briefs, proposed findings and conclusions andthe evidence in the record were considered in making the findings and conclusionsset forth above. To the extent that the suggested findings and conclusionsfiled by interested parties are inconsistent with the findings and conclusionsset forth herein, the requests to make such findings or reach such conclusionsare denied for the reasons previously stated in this decision. <ITAG tagnum="84">Determination </ITAG>The findings and conclusions of this decision do not require any changesin the regulatory provisions of the orders regulating the handling of milkin the Texas and Southwest Plains marketing areas. <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 7 CFR Parts 1126 and 1106 </ITAG>Milk marketing orders, Milk, Dairy products.The authority citation for 7 CFR Parts 1126 and 1106 continues to readas follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Secs. 1-19, 48 Stat. 31, as amended; 7 U.S.C. 601-674.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, on June 22, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Kenneth C. Clayton, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Administrator. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-15283 Filed 6-27-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3410-02-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>