<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89615-0138 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.6-15-89.f2.A1137</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register / Vol. 54, No. 114 / Thursday, June 15, 1989 / Notices</T4><ITAG tagnum="52">OFFICE OF MANAGEMENT AND BUDGET </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Second Advance Notice of Further Policy Development on Disseminationof Information</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="44">June 9, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Office of Management and Budget (OMB) solicits furtherpublic comment in the development of policy concerning the disseminationof information by executive branch agencies. This notice summarizes publiccomments received to OMB's notice of January 4, 1989, regarding proposedchanges to OMB Circular No. A-130, Management of Federal Information Resources;presents OMB reactions to the comments; states preliminary conclusions;and requests further comment. For the reasons indicated, the notice ofJanuary 4, 1989, is withdrawn.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>Comments from the public should be submitted no later thanAugust 14, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>Comments should be addressed to: J. Timothy Sprehe, Officeof Information and Regulatory Affairs, Room 3235 New Executive Office Building,Office of Management and Budget, Washington, DC 20503. Telephone: (202)395-4814.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>On January 4, 1989, the Office of Managementand Budget (OMB) published for comment a notice (hereafter referred toas the January 1989 notice) entitled Advance Notice of Further Policy Developmenton Dissemination of Information (54 FR 214-220). OMB originally set thedeadline for comments on the January 1989 notice as March 6, 1989. In responseto many requests, OMB announced that the deadline was extended until April10, 1989 (54 FR 12038, March 23, 1989).OMB received 226 letters of comment on the January 1989 notice. Five percentof the letters were from Members of Congress; nine percent from Federalagencies; 10 percent from state and local government agencies; 66 percentfrom librarians; and 10 percent from private individuals or other nongovernmentalorganizations. The complete set of comments is available for inspectionand copying in the docket reading room at the Office of Management andBudget, Room 3201 New Executive Office Building, 725 17th Street, NW.,Washington, DC 20503. Persons desiring access to the comments may telephone(202) 395-6880 to arrange for entry to the building. This second advance notice presents OMB's summary of comments on the January1989 notice, OMB's reaction to the comments, and preliminary conclusions.The public is invited to comment further on the contents of this secondadvance notice.<ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of Comments </ITAG>General Comments A majority of commentators expressed views concerning the overall contentsand tone of OMB's January 1989 notice. The most common opinion was thatthe January 1989 notice and OMB Circular No. A-130 were heavily biased,concentrating so much on private sector prerogatives that OMB had failedto elaborate a positive role for Federal agencies in the disseminationof government information, even in situations where dissemination of suchinformation was basic to agencies' missions. The most favorable commentson this general point concluded that a public/private sector sharing ofresponsibility for information dissemination is good public policy andgood economics, but that the notice failed to capture any such positivetheme. Two other frequently expressed general comments were: that OMB should withdrawthe January 1989 notice, lest Federal agencies begin to implement the noticeas established policy; and that OMB should proceed no further with revisionsto OMB Circular No. A-130 until Congress acted on the reauthorization ofthe Paperwork Reduction Act. Another general comment was that the proposed policy, as well as OMB CircularNo. A-130, is silent on the role of the States in information resourcesmanagement policy. With respect to information dissemination policy, commentatorsnoted that the States are both partners with the Federal Government indissemination and a major users group for federally disseminated information.<T3>OMB Reaction: </T3>OMB did not intend that either OMB Circular No.A-130 or the January 1989 notice should express bias in favor of privatesector prerogatives in a manner that would denigrate the central role thatFederal agencies' play in Federal information dissemination. Appendix IVof Circular A-130 analyzed generic and specific statutory requirementsaffecting agencies' information dissemination activities, as well as disseminationresponsibilities arising from proper performance of agency functions asdetermined by heads of agencies. Because comments indicate that OMB's basicpolicy on these matters may not have been well communicated, OMB plansto review and revise the pertinent portions of OMB Circular No. A-130,namely Section 7, Basic Considerations and Assumptions, Section 8(a), InformationManagement, and corresponding sections of Appendix IV; and also to reconsiderfully the content and tone of the January 1989 notice (see below). As to the comment that OMB should withdraw the January 1989 notice, theform of that notice was neither a final policy nor a proposed policy, butan advance notice of proposed policy. That is, the notice was two stepsfrom final policy, and therefore did not constitute either a statementof policy or even necessarily a statement of intended policy. Because commentsindicated that the notice gave rise to substantial concern and some confusionamong the public, OMB herewith withdraws the advance notice published January4, 1989. Other comments indicate that the objection was not to OMB's formulatingpolicy on electronic dissemination. Commentators desired some policy onthe subject, especially to help address the increasingly complex issuesposed by changing technology, but in the opinion of many, not policy asthey understood it. The Paperwork Reduction Act directs OMB to developand implement uniform and consistent information resources management policies,so that undertaking further work on information dissemination policy isa responsibility under OMB's statutory mandate. OMB is mindful of congressionaland public interest in this subject. OMB intends to continue work on developinginformation dissemination policy consistent with its mandate. With respect to the role of the States, OMB agrees that the January 1989notice and OMB Circular A-130 do not adequately treat the role of the States.In revising the Circular and the notice, OMB intends to work with Stateorganizations to ensure that the role of the States is appropriately articulated.Comprehensiveness and Enforcement The January 1989 notice asked two general questions:<ITAG tagnum="16">_Are the policy and accompanying analysis sufficiently comprehensive?Are there other major topics pertaining to information dissemination thatshould be treated? </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">_Is the procedural guidance provided sufficient to ensure enforcementof the policies? More broadly, how should OMB ensure enforcement of thepolicies?</ITAG>Regarding the first question, some commentators answered in the affirmative,stating that the notice was thoughtful and coherent. Some stated that theanalysis was generally sound but that the notice had a negative tone. Manyothers complained that the notice did little to illuminate how terms suchas ``value-added,'' ``unfair competition,'' and ``adequate notice'' shouldbe defined and used. As to other major topics, many commentators pointed to the omission ofany treatment of the Federal depository library program. Some commentatorswanted a fuller discussion of how differences in information format ormedia affected various policy statements. Others wished for renewed discussionof the concepts of information access and information dissemination. Regarding the question on procedural guidance, most who answered said thatthe notice did not provide sufficient guidance. They believed that thenotice was no better than Circular No. A-130 with respect to enforcementand that both documents may be generally unenforceable. Of the few who offered specific comments on procedural guidance for enforcement,their views fell into two groups. One group of commentators believed thatOMB should take an affirmative role in approving or disapproving agencyinformation dissemination products and evaluating private sector products,and that OMB should approve or disapprove agency dissemination plans orat least arbitrate disputes over such plans. The other group of commentators believed that, while it should not micromanage,OMB should act to strengthen agency efforts at enforcement. Their suggestionsincluded requiring public appeal mechanisms, or even making the policyinto a regulation so that the public might seek relief through judicialor administrative proceedings. <T3>OMB Reaction:</T3> OMB agrees that additional topics must be considered,as this notice elsewhere indicates. As to enforcement, OMB disagrees withthe view that OMB should take a more active role of reviewing and approvingor disapproving agencies' information dissemination programs. As CircularNo. A-130 establishes in Section 9a (1), the locus of responsibility foractual management of Federal information resources is the head of eachagency. In revising information dissemination policy, OMB plans to strengthenthe policy framework of agency enforcement responsibilities. Incorporation of OMB Circular No. A-3 The January 1989 notice proposed first to incorporate OMB Circular No.A-3, Government Publications, into OMB Circular No. A-130. The notice introducedcertain changes to definitions in Circular No. A-3, and specified somefunctions that agency publications control systems are to perform, butproposed to leave the remainder of the contents of Circular No. A-3 unchanged.The most common view expressed concerning the treatment of Circular No.A-3 was objection to the proposed elimination of the exclusion of statisticalperiodicals from the reporting requirements of the Circular. Commentatorsargued that the very rationale for reporting is management control by personsoutside the statistical agencies, and therefore the change would open Federalstatistics to real or apparent tampering, both of which must be guardedagainst.As to the desirability of incorporating Circular No. A-3 into CircularNo. A-130, most comments dealt with the effects of incorporation ratherthan arguing for or against it. Two Federal agencies objected to incorporation,arguing that the separate identity and visibility of Circular No. A-3 areimportant to effective publications management within the agencies. In different ways, a number of commentators noted that incorporating CircularNo. A-3 with only minor changes in definitions, inclusions, exclusions,and process would introduce new terms and policy formulations that appeardifferent from and inconsistent with those found in Circular No. A-130;and that as a consequence it was not possible to join the two Circularswithout substantial revision and harmonization of the two. Several commentators pointed out that 44 U.S.C. 1108, the legal basis ofCircular No. A-3, refers only to periodicals, and stated that OMB was extendingits jurisdiction to other information products, especially electronic ones,without a statutory foundation. Other commentators, particularly Federal agencies, focused on the contentsof Circular No. A-3, pointing out that under the Paperwork Reduction ActOMB exercises detailed control over information collections and that similarcontrol over information dissemination, as provided in Circular No. A-3,was excessive and unnecessary. Commentators also objected to the inclusion of internal agency newslettersunder the definition of periodical, since such publications are not intendedfor public distribution. Commentators questioned why OMB did not include, under the definition ofinformation dissemination products, audiovisual activities, which are coveredby OMB Circular No. A-114. With reference to this term, some commentatorsquestioned OMB's statutory authority for extending the definition to coverelectronic information products. <T3>OMB Reaction:</T3> Following are OMB reactions to comments on incorporationof OMB Circular No. A-3.<ITAG tagnum="16">_OMB agrees that Federal statistical publications must be protectedfrom both actual and apparent tampering, and that therefore the exclusionof statistical publications from management control reporting should notbe dropped but should be continued; that is, the policy in existing CircularNo. A-3 should be retained. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">_OMB believes Circular No. A-3, or any revision thereto, should beincorporated into Circular No. A-130. The reason is that a basic purposeof the Paperwork Reduction Act is to coordinate, integrate, and make uniformFederal information policies and practices. (44 U.S.C. 3501) OMB viewsthe joining of the two Circulars as a step toward coordination and integrationof Federal information policy, and believes that the Paperwork ReductionAct and other authorities cited in Section 3 of Circular No. A-130 areadequate legal foundation for extending coverage to include informationproducts other than periodicals. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">_OMB agrees that 44 U.S.C. 1108 refers only to periodicals and isnot a statutory basis for requiring reporting on electronic informationproducts. However, the Paperwork Reduction Act and other authorities citedin Section 3 of Circular No. A-130 are an adequate basis for requiringsuch reporting. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">_OMB believes that Circular No. A-3 should be incorporated into CircularNo. A-130 only after substantial revision to Circular No. A-3. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">_OMB agrees that audiovisual activities may logically belong underthe definition of ``information dissemination product,'' a logic that wouldalso dictate the joining of OMB Circular Nos. A-114 and A-130. However,because agencies experienced administrative difficulties in extending reportingcoverage to include electronic information products, OMB is inclined todefer until a later date the consideration of including audiovisual activitieswithin the meaning of information dissemination product and joining thetwo Circulars. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">_OMB believes any revision to the contents of Circular No. A-3 shouldreduce the exercise of OMB control over the details of agency informationdissemination programs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">_OMB agrees that internal newsletters should not be included withinthe definition of the term periodical.</ITAG>After further consideration, OMB proposes to take the following actionswith respect to Circular No. A-3, actions which effectively incorporatesuggestions made by commentators.<ITAG tagnum="16">_Agencies will be required to maintain current comprehensive inventoriesof information dissemination products. However, the inventories will notbe submitted to OMB and will not be individually examined on a routinebasis by OMB. OMB plans to require that agencies annually submit theirinventories to a single point, possibly the National Technical InformationService, for compilation and publication as a government-wide index forlocating government information. OMB intends to establish an appropriateinteragency group to determine the content of the inventory. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">_OMB intends to reduce annual reporting to OMB to a single table ofobligations data for agency information dissemination products (the equivalentof Exhibit 2 in OMB Bulletin No. 88-10, issued April 22, 1988) that wouldsatisfy the requirements of 44 U.S.C. 1108. When submitting the table,agency heads will be required to certify that: </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="14">(a) The agency's information dissemination products are necessaryfor the proper performance of agency functions (to satisfy 44 U.S.C. 1108);and </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="14">(b) The agency has in place an effective management system for informationdissemination products, including a current inventory. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="16">_For FY 1989, OMB plans to issue a bulletin within the next 60 daysdetailing proposed changes to OMB Circular No. A-3 and requesting the singletable and certifications. OMB intends to write to agencies in responseto the FY 1989 bulletin, indicating whether their responses are in conformitywith 44 U.S.C. 1108. For subsequent years, OMB plans to incorporate reportinginto the annual budget process. </ITAG>Adequate Notice The January 1989 notice proposed requiring agencies: (1) To make determinationsas to which of their information dissemination products are significantand what would constitute adequate notice for initiating or terminatingsuch products; and (2) to establish procedures for providing adequate notice.The analysis of policy provided examples of significant products and formsof notice.Relatively fewer comments were received on this section of the notice thanon others, and many of those were from Federal agencies. In general, whetherin support of or critical of the adequate notice concept, commentatorssuggested that OMB give more specific guidance both on definitions andprocess. Some commentators addressed themselves to issues of timeliness,suggesting precise timeframes for agency notices or requesting more specificguidance on timeframes for different kinds of products. Some pointed outthat advance notice was often precluded by the fact that decisions to terminateinformation dissemination products arose directly from the annual budgetprocess and that budget decisions may not be published in advance. A numberchallenged OMB's characterization of significant and nonsignificant products.Some pointed out, for example, that in a decision to terminate a productbecause of low public interest, as evidenced by diminished demand, agenciesshould also take into account the product's usage by the depository libraries.<T3>OMB Reaction: </T3>OMB's intent in the January 1989 notice was to reinforcethe concept of adequate notice by providing lengthy examples concerningadequate notice, but then to propose that agencies develop their own proceduresin accord with their own circumstances. OMB does not believe it should fix timeliness and other procedural issuesmore precisely, believing that these are matters better left to the agenciesbecause the agencies are in the best position to take into account agencymissions and the nature of the information dissemination products in question.OMB expects to require that agencies establish procedures consistent withgeneral guidelines, but will leave detailed procedural specifications tothe agencies. OMB agrees that, in formulating procedures for adequate notice, agenciesshould take into account the fullest available information, such as depositorylibrary usage of information dissemination products. OMB recognizes thatbudget decisions may affect an agency's ability to provide adequate notice,and considers this a special condition that agencies may wish to list asan exception to their procedures. Electronic Dissemination The January 1989 notice proposed that agencies should examine their informationdissemination products to determine whether conditions favor electronicdissemination, and suggested what some of the conditions might be. Thenotice also stated that agencies should avoid disseminating products thatplace the Government in unfair competition with the private sector, andthat agencies should give preference to basic products and avoid disseminatingvalue-added electronic information products. This section of the notice generated the most comment. A majority of thecommentators took this section as an assault on public policy principlesconcerning the free flow of information. First, commentators questionedwhether the notice took into account the legitimate role of governmentagencies in the dissemination of government information and the rightsof citizens to adequate and preferably convenient access to that information.According to some commentators, the policy as proposed, by impeding agencyinformation dissemination activities, would constitute an obstacle to agenciesin carrying out their dissemination mandates. Second, commentators questioned the statutory basis for a proposed policywhich they believed favored the privatization of government informationdissemination products. Some voiced the belief that the proposed policywas in conflict with those portions of Title 44 governing Federal printing.They questioned a distinction between electronic information products andother government information products, many asserting that the chaptersof Title 44 dealing with printing extend to electronic products and thatOMB is wrong to suggest otherwise. (To the extent this last comment isa reference to the section of the January 1989 notice concerning user fees,see the section on user fees below.) Third, commentators voiced their concerns about too great a reliance onthe private sector for the dissemination of government information, particularlyin electronic form. They noted the uncertainty of corporate continuityand the lack of accountability and obligation to perform as compared withFederal agencies. They pointed to the risk that, if given too strong arole, private firms might exercise control over the content of public domaininformation, releasing only that information that would turn a profit.They objected to the possibility that private firms could exact high pricesand high profits from the sale of information created with public funds.Commentators believed that the proposed policy could amount to a publicsubsidy for commercial interests and could effectively create price barriersto government information. Fourth, commentators focused on the matter of unfair competition, withsome alleging that the proposed policy should foster cooperation betweenthe public and private sectors rather than competition, and others holdingthe view that competition between the two sectors was basically healthy.Fifth, some commentators focused on the special case of Federal statisticalagencies, arguing that these agencies reason for existence is to disseminategeneral purpose statistics and that the proposed policies fail to takeaccount of, and could inhibit, their special missions. Sixth, a paragraph in the analysis section of the notice presented an exampledealing with CD-ROM (Compact Disk_Read Only Memory). This paragraph occasionedthe most comment of any feature of the notice. Commentators took exceptionto the idea that an agency might disseminate a CD-ROM without any addedvalue; that is, without tailoring it to specific user needs. They arguedthat such an action would be inconsistent with the purpose of informationdissemination: some value must be added to any information to enable itto be used. Commentators also objected strenuously to the suggestion thatsoftware development is an inappropriate activity for agencies. Seventh, some commentators on the other hand pointed to examples wherethey believed agencies were disseminating valueadded products in competitionwith the private sector. They expressed the fear that such agency actionswould drive away private sector investment from, and ultimately stifle,emergent technologies. Eighth, comments discussed the responsibility of the Federal Governmentto guarantee equitable access to government information and alleged thatoverdependence on the private sector would lead to higher prices for userswhich, in turn, would undermine equitable access and lead to formationof an information elite composed of those who can afford the higher prices.Several commentators raised the example of a particular agency's automatedsystem. They stressed the positive effects on national competitivenessthat the high quality, readily accessible information from the system wouldprovide. They also expressed fears that OMB policy would prohibit the agencyfrom allowing public access to the system except through private vendorsthat might offer only the profitable portions of the system's databaseat high cost to the public.Ninth, commentators alleged that in the January 1989 notice OMB was proposingto differentiate policy for electronic information from policy for printedinformation. They maintained that the format or media of information shouldnot dictate policy, but that one information policy should apply to allformats or media. Last, many commentators criticized the proposed policy on electronic disseminationbecause there was no discussion of the Federal depository library program.Some also mentioned that the National Technical Information Service shouldbe discussed. In their view, any electronic dissemination policy must includethese two institutional vehicles for making government information availableto the public. <T3>OMB Reaction: </T3>First, OMB wishes to make clear that its fundamentalphilosophy is that government information is a public asset; that is, withthe exception of national security matters and such other areas as maybe prescribed by law, it is the obligation of government to make such informationreadily available to the public on equal terms to all citizens; that tothe extent the flow of information from the government to the public canbe enhanced by the participation of the private sector, such participationshould be encouraged; and that participation by the private sector supplementsbut does not replace the obligations of government. These principles applywhatever the form, printed, electronic, or other in which the informationhas been collected or stored. OMB did not intend that either OMB CircularNo. A-130 or the January 1989 notice should have the effect of dissuadingagencies from carrying out activities they believe are necessary for theproper performance of agency functions. OMB will re-examine OMB CircularNo. A-130 and the January 1989 notice to ensure that these points are adequatelyaddressed. Second, as regards the statutory basis, OMB's information resources managementpolicy is based on the Paperwork Reduction Act and on other statutory authorities,as cited in Section 3 of OMB Circular No. A-130. An OMB Circular is unlikea regulation promulgated pursuant to the notice and comment requirementsof the Administrative Procedure Act. A Circular does not confer rightsor impose obligations on private individuals or organizations. Rather,an OMB Circular imposes binding Administration guidance on executive branchagencies as to how policies and statutes are to be implemented. Third, as regards reliance on the private sector to disseminate governmentinformation, OMB did not intend, either in Circular No. A-130 or in theJanuary 1989 notice, that Federal agencies or the public should be madeto rely primarily on the private sector for the dissemination of governmentinformation. Fourth, as regards unfair competition between the public and private sectors,OMB believes that discussions surrounding Circular No. A-130 and the January1989 notice have polarized debate in ways that may obscure and impede importantareas of cooperation between the public and private sectors. In revisingthe Circular and the notice, OMB will attempt to frame the policy in languagethat avoids polarization and fosters cooperation. Fifth, OMB recognizes, as for example at 5 CFR 1320.7(o) and elsewhere,that Federal statistical agencies are special cases in some respects. OMB'sintent is to formulate information policy that will apply to all executivebranch agencies while taking into account the special circumstances ofstatistical agencies. Sixth, as regards the CD-ROM example in the analysis section of the January1989 notice, OMB agrees that the example was poorly drawn. OMB agrees thatgovernment information dissemination products should be tailored to users'needs, and that software development is often a legitimate Federal activity.Seventh, OMB believes that, all other things being considered, agenciesought to act in a manner that will encourage rather than inhibit privatesector investment in emergent technologies. Eighth, OMB agrees with the view that the Government has a responsibilityto guarantee equitable access to government information. As to the concernthat overdependence on the private sector could result in higher pricesfor users, OMB notes the requirement in Circular No. A-130 that agenciesshall disseminate information products ``in a manner that ensures thatmembers of the public whom the agency has an obligation to reach have areasonable ability to acquire the information.'' (Section 8a (11)(b)) Thediscussion of this policy highlights the need to avoid unreasonably highprices for information products. Ninth, as noted, OMB agrees that a single information policy should applyto government information regardless of format or media. Last, with respect to the Federal depository libraries and the NationalTechnical Information Services (NTIS), OMB agrees that these are institutionalvehicles whose availability should be considered by all government informationdissemination programs. In redrafting the policy, OMB will discuss thedepository libraries and NTIS. In prescribing the functions of agencies'information dissemination management systems, OMB would consider requiringthat agencies ensure that the appropriate information products are madeavailable to the depository libraries. OMB notes that the depository library program is the administrative responsibilityof the Government Printing Office, and therefore does not intend to proposepolicy for the depository library program as such. In revising OMB CircularNo. A-130 and the January notice, OMB does intend to address the questionof executive branch agencies' supplying government publications to thedepository library program. User Charges The January 1989 notice suggested a change in user charges policy as comparedwith the existing policy found in OMB Circular No. A-25, User Charges.The change consisted of treating government information products as fundamentallydifferent from other goods and services. OMB proposed a ceiling on chargesfor information products, asserting that, with relatively rare exception,user charges for government information products should never be set higherthan a level sufficient to recover the costs of disseminating, not collectingthe information. The proposed policy, therefore, would generally precludeuser charges that might attempt to recover costs of collecting and processingthe information, and would preclude using other standards such as the marketvalue of the information. For many commentators, it appeared that the term user charges and any discussionthereof connoted higher prices to the public. Some commentators objectedto the discussion in the notice's analysis section of ``full cost of dissemination,''and asserted that application of full cost of dissemination will raisethe prices paid by end users in the public. Other commentators raised theobjection that user charges are a form of double taxation. The taxpayer,having paid via taxes for the government to create or collect the information,is said to be paying a second time when assessed a user charge. A thirdset of comments stated that decisions on whether to charge and how muchto charge should be based on the nature of the information, circumstancessurrounding the particular information product, and the agency's disseminationmission. In the analysis of user charges, the notice had stated that decisions onpricing and sale of printed government documents were reserved to the Superintendentof Documents, and that therefore the executive branch agencies had discretiononly in the setting of user charges for electronic information products.Some commentators took direct issue with this statement, alleging thatthe statement was incorrect as a matter of law. Other commentators tookthis statement to mean that OMB was asserting electronic information productswere not subject to Chapter 19 of Title 44, U.S.Code, concerning the depositorylibraries. Still others believed that this statement signaled a bifurcationin information policy with one policy applying to printed information productsand another policy applying to electronic products; commentators opposedany such split.<T3>OMB Reaction: </T3>The intent of the user charges section of the noticewas to propose an across-the-board ceiling on user charges for governmentinformation products, except in certain carefully defined cases. Far fromraising prices, OMB intended to reassure the public that prices would notbe raised above the costs of dissemination. In effect, agencies would beprecluded from using information products as a profit center or budgetingmechanism. The public has generally not objected to paying a sales pricefor GPO publications; the user charge OMB contemplates for other governmentinformation products is comparable. Charging for reproduction and distributionof electronic information products, the usual basis for user charges forthese products, is consistent with a cost-of-dissemination policy. As to double taxation, OMB notes that user charges policy has a basis instatute (31 U.S.C. 9701), and the Congress has not viewed user chargesas double taxation because they are applied when the recipient receivesspecial benefits. With regard to basing user charges on the nature of theinformation, the product circumstances, and the agency's mission, OMB believesthat this viewpoint is accommodated in the policy of balancing user chargesagainst the need to ensure that products reach the public for whom theyare intended. OMB notes also that OMB Circular No. A-25, User Charges, makes explicitprovision for the waiver of user charges when the cost of collecting thefees would be an unduly large part of receipts. The January notice indicatedthat agencies should balance the requirement for user charges against theneed to ensure that information products reach certain members of the public,and that this could be a basis for reducing or eliminating the charges.With respect to Chapter 17 of Title 44, U.S. Code, OMB asserted only thatthe Superintendent of Documents prices and sells printed government documentsand that executive branch agencies may set prices for electronic informationproducts. Executive branch agencies have priced and sold electronic informationproducts for several decades without legal or policy challenge. OMB made no statement and drew no firm conclusions as to whether or notChapter 19 of Title 44, dealing with the depository libraries, appliesto electronic information products. The definition of ``government publication''in 44 U.S.C. 1901 is: ``informational matter which is published as an individualdocument * * *'' OMB does not understand that this definition on its faceincludes electronic data files, software, online information services,or the like. Section 1711 of Title 44, for example, requires the Superintendentof Documents ``to prepare a catalog of Government publications which shallshow the documents <T3>printed </T3>during the preceding month * * *'' (emphasis added). Thisstatutory language supports OMB's exclusion of non-printed electronic informationfrom the definition of government publication. Therefore, OMB believesit is not clear that agencies at present have a legal obligation to makeelectronic information products available to depository libraries. Nevertheless,OMB believes that, as a matter of policy, many such products should bemade available to the depository libraries in the same manner as printedmaterials, and intends to redraft the proposed policy to reflect this view.<ITAG tagnum="84">Immediate Action and Preliminary Conclusions About the Next Steps</ITAG>OMB will proceed with the development of a new draft policy statement thatwill reformulate both information collection and information disseminationpolicy, including the pertinent sections of OMB Circular No. A-130, theJanuary 1989 notice, and the notice of August 7, 1987, concerning electroniccollection of information. OMB in due course will publish the new draftpolicy statement for comment. The foregoing summary of comments leads OMB to certain preliminary conclusionsabout the proper role for executive branch agencies in government informationdissemination, and the boundaries between Federal and nonfederal roles.OMB proposes that these conclusions form the basis for OMB's revision ofinformation dissemination policy in OMB Circular No. A-130. 1. The nation benefits from the fact that government information is disseminatedby Federal agencies and also by many nonfederal parties, including Stateand local government agencies, educational and other nonprofit institutions,and for-profit organizations. 2. Over and above their responsibilities to provide access to informationunder the Freedom of Information Act, the Privacy Act, and the Governmentin the Sunshine Act, Federal agencies have a general responsibility todisseminate information:<ITAG tagnum="15">_As appropriate to the pursuit of their mission and program objectives;and </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_In the interest of assuring that the public is appropriately informed.</ITAG>3. Agencies must discharge their information dissemination responsibilitiesin a manner that:<ITAG tagnum="15">_Assures the public reasonable and equitable access to governmentinformation; and </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Is efficient and economical.</ITAG>4. Agencies should discharge their information dissemination responsibilitiesby taking full advantage of all dissemination channels, foremost amongwhich are the Federal depository libraries, but also including other Federalagencies, State and local government agencies, educational and other nonprofitinstitutions, and for-profit organizations. 5. With respect to the roles of Federal and nonfederal entities, agencydissemination responsibilities can be analyzed as a set of decisions:<ITAG tagnum="15">_Whether to disseminate a particular government information productor service: a decision made by the Federal agency involved; </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_What to disseminate, i.e., the content of a government informationproduct or service: a decision made by the Federal agency; </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_When to disseminate, i.e., the timing and frequency of a productor service: a decision made by the Federal agency; </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_How to disseminate, i.e., the strategy for getting a product or serviceto users, including format or medium: a decision made by the Federal agency;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_What price to charge for the product or service: a decision madeby the Federal agency; </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Who carries out the primary or official dissemination activities,after the preceding questions are answered: a decision made by the Federalagency, which may result in activities by the Federal agency or by nonfederalparties; </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Who carries out secondary dissemination, once primary or officialdissemination has been accomplished: a decision made by any interestedparty, Federal or nonfederal.</ITAG>OMB requests public comment on the foregoing, particularly with respectto OMB's reaction to comments and preliminary conclusions. OMB also solicitspositive formulations of policy statements with respect to the topics treatedherein; that is, where members of the public believe the OMB formulationis inadequate or incomplete, OMB invites members of the public to offertheir own formulations. OMB invites comments as to whether it would beuseful for OMB to hold a public hearing on these issues. <ITAG tagnum="6">S. Jay Plager,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator, Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-14224 Filed 6-14-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3110-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>