<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89308-0023 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.3-08-89.f2.A1022</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="52">49 CFR Part 580 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket Number 87-09; Notice 8] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="91">RIN: 2127-AC42 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Odometer Disclosure Requirements </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>agency:</T2> National Highway Traffic Safety Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>action:</T2> Denial of petitions for reconsideration.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>summary:</T2> This is in response to five petitions for reconsiderationof the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration's final rule concerningodometer disclosure requirements. Numerous letters were also submittedon this subject. These petitions request that NHTSA reconsider the provisionsof the final rule that: (1) Prohibit a person from signing the odometerdisclosure statement as both the transferor and transferee in the sametransaction; (2) require that titles and reassignment documents be setforth by a ``secure printing process''; and (3) concern the informationincluded on the odometer disclosure statement. The petitions concerning the provision that prohibits a person from signingthe odometer disclosure statement as both transferor and transferee requestedthat NHTSA eliminate this provision. Alternatively, they ask NHTSA to allowa person to use ``a special power of attorney'' to appoint the other partyto the transfer as his attorney-in-fact to sign the disclosure on his behalf.The petitioners consider ``a special power of attorney'' to be one thatis (1) set forth by a secure printing process; (2) contains the appropriateFederal disclosure; (3) is completed, signed, and dated by the transferee;and (4) submitted to the State with the title and all subsequent reassignments.Before NHTSA could fully consider these petitions, Congress passed an amendmentto the Truth in Mileage Act, which addresses many of the points raisedby these petitions. NHTSA has issued an interim final rule, which appearselsewhere in today's <T4>Federal Register</T4>, to implement the new law. To the extent thatthey seek changes inconsistent with today's rule, NHTSA has denied thepetitions in part, including the requests to eliminate entirely the provisionof the final rule that prohibits a person from signing the odometer disclosurestatement as the transferor and transferee in the same transaction or topermit the use of a special power of attorney. In addition, the petitionconcerning the security of documents asked for no specific relief and itis also denied. Finally, we have denied the petition that requested thatthe exemption from the disclosure requirements for vehicles ten years oldand older be included on the disclosure statements.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>for further information contact:</T2> Judith Kaleta, Office of theChief Counsel, Room 5219, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration,400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590 (202-366-1834).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>supplementary information: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Background </ITAG>To implement the Truth in Mileage Act of 1986 and make some needed changesin the Federal odometer rules, the National Highway Traffic Safety Administration(NHTSA) published a notice of proposed rulemaking (NPRM) on July 17, 1987.52 FR 27022 (1987). The agency received numerous comments on the NPRM,representing the opinions of new and used car dealers, auto auctions, leasingcompanies, State motor vehicle administrators, and enforcement and consumerprotection agencies. Each of the comments was considered and a final rulewas published on August 5, 1988. 53 FR 29464 (1988). As required by the Truth in Mileage Act, the August 1988 final rule requiresthe transferor of a motor vehicle to provide mileage disclosure on thetitle document or, if the title document does not include a space for themileage disclosure (during the phase-in period), or if the vehichle hasnot been previously titled, it requires the transferor to make a writtendisclosure of mileage on a separate document. Also as required by thatstatute, the final rule requires that title documents be manufactured orotherwise set forth by a secure process to deter counterfeiting or alteration;requires that at the time of issue, the titles include the mileage disclosure;adds disclosure requirements for lessors and lessees; and adds retentionrequirements for lessors and auction companies. In addition, consistentwith the statute, this rule amends the form and content of the odometerdisclosure statement. The rule also prohibits a person from signing thedisclosure as both the transferor and transferee in the same transaction,in order to guard against a situation where only one party to the transactionwould be aware of the disclosure. Finally, this rule clarifies the definitionof transferor and transferee and extends the record retention requirementfor dealers and distributors. The Agency received seven petitions for reconsideration of the final rule.In addition, we received numerous letters concerning the final rule andsupporting the petitions. These petitions requested that NHTSA reconsiderthe provisions of the final rule that: (1) Prohibit a person from signingthe odometer disclosure statement as both the transferor and transfereein the same transaction; (2) define ``transferor'' and ``transferee'';(3) concern the ``secure printing process'' for titles and reassignmentdocuments; (4) concern the language included on the odometer disclosurestatement; and (5) require dealers and distributors to retain, for fiveyears, a copy of every odometer disclosure statement, including the transferee'ssignature, that they issue and receive. These petitions and letters havebeen placed in the docket. Before the Agency could fully consider thesedocuments, Congress enacted the Pipeline Safety Reauthorization Act of1988, Pub. L. 100-561. Section 401 of the Pipeline Safety Reauthorization Act, which amends section408(d)(1) of the Motor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act, 15 U.S.C.1988(d)(1), concerns the use of certain powers of attorney in connectionwith the required mileage disclosure. Although the Truth in Mileage Actgenerally requires that a vehicle seller (or other transferor) make therequired disclosure on the vehicle's title, Congress determined that, undercertain limited conditions when the title document is physically held bya lienholder, the transferor should not be precluded from making the disclosureon a secure power of attorney form which includes the required odometerdisclosure information. This secure power of attorney form would be givento a buyer (transferee), authorizing him to restate, on the title document,the mileage disclosed by the seller on the secure power of attorney form,if State law otherwise permits. Congress found that precluding such usesof powers of attorney could cause an undue burden on dealers when a consumer'stitle is held by a bank or other lienholder. Because the consumer doesnot have the vehicle's title document, the consumer would be unable tocomplete the disclosure on the title unless: (1) The consumer returnedto the dealer after the dealer paid off the lien and received the titlefrom the lienholder, or (2) the title was mailed by the dealer to the consumer,completed by the consumer, and mailed back to the dealer. Both of thesealternatives were seen by Congress as interfering with usual commercialtransactions. 134 Cong. Rec. H10079 (daily ed. October 12, 1988) (remarksof Rep. Dingell). To resolve this problem and to alleviate potential costs for dealers andconsumers, the new amendment specifies that a secure power of attorneyform, which includes a mileage disclosure by the transferor, may be usedwhen the transferor's title document is physically held by a lienholder,if otherwise permitted by State law. The new law directs the agency toprescribe the form and content of the power of attorney/disclosure documentand reasonable conditions for its use by the transferor, ``consistent withthis Act and the need to facilitate enforcement thereof.'' More specifically,the new law requires that the form: (1) Be issued by a State to transfereesin accordance with paragraph (2)(A)(i) * * *'' (Paragraph (2)(A)(i) concernsthe issuance of documents that are set forth by a secure printing processor other secure process.); (2) include an odometer disclosure statementand other information as NHTSA deems necessary; and (3) be submitted tothe State by the person granted the power of attorney. It also requiresNHTSA's rule to provide for the retention of a copy of the power of attorneyand to ensure that the person granted the power of attorney completes thedisclosure on the title consistent with the disclosure on the power ofattorney form. Consistent with this statutory mandate, NHTSA has issued an interim finalrule that is published elsewhere in today's <T4>Federal Register</T4>. That rule permits a person to sign an odometerdisclosure statement as both the transferor and transferee in the sametransaction, if the disclosure is based on a secure power of attorney.In addition, NHTSA has issued an NPRM that is also published in today's<T4>Federal Register</T4>. The NPRM attempts to clarify the definitionof transferor and transferee by proposing a new definition for each ofthose terms. Finally, in response to the two petitions for reconsiderationthat concern the disclosure and retention requirements, that NPRM proposesto require the transferee to return a copy of a signed odometer disclosurestatement to his transferor. <ITAG tagnum="84">Scope </ITAG>To the extent the petitions request relief that is not proposed to be grantedin the NPRM or is not granted in the interim final rule, this notice denies,in whole or in part, five petitions for reconsideration. These petitionsrequest that NHTSA reconsider the provisions of the final rule that: (1)Prohibit a person from signing the odometer disclosure statement as boththe transferor and transferee in the same transaction; (2) require thattitles and reassignment documents be set forth by a ``secure printing process'';and (3) concern the information included on the odometer disclosure statement.<ITAG tagnum="84">Security for Motor Vehicle Titles </ITAG>The Truth in Mileage Act of 1986 requires that, beginning April 29, 1989,each State motor vehicle title must be set forth by a secure printing processor other secure process. To implement this statutory requirement, we proposedto define ``secure printing process'' and ``other secure process'' as ``anyprocess which deters and detects counterfeiting and/or unauthorized reproductionand allows alterations to be visible to the naked eye''. 3M requested thatthe definition be amended to read, in lieu of ``visible to the naked eye'',``easily detected under recommended viewing conditions''. 3M stated thatthe definition as proposed could be interpreted to mean without the aidof a verification device and asserted that any verification process thatprecludes the use of a supporting device was too restrictive. Because theintent of the Truth in Mileage Act is to provide a paper trail for theprotection of consumers, we stated that any alteration should be visibleto the purchaser who would not routinely have a verification device. Weadopted the definition as proposed. To implement the provisions of the Truth in Mileage Act that require thesecurity of motor vehicle titles, we also proposed the addition of a newandSection;580.4. This section proposed to require that motor vehicle titlesbe set forth by a secure printing process or other secure process. It alsoproposed to require that any documents used to reassign the title be setforth by the same secure process. To assist the States in their effortsto issue motor vehicle titles that comply with the requirements of theTruth in Mileage Act and the regulations implementing the Act, we proposedto include an Appendix A consisting of a list of technologies that we deemedto be secure processes. We proposed that Appendix A would include intaglio,high resolution, and micro-line printing, security paper, erasure sensitivebackground inks, and security lamination. The comments concerning the proposedandSection;580.4 and Appendix A were divergent. 3M suggested that NHTSA requirethe title to be set forth by one of the secure processes in Appendix Aand that Appendix A be amended to include all available security processeswhich would be ranked as to the level of security that they provide. TheAmerican Association of Motor Vehicle Administrators (AAMVA) and severalmember jurisdictions commented that Appendix A was superfluous and unnecessary,and requested that it be deleted. In addition, these commenters also requestedthat the agency permit reassignment documents to be printed by a secureprocess, not necessarily the same secure process as the title. To allow for the maximum administrative discretion on the part of the States,we did not adopt 3M's suggestion to list and rank all secure processes.Appendix A was adopted with minor technical changes. We noted that theStates are permitted to choose alternative methods of security beyond thoselisted in Appendix A. In addition, we adopted the suggestion of AAMVA andits member jurisdictions with regard to reassignment documents. Accordingly,the final rule of August 1988 permits reassignment documents to be setforth by a secure process, but not necessarily the same process as thetitle. 3M filed a petition for reconsideration. 3M stated, ``* * * it is incumbentupon 3M to respond for reconsideration of the final ruling. 3M agrees withthe intent of the final ruling, but feels that further clarification isrequired to prevent any misunderstanding of the assumptions made by NHTSArelative to 3M's security lamination and the consumer protection affordedby its inclusion on title documents issued by individual states.'' 3M thenexplained its security lamination and claimed that NHTSA's reference to3M's security lamination ``does not take the consumer verifiable featureinto consideration and gives the impression that the intent of the lawis not met with its incorporation.'' Paragraph 2(b) of Appendix A lists security laminate under the heading:``Methods to allow alterations to be visible to the naked eye.'' NHTSAfinds no inaccuracies concerning security lamination in the preamble tothe final rule of August 1988, nor in Appendix A, and 3M fails to be specificin its allegations. Furthermore, 3M has not requested the agency to takeany specific action. Therefore, 3M's petition for reconsideration is denied.<ITAG tagnum="84">Disclosure of Odometer Information: Exemptions</ITAG>With regard to the information concerning the odometer required to be disclosedby the transferor to the transferee, we proposed a new andSection; 580.5.This section proposed to continue to require certain information that theagency had already required and to include some additional provisions.While the proposed regulation set forth the information which would bedisclosed, it also included, in Appendices B and C, sample disclosure formswhich could be followed. Appendix B was a sample disclosure form whicha State may wish to include on its titles. Appendix C was a sample disclosureform which could be used if the vehicle was not titled on a title thatconforms to the law and our regulations (during the phase-in period) orif the vehicle had not been previously titled, such as a new vehicle ora vehicle imported into the United States from a foreign country. Withsome minor changes, andSection; 580.5 and Appendices B and C were adoptedas proposed. We also proposed a new andSection; 580.6 which proposed to exempt certaintransferors from issuing odometer disclosure statements. This section proposedto exempt the transferors that NHTSA currently exempts. Specifically, amongother transferors, NHTSA proposed to continue to exempt a transferor ofa vehicle that is twenty-five years or older from the requirements of issuingan odometer disclosure statement. We received numerous requests to lowerthe vehicle's age. AAMVA, several of its member jurisdictions, and a coalitionof commenters (the ``coalition'') consisting of AAMVA, the National AutomobileDealers Association (NADA), the National Auto Auction Association (NAAA),the National Independent Automobile Dealers Association (NIADA), the AutomotiveTrade Association, and the American Car Rental Association, suggested thatthe exemption be given to the transferor of a vehicle that is ten yearsold and older. The National Association of Consumer Agency Administratorsrecommended that the absolute maximum age of a vehicle for which the transferorshould be required to issue an odometer disclosure statement is fifteenyears. The Director of the California Department of Motor Vehicles proposedthat the regulation be changed to exempt transferors of vehicles that aresix years or older. Oregon noted that the State legislature amended Oregonlaw to require odometer disclosure information only for vehicles eightyears old and newer. NHTSA considered each of the suggestions and the August1988 final rule exempts a transferor of a vehicle ten years old and older.A private citizen filed a petition for reconsideration concerning the odometerdisclosure requirements and the exemption for a transferor of a vehicleten years old and older. Referring to Appendices B and C, he recommendsthat the exemption for vehicles ten years and older be incorporated intothe disclosure forms. He feels that a statement noting the exemption wouldclarify the regulatory requirements for the benefit of persons who buyand sell automobiles for personal use. While entitling his letter a petition for reconsideration, this individualdoes not explain why compliance with Appendices B and C of the rule isnot practicable, is unreasonable, or is not in the public interest. <T3>See</T3>, 49 CFR 553.35. Rather, he seems to suggest that NHTSA amendthe appendices. As noted in the preamble to the final rule, the appendicesare examples and do not introduce any new requirements or restrictionsinto the law. 53 FR 29471 (1988). Therefore, what this individual is actuallysuggesting is that NHTSA amend the provisions concerning the disclosureof odometer information, andSection; 580.5, to require the transferor toinform his transferee that, because the vehicle is ten years old or older,the transferor is not required to disclose the vehicle's mileage. To adoptthis suggestion at this time could impose unnecessary financial burdenson the States that have already begun to revise their titles to conformwith the requirements of the Truth in Mileage Act and the final rule. Itcould also impose similar burdens on dealers and distributors who havealready placed orders for separate disclosure statements and/or sales contractsthat contain odometer disclosure statements that meet all statutory andregulatory requirements. Furthermore, this suggested statement would notalert buyers and sellers to their legal obligations, but rather merelyadvise them of an exemption from those obligations. The benefits to begained from this suggested statement would not outweigh the significantcosts that could be imposed on the States and the automobile industry.Therefore, we are denying this petition, but may consider this suggestionat the time of any future rulemaking. We note that the States and dealers,distributors, and other transferors may include a provision of an odometerdisclosure statement that a transferor of a vehicle ten years old or olderis not required to disclose the vehicle's mileage to his transferee. <ITAG tagnum="84">Powers of Attorney </ITAG>A. Background; Misuse in Odometer Fraud Schemes Although the July 1987 proposed rule to implement the Truth in MileageAct did not include a regulatory provision explicitly concerning the useof powers of attorney, we stated in the preamble to the proposed rule thatwe recognize that powers of attorney are necessary in certain transactions.Someone acting on behalf of a deceased or incompetent owner would use apower of attorney from those owners to transfer the vehicles to a thirdparty. In addition, the spouse of overseas military personnel, or of someoneout of town or otherwise unavailable, may have a power of attorney froma husband or wife to transfer a vehicle to a third party. However, we emphasizedthat powers of attorney that allow a person to sign a disclosure as boththe transferor and transferee result in only one party to the transactionbeing aware of the previous mileage disclosures. This could jeopardizethe integrity of the ``paper trail'', the evidence of rollbacks that Congressintended to create by enacting the Truth in Mileage Act. 52 FR 27026 (1987).The American Association of Motor Vehicle Administrators (AAMVA), the NationalAssociation of Consumer Agency Administrators (NACAA), and the WisconsinDepartment of Transportation, Motor Vehicle Division. (Wisconsin) agreedwith our position. AAMVA noted a power of attorney that allows a personto sign the disclosure as both the buyer and the seller creates a situationripe for fraud, if that person is intent on rolling back the vehicle'sodometer. Several of AAMVA's members concurred in this position. Wisconsinsuggested that a new paragraph be added to andSection; 580.5 providing thatno person may sign a disclosure as both the transferor and transferee.Other commenters, concerned that the title had to be present at the timeof sale (``title present''), hoped that the use of a power of attorneywould ease the burden that title present might have imposed. The coalitionsuggested the use of a special power of attorney. (Although the coalitionused the term ``secure power of attorney'', we are referring to the coalition'ssuggestion by the term ``special power of attorney''. This will help todifferentiate between the statutorily permissible secure power of attorneyand the power of attorney proposed by the coalition.) The coalition proposedthat this special power of attorney would (1) be set forth by a secureprocess; (2) contain the appropriate Federal odometer disclosure statement;and (3) be fully completed, dated, and signed by the transferee. Upon receiptof the transferor's title, the initial transferee would negotiate the titleand complete the transferor's statement based on the transferor's specialpower of attorney and mileage disclosure thereon. The title, together withthe special power of attorney and all subsequent reassignments, would bepresented to the State with any application for title. We reviewed AAMVA's comments and the suggestions of Wisconsin and the coalitionin light of our investigative experience which showed that powers of attorneyhave been abused in the furtherance of odometer fraud schemes. The followingtwo schemes, uncovered during NHTSA's investigations, are illustrativeof the use of a power of attorney to commit odometer fraud: (A) The transferor, a leasing company, sold several vehicles to a wholesaledealer and gave this dealer a power of attorney to execute the odometerdisclosure statements on its behalf. The buying dealer rolled back theodometer on the vehicles, entered the lower mileage on the disclosure statements,and signed the disclosures as both the buyer and the seller. The buyerthen sent a copy of the statements to the leasing company where they werefiled. (B) A new car dealer purchased a used vehicle and received a separate odometerdisclosure statement on which his transferor certified that the odometerreflected the actual mileage of the vehicle. The new car dealer sold thecar before he received the title, certifying that the odometer reflectedthe vehicle's actual mileage. The new car dealer then received the title,which had a blatantly altered odometer reading in the reassignment spaceon the reverse side of the title. Using the power of attorney that he receivedfrom his buyer, the new car dealer signed the disclosure as both the transferorand transferee. He never advised his buyer of the mileage problem.<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note: </T4>Other title problems that could be ignored by unscrupulouspersons include higher mileage on the face of the title than on the reassignmenton the reverse side and a certification that the odometer reading doesnot reflect the actual mileage.</ITAG>Based on the comments from AAMVA, NACAA, and Wisconsin and our own investigativeexperience, we adopted Wisconsin's suggestion and added a new andSection;580.5(h). This provision prohibits a person from signing the disclosureas both the transferor and transferee in the same transaction.  We did not adopt the suggestion of the coalition of commenters for severalreasons. First, we had modified the proposed requirement in the NPRM ofJuly 1987 that the title be present at the time of transfer of ownershipand addressed the primary concern of the commenters by permitting the disclosureto be made ``in connection with the transfer of ownership'', rather than``at the time of transfer of ownership.'' Second, we were concerned thatthe coalition's suggestion would interfere with the integrity of the papertrail, which Congress intended to enhance by enacting the Truth in MileageAct. Under the coalition's suggestion, only one party to the transfer wouldsee the odometer disclosure (which would have been on the title). The powerof attorney could be easily discarded and a new one forged and submittedto the State by any of the subsequent transferees, since the issuance ofthe special power of attorney forms would not be controlled in any way.Finally, this process would place a burden on State titling offices toreview additional documentation, check for conformity of the informationcontained on the documents, and maintain additional records. Accordingly,the final rule of August 1988 implemented the Truth in Mileage Act, whileallowing the States the maximum discretion in complying with these requirements.53 FR 29469, 29472, 29475 (1988).B. Petitions for Reconsideration In petitions filed with the agency, NADA, NIADA, and NAAA asked NHTSA toreconsider andSection; 580.5(h), the provision which prohibits a person fromsigning the disclosure as the transferor and transferee in the same transaction.The agency also received many letters in support of the petitions. Thepetitioners correctly noted that this provision would prohibit a sellerfrom giving his buyer, and conversely, a buyer from giving his seller,a power of attorney to sign the disclosure on the title. The basis forthe petitions is the fear that customers buying from, and selling to, automobiledealers will not return to the dealers to sign the disclosure on the title,although the customer's failure to sign the title would be in violationof the Federal law and could result in fines and/or imprisonment. The petitionersclaimed that customers failing to return to the dealer to sign the disclosureon the title would interfere in the sales of vehicles and result in costsassociated with locating these people, administrative costs for mailingand/or duplicating titles, and increased inventory costs in States wherethe dealer must have the title present at time of sale. This would resultin higher vehicle prices as dealers would shift these expenses to the consumer.Alternatively, they argued that if customers did return, this return visitwould result in lost time at work, travel time, and other costs. They alsoclaimed that a person signing the disclosure as the buyer and the sellerdid not create a situation ripe for fraud, that the provision conflictedwith State laws and was contrary to Federal law. The petitioners asked that NHTSA eliminate andSection; 580.5(h). Alternatively,the petitioners suggested that NHTSA permit the use of special powers ofattorney or require title sets, a two-part title system where the registeredowner holds the title to his vehicle and the lienholder holds a noticeof security interest filing.C. Congressional MandateBefore the agency could fully consider these petitions, Congress enactedthe Pipeline Safety Reauthorization Act, Pub. L. 100-561. Section 401 ofthe Act, which amends section 408(d)(1) of the Motor Vehicle Informationand Cost Savings Act, 15 U.S.C. 1988(d)(1), and concerns the use of limitedpowers of attorney in connection with mileage disclosure. The purpose ofthis provision is to resolve a technical problem for purchasers of usedmotor vehicles (dealers), without increasing the burden on States or lesseningour ability to fight odometer fraud. 134 Cong. Rec. H10079 (daily ed. October12, 1988) (remarks of Rep. Whittaker). Congress determined that NHTSA'sfinal rule, which prohibits a person from signing an odometer disclosurestatement as both the transferor and transferee in the same transaction,could have the effect of precluding the use of a power of attorney in certaininstances. Recognizing that the Truth in Mileage Act of 1986 requires adisclosure, including the transferee's signature, on the title, Congressfound that limiting the use of powers of attorney could cause an undueburden on dealers and consumers when a consumer's title is held by a bankor other lienholder. Because the consumer does not have the vehicle's titlein these instances, the consumer, as a transferor, would be unable to completethe disclosure on the title unless: (1) The consumer returned to the dealerafter the dealer paid off the lien and received the title from the lienholder,or (2) the title was mailed by the dealer to the consumer, completed bythe consumer, and mailed back to the dealer. Both of these alternativeswere rejected by Congress. ``It is not reasonable to assume that the consumerwill come back to the dealer several days or weeks later to fill in a titlereceived from the bank by the dealer after paying off the lien. It is alsonot safe to rely on the mails to send the valuable title document to theconsumer or to rely on the consumer to return the document in a timelyfashion.'' 134 Cong. Rec. H10079 (daily ed. October 12, 1988) (remarksof Rep. Dingell).To resolve the problem and alleviate potential costs for dealers and consumers,the new law specifies that a power of attorney authorizing the dealer todisclose mileage on the title on behalf of the consumer may be used whenthe transferor's title document is physically held by a lienholder, ifotherwise permitted by State law. The new law does not require the Statesto allow the use of a power of attorney for the purpose of mileage disclosure.However, if a State chooses to permit the use of powers of attorney inconnection with mileage disclosure, the State itself must issue the powerof attorney form, and the form must be consistent with the requirementsof the law and the regulations promulgated thereunder. The new law directsthe agency to prescribe the form and content of the power of attorney/disclosuredocument and reasonable conditions for its use by the transferor. Morespecifically, the new law requires that the form: (1) ``be issued by aState to transferees in accordance with paragraph (2)(A)(i) * * * '' (Paragraph(2)(A)(i) concerns the issuance of documents that are set forth by a secureprinting process or other secure process.); (2) include an odometer disclosurestatement and other information as NHTSA deems necessary; and (3) be submittedto the State by the person granted the power of attorney. It also requiresNHTSA to provide for the retention of a copy of the power of attorney formand to ensure that the person granted the power of attorney completes thedisclosure on the title consistent with the disclosure on the power ofattorney form.We note that in some States, a secure power of attorney is not necessaryto ensure that the customer trading in a vehicle to a dealer makes a mileagedisclosure on the vehicle's title document. For example, some States recordall lien information on computerized recordkeeping systems and allow theregistered owner to hold the title document. Other States have adopteda two-part title system under which the registered owner holds the titledocument and the lienholder holds a notice of security interest filing.Under either system, because the vehicle owner would have the title document,he could make the disclosure on the title and would not need to use a powerof attorney form. In these States, the provisions of the new law wouldnot apply, and the disclosure signed by the transferor would continue tobe required on the vehicle's title document.To implement section 401 of the Pipeline Safety Authorization Act of 1988,NHTSA has published an interim final rule in today's <T4>Federal Register. </T4>Consistent with the new law, this rule allowsthe use of a secure power of attorney that would permit a person to signa disclosure as both the transferor and transferee in the same transactions,in specified instances. NHTSA has also published an NPRM in today's <T4>Federal Register. </T4>Although the NPRM and the rule responds to mostof the requests set forth in the petitions for reconsideration, this noticewill respond to the issues not addressed in today's NPRM and interim finalrule.D. The Agency Response to the Petitions<ITAG tagnum="81">1. Costs to Dealers and Consumers</ITAG>The petitioners claimed that andSection; 580.5(h) would result in significantcosts to dealers and consumers and, therefore, that compliance with thesection is not practicable, is unreasonable, and is contrary to the publicinterest. The petitioners claimed that customers would not return to dealersto sign the disclosure on the title, and that this inaction would resultin costs associated with locating these people, administrative costs formailing and/or duplicating titles, and increased inventory costs in Stateswhere the dealer must have the title present at time of sale. This wouldresult in higher vehicle prices as dealers would shift these expenses onto the consumer. Alternatively, they argued that if customers did return,this return visit would result in lost time at work and other costs. NIADAestimates that the costs associated with this section are $170,000,000.(17,000,000 used cars sold each year andmultiply; $10 per car.) NADA estimatesthe costs of this section to be $365,100,000.Consistent with section 401 of the Pipeline Safety Reauthorization Actof 1988, and balancing the need for strong odometer laws against the potentialbusiness problems in used vehicle sales presented in our original rule,in an interim final rule, we have issued an amendment to andSection; 580.5(h)which permits the use of a secure power of attorney in certain limitedinstances. The interim final rule is published elsewhere in today's <T4>Federal Register.</T4>In reviewing these petitions, including the data provided by NIADA andNADA, NHTSA undertook to reanalyze its <T3>Regulatory Evaluation_Final Rule Implementing the Truth in MileageAct</T3> (April 1988). This new evaluation, <T3>Regulatory Evaluation_Restrictions on Power of Attorney Resulting fromImplementation of the Truth in Mileage Act</T3>, has been placed in thedocket for this notice and interested persons may obtain a copy by writingto NHTSA Docket Section, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590,or by calling the Docket Section at (202) 366-4949. In light of these costsestimates and the interim final rule, the petitioners have not demonstratedthat compliance with andSection; 580.5(h) is not practicable, is unreasonable,and is contrary to the public interest.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Fraud and andSection; 580.5(h)</ITAG>NADA claims that the number of instances where franchised dealers havediscarded and/or forged separate odometer disclosure statements is insignificantand that there is an insignificant level of fraud by franchised dealersor their employees acting on behalf of customers under powers of attorney.NADA attributes this to the legal sanctions imposed upon those acting ina manner inconsistent with the terms of a power of attorney. NADA arguesfurther that andSection; 580.5(h) may nevertheless promote fraud by unscrupulousdealers. NADA claims that these dealers are likely to forge the transferor'sor transferee's signature on the title, in order to transfer a vehiclethat a customer has traded-in but for which the customer has not returnedto sign the title.As noted above, section 401 of the Pipeline Safety Reauthorization Actand the interim final rule which is published elsewhere in today's <T4>Federal Register</T4>, permit the use of a secure power of attorneyunder certain limited conditions when the title documents is physiciallyheld by a lienholder. Therefore, the major portion of NADA's concerns havebeen addressed. The new law and the interim final rule have balanced thebusiness concern raised in the event that a title document is held by alienholder against the need for an enhanced paper trial to deter and detectodometer fraud. However, as we have explained above, a person signing amileage disclosure as both the transferor and transferee creates a situationripe for fraud when the person signing the disclosure is intent on rollingback the vehicle's odometer. Therefore, neither the law nor the interimfinal rule permit a person to sign a disclosure statement as the transferorand transferee in the same transaction in the event that title is lost,misplaced or otherwise unavailable; we have amended andSection; 580.5(h),but we have not eliminated it in its entirety. Increasing the number ofsituations in which the same person is permitted to sign the disclosureas the transferor and transferee increases the opportunity for odometerfraud. Because lost or misplaced titles can be replaced and because wecan limit the possible misuse of secure power of attorney forms, we havenot proposed to extend the use of secure power of attorney forms to situationsin which the transferor's title is lost or misplaced.<ITAG tagnum="81">3. The Administrative Procedures Act and NHTSA's Rulemaking Regulations</ITAG>NADA and NIADA assert that the agency must reconsider andSection; 580.5(h)because that section did not appear in the proposed rule published on July17, 1987. They claim that the agency violated the Administrative ProceduresAct, 5 U.S.C. 553, and the agency's regulation concerning rulemaking, 49CFR Part 553, by failing to provide notice and comment.Contrary to the petitioners' assertion, the agency did provide notice andan opportunity for comment. The very cases cited by NIADA in support ofits allegation find that the Administrative Procedures Act does not requirean agency to publish in advance every precise proposal which it may ultimatelyadopt as a rule. The test of adequacy of notice of proposed rulemakingis whether it fairly appraised interested parties of the issues involved.In the NPRM, we addressed NIADA's question about whether a power of attorneycould be granted so that the transferor could sign a disclosure on behalfof the transferee, to avoid any problems when the vehicle was subject toan existing lien. In response to this inquiry, the preamble to the NPRMdiscussed that NHTSA recognizes that powers of attorney are necessary incertain transactions. 52 FR 27026 (1987). The coalition, which includedthese petitioners, commented on the use of a power of attorney that wouldallow a person to sign the disclosure as the transferor and transfereein the same transaction. The rulemaking record supports our conclusionthat they did have notice and were provided an opportunity to comment onthe power of attorney issue.In any event, the NIADA argument is largely moot insofar as titles heldby lienholders are concerned. Consistent with section 401 of the PipelineSafety Reauthorization Act of 1988, as noted above, we have issued an interimfinal rule amending andSection; 580.5(h) to address the lienholder issue.The interim final rule is published elsewhere in today's <T4>Federal Register</T4>. We have requested comments on the interim finalrule. Following the close of the comment period, NHTSA will publish a noticeresponding to the comments and, if appropriate, NHTSA will amend the provisionsof this rule. Thus, NIADA will have an opportunity to comment.<ITAG tagnum="81">4. The Regulatory Flexibility Act</ITAG>NADA and NIADA requested that the agency reconsider section 580.5(h) andits regulatory flexibility determination. Both petitioners submit thata power regulatory flexibility analysis would include regulatory alternatives.At the time the NPRM and final rule were published, the agency certifiedthat neither rulemaking would have a significant economic impact on a substantialnumber of small entities. No alternatives were presented because the agencycannot impose different requirements on small dealers as opposed to newdealers, or new car dealers as opposed to used car dealers or wholesalers.Odometer fraud is not limited to a particular segment of the automobileindustry. <ITAG tagnum="81">5. Petitioners' Suggested Alternatives </ITAG>The petitioners request, as they did when commenting on the NPRM, thatthe agency permit the use of a special power of attorney. This specialpower of attorney would (1) be set forth by a secure process; (2) containthe appropriate Federal odometer disclosure statement; and (3) be fullycompleted, dated, and signed by the transferee. Upon receipt of the transferor'stitle, the initial transferee would negotiate the title and complete thetransferor's statement based on the transferor's special power of attorneyand mileage disclosure thereon. The title, together with the special powerof attorney and all subsequent reassignments, would be presented to theState with any application for title. We have carefully considered the petitioners' request but have decidedto deny it. We have concluded that granting the request would interferewith the integrity of the paper trail, which Congress intended to enhanceby enacting the Truth in Mileage Act without providing any compensatingcommercial advantages that would outweight the law enforcement concern.The special power of attorney could be easily discarded and a new one forged,since the issuance of the special power of attorney forms would not becontrolled in any way. For the agency to spend resources to investigatewhether the powers of attorneys were, in fact, securely printed when thereis no limit on who could print these documents, would detract from thetime that could be spent on odometer fraud investigations. Indeed, theagency has experienced investigatory problems pursuing cases involvingunsecure powers of attorney. Furthermore, to allow the person granted thepower of attorney to reassign the title and pass along the power of attorneycould result in a subsequent transferor discarding the actual documentand forging a false power of attorney. The petitioners also requested that NHTSA require the States to adopt atwo-part title system or a system that records all lien information oncomputerized recordkeeping systems and allows the registered owner to holdthe title. We have not adopted this alternative. We have allowed the Statesthe maximum administration discretion possible in complying with the Federalrequirements. We note that the States may also petition for approval ofalternative mileage disclosure requirements under section 580.11 of theAugust 1988 final rule. In an interim final rule published in today's <T4>Federal Register</T4>, the agency implements the provisions of thePipeline Safety Reauthorization Act that concerns the use of a secure powerof attorney to disclose mileage. The interim final rule permits a personto sign the disclosure on the title as the transferor and transferee inthe same transaction in certain limited circumstances. Congress' actionaddresses the major problem posed in the petitions and we are implementingthat law. A balance has been struck between the potential problem in thesale of used cars and legitimate enforcement concerns. Except to the extent they are granted in today's interim final rule, NHTSAhas concluded that these petitions have not otherwise provided any reasonablebasis for changing andSection; 580.5(h) of the final rule published on August5, 1988. Accordingly, these petitions are denied.<ITAG tagnum="21">Issued on March 3, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Diane K. Steed, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">National Highway Traffic Safety Administrator. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-5394 Filed 3-6-89; 10:02 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-59-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>