<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89214-0085 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.2-14-89.f2.A1084</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Application No. D-7387 et al.]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Proposed Exemptions; The Equity Real Estate Account of John HancockMutual Life Insurance Company, el al.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of proposed exemptions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This document contains notices of pendency before theDepartment of Labor (the Department) of proposed exemptions from certainof the prohibited transaction restrictions of the Employee Retirement IncomeSecurity Act of 1974 (the Act) and/or the Internal Revenue Code of 1954(the Code).<ITAG tagnum="84">Written Comments and Hearing Requests</ITAG>All interested persons are invited to submit written comments or requestsfor a hearing on the pending exemptions, unless otherwise stated in theNotice of Pendency, within 45 days from the date of publication of this<T4>Federal Register</T4> Notice. Comments and requests for a hearing shouldstate the reasons for the writer's interest in the pending exemption.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>All written comments and requests for a hearing (at leastthree copies) should be sent to the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration,Office of Regulations and Interpretations, Room N-5671, U.S. Departmentof Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20210. Attention:Application No. stated in each Notice of Pendency. The applications forexemption and the comments received will be available for public inspectionin the Public Documents Room of Pension and Welfare Benefit Programs, U.S.Department of Labor, Room N-5507, 200 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington,DC 20210.<ITAG tagnum="84">Notice to Interested Persons</ITAG>Notice of the proposed exemptions will be provided to all interested personsin the manner agreed upon by the applicant and the Department within 15days of the date of publication in the <T4>Federal Register.</T4> Such notice shall include a copy of the noticeof pendency of the exemption as published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> and shall inform interested persons of theirright to comment and to request a hearing (where appropriate).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>The proposed exemptions were requestedin applications filed pursuant to section 408(a) of the Act and/or section4975(c)(2) of the Code, and in accordance with procedures set forth inERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). Effective December31, 1978, section 102 of Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1978 (43 FR 47713,October 17, 1978) transferred the authority of the Secretary of the Treasuryto issue exemptions of the type requested to the Secretary of Labor. Therefore,these notices of pendency are issued solely by the Department.The applications contain representations with regard to the proposed exemptionswhich are summarized below. Interested persons are referred to the applicationson file with the Department for a complete statement of the facts and representations.<ITAG tagnum="75">The Equity Real Estate Account (Account) of John Hancock Mutual LifeInsurance Company, located in Boston, Massachusetts </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(Application No. D-7387) </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Proposed Exemption </ITAG>The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and in accordance with the procedures setforth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemptionis granted, the restrictions of section 406(b)(2) of the Act shall notapply, effective December 30, 1988 through December 31, 1990, to the saleand transfer of certain real estate investments by the Account to JohnHancock Property Fund, a separate account of John Hancock Mutual Life InsuranceCompany (the Company), a party in interest with respect to the plans participatingin the Account, provided that the terms of sale are not less favorableto the Account than those terms obtainable in an arm's length transactionwith an unrelated party at the time of execution of the transaction.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>If granted, this exemption will be effective fromDecember 30, 1988 through December 31, 1990. <ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of Facts and Representations </ITAG>1. The Account was established by a June 9, 1975, vote of the Committeeof Finance of the Company. The Account is maintained as a pooled separateaccount in accordance with the insurance laws of the State of Massachusetts.There are sixty-three pension plans participating in the Account at thistime. As of December 31, 1987, the assets of the Account were valued atapproximately $545,350,000. Most of the plans (the Plans) participatingin the Account are subject to the general fiduciary provisions of the Act(the remainder of the participating plans are governmental plans whichare exempt from Title I of the Act). The Account is composed primarilyof equity real estate investments, both commercial and residential. Someof the investments are structured as joint ventures with an unrelated developeror property manager. 2. The group annuity contracts issued with respect to the Account providethe contract holder with the right to request the withdrawal of part orall of its interest in the Account upon 90 days written notice to the Company,subject to sufficient liquidity in the Account to honor the request. Inthe event that two or more contract holders have withdrawal requests outstandingat the same time, all such contract holders share in the cash flow of theAccount available for distribution. Each contract holder's share is basedon the total dollar amount of its request relative to the total dollaramount attributable to other contract holder requests. 3. Unfavorable economic conditions exist in several geographical areasrepresented in the Account portfolio, and real estate located in theseareas has not performed well in recent years. The Account owns severalproperties in these areas and, as a result, recent Account returns havenot compared favorably with other investment alternatives. Certain of theparticipating Plans representing substantial interests in the Account providedthe Company with written requests for withdrawal. However, in the normalcourse of managing the Account, property sales will not raise enough cashto satisfy the pending withdrawal requests for a number of years. In addition,the Company represents that it is unlikely that new investors would investin the Account in the near future. Therefore, the Company has been facedwith a decision how to act in the best interests of the Plans desiringto withdraw completely as well as the Plans that want to continue to participatein certain Account investments. 4. In response to the above situation, the Company has obtained withdrawalrequests from the remaining Account contract holders and has proposed tosell by December 31, 1990, all of the Account properties to either unrelatedparties or to a new fund established by the Company. The proceeds fromsuch sales will then be distributed to the contract holders on a pro ratabasis. 5. The new fund, John Hancock Properties Fund (the Property Fund), wasestablished effective January 1, 1988 by the Company to acquire certainof the Account properties (the Core Portfolio). Existing Account contractholders desiring to continue participation may choose to reinvest theirshare of distributions from the Account in the Property Fund. The CorePortfolio would provide the Property Fund with properties with a proventrack record, which should be attractrive to new investors. The goal ofthe Property Fund is to outperform the Frank Russell Company Real EstateIndex by at least 10% annually. John Hancock Properties, Inc. (Properties,Inc.), a subsidiary of the company, will be charged with managing the PropertyFund.   6. Plans participating in the Account were informed in writing of the proposedtransfer of Core Portfolio investments and were provided the opportunityto participate in the process of selecting a firm to represent their interests.Representatives of a number of Plans responded affirmatively to the Company'sinvitation and served on a committee which interviewed several firms andselected Cushman andamp; Wakefield (Cushman) to act as an Independent Fiduciaryon behalf of the Plans. Cushman is a nationally-known real estate appraisaland advisory firm. The Company represents that Cushman is not related toor affiliated with the Company. In addition, Cushman has represented inwriting that it did not receive more than one percent of its annual grossreceipts during the past three years from business with the Company.7. Properties, Inc. developed a proposal regarding each asset to be transferredfrom the Core Portfolio. Each transaction would be carried out based onthe current market value of the property. This value will be determinedeach quarter using well established procedures for the appraisal of realestate. Each property is appraised twice annually, once by Properties,Inc. and once by an independent firm.8. The proposal will then be presented to Cushman to review on behalf ofall Plans affected by the transaction. Cushman will be responsible forreviewing all aspects of the procedures used to determine the value tobe paid for such assets by the Property Fund. If deemed necessary, Cushmanwould be authorized to obtain new outside appraisals of the value of theproperty in question. In addition, Cushman will review the suitabilityof each property as an investment for the Property Fund, based on the Statementof Investment Objectives and Constraints (Guidelines) for the PropertyFund. The Guidelines require, inter alia, that all properties acquiredhave at least 3 years of operating history, be located in economicallystable markets and have reasonable anticipation of near term appreciationand yield growth. A copy of the Guidelines will be provided to each prospectivecustomer prior to participation in the Property Fund.9. After reviewing the proposed transaction, Cushman will submit a writtenreport with respect to whether the price to be paid to the Account by theProperty Fund for each property being purchased is equal to its fair marketvalue. This investigation will include an analysis of the valuation proceduresused and the findings of the appraisers. The report will also state whetherin Cushman's opinion the property in question is suitable for the PropertyFund, based on the criteria provided in the Guidelines. The ultimate purposeof Cushman's review is to assure that all sales from the Account to theProperty Fund are in the best interests of all Plans affected by the transaction.10. On December 30, 1988, two of the Account's investments were transferredto the Property Fund. These properties were the Gulf Gate Apartments locatedin Sarasota, Florida and El Mercado Plaza located in Union City, California(the Properties). The sales price for the Properties was $8,725,000 forthe Gulf Gate Apartments and $8,500,000 for El Mercado Plaza. Cushman reviewedthe proposal to sell the Properties to the Property Fund and in a writtenreport determined that the Properties were appropriately suited for theProperty Fund and that the prices to be paid for the Properties was notmore than their fair market values.11. In summary, the applicant represents that the subject transactionssatisfy the statutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because:a. The transfer would permit Account investments to be sold to the PropertyFund, whose management is already familiar with the history and structureof each investment;b. Each investment proposed for transfer to the Property Fund will be reviewedby Cushman, an Independent Fiduciary acting on behalf of the Plans affectedby the transaction;c. Each transfer would only be executed if Cushman determines that theprice paid for the property is its fair market value and that the propertyin question is suitable for the Property Fund;d. The transfer would provide the Account with additional liquidity andhelp the Company to satisfy the outstanding withdrawal requests; ande. There is no sales commission or similar consideration accruing to theCompany or other related parties from the transfer of investments fromthe Account.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Alan H. Levitas of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8194. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="75">ServiceMaster Profit Sharing, Savings and Retirement Plan (the Plan)Located in Downers Grove, IL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(Application No. D-7416)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Proposed Exemption</ITAG>The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsections 406 (a), (b)(1) and (b)(2) and 407 of the Act and the sanctionsresulting from the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason ofsection 4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code shall not apply to: (1)The Plan's proposed one-time acquisition from ServiceMaster Limited Partnership(Employer), the sponsor of the Plan, and, as such, a party in interestwith respect to the Plan, and holding of the Employer's limited partnershipunits (the Units) at a price per Unit which is the lower of: (a) $22.50;or (b) the closing price of the Units as publicly traded on the New YorkStock Exchange (NYSE) on the date of the purchase; provided that the Planhold no greater than 25% of its assets in such Units after acquisitionthereof from the Employer; (2) the contribution to the Plan by the Employerof an irrevocable put option (the Put Option) which permits the Plan tosell the Units to the Employer at a price per Unit of $22.50; and (3) theholding of said Put Option by the Plan.Temporary Nature of the Exemption: The exemption will expire ten yearsfrom the date the exemption is granted.<ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of Facts and Representations</ITAG>1. The Plan is a defined contribution plan which, as of December 31, 1987,held assets of approximately $37,500,000. As of December 31, 1986, thePlan had 3,388 participants. The Plan's trustee is currently the Gary-WheatonBank. The Plan is administered by a committee of three (3) or more persons(the Committee) appointed by ServiceMaster Management Corporation (theCorporate General Partner), which may remove any Committee member at anytime. Each member of the Committee must be an employee or partner of theEmployer or its subsidiaries and may be a Plan participant.2. The Employer is a partnership which provides management support to customersin the health care, industrial, commercial, residential and educationalfields. The Employer succeeds ServiceMaster Industries, Inc. (the Corporation),which was reorganized under the laws of Delaware into partnership form,effective December 30, 1986 (the Reorganization). Under the terms of theReorganization, one share of the Corporation's common stock (the CommonShares) was exchanged for one Unit.Prior to the Reorganization, the Plan provided that all amounts contributedtherein by the Corporation were to be invested in the Common Shares. Untilthe Reorganization, the Plan was almost fully invested (i.e. 99.3%) inthe Common Shares. Effective December 29, 1986, the Plan was amended topreclude investment in employer securities and, on December 29, 1986, thePlan sold its 1,603,489 Common Shares to the Corporation at $22.50 pershare.3. The Employer now proposes to sell to the Plan the number of Units whichwould comprise, immediately after acquisition, 25% of the Plan's assetsat a Unit price the lower of $22.50 (the Reorganization sales price) orthe closing price of the Units as publicly traded on the NYSE on the dateof sale. The applicant represents that it has considered the proposed transactionin terms of section 415 of the Code and has stated that it does not seeany problems with respect to that Code section. The applicant further representsthat voting rights will attach to each Unit and that Plan participantswill be entitled to vote their pro rata number of Units.4. The Units are equity securities entitled to participate pro rata indistributions of Employer funds determined in the sole discretion of theCorporate General Partner. The applicant represents that investment inthe Units is very similar to and, in some instances, more advantageousthan investment in the Common Shares. The Units, like the Common Shares,have met the prerequisites to be listed on the NYSE and are publicly tradedthereon. As with publicly traded corporations, the Employer is subjectto the reporting and disclosure requirements of the Securities ExchangeAct of 1934.The applicant further represents that favorable income tax treatment ofthe Units enables the Employer to make substantially larger cash contributionsto Unit-holders than the Corporation would have been able to pay in dividendson its Common Shares. Moreover, the applicant represents that recent changesin Delaware limited partnership law result in limited partner liabilitythat is essentially the equivalent of a corporate shareholder's liability.5. The Employer also proposes to contribute to the Plan a Put Option exercisableby an independent fiduciary representing the Plan which would permit thePlan to sell to the Employer the Units acquired from the Employer at astrike price per Unit of $22.50. The applicant represents that the PutOption will be irrevocable for the term of the exemption.6. The applicant further represents that Continental Capital ManagementCorporation, a subsidiary of Continental Illinois Bank and Trust Companyof Chicago (Continental), has been appointed the independent fiduciaryfor the Plan concerning the proposed transaction. Continental representsthat the Employer's deposits constitute no more than 1% of its loan businessand that it and the Employer do not share any common directors. Continentalfurther represents that it is an experienced employee benefits trust fiduciarywith approximately $1.6 billion assets under management and a large professionalstaff.7. Continental has reviewed the proposed transactions and has determinedthe following:(a) The Units have been less volatile than the average equity securityand have produced higher than average returns;(b) The investment of 25% of Plan assets in the Units does not create unduerisk to the Plan's portfolio and may, in fact, improve the total portfoliorisk/reward balance;(c) The Units outperformed the average stock during the declining marketof October, 1987, and have demonstrated positive investment characteristics;(d) The Employer's business is varied among several customer segments,which provide for significant diversification and reduce the risk of alarge loss in the Plan's proposed acquisition and holding of the Units;(e) The voting rights characteristic of the Units and Unit-holder liabilityneither diminish the value of the Units nor do they render them less attractivefrom an investment standpoint than shares of common stock;(f) Unit-holder after-tax income has hitherto been greater than the dividendspaid to the Common Shareholders prior to the Reorganization; and(g) The Put Option, with its strike price of $22.50 per Unit, improvesgreatly the risk/reward ratio associated with the Plan's investment inthe Units and is highly beneficial to the Plan.Continental summarizes its analysis by concluding that an investment upto 25% to the Plan's assets in the Units would be prudent under the Act.As independent fiduciary, Continental will continue to review and analyzethe Plan's holding of the Units and will monitor the Units' performanceand the Employer's business outlook. Continental will assume full responsibilityfor determining whether to exercise the Put Option during the term of theproposed exemption. 8. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transactionsmeet the criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because: (a) The Plan'spurchase of the Units will be a one-time transaction; (b) The Plan willhold no greater than 25% of its assets in the Units immediately after acquisitionthereof from the Employer; (c) The Plan will pay no greater than fair marketvalue for the Units; (d) The fair market value of the Units at the timeof the purchase will be determined by the objective standard of the closingprice of the Units on the NYSE; (e) The Plan will receive an additionalsafeguard in the form of an irrevocable Put Option which will enable thePlan, upon the independent fiduciary's decision, to sell the Units backto the Employer at a price of $22.50; (f) Continental has agreed to serveas the Plan's independent fiduciary in connection with the transactionsand has reviewed them and determined that they are in the best interestsof the Plan and its participants; and (g) Continental will monitor theperformance of the Units after the Plan's acquisition thereof to determine,<T3>inter alia,</T3> whether to exercise the Put Option. <ITAG tagnum="84">Tax Consequences of Transaction </ITAG>The Department of the Treasury has determined that if a transaction betweena qualified employee benefit plan and its sponsoring employer (or affiliatethereof) results in the plan either paying less than or receiving morethan fair market value such excess may be considered to be a contributionby the sponsoring employer to the plan and therefore must be examined underapplicable provisions of the Internal Revenue Code, including sections401(a)(4), 404 and 415. For Further Information Contact: Mrs. B.S. Scott of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8194. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="75">Plessey Dynamics Employees Retirement Plan (the Plan) Located in Hillside,New Jersey </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">[Application No. D-7473] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Proposed Exemption </ITAG>The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedures 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsections 406(a) and 406(b) (1) and (2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of 4975(c)(1)(A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to the cash sale of certainreal property (the Property) from the Plan to Plessey Incorporated (Plessey),a party in interest with respect to the Plan, for the greater of $675,000or the fair market value for the Property at the time of sale. <ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of Facts and Representations</ITAG>1. Plessey Dynamics Corporation (the Employer) is a manufacturer of partsfor the aerospace and defense industries. The Employer is a wholly-ownedsubsidiary of Plessey. The plan is a defined benefit pension plan. As ofDecember 31, 1987, the Plan had approximately 162 participants and totalassets (excluding the Property) of around $3.8 million. The Plan is administeredby a retirement committee, the members of which are appointed by the boardof directors of the Employer. 2. On October 1, 1965, the Plan purchased an approximate one-half acreof improved real property located at 1420 Chestnut Avenue, Hillside, NewJersey (the 1420 Property) from unrelated parties for cash in the amountof $138,000. The improvements to the 1420 Property consisted of a single-storyindustrial building, about 40 percent of which is finished as office spaceand the remainder of which was used as a fabrication and laboratory area.On October 2, 1967, the Plan purchased another approximately one-half acreof improved real property adjacent to the 1420 Property (the 1416 Property),also from unrelated parties for cash, in the amount of $118,000. The improvementsto the 1416 Property consisted of a single-story industrial building witha small second-story addition. The area to the rear of the building ispaved and used for parking. The 1420 Property and the 1416 Property togetherare referred to as the Property. 3. The Property has been leased to the Employer pursuant to the terms describedin a previous exemption, Prohibited Transaction Exemption (PTE) 86-2 (51FR 2594, January 17, 1986). PTE 86-2 granted retroactive relief as of December5, 1984, the effective date of the lease agreement. The lease requirescombined rental payments of $6,692 per month. The applicant representsthat all terms of the lease under PTE 86-2 have been met and that all relatedlease payments have been received by the Plan timely and in full. The exemptlease terminated in October 1986. The Employer did not exercise its renewaloption on the lease and moved in May 1986 to new rented facilities in Whippany,New Jersey.\1\<NOTE/> <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ The Department expresses no opinion as to whether Planfiduciaries violated any of the fiduciary responsibility provisions ofPart 4 of Title I of the Act in allowing the Property to remain unused(and producing no income) since the time of lease expiration in October1986. 4. The Plan obtained an appraisal on the Property from Jon P. Brody (Brody),a real estate appraiser located in Livingston, New Jersey. The applicantrepresents that Brody is independent of the Plan and the Employer. Utilizingthe anticipated rental income and comparable sales approaches to value,Brody estimated that as of May 16, 1988, the fair market value of the 1416Property was $420,000 and that of the 1420 Property was $250,000, givinga total fair market value for the Property of $670,000. 5. Plessey owns three buildings on Chestnut Avenue and on Montgomery Streetin Hillside, New Jersey (the Corporate Premises), which are contiguousto the Property. The Property and the Corporate Premises together comprisethe entire Plessey Plant. Integrated Properties, Inc. (IPI), an unrelatedthird party, wishes to purchase the entire Plessey Plant. The Plan hadnegotiated with IPI concerning a sale of the Property to IPI. However,the Employer has been required to design and implement an approved cleanupplan for the entire Plessey Plant under the New Jersey Environmental CleanupResponsibility Act (ECRA) and the Plan has requested that the Employertake responsibility for the cleanup plan. Accordingly, the Plan has determinedthat it would be preferable to sell the Property to Plessey, who in turnproposes to sell the Property to IPI. Plessey has agreed to purchase theProperty from the Plan on terms and conditions that assure that the Planwill not be involved in the cleanup plan or bear any risk or costs associatedwith the ECRA claims. The Plan has negotiated a contract with the assistanceof Leonard D. Furman (Furman), independent fiduciary for the Plan underPTE 86-2, which was entered into on January 9, 1987, for the sale of theProperty. The sale will be a one-time transaction for cash at a price of$675,000. The Plan will pay no transaction costs in connection with thesale. 6. In regard to the exemption granted for the lease of the Property underPTE 86-2, Furman was appointed as an independent fiduciary for the Plan.PTE 86-2 noted that Furman is independent of the Employer and is an attorneyand certified public accountant practicing mainly in the fields of incometaxation, pensions and estate planning. Furman stated that he understandshis duties and liabilities as an independent fiduciary under the Act. Hisduties under PTE 86-2 included reviewing and monitoring the lease of theProperty entered into under that exemption between the Plan and the Employer.Furman states that the Property was listed for sale with various brokersbut could not be sold because of the costly ECRA problems. Furman saysthat he has reviewed the contract for the proposed sale of the Propertyto Plessey and that Plessey will bear any costs resulting from ECRA. Becausethe Property otherwise has produced no income since lease expiration, theEmployer has agreed to make lease payments since October 1986 at the amountthen in effect ($6,692 per month) plus interest at the rate of 10 percentper annum for all rent attributable to the retroactive period through thetime when the Plan no longer owns the Property. Furman has reviewed theindependent appraisal of the Property and believes that the proposed saleto Plessey should be approved. Furman agrees to see that the terms of thesales contract are met on behalf of the Plan. Also, Furman believes thatthe proposed transaction is in the interests of the Plan and is protectiveof its participants and beneficiaries. 7. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transactionswill satisfy the statutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because:(1) The sale of the Property will be entirely for cash and the Plan willpay no transaction costs in regard to the sale; (2) the fair market valueof the Property will be established by an appraiser who is independentof the Plan and the Employer; (3) all the lease payments due under PTE86-2 have been received by the Plan timely and in full; (4) according tothe terms of the sale, the Plan will not bear any of the costs associatedwith the ECRA claims; and (5) an independent fiduciary of the Plan believesthat the sale would be in the interests of the Plan and agrees to see thatthe terms of the sales contract are met on behalf of the Plan.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>For Further Information Contact: </T2>Paul Kelty of the Department,Telephone (202) 523-8883. (This is not a toll-free number.) <ITAG tagnum="85">United Artists Communications, Inc. (Rowley United Division) RetirementPlan (the Plan) Located in Dallas, Texas</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7491]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsections 406(a) and 406(b) (1) and (2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to the sale ofcertain real property (the Property) from the Plan to United Artists Communications,Inc. (the Employer), a party in interest with respect to the Plan, providedthe Plan receives no less than fair market value for the Property at thetime of sale.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Employer is a national motion picture exhibitor which operates theatresin numerous locations throughout the country. The Rowley Division of theEmployer operates theatres throughout the Southern part of the United States.The Plan is a profit sharing plan having approximately 419 participants.The assets of the Plan totaled $3,271,450 as of December 31, 1986. ThePlan has been frozen as to further contributions since September 30, 1987,pending liquidation, distribution of assets and termination.2. The Property consists of approximately 11.1 acres of land located inthe City of Killeen, Bell County, Texas. The Property adjoins a theatrewhich is currently owned and operated by a wholly-owned subsidiary of theEmployer. Of the total land, 2.8 acres are subject to a superior parkingeasement held by the Employer and benefitting the adjacent theatre property.This 2.8 acre parcel is currently used as a parking lot. The remaining8.3 acres of the Property are undeveloped and unencumbered by the parkingeasement.3. The Property is part of an 11.7 acre tract that was purchased by thePlan from an unrelated party in 1969 (prior to passage of the Act) for$90,000 in cash. The Property was purchased as a site for the Plan to builda motion picture theatre. Prior to 1969, the Plan owned a number of motionpicture theatres in Killeen which were leased to and operated by the Employer.The Cinema I and II Theatres and a 2.8 acre parking lot adjoining the theatrewere constructed by the Plan and included in the lease to the Employer.In June 1971 the Plan sold all eight of its Killeen motion picture properties,including the Cinema I and II Theatres, to Magna Pictures Corporation (Magna)which was then a 30 percent owned subsidiary of the Employer (80 percentafter 1981). The eight properties together were sold for a total of $2,560,000.The Property was not included in that sale, except for the 0.5 acre tractcontaining the theatre building, and the Plan retained title to the Property.As further terms of the transaction, Magna was given a perpetual parkingeasement, to accommodate the parking needs of the theatre, over a 2.8 acreparking lot which was part of the Property and Magna obligated itself topay all maintenance expenses and taxes on the parking area.\2\<NOTE/> The consideration paid to the Plan for the parking easementwas an unspecified portion of the $2,560,000 purchase price paid for theKilleen theatre properties.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ The applicant represents that, under Texas law, the grantof such an easement is a common practice when conveying a portion of alarger tract. The applicant represents further that Texas law providesthat the grant of an easement in circumstances like those described inthe application constitutes a sale of an interest in real estate. The grantof the easement was complete and unconditional in 1971 and no rent paymentsor renewals of contracts are involved in the grant of the easement. TheDepartment is expressing no view herein with respect to the granting ofthe subject easement and is proposing no exemptive relief in regard toany prohibited transactions which may have arisen as a result thereof.4. The Plan obtained an appraisal on the Property from Clemo L. Ray, Jr.(Ray) of the Central Texas Appraisal Company in Temple, Texas. The applicantrepresents that Ray is independent of the Plan and of the Employer. InRay's opinion, the existence of the easement on 2.8 acres has somewhatof a detrimental effect on the remaining 8.3 acres of the Property whichcould be developed. Ray believes that the highest and best use of the Propertyat the present time would be that of a holding investment but that eventuallythe Property should be developed for commercial purposes. Ray did not givea premium to the Property due to the existence of the adjacent theatre.Placing emphasis on the comparable sales approach to value and taking intoaccount the easement on the Property, Ray estimated that the fair marketvalue of the Property as of November 16, 1987, was $340,000.\3\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\ By letter dated September 6, 1988, Ray estimated thatthe dollar amount of the effect on the Property due to the easement was$48,000 as of the date of the appraisal.5. In order to further the liquidation of the assets of the Plan, Planfiduciaries propose to sell the Property to the Employer. The Employerwill pay no less than fair market value for the Property at the time ofsale, based on an updated independent appraisal. Also, the Employer willreimburse the Plan at the closing for the appraisal fee of $2,100 whichwas previously paid by the Plan. The transaction will be entirely for cashand the Plan will pay no fees or commissions in regard to the sale.6. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transaction willsatisfy the statutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because: (1)The sale of the Property will be entirely for cash and the Plan will payno fees or commissions in connection with the sale; (2) the Employer willpay no less than fair market value for the Property at the time of sale;(3) the fair market value will be based on an independent appraisal ofthe Property; and (4) the transaction will enable Plan fiduciaries to furtherthe liquidation of the assets of the Plan.For Further Information Contact: Paul Kelty of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8883. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Mid State Machine Products, Inc. Defined Benefit Plan (the Plan) Locatedin Winslow, Maine</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7675]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and in accordancewith the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 184712, April28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions of section 406(a),406(b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resulting from the applicationof section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1)(A) through(E) of the Code shall not apply to the proposed sale by the Plan of certainreal estate limited partnerships and real estate investment trusts (together,the Interests) to Mid State Machine Products, Inc. (the Employer), thesponsor of the Plan, provided that the price paid is the higher of eitherthe Plan's original purchase price for each of the Interests or the fairmarket value of each of the Interests on the date of sale.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan is a defined benefit pension plan which, as of June 15, 1988,had 92 participants and total assets of approximately $80,720. The trusteesof the Plan (the Trustees), and the decision-makers with respect to Planinvestments, are Douglas Sukeforth (Mr. Sukeforth) and his wife, Rita Sukeforth(Ms. Sukeforth), and Barry Stewart (Mr. Stewart). The Plan was establishedin 1979 to provide retirement benefits to employees in addition to thosebenefits provided under the Employer's profit sharing plan. However, benefitaccruals under the Plan were ``frozen'' as of July 7, 1987. The Plan isin the process of being terminated. By letter dated July 5, 1988, the InternalRevenue Service determined that the Plan was qualified upon termination.2. The Employer is a Maine corporation which operates a precision machineshop in Winslow, Maine. Mr. Sukeforth is the President and Treasurer ofthe Employer and owns approximately 60 percent of the stock of the Employer.Ms. Sukeforth is the Corporate Secretary and owns approximately 40 percentof the stock of the Employer. Mr. Steward is an accountant employed bythe Employer.3. The Plan acquired the Interests beginning in 1979 when the Plan wasestablished. The Plan has paid a total of $74,000 for the Interests. TheInterests consist of a variety of shares or units in a total of seven realestate limited partnerships (the Partnerships) and real estate investmenttrusts (the Trusts), which are dispersed as to geographic region and industryinvestment. The Interests represent over half of the assets of the Plan.\4\<NOTE/> The Interests were acquired from unrelated parties eitheron the open market or as part of the initial offering of the particularInterests by the issuer. Neither the Employer, Mr. Sukeforth nor any ofthe other Trustees hold any interests in the Partnerships or Trusts.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\4\ The Department is expressing no opinion as to whetherthe acquisition and holding of the Interests violated any of the provisionsof Part 4 of Title I of the Act.The applicant asserts that since each of the Partnerships and Trusts offeredthe Interests for sale pursuant to a public offering, with the appropriateregistrations under the Securities Acts of 1933 and 1934, and since theInterests are freely transferable and widely-held, none of the Partnershipsor Trusts are considered to hold ``plan assets'' as a result of the investmentby the Plan, or any other employee benefit plan, in the Partnerships orTrusts. Thus, the applicant represents that the assets of the Plan areconsidered to consist solely of the Interests held by the Plan and arenot considered to extend to any interest in the underlying properties ormortgages held by the Partnerships or the Trusts.4. The applicant states that in order to complete the termination of thePlan, the Plan must have sufficient cash to pay the accrued benefit balancesto the participants and beneficiaries. Since the bulk of the Plan's assetsare invested in the Interests, these balances cannot be paid without liquidatingthe Interests.In addition, based on the current fair market value of the Plan's assets,the Plan has accrued liabilities which are in excess of its assets. TheEmployer will be required to make a contribution to the Plan prior to itstermination sufficient to fund all accrued benefits. The amount of theEmployer's required contribution will be determined, among other things,by the price that the Plan receives on the sale of the Interests.Most of the Interests are several years away from maturity. The applicantstates that the Plan could remain in a ``frozen'' status until each ofthe Interests reaches maturity. However, the Trustees believe that terminationof the Plan and the distribution of benefits to the participants and beneficiariesnow is preferable to waiting until all the Interests reach maturity becausetermination of the Plan will eliminate the annual costs attendant uponthe maintenance of the Plan which are borne, in part, by the Plan. TheTrustees state that the intervening costs to the Plan over the next tento fifteen years of maintaining the Plan in a ``frozen'' status would likelyoutweigh any benefit in investment gains on the Interests which may beexperienced during that time.5. The applicant states that while the Interests are publicly-traded securitieswhich are freely transferable and widely-held, almost all of the Interestsare traded very thinly and are fairly illiquid investments. The marketvalue of the Interests has declined since the time of the Plan's acquisitionof the Interests. The Trustees believe that the Plan could incur substantiallosses, as well as commissions and other related expenses, if the Planattempted to sell the Interests on the open market to unrelated parties.Therefore, the Employer proposes to purchase the Interests from the Planat a price which will be the higher of either the Plan's original purchaseprice for each of the Interests or the fair market value of each of theInterests, as established by an independent, qualified appraiser. The Planwould not pay any commissions or other expenses with respect to the sale.6. A.G. Edwards andamp; Sons, Inc. (Edwards) of Portland, Maine, has providedan independent assessment of the fair market value of the Interests (theAppraisal). Edwards is an investment firm experienced in securities analysisand market research. Edwards states that it has no prior relationship witheither the Plan or the Employer. In addition, none of the Interests heldby the Plan were purchased through Edwards.The Appraisal provides a valuation of the Interests according to the mostcurrent prices available as of May 12, 1988. Based on the Appraisal, thetotal fair market value of the Interests was $43,205, as of that date.By letter dated June 1, 1988, Peter M. Shaw (Mr. Shaw), an investment brokerwith Edwards, provided a further analysis of the Interests. Mr. Shaw statesthat the Interests in the Trusts are all traded on the national securitiesexchanges and that obtaining a current market value for these Interestsis not a problem. In addition, the Interests in the Partnerships are limitedpartnership units which are traded on the National Partnership Exchange(NAPEX). NAPEX is an exchange which provides a secondary market for thetrading of publicly-registered limited partnership interests. The Appraisalof the Interests in the Partnerships is based on information obtained fromNAPEX.7. In the proposed transaction, the Plan will receive the higher of eitherthe current fair market value of the particular Interest, as determinedby Edwards in accordance with the latest prices on the appropriate securitiesexchanges of NAPEX, or the Plan's original purchase price for the particularInterest. The applicant states that the Appraisal will be updated by Edwards,as of the date of sale, to obtain the most current market values for theInterests.8. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transaction willsatisfy the statutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because: (a)The sale will be a one-time transaction for cash; (b) the Plan will receivea price which will be the higher of either the fair market value of eachof the Interests, as established by an independent appraiser, or the Plan'soriginal purchase price for each of the Interests; (c) the Plan will notpay any commissions or other expenses with respect to the sale; and (d)the transaction will allow a prompt termination of the Plan and a distributionof the Plan's assets to the participants and beneficiaries.For Further Information Contact: Mr. E.F. Williams of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8883. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Barber and Lundberg Profit Sharing Plan and Trust (the Plan) Locatedin Oklahoma City, Oklahoma </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7788]</ITAG>Proposed Exemption The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a), 406 (b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code shall not apply to a proposed loannot to exceed $300,000 by the Plan to Barber and Lundberg, Inc. (the Employer),the sponsor of the Plan; provided that all terms of such loan are at leastas favorable to the Plan as those which the Plan could obtain in an arm's-lengthtransaction with an unrelated party. Summary of Facts and Representations 1. The Plan is a defined contribution pension plan with fourteen participantsand total assets of $1,206,733 as of December 31, 1987. The Employer isa closely-held Oklahoma corporation engaged in wholesale marketing of veterinaryand animal health supplies in Oklahoma City, Oklahoma. The trustee of thePlan is Van Barber, a shareholder, officer and employee of the Employer.2. The Employer recently arranged for the construction of a new officeand warehouse facility (the Building) on Employer-owned property (the Land)to serve as a new and larger principal place of business. Interim, short-termconstruction financing was secured by the Employer to enable the constructionof the Building. The Employer seeks to retire the short-term constructionfinancing in part by security a loan (the Loan) from the Plan and is requestingan exemption to permit the Loan under the terms and conditions describedherein. 3. The Employer proposes to borrow from the Plan the lesser of (1) $300,000or (2) twenty-five percent of the Plan's assets at the time of the Loantransaction. As security for the Loan, the Employer will grant to the Plana duly filed and perfected first mortgage on the Building and the Land.The Land is a commercially-zoned 1.5 acre parcel of real property locatedat 212 Ann Arbor Drive in Oklahoma City and the Building is a concretepanel commercial building with approximately 14,438 square feet of officeand warehouse space. As of September 7, 1988 the Land and Building hada fair market value of $450,000, according to Patrick O. Glenn, MAI, anindependent professional real estate appraiser in Oklahoma City. The Loan will be evidenced by a promisory note (the Note) in favor of thePlan which provides for repayment of the Loan over twenty years in equalmonthly installments of principal plus interest at an annually-adjustedrate of one percent above the prime commercial rate as announced and chargedby Citibank, N.A. of New York City. The Note provides that the entire outstandingprincipal amount of the Loan, plus accrued interest, shall become due andpayable at the Note holder's option in the event any monthly installmentdue thereunder is not paid when due. The Note further provides that theentire indebtedness due thereunder will be immediately due and payableupon any sale or transfer of the Land or Building by the Employer, unlessthe Note holder has consented to such sale or transfer in writing. TheNote requires the Employer to bear all costs and expenses, including butnot limited to reasonable attorney's fees, which are incurred in the eventof a lawsuit to collect from the Employer under the Note. 4. The interests of the Plan with respect to the proposed Loan are representedby the Dozier Company (the Fiduciary), an Oklahoma City-based pension servicescorporation which represents that it has substantial fiduciary experienceunder the Act. The Fiduciary represents that it is independent of and unrelatedto the Employer except as consultant to certain of the Employer's qualifiedemployee benefit plans and that fees received from the Employer for suchconsultative services represent less than one percent of the total feesreceived by the Fiduciary. The Fiduciary has agreed to act in a fiduciarycapacity on behalf of the Plan with respect to all aspects of the proposedLoan for its duration, to monitor and enforce the Employer's performanceof all Loan terms and to initiate remedies, if necessary, on behalf ofthe Plan in case of any default by the Employer on any Loan obligation.The Fiduciary represents that the proposed Loan will constitute an enhancementof the Plan's investment returns by providing the highest rate of returnwhich can be realized. The Fiduciary states that the proposed Loan's interestrate is no less than the prevailing market rates charges by local commerciallenders for equivalent loans. The Fiduciary states that it will requirethe Employer to provide proof of insurance and payment of taxes on theLand and Building and that it will ensure that the Employer keeps the Landand Building in adequate condition for the duration of the Loan. 5. David Shaefer (Shaefer), vice president of The Oklahoma Bank (the Bank)in Oklahoma City, offers a statement establishing that the Employer isin good credit standing as a preferred customer of the Bank and that theEmployer has a record of successful performance under numerous loan arrangementswith the Bank since 1973. Shaefer states that the proposed terms of theLoan constitute terms under which the Bank, subject to committee approval,could extend credit to the Employer under the same circumstances as thoseof the proposed Loan. 6. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transaction satisfiesthe criteria of section 408(a) of the Act for the following reasons: (1)The Loan will be secured by a first mortgage on real property collateral,the Land and Building, having an appraised value of 150 percent of theprincipal of the Loan; (2) The Loan principal will not exceed twenty-fivepercent of the Plan's assets at the time of the Loan; (3) The Plan's interestsunder the proposed Loan are represented by the Fiduciary, which will monitorand enforce the Employer's performance of Loan obligations and will ensurethe Employer's adequate maintenance of the Land and Building as collateral;(4) The Plan will earn interest at a rate of one percentage point abovethe prime rate charged by Citibank, N.A. of New York, a rate of returnwhich the Fiduciary represents to be no less than the applicable marketrates charged by local lenders for equivalent loans; and (5) The Note whichevidences the Loan enables acceleration of the Loan in the event of anydefault or any transfer of the Land or Building by the Employer and requiresthe Employer to bear all expenses incurred in any suit for enforcementof Loan terms. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>For Further Information Contact:</T2> Ronald Willett of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="84">General Information   </ITAG>The attention of interested persons is directed to the following:   (1) The fact that a transaction is the subject of an exemption under section408(a) of the Act and/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code does not relievea fiduciary or other party in interest or disqualified person from certainother provisions of the Act and/or the Code, including any prohibited transactionprovisions to which the exemption does not apply and the general fiduciaryresponsibility provisions of section 404 of the Act, which among otherthings require a fiduciary to discharge his duties respecting the plansolely in the interest of the participants and beneficiaries of the planand in a prudent fashion in accordance with section 404(a)(1)(B) of theAct; nor does it affect the requirement of section 401(a) of the Code thatthe plan must operate for the exclusive benefit of the employees of theemployer maintaining the plan and their beneficiaries;   (2) Before an exemption may be granted under section 408(a) of the Actand/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code, the Department must find that theexemption is administratively feasible, in the interests of the plan andof its participants and beneficiaries and protective of the rights of participantsand beneficiaries of the plan; and   (3) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be supplemental to, and notin derogation of, any other provisions of the Act and/or the Code, includingstatutory or administrative exemptions and transitional rules. Furthermore,the fact that a transaction is subject to an administrative or statutoryexemption is not dispositive of whether the transaction is in fact a prohibitedtransaction.   (4) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be subject to the expresscondition that the material facts and representations contained in eachapplication are true and complete, and that each application accuratelydescribes all material terms of the transaction which is the subject ofthe exemption.<ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, this 9th day of February, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Robert J. Doyle,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director of Regulations and Interpretations, Pension and Welfare BenefitsAdministration, U.S. Department of Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-3430 Filed 2-13-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4510-29-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>