<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89918-0121 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.9-18-89.f2.A1120</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 179 / Monday, September 18, 1989/ Notices<ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Office of Public and Indian Housing</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. N-89-2036; FR-2675]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Public Housing Drug Elimination Program; Notice of Fund Availability</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>agency:</T2> Office of Public and Indian Housing, HUD.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>action:</T2> Notice of fund availability.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>summary:</T2> HUD is announcing the availability of $8,200,000 in grantfunds appropriated by the Dire Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act(Pub. L. 101-45, approved June 30, 1989). These funds are to be used ina manner consistent with the requirements of the Public Housing Drug EliminationAct of 1988 to provide grants to Public Housing Agencies (PHAs) and IndianHousing Authorities (IHAs) to eliminate drug-related crime in public housingprojects. To receive funding under the program, PHAs and IHAs are requiredto develop a plan for addressing drug-related crime, and to indicate howassisted activities will further the plan. Grant funds may be used forthe following activities designed to eliminate drug-related crime: (1)Employment of security personnel and investigators; (2) reimbursement oflocal law enforcement agencies for the cost of providing additional securityand protective services; (3) physical improvements designed to enhancesecurity in public housing projects; (4) support of public housing tenantpatrols acting in cooperation with local law enforcement agencies; (5)innovative programs to reduce drug use in and around public housing projects;and (6) funding of Resident Management Corporations (RMCs) and ResidentCouncils (RCs) to develop security and drug abuse prevention programs involvingsite residents.HUD recently published a proposed rule for the Public Housing Drug Eliminationprogram, most of the requirements of which are contained in this NOFA.However, the Department has made a number of revisions in this NOFA tothe proposed rule requirements, and the public is invited to submit commentson these provisions. In developing the final rule for the program, HUDwill consider the public comments received on both the proposed rule andthis NOFA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>effective date:</T2> The requirements contained in this NOFA are effectiveas of September 18, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2> date:</T2> Public comments on the NOFA must be received by November17, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>address:</T2> Interested persons are invited to submit comments tothe Office of the General Counsel, Rules Docket Clerk, Room 10276, Departmentof Housing and Urban Development, 451 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC20410. Comments should refer to the above docket number and title. A copyof each communication submitted will be available for public inspectionand copying during regular business hours (weekdays 7:30 a.m. to 5:30 p.m.)at the above address.As a convenience to commenters, the Rules Docket Clerk will accept briefpublic comments transmitted by facsimile (``FAX'') machine. The telephonenumber of the FAX receiver is (202) 755-2575. Only public comments of sixor fewer total pages will be accepted via FAX transmittal. This limitationis necessary to assure reasonable access to the equipment. Comments sentby FAX in excess of six pages will not be accepted. Receipt of FAX transmittalswill not be acknowledged, except that the sender may request confirmationof receipt by calling the Rules Docket Clerk at (202) 755-7084. (Neitherof the telephone numbers listed in this paragraph is toll-free.)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>application deadline:</T2> Applications must be received by 5:15 p.m.,Eastern Standard Time, on November 2, 1989, or postmarked no later thanNovember 2, 1989, at the Department of Housing and Urban Development, Room4110, 451 Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 20410, Attention: Howard Mortman,Office of Public and Indian Housing. A copy of the application materialsshould be simultaneously forwarded to the HUD Field Office with jurisdictionover the PHA or IHA, Attention: Director, Assisted Housing Branch.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>for further information contact: </T2>Howard Mortman, Office of Publicand Indian Housing, Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 SeventhStreet SW., Room 4110, Washington, DC 20410, telephone (202) 755-3611.(This is not a toll-free number).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>supplementary information:</T2> The information collection requirementscontained in this Notice of Fund Availability (NOFA) have been approvedby the Office of Management and Budget under the Paperwork Reduction Actof 1980, and have been assigned OMB control number 2577-0124. Public reportingburden for the collection of information requirements contained in thisNOFA are estimated to include the time for reviewing the instructions,searching existing data sources, gathering and maintaining the data needed,and completing and reviewing the collection of information. Informationon the estimated public reporting burden is provided at section 4.4 ofthis NOFA under <T3>Other Matters.</T3> Send comments regarding this burden estimate, orany other aspect of this collection of information, including suggestionsfor reducing this burden, to the Department of Housing and Urban Development,Rules Docket Clerk, 451 Seventh Street SW., Room 10276, Washington, DC20410; and to the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, Officeof Management and Budget, Washington, DC 20503.<ITAG tagnum="84">I. Background</ITAG>The Dire Emergency Supplemental Appropriations Act (Pub. L. 101-45, approvedJune 30, 1989) appropriated $8,200,000 for grants for use in eliminatingdrug-related crime in public housing projects. That Act requires appropriatedfunds to be used in a manner consistent with the requirements of the PublicHousing Drug Elimination Act of 1988.Congress authorized the Public Housing Drug Elimination Program under chapter2, subtitle C, title V of the Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988 (Pub. L. 100-690,approved November 19, 1988) (``the Act''). The Act authorizes HUD to makegrants to public housing agencies (PHAs) and Indian Housing Authorities(IHAs) to eliminate drug-related crime in selected public housing projects.The Department published a proposed rule for the program on June 21, 1989(54 FR 26154). The majority of the proposed rule requirements are reflectedin this NOFA announcing the availability of the $8,200,000 appropriation.However, the Department is requesting public comment on those provisionsof the NOFA that differ from the requirements of the proposed rule. HUDwill consider the comments on the NOFA and the proposed rule when it developsthe final rule for the program.<ITAG tagnum="84">II. Implementation of the Program</ITAG>The Public Housing Drug Elimination Program provides grant funds to PHAsand IHAs for a number of eligible activities designed to reduce the incidenceof drug-related crime in public housing projects.A. Entities eligible to participate In general, a PHA or IHA may undertake any of the eligible activities underthis program or it may contract with a qualified third party, includingResident Management Corporations (RMCs) and Resident Councils (RCs). Ifneither an RMC or RC exists, the Department encourages PHAs and IHAs toshare with an organized group of project residents the development of thegrant application and the management or operation of the program. However,it should be noted that the only tenant organizations that may receivefunds as subgrantees under this program are RMCs or RCs; other organizedgroups of project residents may share with the PHA or IHA in the managementor operation of the program, but may not receive funds as subgrantees.An RMC under this NOFA must comply with the requirements of 24 CFR part964 (as amended on September 7, 1988, see 53 FR 34676). In the case ofan IHA, the RMC or RC must meet the requirements of section 1.3 of thisnotice. However, to increase the ability of PHAs to combat drug-relatedcriminal activity in their projects, RCs as well as RMCs will be permittedto undertake any of the functions specified under this NOFA (includingany of the eligible activities at section 2.1), notwithstanding the otherwiseapplicable requirements of 24 CFR part 964. Subgrants or cash contributions to RMCs or RCs may be made only under awritten agreement executed between the PHA and the RMC or RC. The agreementmust include a project budget that is acceptable to the PHA, and that isotherwise consistent with the PHA's grant application budget. In addition,the agreement must obligate the RMC or RC to permit the PHA to inspectand audit the RMC or RC financial records related to the agreement, andto account to the PHA on the use of grant funds, and on the implementationof project activities. The PHA shall be responsible for monitoring, and for providing technicalassistance to, any subgrantee to ensure compliance with HUD program requirements,including OMB Circular Nos. A-110 and A-122, which apply to the acceptanceand use of assistance by private nonprofit organizations. The PHA mustalso ensure that subgrantees are covered under the PHA's liability, orother equivalent, insurance.B. Eligible activities Grant amounts may only be used for the activities listed below, and forincidental costs related to carrying out these activities, provided thePHA or IHA has a cost allocation plan in place.<ITAG tagnum="81">1. Security personnel </ITAG>Security personnel may be employed under section 2.1(a) of this NOFA topatrol public housing projects and to carry out drug-related security functions.Security personnel employed with assistance under this NOFA may respondto incidents that are not drug-related if they become aware of these incidentsin the course of carrying out their drug-related duties. It should be noted that any security personnel employed under this provision,or any investigators employed under section 2.1(d), are required as a conditionof employment to meet all relevant local, State or tribal training, licensing,or other similar, requirements.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Additional security and protective services </ITAG>Grant funds may be used to reimburse local law enforcement agencies forthe cost of providing additional security and protective services for publichousing projects under this NOFA. The Department construes ``additional''to mean that Federal grant funds may not be used to supplant existing fundinglevels for security services to a project. Consequently, the security andprotective services under this provision must be either: (i) A service that no local law enforcement agency (or agencies) providedfor public housing projects administered by the grantee immediately beforethe publication of this Notice of Fund Availability; or (ii) A quantifiable increase in the level of an ongoing service above thatwhich the local law enforcement agency (or agencies) provided for publichousing projects administered by the grantee immediately before the publicationof this Notice of Fund Availability. An example of a service that might be encompassed under this provisionis the reimbursement of local law enforcement agencies for extra patrolsof a project. Services to be provided with grant funds should be over and above thosefor which the local government is already contractually obligated underits Cooperation Agreement with the PHA. This requirement stems from thelocality's obligation under the Cooperation Agreement to furnish to thePHA public services and facilities that are comparable to those providedat no cost or at a comparable cost to the general community. The executionof this Cooperation Agreement between the governing body and the PHA constitutesa condition for initial approval for project development and the Federalassistance commitments under the Annual Contributions Contract. (<T3>See</T3> 24 CFR 941.201(c) and the definition of ``Cooperation Agreement''under 24 CFR 941.103.) Consequently, applications for grants under this NOFA must address theissue of whether the local governing body is meeting its obligations underthe Cooperation Agreement, particularly as to law enforcement. While dueconsideration will be given to special circumstances, the Department willassess this factor in determining whether a locality supports the PHA'santi-drug related crime efforts. (See section 3.6(b)(4)). <ITAG tagnum="81">3. Physical improvements designed to enhance security </ITAG>The Act authorizes the use of grant funds for physical improvements specificallydesigned to enhance security in public housing projects. These improvementsmight include (but are not limited to) the installation of lighting systems,bolts, or locks inside, or on the grounds of, selected projects, or thereconfiguration of common areas to discouarge drug-related crime. Suchimprovements may not involve the demolition of any public housing units.A PHA may not use grant funds under this NOFA for any physical improvementsthat would result in the displacement of persons. It should be noted that because physical improvements for public housingprojects are eligible under special purpose modernization and comprehensivemodernization, the Department does not expect this program to be a primaryvehicle for physical improvements. Note also that under section 12 of the United States Housing Act of 1937,the employment of certain workers in connection with physical improvementsrelating to the development of a public housing project, or the employmentof certain workers in connection with carrying out non-routine maintenancein a project, requires the PHA to pay certain prevailing wage rates. Section4.3(a) of the NOFA should be consulted for further guidance on these requirements.<ITAG tagnum="81">4. Employment of investigators </ITAG>A PHA may employ individuals to investigate drug-related crime on or aboutthe real property comprising the public housing project and to provideevidence relating to such crimes in any administrative or judicial proceedings.As discussed earlier, any investigators employed under section 2.1(d) ofthis NOFA are required as a condition of employment to meet any local,State or tribal licensing, training, or other similar, requirements.<ITAG tagnum="81">5. Public housing tenant patrols </ITAG>A PHA may use grant funds to provide training, communications equipment,and other related equipment (including uniforms), for use by voluntarypublic housing tenant patrols acting in cooperation with officials of locallaw enforcement agencies. PHAs are advised to obtain liability insurance relating to the tenant patrolsorganized under this section. Although the cost of such insurance is notan eligible expense under this program, it may be paid for out of a PHA'sor IHA's operating subsidies.<ITAG tagnum="81">6. Innovative programs to reduce the use of drugs </ITAG>Section 5124(6) of the Act provides for the use of grant funds for ``innovativeprograms'' to reduce the use of drugs in and around public housing projects.The Department will construe the term ``innovative'' to mean that the programuses a new or creative approach to accomplish this statutory objective.A PHA, RMC or RC may use grant funds under this section to develop andoperate, or to contract for services to provide, innovative drug education,intervention, referral, and outreach efforts. Grant funds may also be usedfor innovative strategies to prevent drug-related crime, including recreational,vocational, educational and other constructive alternatives for youth andfamilies.<ITAG tagnum="81">7. Resident Management Corporations and Resident Councils </ITAG>Grant funds may be provided by a grantee to RMCs and RCs to develop securityand drug abuse prevention programs involving site residents. These programsmay include (but are not limited to) the development of law enforcementstrategies, drug education and treatment, counseling, referral, leadershiptraining, security patrols, and outreach efforts.IHAs that seek funding for this category of eligible activities must havein place an RMC or RC that meets the requirements specified at section1.3 (see definitions of ``Resident Management Corporation'' and ``ResidentCouncil''). An RMC or RC established under this provision is only recognizableby HUD for purposes of the Public Housing Drug Elimination program. <ITAG tagnum="84">III. Requirement of a Plan </ITAG>As a condition of funding, section 5125(a) of the Act requires PHAs andIHAs to submit a grant application to HUD that includes a plan addressingthe problem of drug-related crime on the premises of projects proposedfor assistance. (See section 3.3.) While this plan is not intended to be an exhaustive document, it must addresseach of the following elements: (1) An assessment of the nature and extentof the problem of drug-related crime, and the problems associated withdrug-related crime; (2) the current activities being undertaken by thePHA or IHA, the State, tribal or local government, and RMCs and RCs orother organized groups of project residents to address the drug-relatedcrime problem; and (3) a realistic strategy for responding to the problemof drug-related crime. It should be noted that while the Act refers to ``drug-related crime''under the plan provision at section 5125(a), and simply to ``crime'' underselection criteria at section 5125(b) (1), (2) and (4), the Departmentbelieves that Congress intended to limit the scope of the program to drug-relatedcrime. As a result, the program generally reflects this interpretation.One exception is that the plan asks for an assessment not only of the problemof drug-related crime, but also of the problems associated with drug-relatedcrime. Such ``associated'' problems might include homicides, muggings,burglaries, and incidents of vandalism resulting from drug-related crimein the projects. The Department believes that this information is vitalto obtain an accurate assessment of the drug-related crime problem in theprojects proposed for assistance under this program. <ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Rating Factors </ITAG>To qualify for a grant, PHAs and IHAs must submit an application that meetsthe requirements of section 3.5 (including the plan under section 3.3).Applications will be evaluated on the basis of the selective rating criteriaat section 3.6(b). These criteria include: (1) The extent of the drug-relatedcrime problem in the applicant's targeted projects; (2) the quality ofthe plan under section 3.3; (3) the applicant's capability to carry outits plan; and (4) the extent to which the local government and local communitysupport the applicant's anti-drug-related crime activities. With respect to the third rating criterion, HUD will determine an applicant'scapability to carry out its plan on the basis of several factors, includingits administrative capability to manage its projects. Administrative capabilitywill be determined in accordance with the requirements of the Annual ContributionsContract executed between HUD and the PHA or IHA, and the relevant programregulations (see 24 CFR parts 905 and 941). The second rating criterion assesses the quality of the applicant's planbased upon the extent to which the information provided by the applicantis accurate and complete, and the plan strategy is realistic and attainable.In addition, the Department provides additional points under this criterion(see section 3.6(b)(2)(B)) based upon the extent of RMC or RC involvementin the development of the grant application, and the extent to which anRMC or RC will assume substantial management responsibilities under thePHA's plan. If neither an RMC or RC exists, the Department will assessinstead the extent to which an organized group of project residents willshare with the applicant in the development of the grant application andin the management or operation of the program. Applicants will be evaluated on the four rating criteria of section 3.6(b),with each rating factor assigned up to a maximum of 25 points. An applicantmay obtain up to an additional 15 points under section 3.6(b)(2)(B) basedupon the extent of RMC, RC or other organized tenant participation as describedabove. Applicants will then be ranked based upon their total selectiverating score, and grants will be awarded to the highest-ranked applicants.<ITAG tagnum="84">V. Encouragement of Tenant Participation </ITAG>While this program is intended to provide grants to PHAs and IHAs, theDepartment strongly encourages the participation of project residents,and especially of RMCs and RCs, in the effort to combat drug-related crime.Specifically, section 3.6(b)(2)(B) provides maximum rating points to anapplicant that establishes that its grant application, including its plan,was prepared in cooperation with its RMC or RC, and that an RMC or RC willhave substantial program management responsibilities under the PHA's plan.If neither an RMC or RC exists, HUD will assess instead the extent to whichan organized group of project residents will share with the PHA or IHAin the development of the grant application and in the management or operationof the program. Tenant participation is especially critical in implementing certain aspectsof the program, including implementation of the voluntary tenant patrolsunder section 2.1(e), and the development by RMCs or RCs of the securityand drug abuse prevention programs involving site residents under section2.1(g). <ITAG tagnum="84">VI. NOFA Provisions </ITAG>As discussed above, this NOFA largely duplicates the requirements of theproposed rule published on June 21, 1989. However, the NOFA does containa number of provisions that are different from the proposed rule requirements.The public is invited to submit comments on these provisions, which include:1. In the proposed rule, HUD indicated that maximum rating points wouldbe awarded in the grant selection process to a PHA that demonstrates thatits grant application, including its plan, was prepared in cooperationwith its RMC or RC, and that an RMC or RC would have substantial programmanagement responsibilities under the plan. HUD indicated that the RMC/RCpreference would not be applied to IHA applicants since IHAs are not coveredby the Department's tenant participation regulations (24 CFR part 964)and typically do not have RMCs or RCs. As a result, the proposed rule wouldhave established a dual rating process, with PHAs evaluated and rankedin one category and IHA applicants separately evaluated and ranked. Under a separate provision of the proposed rule, HUD would have had thediscretion to ensure an equitable distribution of grant funds among thetop-rated PHA and IHA applicants. The proposed grant selection process is revised in this NOFA to providethat if an RMC or RC does not exist, the Department will nevertheless permitan applicant to obtain up to the maximum preference points. In such instances,the actual number of points awarded will depend upon the extent to whichan organized group of project residents will share with the PHA or IHAin the development of the grant application and in the management or operationof the program. (See sections 3.5(a)(11)(b) and 3.6(b)(2)(B) of this NOFA.)Because this expanded language on tenant participation can be satisfiedby either a PHA or an IHA, the Department is eliminating both the proposedrule's dual rating system, and the provision that would have allowed HUDto equitably distribute grant funds among the top-ranked PHA and IHA applicants.Instead, PHAs and IHAs will be rated on the same four criteria, includingtenant participation, with grants being awarded to the top-rated applicants.In addition, this NOFA eliminates the proposed provision that would haveprovided for the equitable geographical distribution of grant funds betweenurban and rural areas, and between housing agencies of varying sizes. Instead,the Department will make its grant awards solely on the basis of the statutoryselection criteria. (See section 3.6(a) of this NOFA for a discussion ofthe revised rating process.) 2. In the proposed rule, HUD provided definitions from 24 CFR part 964for the terms, ``resident management corporation'' and ``resident council''.These definitions set out the requirements for establishing RMCs and RCsin public housing projects. However, because part 964 does not cover IHAs,the Department also included under these definitions an abbreviated setof requirements for RMCs and RCs serving Indian housing projects. For pruposesof consistency and tenant accountability, this NOFA eliminates the modifiedrequirements for Indian RMCs and RCs, and applies instead the uniform part964 definitions. (See section 1.3.) 3. This NOFA establishes a maximum grant amount of $100,000 for PHAs andIHAs with 500 units or less. For PHAs and IHAs with more than 500 units,the maximum grant amount is $250,000. (<T3>See</T3> section 2.2.) 4. Under section II(B)(3) of the preamble to this NOFA, the Departmentnotes that since physical improvements are eligible under special purposemodernization as well as comprehensive modernization, this program is notexpected to be a primary vehicle for physical improvements. 5. HUD has made a number of changes to the plan requirements under section3.3. Because of the revised language on tenant participation, the Departmentis requesting information not only on RMC and RC involvement, but alsoon the involvement of organized groups of project residents. (<T3>See </T3>sections 3.3(b)(2) and 3.3(b)(3)(vi).) HUD is also requesting information concerning the financial resources thatthe applicant expects to be available from other drug elimination grantprograms to carry out its plan strategy (section 3.3(b)(3)(ii)), and theresources that will be available to continue the anti-drug-related crimeeffort at the conclusion of the grant term (section 3.3(b)(3)(v)). Under the proposed rule, applicants were asked to provide their plans anassessment of the nature and extent of the problem of drug-related crime,and the problems associated with drug-related crime in the projects theyadminister. In this NOFA (at section 3.3(b)(1)), HUD is requiring as partof that assessment that applicants also provide a description of otherbaseline conditions existing in the projects proposed for assistance, measuresthat the applicant believes to be important in evaluating the success ofthe plan, a discussion of the types of information the PHA will need tomeasure the plan's success, and the method by which the applicant willgather and analyze this information. The Department believes this informationto be vital in assessing the program's impact on the problem of drug-relatedcrime in projects selected for funding. 6. The NOFA requires any security personnel or investigators employed undersections 2.1 (a) and (d), as a condition of employment, to meet all relevantlocal, State or tribal training, licensing, or other similar requirements.7. Some of the selective rating criteria contained in the proposed rulehave been modified in this NOFA. In assessing the quality of an applicant'splan under section 3.6(b)(2)(A), HUD will consider the resources that mayreasonably be expected to be available to address the drug-related crimeproblem at the end of the grant term. Under section 3.6(b)(3), the Department is clarifying that, in assessingan applicant's capability to carry out its plan, HUD will consider as oneof the factors the applicant's ability to obtain local and other non-HUDfunding or other commitments of support for the plan. The proposed rulehad not specified the nature of the funding sources under this provision.HUD is also including as an additional factor in assessing an applicant'scapability to carry out its plan the recommendations of the local HUD fieldoffice (section 3.6(b)(3)). 8. Under section 3.5(a)(11)(a), HUD is making a technical correction toprovide that an RMC or RC submit a certification that the grant application(including the plan under section 3.3) was jointly prepared with the applicant.The proposed rule inadvertently required the RMC or RC to certify onlythat the plan was jointly prepared with the applicant. 9. A new provision has been added at section 3.5(a)(13) requiring granteesto certify that they will collect, maintain and provide to HUD such additionaldata as may be required for the Department to assess the effectivenessof this grant program. Details on the nature of this assessment will beprovided to grantees at a later date. 10. Section 3.1 of the NOFA provides that grant applications should besubmitted to HUD by November 2, 1989. The Department is also requiringthat a copy of the application materials be forwarded to the HUD fieldoffice with jurisdiction over the PHA or IHA, Attention: Director, AssistedHousing Branch. In assessing the applicant's capability to carry out itsplan, HUD will give particular consideration under section 3.6(b)(3) tothe recommendations of the local HUD field office. 11. The NOFA provides that the maximum grant term generally should notexceed 24 months. (Section 4.1(c).) 12. A new provision is added at section 4.1 relating to subgrants. Thatsection provides that the only tenant organizations that may receive fundsas subgrantees under this program are RMCs or RCs. Other organized groupsof project residents may share with the PHA or IHA in the management oroperation of the program, but may not receive funds as subgrantees. In addition, section 4.1(b) provides that subgrants or cash contributionsto RMCs or RCs may be made only under a written agreement executed betweenthe PHA and the RMC or RC. The agreement must include a project budgetthat is acceptable to the PHA, and that is otherwise consistent with thePHA's grant application budget. In addition, the agreement must obligatethe RMC or RC to permit the PHA to inspect and audit the RMC or RC financialrecords related to the agreement, and to account to the PHA for the useof grants funds, and on the implementation of project activities. The PHA is responsible for monitoring, and for providing technical assistanceto, any subgrantee to ensure compliance with HUD program requirements,including OMB Circular Nos. A-110 and A-122 which apply to the acceptanceand use of assistance by private nonprofit organizations. The PHA mustalso ensure that a subgrantee is covered under the PHA's liability, orother equivalent, insurance.13. The NOFA includes a provision at section 2.1(e) advising PHAs and IHAsto obtain liability insurance relating to any voluntary tenant patrolsestablished under this program. While the cost of such insurance is notan eligible expense under this grant program, it may be paid for out ofa PHA's or IHA's operating subsidies.14. Section 1.1 is revised to clarify the purposes of this drug program,which include: (1) The elimination of drug-related crime on or about thereal property comprising the public housing project; (2) the encouragementof PHAs and IHAs to develop a plan for addressing the problem of drug-relatedcrime on the premises of the projects proposed for funding under this NOFA;and (3) the provision of Federal grants to help PHAs and IHAs to carryout their plans.15. The Department is revising in this NOFA the descriptive list of innovativeprograms at section 2.1(f) by: (1) Removing law enforcement activities,since these are already provided for under several other provisions ofthe NOFA; and (2) changing the proposed rule's reference to drug treatmentand counseling to drug intervention. In addition, HUD is expanding thefocus of the innovative programs under this section to include not onlyyouth, but also families.16. Section 4.1(c) includes a provision requiring grantees to comply withOMB Circular A-87, relating to the acceptance and use of assistance underthis NOFA. In addition, this section requires grantees to comply with anyreporting, fiscal and audit requirements prescribed by HUD.17. Section 4.2 includes a requirement that grantees provide HUD with afinal post-grant report, in addition to semi-annual progress reports. Granteesare required to provide in their semi-annual reports information concerningtheir efforts to encourage tenant participation, as well as an evaluationof their progress in eliminating drug-related crime in relation to theirplans.<ITAG tagnum="74">Program Guidelines</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Section 1_General</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">1.1 Purpose</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">1.2 Encouragement of Tenant Participation</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">1.3 Definitions</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Section 2_Use of Grant Amounts</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">2.1 Eligible Activities</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">2.2 Maximum Grant Amount</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Section 3_Application and Selection</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">3.1 Submission</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">3.2 Late Applications, Modification and Withdrawal of Applications</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">3.3 Plan</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">3.4 Tenant Comments on Grant Application</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">3.5 Application Requirements</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">3.6 Application Selection</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Section 4_Grant Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4.1 Grant Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4.2 Periodic Reports</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4.3 Other Federal Requirements</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4.4 Other Matters</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="81">1. General</ITAG>Section 1.1 PurposeThis NOFA provides funding for the Public Housing Drug Elimination program.The purposes of the program are to: (1) Eliminate drug-related crime onor about the real property comprising the public housing project; (2) encouragepublic housing agencies (PHAs) and Indian Housing Authorities (IHAs) todevelop a plan for addressing the problem of drug-related crime on thepremises of the public and Indian housing projects proposed for fundingunder this NOFA; and (3) make available Federal grants to help PHAs andIHAs carry out their plans.Section 1.2 Encouragement of Tenant ParticipationThe elimination of drug-related crime in public housing projects requiresthe active involvement and commitment of public housing residents and theirorganizations. To increase the ability of PHAs to combat drug-related criminalactivity in their projects, Resident Councils (RCs) and Resident ManagementCorporations (RMCs) will be permitted to undertake management functionsspecified in this part, notwithstanding the otherwise applicable requirementsof 24 CFR part 964. The Department encourages PHAs and IHAs to make ResidentManagement Corporations (RMCs) and Resident Councils (RCs) full partnersin this effort. If neither an RMC or RC exists, the Department encouragesPHAs and IHAs to share with organized groups of project residents the developmentof the grant application and the management or operation of the program.Areas in which this partnership can be particularly significant include(but are not limited to) the planning and execution of strategies and activitiesto eliminate drug-related crime in public housing projects, the institutionof voluntary tenant patrols (section 2.1(e)), and the development by RMCsand RCs of security and drug-abuse prevention programs involving site residents(section 2.1(g)).To emphasize the importance that the Department attaches to full tenantparticipation in activities assisted under this part, section 3.4 requiresapplicants to: (i) Give RMCs and RCs, as well as the resident of the targetedprojects, a reasonable opportunity to comment on the application; and (ii)give serious consideration to these comments in developing the application.In addition, points will be awarded to applicants under section 3.6(b)(2)(B)based upon the extent of RMC or RC involvement in the development of thegrant application, and the extent to which an RMC or RC will have substantialprogram management responsibilities under the applicant's plan. (If neitheran RMC or RC exists, this criterion will assess instead the extent to whichthe applicant will share with an organized group of project residents thedevelopment of the grant application and the management or operation ofthe program.)Section 1.3 Definitions<T3>Applicant</T3> means a PHA or IHA that applies for a grant under thisNOFA.<T3>Chief executive officer</T3> of a State or a unit of general localgovernment means the elected official or the legally designated official,or his or her designee, who has the primary responsibility for the conductof the entity's governmental affairs. Examples of the chief executive officerof a unit of general local government are: The elected mayor of a municipality;the elected county executive of a county; the chairperson of a county commissionor board in a county that has no elected county executive; or the officialdesignated pursuant to law by the governing body of the unit of generallocal government. The chief executive officer of an Indian tribe is thetribal governing official.<T3>Controlled substance</T3> means a drug or other substance or immediateprecursor included in schedule I, II, III, IV, or V of section 102 of theControlled Substances Act (21 U.S.C. 802). The term does not include distilledspirits, wine, malt beverages or tobacco as those terms are defined inSubtitle E of the Internal Revenue Code of 1954.<T3>Drug-related crime</T3> means the illegal manufacture, sale, distribution,use, or possession with intent to manufacture, sell, distribute, or use,of a controlled substance.<T3>Governmental jurisdiction</T3> means the unit of general local government,State, or Indian tribe in which the public housing project administeredby the applicant is located.<T3>Grantee</T3> means an applicant that executes a grant agreement withHUD under this NOFA.<T3>HUD</T3> or <T3>Department</T3> means the United States Department of Housing and UrbanDevelopment.<T3>Indian</T3> means any person recognized as being an Indian or AlaskaNative by an Indian tribe, the Federal Government, or any State.<T3>Indian Housing Authority</T3> (IHA) means any entity that:(a) Is authorized to engage in or assist in the development or operationof lower income housing for Indians; and(b) Is established either by exercise of the power of self-government ofan Indian tribe independent of State law, or by operation of State lawproviding specifically for housing authorities for Indians, including regionalhousing authorities in the State of Alaska.<T3>Indian tribe</T3> means any tribe, band, pueblo, group, community,or nation of Indians or Alaska Natives.<T3>Local law enforcement agency</T3> means a police department, sheriff'soffice, or other entity of the governmental jurisdiction that has law enforcementresponsibilities for the community at large, including the public housingprojects administered by the applicant. More than one law enforcement agencymay have these responsibilities for the jurisdiction that includes theapplicant's projects.<T3>Public housing agency (PHA)</T3> means any State, county, municipalityor other governmental entity or public body (or agency or instrumentalitythereof) that is authorized to engage in or assist in the development oroperation of housing for lower income families.<T3>Public housing project</T3> or <T3>project</T3> means lower income housing and all necessary appurtenancesdeveloped, acquired, or assisted by a PHA or an IHA under the United StatesHousing Act of 1937 (other than under section 8). A project encompassesthose buildings identified in the Annual Contributions Contract (ACC) thatis executed between HUD and the PHA or IHA.<T3>Resident Council (RC)</T3> means: An incorporated or unincorporatednonprofit organization or association that meets each of the followingrequirements:(1) It must be representative of the tenants it purports to represent.(2) It may represent tenants in more than one project or in all of theprojects of a PHA or IHA, but it must fairly represent tenants from eachproject that it represents.(3) It must adopt written procedures providing for the election of specificofficers on a regular basis (but at least once every three years).(4) It must have a democratically elected governing board. The voting membershipof the board must consist of tenants of the project or projects that thetenant organization or resident council represents.<T3>Resident Management Corporation (RMC) </T3>means the entity that proposesto enter into, or that enters into, a management contract with a PHA under24 CFR part 964, or with an IHA in accordance with the requirements ofthis NOFA. The corporation must have each of the following characteristics:(1) It must be a nonprofit organization that is incorporated under thelaws of the State or Indian tribe in which it is located.(2) It may be established by more than one tenant organization or residentcouncil, so long as each such organization or council: (i) Approves theestablishment of the corporation and (ii) has representation on the Boardof Directors of the corporation.(3) It must have an elected Board of Directors.(4) Its by-laws must require the Board of Directors to include representativesof each tenant organization or resident council involved in establishingthe corporation.(5) Its voting members must be tenants of the project or projects it manages.(6) It must be approved by the resident council. If there is no council,a majority of the households of the project must approve the establishmentof such an organization to determine the feasibility of establishing acorporation to manage the project.(7) It may serve as both the resident management corporation and the residentcouncil, so long as the corporation meets the requirements of part 964for a resident council. (In the case of a resident management corporationfor an Indian Housing Authority, it may serve as both the RMC and the RCso long as the corporation meets the requirements of this NOFA for a residentcouncil.)<T3>State</T3> means the several States, the District of Columbia, theCommonwealth of Puerto Rico, the territories and possessions of the UnitedStates, and the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands.<T3>Unit of general local government</T3> means any city, county, town,township, parish, village, or other general purpose political subdivisionof a State.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Use of Grant Amounts</ITAG>Section 2.1 Eligible ActivitiesActivities assisted under this NOFA must be directed toward the eliminationof drug-related crime in public housing projects, and may include one ormore of the following activities. Incidental costs related to carryingout these activities are also eligible program costs, provided the PHAor IHA has a cost allocation plan.(a) <T3>Security personnel.</T3> Employment of security personnel in publichousing projects. Security personnel employed under this section are requiredas a condition of employment to meet all relevant local, State or tribaltraining, licensing, or other similar requirements.(b) <T3>Additional security and protective services.</T3> Reimbursement oflocal law enforcement agencies for the cost of providing additional securityand protective services for public housing projects. The security and protectiveservices provided must be either:(1) A service that no local law enforcement agency (or agencies) providedfor public housing projects administered by the grantee immediately beforethe publication of this NOFA; or(2) A quantifiable increase in the level of an ongoing service above thatwhich the local law enforcement agency (or agencies) provided for publichousing projects administered by the grantee immediately before the publicationof this NOFA.(c) <T3>Physical improvements.</T3> Physical improvements in public housingprojects that are specifically designed to enhance security. These improvementsmay include (but are not limited to) the installation of lighting systems,bolts, or locks, or the reconfiguration of common areas to discourage drug-relatedcrime. Such improvements may not involve the demolition of any units ina project. A PHA may not use grant funds under this NOFA for any physicalimprovements that would result in the displacement of persons.(d) <T3>Employment of investigators.</T3> (1) Employment of one or more individualsto:(A) Investigate drug-related crime on or about the real property comprisingany public housing project; and(B) Provide evidence relating to any such crime in any administrative orjudicial proceedings.(2) Investigators employed under this section are required as a conditionof employment to meet all relevant local, State, or tribal training, licensing,or other similar requirements.(e) <T3>Tenant patrols.</T3> The provision of training, communications equipment,and other related equipment (including uniforms), for use by voluntarypublic housing tenant patrols acting in cooperation with officials of locallaw enforcement agencies.PHAs are advised to obtain liability insurance relating to any tenant patrolsestablished under this section. Although this cost is not an eligible expenseunder this program, it may be paid for out of a PHA's or IHA's operatingsubsidies.(f) <T3>Innovative programs.</T3> Innovative programs to reduce the use ofdrugs in and around public housing projects. A program will be considered``innovative'' under this paragraph if it uses a new or creative approachto reducing the use of drugs in and around public housing projects. Activitiesthat may be funded under this paragraph include (but are not limited to)innovative drug education, intervention and referral, outreach efforts,and programs to prevent drug-related crime involving recreational, vocational,and educational activities and other constructive alternatives for youthand families.(g) <T3>RMCs and RCs.</T3> Funding of RMCs and RCs to develop security anddrug abuse prevention programs involving site residents. Such programsmay include (but are not limited to) law enforcement activities, drug education,drug treatment, counseling, referral, and outreach efforts.Section 2.2 Maximum Grant AmountThe maximum grant amount under this NOFA is $100,000 for PHAs or IHAs with500 units or less. For PHAs or IHAs with more than 500 units, the maximumgrant amount is $250,000. The Department has discretion to determine theamount of any grant award.<ITAG tagnum="81">3. Application and Selection</ITAG>Section 3.1 SubmissionPHAs and IHAs interested in receiving a grant under this NOFA should submitan original plus one copy of the application materials listed at section3.5 of this NOFA to Howard Mortman, Office of Public and Indian Housing,Department of Housing and Urban Development, 451 Seventh Street SW., Room4110, Washington, DC 20410. The submission must be received in room 4110by 5:15 p.m., Eastern Standard Time, on November 2, 1989; or postmarkedno later than November 2, 1989. Applications received or postmarked afterthis date, or applications that fail to address all of the requirementsset out below, will be disqualified from receiving a grant award.In addition, a copy of the application materials should be forwarded simultaneouslyto the HUD Field Office with jurisdiction over the PHA or IHA.Section 3.2 Late Applications, Modification and Withdrawal of Applications(a) Any application received at the HUD Washington, DC, office designatedin this NOFA after the exact date and time specified for receipt will notbe considered unless it is received before award is made and_(1) It was mailed on or before 12:00 midnight of the application deadlinedate. In such cases, applicants must use registered, certified, or U.S.Postal Service Express Mail Next Day Service_Post Office to Addressee,to substantiate the date of mailing. The only evidence to establish thedate of mailing is the label or postmark on the wrapper, or on the originalreceipt from the U.S. Postal Service. (The term ``postmark'' means a printed,stamped or otherwise placed impression that is readily identifiable withoutfurther action as having been supplied and affixed by the U.S. Postal Service.)If neither shows a legible date, and the application is received afterthe date specified, the application shall be deemed to have been mailedlate. Private metered postmarks (such as those from Federal Express orother courier companies) shall not be acceptable proof of the date of mailing;or(2) It was the only application received.(b) Hand-delivered applications must be received in the designated officeby the application deadline date and time (documentation is the notationon the application wrapper of the time and date received by the designatedoffice).(c) Any modification of an application is subject to the same conditionsas in paragraphs (a) and (b).(d) Notwithstanding the above, a late modification of an application thatalready has been selected for funding and which makes its terms more favorableto HUD will be considered at any time it is received and may be accepted.(e) Applications may be withdrawn by written notice or telegram (includingmailgram) received at any time prior to award. Applications may be withdrawnin person by an applicant or by the applicant's authorized representative,provided his or her identity is made known and the representative signsa receipt for the application prior to award.Section 3.3 Plan(a) <T3>Requirement of plan.</T3> Each application for a grant under this NOFAmust include a plan for addressing the problem of drug-related crime onthe premises of the public housing projects proposed for funding.(b) <T3>Plan content.</T3> The plan referred to in paragraph (a) of this sectionmust contain the following elements:(1) <T3>Assessment of problem.</T3> (i) The best available objective data onthe nature and extent of the problem of drug-related crime, and the problemsassociated with drug-related crime, in the projects administered by theapplicant that are proposed for funding under this NOFA. These data shouldgenerally be derived from crime statistics from Federal, State, tribalor local law enforcement agencies. If such data are not available at theproject or precinct level, the applicant may use other reliable, objectivedata including (but not limited to) those derived from its records or thoseof RMCs or RCs. The data should be reported both in real numbers, and asa percentage of the tenants in each project (<T3>e.g.</T3>, 20 arrests for distribution of heroin in a project with100 residents reflects a 20% occurrence rate). The data should cover thepast one-year period and, to the extent feasible, should indicate whetherthese data reflect a percentage increase or decrease in drug-related crimeover the past several years. In addition, the applicant should providea description of other baseline conditions existing in projects proposedfor funding under this NOFA;(ii) Measures that the applicant believes to be important in evaluatingthe success of the plan, a discussion of the types of information the PHAwill need to measure the plan's success, and the method by which the applicantwill gather and analyze this information.(2) <T3>Current activities to address problem.</T3> A narrative discussionof the activities currently being undertaken, and a listing of the resourcesbeing provided, by the applicant, governmental entities, RMCs and RCs,or other organized groups of project residents, to address the problemof drug-related crime in the projects proposed for assistance under thisNOFA.(3) <T3>Strategy for addressing problem.</T3> A narrative discussion of theapplicant's strategy for addressing the problem of drug-related crime ineach of the projects proposed for assistance under this NOFA. The discussionmust offer a realistic approach for dealing with the applicant's drug-relatedcrime problem, taking into account the nature and extent of the problem,and the local and other non-HUD funding and other resources that reasonablymay be expected to be available to combat the problem. At a minimum, thediscussion must include the following information for each of the projectsproposed for assistance:(i) A description of each component of the applicant's strategy, includingactivities to be undertaken with funding under this NOFA, and how thesecomponents interrelate. The applicant should indicate how such activitieswill complement, and be coordinated with, current services.(ii) The anticipated cost of each component of the strategy, and the financialand other resources (including funding under this NOFA, and from otherdrug-elimination grant programs) that may reasonably be expected to beavailable to carry out each component;(iii) A timeframe for beginning and completing each component of the strategy;(iv) An estimate of the results that each component of the strategy, aswell as the overall strategy, is expected to achieve for each year thatthe strategy is in effect and upon its completion.(v) The resources that the PHA or IHA may reasonably expect to be availableat the end of the grant term to continue the anti-drug related crime effort;(vi) The role of RMCs, RCs (or, if neither exists, the role of any organizedgroup of project tenants that will share with the applicant in the developmentof the grant application and in the management or operation of the program)and any other entities (<T3>e.g.</T3>, local and State governments and community organizations)in planning and carrying out the strategy. The applicant should also indicatethe name of the RMC or RC that will develop any security and drug abuseprevention programs involving site residents under section 2.1(g); (vii) If grant amounts under this NOFA are to be used for physical improvementsunder section 2.1(c), a statement as to how these improvements will becoordinated with the applicant's modernization program under 24 CFR part968; (viii) If grant amounts under this NOFA are to be used for innovative programsto reduce the use of drugs in and around public housing projects undersection 2.1(f), a statement by the applicant as to the nature of the programand how the program represents a new or creative approach to achievingthis purpose. Section 3.4 Tenant Comments on Grant Application The applicant must provide the residents of projects proposed for fundingunder this NOFA, as well as any RMCs or RCs that represent those tenants(including any PHA-wide RMC or RC), with a reasonable opportunity to commenton its application under section 3.5 (including its plan under section3.3). The applicant must give these comments careful consideration in developingits plan and application. Section 3.5 Application Requirements (a) <T3>Contents. </T3>To qualify for a grant under this NOFA, an applicantmust submit an application to HUD that contains the following: (1) Standard Grant Application Form SF-424 (ncluding SF-424A); (2) The plan referred to in section 3.3; (3) Copies of any tenant comments submitted to the PHA under section 3.4;(4) A certification by the applicant that: (i) Grant amounts under this NOFA will not substitute for activities currentlybeing undertaken to address the problem of drug-related crime in the project(s)proposed for assistance; and (ii) Any additional security and protective services to be assisted undersection 2.1(b) meet the requirements of that section; (5) If grant amounts under this NOFA are to be used to establish voluntarytenant patrols under section 2.1(e), a certification by the applicant thatthe local law enforcement agency and the tenant patrols have entered, orwill enter into, such agreements as are needed to ensure cooperation; (6) A certification from the chief executive officer (or an official designatedby the chief executive officer) of the Indian tribe, unit of general localgovernment (or, for areas outside a unit of general local government, theState) in which the applicant is located that, to the best of the officer'sknowledge: (i) The applicant's assessments of the drug-related crime problem, andthe problems associated with drug-related crime, in the projects proposedfor assistance under this NOFA (as required by section 3.3(b)(1)), arebased on the best available objective data, and are complete and accurate;(ii) The applicant's descriptions of the current activities being undertakento address the problem of drug-related crime in its projects (as requiredby section 3.3(b)(2)) are complete and accurate; and (iii) The information provided by the applicant regarding its strategyunder section 3.3(b)(3) is accurate and complete, and the strategy is realisticand attainable, given the nature and extent of the applicant's drug-relatedcrime problem, the resources that the applicant expects to be availableto address the problem, and the applicant's proposed timeframe for accomplishingthis strategy; (7) A certification from the chief executive officer (or an official designatedby the CEO) that: (A) Grant amounts under this NOFA will not substitutefor activities currently being undertaken by the jurisdiction to addressthe problem of drug-related crime in projects proposed for assistance;and (B) any additional security and protective services to be assistedunder section 2.1(b) meet the requirements of that section. (8) A certification from the chief executive officer (or an official designatedby the CEO) of the relevant govenmental jurisdiction that it will takethe actions described in the applicant's strategy under section 3.3(b)(3);(9) A statement from the chief executive officer (or an official designatedby the CEO) as to whether the relevant governmental jurisdiction is meetingits obligations under the Cooperation Agreement with the PHA, particularlywith regard to law enforcement. If the jurisdiction is not meeting itsobligations under this Agreement, it should identify any special circumstancesrelating to its failure to do so. (10) If applicable, a certification from the chief of the local law enforcementagency that the agency has, or will, enter into such agreements as areneeded to ensure cooperation with the voluntary tenant patrol under section2.1(e); (11) (a) If applicable, a certification by the RMC or RC for a projectproposed for funding under this NOFA that the grant application was jointlyprepared with the applicant, and a description of the activities it willimplement under this NOFA. (b) If neither an RMC or RC exists (and if otherwise applicable), a certificationby the PHA or IHA that the grant application was jointly prepared withan organized group of project residents, and that the group will sharewith the applicant in the management or operation of the program. The applicantshould also include a description of the tenant organization, and the activitiesthat it will undertake under this NOFA; (12) A certification that the grantee will maintain a drug-free workplacein accordance with the requirements of the Drug-Free Workplace Act of 1988(54 FR 4946, published January 31, 1989, effective March 18, 1989). (13) A certification that the grantee will collect, maintain and provideto HUD such additional data as may be required to evaluate the effectivenessof the use of the grant funds. Section 3.6 Application Selection (a) <T3>Ranking. </T3>(1) Each application submitted by a PHA or IHA underthis NOFA that meets the application requirements under section 3.5(a)will be evaluated in accordance with the selective rating criteria underparagraph (b) of this section. Applications will be evaluated on the basisof the four rating criteria under paragraph (b), with each rating criterionassigned up to a maximum of 25 points. In addition, an applicant may obtainup to an additional 15 points under section 3.6(b)(2)(B) based upon theextent of RMC or RC involvement in the development of the grant application(including the plan under section 3.3), and the extent to which an RMCor RC will assume substantial management responsibilities under the applicant'splan. If neither an RMC or RC exists, HUD will assess instead the extentto which an organized group of project residents will share with the PHAor IHA in the development of the grant application and in the managementor operation of the program. These applications will then be ranked basedupon their total rating score. Grant awards will be made to the highest-rankedapplicants. (2) Failure to address a required rating criterion under paragraph (b)of this section will result in an applicant's receiving no points for thatelement. (b) <T3>Selective rating criteria. </T3>The selective rating criteria are:(1) The extent of the problem of drug-related crime in the applicant'sprojects. (Maximum points: 25.) (2)(A) The quality of the plan under section 3.3, based upon the extentto which the information provided by the applicant under that section isaccurate and complete; and the extent to which the applicant's strategyunder that section is realistic and attainable, given (among other things)the nature and extent of the applicant's drug-related crime problem, andthe funding and other resources that may reasonably be expected to be available(both during and at the end of the grant term) to address the problem.(Maximum points: 25.)(B) Applications will also be evaluated on the extent of RMC or RC involvementin the development of the grant application, and the extent to which anRMC or RC will assume substantial program management responsibilities underthe PHA's plan. If neither an RMC or RC exists, HUD will assess insteadthe extent to which an organized group of project residents will sharewith the PHA or IHA in the development of the grant application and inthe management or operation of the program. (Maximum points: 15.) (3) The applicant's capability to carry out its plan under section 3.3,as reflected by its ability to obtain local and other non-HUD funding orother commitments of support for each aspect of the plan; its administrativecapability to manage its projects; and its degree of commitment to addressingthe problem of drug-related crime. In making its assessment under thisprovision, HUD will give particular consideration to the recommendationsof the local HUD field office. (Maximum points: 25.) (4) The extent to which the governmental jurisdiction, local law enforcementagencies, and the local community support the applicant's activities toeliminate drug-related crime. HUD may consider as evidence of such supportwhether the relevant governmental jurisdiction has met its obligationsunder the Cooperation Agreement with the applicant. (Maximum points: 25.)(c) <T3>Environmental review. </T3>Grants under this NOFA are categoricallyexcluded from review under the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969(NEPA) (42 U.S.C. 4321). However, before making an award of grant fundsunder this NOFA, HUD will perform an environmental review to the extentrequired under the provisions of the National Environmental Policy Actof 1969 (NEPA) (42 U.S.C. 4321), applicable related authorities at 24 CFR50.4, and HUD's implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 50. <ITAG tagnum="81">4. Grant Administration</ITAG> Section 4.1 Grant Administration (a) <T3>General. </T3>The duty to use grant funds to eliminate drug-relatedcrime in public housing projects in accordance with the requirements ofthis NOFA will be incorporated in a grant agreement executed by HUD andthe grantee. Each grantee is responsible for ensuring that grant fundsare administered in accordance with the requirements of this NOFA and applicablelaws. (b) <T3>Subgrants. </T3>A PHA or IHA may undertake directly any of the eligibleactivities under this NOFA or it may contract with a qualified third party,including Resident Management Corporations (RMCs) and Resident Councils(RCs). Tenant organizations that are neither RMCs or RCs may share withthe PHA or IHA in the management or operation of the program, but may notreceive funds as subgrantees. Subgrants or cash contributions to RMCs or RCs may be made only under awritten agreement executed between the PHA and the RMC or RC. The agreementmust include a project budget that is acceptable to the PHA, and that isotherwise consistent with the PHA's grant application budget. In addition,the agreement must obligate the RMC or RC to permit the PHA to inspectand audit the RMC or RC financial records related to the agreement, andto account to the PHA on the use of grants funds, and on the implementationof project activities. The PHA shall be responsible for monitoring, and for providing technicalassistance to, any subgrantee to ensure compliance with HUD program requirements,including OMB Circular Nos. A-110 and A-122, which apply to the acceptanceand use of assistance by private nonprofit organizations. The PHA mustalso ensure that subgrantees are covered under the PHA's liability, orother equivalent, insurance. (c) <T3>Applicability of OMB Circulars and HUD fiscal and audit controls. </T3>Thepolicies, guidelines, and requirements of 24 CFR part 85 and OMB CircularA-87 apply to the acceptance and use of assistance by grantees under thisNOFA; and OMB Circulars A-110 and A-122 apply to the acceptance and useof assistance by private nonprofit organizations (including RMCs and RCs).In addition, grantees and subgrantees must comply with fiscal and auditcontrols and reporting requirements prescribed by HUD. (d) <T3>Grant term and obligation of grant funds. </T3>Grantees are requiredto use grant amounts under this NOFA according to their approved work plan,which generally shall not exceed 24 months. It is not required that thegrantee obligate its funds within a particular fiscal year. Section 4.2 Periodic Reports (a) Semi-annual progress reports. Grantess must provide HUD with semi-annualprogress reports which evaluate the grantee's progress against its plan.These reports must include (but are not limited to) the following: anychange (or lack of change) in crime statistics and an explanation of anydifference; activities initiated under the plan (taking into account bothassistance under this NOFA and funds from other sources); a discussionof any problems encountered in implementing the plan and how they wereaddressed; an evaluation of whether the rate of progress meets expectations;a discussion of the grantee's efforts in encouraging tenant participation;a description of any other programs that may have been initiated or expandedas a result of the plan, with an identification of the resources and thenumber of people involved in the programs and their relation to the plan.(b) <T3>Post-grant report. </T3>A post-grant evaluation should be submittedto HUD within 90 days upon completion of the plan, using at a minimum theevaluation criteria for the periodic reports.Section 4.3 Other Federal RequirementsUse of grant funds under this NOFA requires compliance with the followingadditional Federal requirements:(a) <T3>Labor standards.</T3> Where grant funds are used to undertake physicalimprovements to increase security under section 2.1, the following laborstandards apply:(1) The PHA and its contractors and subcontractors must pay the followingprevailing wage rates, and must comply with all related rules, regulationsand requirements:(i) For laborers and mechanics employed in the development of the project,the wage rate determined by the Secretary of Labor pursuant to the Davis-BaconAct (40 U.S.C. 276a <T3>et seq.</T3>) to be prevailing in the locality with respect to suchtrades;(ii) For architects, technical engineers, draftsmen and technicians employedin the development of the project, the HUD-determined prevailing wage rate;or(iii) For laborers and mechanics employed in carrying out non-routine maintenancein the project, the HUD-determined prevailing wage rate. As used in thissubsection, nonroutine maintenance means work items that ordinarily wouldbe performed on a regular basis in the course of upkeep of a property,but have become substantial in scope because they have been put off, andthat involve expenditures that would otherwise materially distort the leveltrend of maintenance expenses. Non-routine maintenance may include replacementof equipment and materials rendered unsatisfactory because of normal wearand tear by items of substantially the same kind. Work that constitutesreconstruction, a substantial improvement in the quality or kind of orginalequipment and materials, or remodeling that alters the nature or type ofhousing units is not nonroutine maintenance.(2) The employment of laborers and mechanics is subject to the provisionsof the Contract Work Hours and Safety Standards Act (40 U.S.C. 327-333).(b) <T3>Nondiscrimination and equal opportunity.</T3> The following nondiscriminationand equal opportunity requirements:(1) The requirements of Title VIII of the Civil Rights Act of 1968, 42U.S.C. 3600-20 (Fair Housing Act) and implementing regulations issued atsubchapter A of title 24 of the Code of Federal Regulations, as amendedby 54 FR 3232 (published January 23, 1989); Executive Order 11063 (EqualOpportunity in Housing) and implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 107;and title VI of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 (42 U.S.C. 2000d-2000d-4)(Nondiscrimination in Federally Assisted Programs) and implementing regulationsissued at 24 CFR part 1;(2) The prohibitions against discrimination on the basis of age under theAge Discrimination Act of 1975 (42 U.S.C. 6101-07) and implementing regulationsat 24 CFR Part 146, and the prohibitions against discrimination againsthandicapped individuals under section 504 of the Rehabilitiation Act of1973 (29 U.S.C. 794) and implementing regulations at 24 CFR part 8;(3) The requirements of Executive Order 11246 (Equal Employment Opportunity)and the regulations issued under the Order at 41 CFR chapter 60;(4) The requirements of section 3 of the Housing and Urban DevelopmentAct of 1968, 12 U.S.C. 1701u (Employment Opportunities for Lower IncomePersons in Connection with Assisted Projects); and(5) The requirements of Executive Orders 11625, 12432, and 12138. Consistentwith HUD's responsibilities under these Orders, recipients must make effortsto encourage the use of minority and women's business enterprises in connectionwith funded activities.(c) <T3>Use of debarred, suspended or ineligible contractors. </T3>The provisionsof 24 CFR part 24 relating to the employment, engagement of services, awardingof contracts, or funding of any contractors or subcontractors during anyperiod of debarment, suspension, or placement in ineligibility status.(d) <T3>Flood insurance. </T3>Grants will not be awarded for proposed projectsthat involve acquisition, construction, reconstruction, repair or improvementof a building or mobile home located in an area that has been identifiedby the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) as having special floodhazards unless: (i)(A) The community in which the area is situated is participatingin the National Flood Insurance Program in accordance with 44 CFR parts59-79; or (B) less than a year has passed since FEMA notification to thecommunity regarding such hazards; and (ii) flood insurance on the structureis obtained in accordance with section 102(a) of the Flood Disaster ProtectionAct of 1973 (42 U.S.C. 4001).(e) <T3>Lead-based paint. </T3>The provisions of section 302 of the Lead-BasedPaint Poisoning Prevention Act, 42 U.S.C. 4821-4846, and implementing regulationsat 24 CFR part 965, subpart H (51 FR 27789-27791, August 1, 1986). Thissection is promulgated pursuant to the authority granted in 24 CFR 35.24(b)(4)and supersedes, with respect to all housing to which it applies, the requirements(not including definitions) prescribed by subpart C of 24 CFR part 35.(1) <T3>Applicability. </T3>The provisions of section 302 shall apply to allprojects constructed or substantially rehabilitated before January 1, 1978,and for which assistance under this NOFA is being used for physical improvementsto enhance security under section 2.1(c).(2) <T3>Definitions. </T3>For purposes of this paragraph (e), the term ``applicablesurfaces'' means all intact and nonintact interior and exterior paintedsurfaces of a residential structure.(3) <T3>Exceptions. </T3>The following activities are not covered by this section:(i) Installation of security devices; (ii) other similar types of single-purposeprograms that do not involve physical repairs or remodeling of applicablesurfaces of residential structures; or (iii) any non-single purpose rehabilitationthat does not involve applicable surfaces and that does not exceed $3,000per unit.(f) <T3>Conflicts of Interest. </T3>In addition to the conflict of interestrequirements in 24 CFR part 85, no person:(1) Who is an employee, agent, consultant, officer, or elected or appointedofficial of the grantee, that receives assistance under the program andwho exercises or has exercised any functions or responsibilities with respectto assisted activities; or(2) Who is in a position to participate in a decisionmaking process orgain inside information with regard to such activities, may obtain a personalor financial interest or benefit from the activity, or have an interestin any contract, subcontract, or agreement with respect thereto, or theproceeds thereunder, either for himself or herself or for those with whomhe or she has family or business ties, during his or her tenure, or forone year thereafter.(g) <T3>Intergovernmental review. </T3>The requirements of Executive Order12372 and the regulations issued under the order at 24 CFR part 52, tothe extent provided by <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice in accordance with 24 CFR 52.3.(h) <T3>Indian preference. </T3>The provisions of section 7(b) of the IndianSelf-Determination and Education Assistance Act (25 U.S.C. 450e) applyto IHAs. These provisions require to the greatest extent feasible thatpreference and opportunities for training and employment be given to Indiansand that preference in the award of subcontracts and subgrants be givento Indian Organizations and Indian Owned Economic Enterprises.Section 4.4 Other MattersA Finding of No Significant Impact with respect to the environment hasbeen made in accordance with HUD regulations at 24 CFR part 50 implementingsection 102(2)(C) of the National Environmental Policy Act of 1969, 42U.S.C. 4332. The Finding of No Significant Impact is available for publicinspection and copying between 7:30 a.m. and 5:30 p.m. weekdays at theOffice of the Rules Docket Clerk, 451 Seventh Street SW., Room 10276, Washington,DC 20410.The collection of information requirements contained in this NOFA havebeen approved by the OMB under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 andhave been assigned OMB control number 2577-0124. Certain sections of thisNOFA have been determined by the Department to contain collection of informationrequirements. Information on these requirements is provided as follows:<ITAG tagnum="110"><C/><T4>Tabulation of Annual Reporting Burden, Notice of Fund Availability_PublicHousing, Drug Elimination Program</T4><H1>Description of information collection</H1><H1>Section of NOFA affected</H1><H1>Number of respondents</H1><H1>Number of responses per respondents</H1><H1>Total annual responses</H1><H1>Hours per responses</H1><H1>Total hours</H1><ITAG tagnum="1">Plan for addressing drug-related crime problem(s) includes assessment,current activities, strategy<D>Section 3.3</D><D>500</D><D>1</D><D>500</D><D>26</D><D>13,000</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Request for tenant comments on plan and application<D>Section 3.4</D><D>5,000</D><D>1</D><D>5,000</D><D>1</D><D>5,000</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Application requirements: SF-424, SF-424A, certification, copies oftenant comments<D>Section 3.5</D><D>500</D><D>1</D><D>500</D><D>32</D><D>16,000</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Written agreement, including project budget, PHA inspection of financialrecords, between, PHA/RMC or RC for subgrants or cash contributions<D>Section 4.1</D><D>500</D><D>1</D><D>500</D><D>5</D><D>2,500</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Semi-annual reports on fund expenditures, data tracking drug-relatedcrime<D>Section 4.2</D><D>100</D><D>2</D><D>\1\ 200</D><D>25</D><D>5,000</D><R>n,n,n,n,n,n,s</R></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Total burden<D/><D/><D/><D/><D/><D>41,500</D><F>\1\ Three-year period.</F></ITAG></ITAG> <T3>Family impact.</T3> The General Counsel, as the Designated Officialfor Executive Order 12606, <T3>the Family</T3>, has determined that the provisions of this NOFA havethe potential for significant impact on family formation, maintenance andgeneral well-being within the meaning of the Order. The NOFA implementsa program that encourages PHAs and IHAs to develop a plan for addressingthe problem of drug-related crime, and makes available grants to help PHAsand IHAs to carry out this plan. As such, the program is intended to improvethe quality of life of public housing project residents by reducing theincidence of drug-related crime and should have a strong positive effecton family formation, maintenance and general well-being for PHAs and IHAsselected for funding. Further review under the Order is not necessary,however, since the NOFA essentially tracks the authorizing legislationand involves little exercise of HUD discretion. <T3>Federalism impact.</T3> The General Counsel, as the Designated Officialunder section 6(a) of Executive Order 12612, <T3>Federalism</T3>, has determined that the provisions of this NOFA have``federalism implications'' within the meaning of the Order. The NOFA implementsa program that encourages PHAs and IHAs to develop a plan for addressingthe problem of drug-related crime, and makes available grants to PHAs andIHAs to help them carry out their plans. As such, the program helps PHAsand IHAs to combat serious drug-related crime problems in their projects,thereby strengthening their role as instrumentalities of the States. Furtherreview under the Order is unnecessary, however, since the NOFA generallytracks the statute and involves little implementing discretion. The NOFA'smost significant exercise of discretion involves the establishment of selectionpreferences based upon the extent of RMC or RC involvement (or, where neitheran RMC nor RC exists, the involvement of organized groups of project residents,as specified in this NOFA). The involvement of tenants and their residentsorganizations should greatly increase the success of the anti-drug-relatedcrime efforts and, therefore, should have positive effects on the PHAsand IHAs.<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> Sec. 5127, Public Housing Drug Elimination Act of 1988(Chapter 2, Subtitle C, Title V, Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1988 (Pub. L. 100-690,approved November 18, 1988); section 7(d), Department of Housing and UrbanDevelopment Act (42 U.S.C. 3535(d)).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: September 8, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Thomas Sherman,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting General Deputy Assistant Secretary for Public and Indian Housing.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-21908 Filed 9-15-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4210-28-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>