<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR891017-0034 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.10-17-89.f2.A1033</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 199 / Tuesday, October 17, 1989/ Proposed Rules <ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATlON </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Coast Guard</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">33 CFR Part 155 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">46 CFR Parts 12, 13, 15, 30, 31, 35, 78, 90, 97, 98, 105, 151, 153,and 154 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[CGD 79-116 and 79-116a] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="91">RlN 2115-AA03 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Tankerman Requirements and Qualifications for Persons-in-Charge ofDangerous Liquid and Liquefied Gas Transfer Operations </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY:</T2> Coast Guard, DOT.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION:</T2> Supplemental notice of proposed rulemaking. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY:</T2> The Coast Guard is proposing to issue regulations governingthe qualifications of personnel in charge of and assisting in the handling,transfer, and transportation of oil and hazardous liquid cargoes in bulkaboard vessels. Human error and lack of awareness of the hazards involvedon the part of personnel engaged in these operations have resulted in anumber of well publicized marine casualties. Having better qualified personnelparticipating in these operations should lead to a reduction in tank vesselcasualties.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE:</T2> Comments must be received on or before January 16, 1990.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES:</T2> Comments should be submitted to: The Executive Secretary,Marine Safety Council (G-LRA-2/3600) [CGD 79-116] U.S. Coast Guard, Washington,DC 20593-0001. Between 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday exceptholidays, comments may be delivered to and will be available for inspectionor copying at the Marine Safety Council (G-LRA-2/3600), Room 3600, U.S.Coast Guard Headquarters, 2100 Second Street, SW., Washington, DC 20593-0001,phone (202) 267-1477.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Mr. Christopher J. Heizer, ProjectManager, Office of Marine Safety, Security and Environmental Protection(G-MVP), phone (202) 267-0224.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2> Two notices of proposed rulemaking(NPRMs) were published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on December 18, 1980: CGD 79-116 (45 FR 83290)covering proposed rules for tankerman requirements and CGD 79-116a (45FR 83268) covering proposed rules for the qualifications of persons-in-chargeof oil transfer operations. In conjunction with the NPRMs the Coast Guardheld public hearings in St. Louis, Missouri; New Orleans, Louisiana; LongBeach, California; and Washington, DC. Due to the similarity of these two rulemakings the Coast Guard has decidedto combine the two dockets into CGD 79-116 and hereby withdraws CGD 79-116a.Interested persons are invited to participate in this rulemaking by submittingwritten data, views or arguments. Written comments should include the nameand address of the person making comment, identify this notice [CGD 79-116],the specific section of the proposal to which the comment applies, thereasons for the comment, and suggested modifications to the proposed rules.Persons desiring an acknowledgment that their comment has been receivedshould enclose a stamped, self-addressed postcard or envelope. All commentsreceived before expiration of the comment period will be considered beforefinal action is confirmed. <ITAG tagnum="84">Drafting Information </ITAG>The principal drafters of this supplemental notice are: Mr. ChristopherJ. Heizer, Office of Marine Safety, Security and Environmental Protection,and CDR Gerald A. Gallion, Office of Chief Counsel. <ITAG tagnum="84">Background </ITAG>The Port and Tanker Safety Act of 1978 (PTSA) (46 U.S.C. 3703) specificallyrequires the Secretary of Transportation to prescribe personnel and manningstandards for tank vessels of the United States. The Coast Guard interpretspersonnel and manning standards to include training, license qualifications,health and physical fitness criteria, periodic retraining, recognitionof experience and completed training, and performance testing in the determinationof licenses and certificates for the certification of crew members in thehandling of oil and hazardous materials. Section 7317 of title 46 of theU.S. Code also authorizes the Secretary to prescribe procedures, standards,and qualifications for the issuance of certificates or endorsements astankerman. Improvement of crew standards was the subject of the International Conferenceon Training and Certification of Seafarers held in 1978 under the auspicesof the Intergovernmental Maritime Consultative Organization, now knownas the International Maritime Organization (IMO). At this conference, 72nations agreed on the text of the world's first international conventionestablishing basic requirements concerning training, certification andwatchkeeping for masters, officers, and crews of seagoing merchant ships.The International Convention on Standards of Training, Certification andWatchkeeping for Seafarers, 1978 (STCW) will be applicable to vessels ofthe United States once the Convention is ratified by the U.S. Senate. Sincethe Convention has been accepted internationally, it already applies toU.S. flag vessels on foreign voyages to party states. The Coast Guard in the December 18, 1980, <T4>Federal Register</T4> (45 FR 83268, 83290) published notices of proposedrulemaking which proposed redefining and establishing more stringent qualifyingcriteria for individuals engaged in transporting and transferring variouscategories of oil and hazardous materials and proposed revising the qualificationsof the person-in-charge of an oil transfer operation. Four public hearingswere held and 140 written comments were received in response to the proposedrules and are discussed in this document. Comments were received from privateindividuals, maritime attorneys, commercial enterprises, maritime unions,industry associations, state maritime agencies, Federal agencies, and stateand Federal maritime schools. Many commenters complained that industry input was not sought during thedevelopment of the NPRMs. Many commenters want the Coast Guard to allowthe Towing Safety Advisory Committee (TSAC) to review the proposed regulationswhile other commenters want the Coast Guard to publish another notice ofproposed rulemaking before publishing a final rule. The Coast Guard agreeswith both of these recommendations. The Coast Guard has worked closelywith TSAC in revising these proposed regulations and considered TSAC Recommendationandplusmin;53, which contains TSAC's specific recommendations. The minutesfrom the TSAC meetings at which the proposed tankerman regulations werediscussed and TSAC's Recommendation andplusmin;53 have been placed in theofficial docket, where they are available to the public for review. As a result of working with TSAC in developing this supplemental noticeof proposed rulemaking (SNPRM) the Coast Guard has revised the tankermanregulations by separating the tankship and tank barge tankerman requirementsso special consideration could be given to the operational conditions andpractices of each industry. The proposed tankerman regulations in the SNPRMtry to ensure the requirements for a tankerman endorsement correspond tothe operational level of authority granted by the endorsement. These proposed regulations have been renumbered to maintain consistencywith other sections in the Code of Federal Regulations. Therefore, aftereach specific comment is a ``new'' cite that reflects the affected sectionin this supplemental notice of proposed rulemaking and an ``old'' citecorresponding to the previous proposal (45 FR 83268, 83290), e.g. New 46CFR 13.103, Old 46 CFR 13.01-3.The Coast Guard has revised the proposed regulations to require only themaster, chief mate, and other personnel designated as person-in-chargeof liquid cargo transfer operations to be fully qualified tankermen. Personnelassisting with the transfer of bulk liquid hazardous materials do not needthe same extensive training required by the person-in-charge, who is responsiblefor supervising the transfer. The requirements for engineers and personnelassisting in transfer operations have been revised to more closely reflecttheir level of responsibility. To reflect the levels of experience and training necessary for the differentlevels of responsibility, the proposed regulations use several new merchantmariner's document (MMD) endorsements. A person who has satisfied the requirementsto be a person-in-charge of bulk liquid cargo transfer operations wouldbe issued an MMD endorsement as ``Tankerman-PIC'' or ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge).''The abbreviation PIC stands for ``Person-In-Charge'' and indicates theperson can be in charge of bulk liquid cargo transfer operations. ``Tankerman-PIC''authorizes service on tank vessels, while ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'' authorizesservice on tank barges only. The proposed ``Tankerman-Assistant'' endorsement would not authorize aperson to be a person-in-charge of bulk liquid cargo transfer operations.On tankships a person who will be assigned duties and responsibilitiesrelated to bulk liquid cargo or cargo equipment during a transfer operation,that will not be directly supervised by the person-in-charge of the transfer,must have a ``Tankerman-Assistant'' or ``Tankerman-PIC'' endorsement forthe classification of cargo being transferred. Individuals serving as chief, first assistant, or cargo engineer on a tankshipmust have a ``Tankerman-Engineer'' endorsement. When the Certificate ofInspection for a tankship requires a licensed engineer but not a chiefor a first assistant engineer, at least one of the required engineers musthave a ``Tankerman-Engineer'' endorsement. This proposed endorsement doesnot allow an individual to serve as a person-in-charge of bulk liquid cargotransfer operations. All tankermen endorsements will be placed on an individual's MMD, evenif the individual also has a license. The Coast Guard has reduced the number of cargo classifications from thethree proposed in the NPRM, Flammable/Combustible Liquids, Dangerous Liquids,and Liquefied Gases, to two, Dangerous Liquids and Liquefied Gases. Thenew Dangerous Liquids classification will cover all products previouslycovered under the Flammable/Combustible Liquids and Dangerous Liquids classificationsof the NPRM. To reduce the number of cargo tables to which the public must refer andthe Coast Guard must update, the tables listing the specific cargoes thatfall under the Dangerous Liquid and Liquefied Gas classifications havebeen eliminated from the rulemaking. Dangerous Liquids are liquids identifiedby the Coast Guard in 46 CFR 153.40 as dangerous when transported in bulkthat are not Liquefied Gases. Part 13 uses the same definition for LiquefiedGas as used in 46 CFR Part 154. Cargoes listed in 46 CFR Part 153 Table2 are not regulated when carried on non-oceangoing barges. The proposed grandfathering provisions for personnel currently authorizedto transfer bulk liquid cargoes have been revised. Personnel currentlyauthorized to supervise the transfer of Liquefied Gases will be grandfatheredjust like personnel currently authorized to supervise the transfer of DangerousLiquids. Personnel willing to accept a restricted tankerman endorsement,that reflects their actual transfer experience, will only have to presentevidence of having met the firefighting training requirement and the servicerequirements. Applicants who want a standard Dangerous Liquid or a LiquefiedGas endorsement will also have to meet the liquid cargo training courserequirement, since these endorsements will normally authorize an individualto transfer a wider variety of cargoes than they have in the past. Comments are invited on how the Coast Guard should document who is authorizedto transfer bulk liquid cargoes during the five year transition periodfor grandfathered personnel. The Coast Guard has proposed that the firefighting training be requiredfor all tankerman endorsements because of the importance of this knowledgewhen serving on tank vessels. Due to the limited firefighting capabilityof tank barges, it is proposed that grandfathered applicants for a ``Tankerman-PIC(Barge)'' endorsement not be required to attend a firefighting trainingcourse if they can document they attended some form of flammability hazardawareness and tank barge firefighting lecture, seminar, or training program.This flammability hazard awareness and tank barge firefighting trainingshould have included some hands-on practice in extinguishing fires. In the NPRM both the firefighting training course and the liquid cargotraining course had to be completed within two years of the date of application.This has been changed in this SNPRM. The firefighting training course mustnow be completed within five years of the date of application. This increasein time frame coincides with the revised 46 CFR part 10 licensing requirementsfor firefighting training. The liquid cargo training course must stillbe completed within two years of the date of application because the traininginvolves many complex operations and teaches the skills that are crucialto a tankerman safely and efficiently conducting bulk liquid cargo transferoperations.The Coast Guard proposes that grandfathered personnel may meet the firefightingtraining requirement by having attended a firefighting training courseat some time; recency is not required. If the course was not Coast Guardapproved, the Coast Guard must be able to verify that the course substantiallymeets the firefighting training guidelines established by the Coast Guardand used as the basis for reviewing firefighting courses for Goast Guardapproval. In the NPRM published in December 1980, the proposed course outlines wereincluded as a part of the regulations in 46 CFR 13.05 (Old). In responseto comments, these outlines for the liquid cargo and tank barge firefightingtraining courses have been modified and are included at the end of thepreamble to this SNPRM. Comments are invited on these course outlines.The course outlines adopted when the final rule is published will be thebasis for evaluating the courses needing Coast Guard approval. The CoastGuard recognizes that there is no ``best'' way to teach a course and thatflexibility in designing courses is essential. This flexibility will alsopermit revisions to courses as needed to reflect changing technology andlessons learned through casualty analysis. Since the NPRM was published, the Coast Guard has decided not to specifythe number of hours for a particular course. Each course submitted forCoast Guard approval will be examined to determine whether it will be ofsufficient duration to adequately cover the material in the course. Asa result, there are no course lengths specified. The Coast Guard is in the process of developing proposed regulations forvapor recovery systems, docket CGD 88-102. Some training on vapor controlis included in the proposed liquid cargo training course outlines, butthe training requirements for vapor control systems have not been finalized.The Coast Guard will coordinate development of the vapor control regulationsand the development of these tankerman regulations. The Coast Guard published an SNPRM on Hazardous Materials Pollution Prevention[CGD 86-034] in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> of June 9, 1989 (54 FR 24718). It proposed toapply the oil pollution regulations to vessels and facilities which transferbulk liquid ``hazardous materials,'' including oil and all 46 CFR subchapterO and MARPOL 73/78 Annex II Noxious Liquid Substances (NLS) materials.Personnel handling these materials, not previously required to have a tankermanendorsement, would now be required to have one. The proposed tankermanregulations in this SNPRM address these personnel. <ITAG tagnum="84">Discussion of Comments </ITAG>In general, the comments received are not supportive of the originallyproposed action. Many commenters question the basis and need for the proposedregulations applying to the inland barge industry and feel the cost ofthe regulations is not justified. However, many commenters support theneed for better trained, more conscientious tankermen, admitting many spillsand other relatively minor incidents aboard barges result from ignoranceor inattention. <ITAG tagnum="84">Specific Comment Areas </ITAG>1. <T3>Current regulations: </T3>Thirteen commenters are against revisingthe current regulations because they believe the current regulations areadequate. The Coast Guard disagrees. The Statement of Policy in the PTSAdeclares ``that existing standards for the design, construction, alteration,repair, maintenance, operation, equipping, personnel qualification, andmanning of all such vessels which use any port or place subject to thejurisdiction of the United States or which operate in the navigable watersof the United States must be more stringent and comprehensive for the mitigationof the hazards to life, property, and the marine environment; * * *.''The regulations concerning the training and qualifications required fora tankerman endorsement have not been revised since the PTSA was passedand do not have a clear standard that can be uniformly applied. Seven commenterssupport the need for the proposed regulations. 2. <T3>Enforcement of current regulations: </T3>Fourteen commenters believeincreased enforcement of the current regulations would be sufficient andare opposed to revising the regulations. The Coast Guard disagrees. Theincreased hazards associated with the volume and types of hazardous cargoesbeing shipped today clearly support the Congressional finding that thepersonnel qualification and manning standards must be more comprehensiveand stringent. In addition, the lack of clear-cut qualification standardsmakes it difficult to enforce the current regulations effectively. 3. <T3>Effectiveness of training requirements: </T3>Nine commenters believethe additional training requirements called for in the NPRM would not havea major impact on pollution and casualties. They feel the personnel involvedin the casualties cited in the NPRM had plenty of experience but had acareless attitude, and that carelessness and inattention cannot be regulatedout of existence. The Coast Guard disagrees in part. While the Coast Guard cannot regulateaway carelessness and inattention, proper training can heighten a tankerman'sawareness of tasks and information essential to the safe performance ofhis or her duties. Many times a careless attitude evolves from a lack ofunderstanding of the hazards involved or lack of familiarity with the itemsa tankerman should be monitoring during a transfer operation. The requirementsproposed in the SNPRM are designed to ensure the personnel having dutiesand responsibilities related to bulk liquid cargo transfer and tank cleaningoperations are fully aware of all aspects of these operations, especiallythe safety considerations. 4. <T3>Imposing international standards on domestic industries: </T3>Seventeencommenters are against imposing standards derived from the STCW on thedomestic inland tank barge industry. The Coast Guard agrees. Although theCoast Guard agrees with and supports the STCW standards, the tankermanstandards in the Convention were primarily designed for seagoing tankships.In this proposal, the Coast Guard has focused attention on the standardizationand improvement of the tankerman qualifications and manning requirementsthat are appropriate to the barge industry. This SNPRM proposes additionaltraining requirements; however, they have been modified from the NPRM andtailored to the particular circumstances that will be encountered.5. <T3>Exceeding the STCW requirements: </T3>One commenter believes the proposedregulations in the NPRM exceed the STCW requirements. The Coast Guard agreesthat some of the proposed regulations in the NPRM were excessive becausethe levels of training and experience were not related to the level ofauthority exercised by various crew members. The Coast Guard has revisedthe proposed regulations to ensure the level of experience and trainingreflects the level of authority authorized by the particular tankermanendorsement. The Coast Guard believes this has eliminated most of the instanceswhere the requirements exceed the STCW.6. <T3>Separating tankship and tank barge requirements: </T3>Ten commentersfrom the inland tank barge industry believe the Coast Guard did not considerthe special requirements of their industry and inappropriately merged tankbarges with tankships. The Coast Guard agrees that not enough considerationwas given to the operating practices and conditions in the tank barge industry.The qualifications and training requirements for tankship and tank bargetankermen have been placed in separate sections, recognizing the differencesin the methods of operation and equipment utilized.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">(New part 13, subparts B andamp; C; Old 13.01-11 and 13.01-12)7. <T3>Removing authority of licensed officers to act as tankermen:</T3> Eightcommenters are against removing the regulatory authority for licensed officersto serve as tankermen and want any additional knowledge requirement tobe verified by an expanded license examination. The Coast Guard partiallyagrees. The Coast Guard believes licensed officers without specializedtank vessel training and experience can safely act as the person-in-chargeof vessel fueling and the transfer of the limited quantities of grade Dand E bulk liquid cargo carried on passenger, freight, and miscellaneousvessels. This limited authority is supported by four commenters. Loading and discharging a tank vessel, however, calls for specialized trainingand experience. The Coast Guard believes even licensed officers need thespecialized training and experience. This has been recognized by the tankercompanies' reluctance to make an officer, with no experience on tankers,the person-in-charge of a cargo transfer operation. Normally officers withouttanker experience go through a period where the chief mate provides theneeded on-the-job-training (OJT) and evaluates their ability before theycan assume the responsibilities of a person-in-charge. In the proposedrule only officers on tank vessels or transferring the more dangerous bulkliquid cargoes will be required to obtain the specialized training andexperience.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">(New 31.15, 35.35, 70.05-30, 90.10-42, 98.30-17, 151.45-3, 153.957,154.1831, and 33 CFR 155.710; Old 31.15, 35.35, 70.05-30, 90.10-42, 98.30-17,151.45-3, 153.957, and 33 CFR 155.710)8. <T3>Required training</T3> vs <T3>examination:</T3> Three commenters want all applicants to have theoption of qualifying for a tankerman's endorsement by taking a Coast Guardexamination or completing a Coast Guard approved course. The Coast Guarddisagrees. Overall, the Coast Guard believes required attendance of anapproved training course with curriculum and instructors that have beenreviewed and determined to meet a minimum standard is the best way to ensurea required minimum level of training. An additional commenter wants the Coast Guard to continue testing tankermanapplicants to ensure quality control. The Coast Guard disagrees. Requiringapplicants to take a Coast Guard examination is not the only method thatcan be used to ensure only qualified applicants obtain a tankerman endorsement.A properly monitored approved course can also effectively filter out applicantswho are not qualified. The Coast Guard plans to make the monitoring ofapproved courses a high priority to ensure the maintenance of Coast Guardstandards. There are many problems with relying solely upon OJT. Reliance upon OJTis not effective in that it tends to perpetuate the standards of the personcurrently doing the job. If the person has high standards, they are passedon. Many times the standards passed on are not as high as they should be,even though the person believes they are passing on the highest standard.Not all tankermen have the same level of knowledge, competence, abilityto communicate, desire to communicate, or the varied background neededfor a well rounded tankerman instructor. Emergency procedures can not normallybe practiced. The duties of the person-in-charge of the transfer operationmay restrict the time available to train assisting personnel. However,because loading and discharging a tank barge is a relatively simple operation,the Coast Guard proposes to allow applicants for a ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)-DL''endorsement the option of obtaining all of their training on the job anddemonstrating their qualifications by taking a Coast Guard examination.9. <T3>Simulation training:</T3> Six commenters want simulator training tobe mandatory. The Coast Guard does not agree. Simulator training is a valuableway to gain an understanding of the proper procedures for transferringbulk liquid cargoes, but it is not the only way to conduct training. TheCoast Guard has revised the proposed regulations to give credit towardthe required transfer experience for transfers obtained through coursesthat provide simulated transfers. 10. <T3>Oral examinations:</T3> Two commenters indicate the Coast Guard shouldnot allow oral examinations for tankerman endorsements because tankermenmust be able to read and write to fill out required forms. The Goast Guardpartially agrees. While a tankerman must be able to review forms and informationrelated to the cargo and the transfer operation, the Coast Guard does notbelieve it is justified in disqualifying an experienced individual whomay have a reading deficiency. In the proposed regulations no tankermanapplicant is forced to take a Coast Guard examination. Applicants willalways have the option to take a Coast Guard approved course, where readingdifficulties can be handled individually. Therefore, no provisions foran oral examination have been made.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">(New 46 CFR 13.309; Old 46 CFR 13.01-16)11. <T3>Unilateral action on foreign flag vessels:</T3> Seven commenters arecritical of the potential impact unilateral action by the Coast Guard inregards to foreign vessels would have on international cooperation if theproposed regulations were brought into force prior to ratification of theSTCW. STCW came into force on April 28, 1984 for the initial ratifyingstates. As other countries ratify the convention, their vessels will besubject to the Convention. Since STCW has been accepted internationally,the Coast Guard believes this proposal will not produce the unilateralnegative impact envisioned.12. <T3>Equal enforcement on foreign vessels: </T3>Six commenters want theCoast Guard to ensure foreign flag vessels meet the same standards U.S.vessels are required to meet. Five commenters want the Coast Guard to evaluatethe content of the training and licensing programs foreign countries haveestablished to ensure they meet the STCW requirements. The Coast Guardplans to require that personnel on vessels of countries signatory to STCWmeet the requirements of STCW when in U.S. waters and that personnel onvessels of countries not signatory to STCW have equivalent qualifications.13. <T3>Foreign certificates: </T3>Three commenters state that foreign countriesdo not issue ``certificates.'' The term ``certificate'' is defined in ArticleII of the STCW as a valid document by whatever name it may be known, issuedby or under the authority of the administration or recognized by the administrationauthorizing the holder to serve as stated in this document or as authorizedby national regulations. The proposed regulations have been modified, however,to refer to licenses or other documentation authorizing service on thevessel. 14. <T3>COW training: </T3>One commenter wants the liquid cargo training courseto be considered as meeting the crude oil washing (COW) training optiondiscussed in 33 CFR 157.152(c)(2). The Coast Guard partially agrees. Ifthe liquid cargo training course covers the material outlined in AppendixII of IMO Resolution A.446(XI), students will be considered as meeting157.152(c)(2). Although COW/Inert Gas (IG) equipment and operations needto be covered in the liquid cargo training course, the extensive coverageneeded to meet 157.152(c)(2) is not required. It is the vessel operator'sresponsibility to ensure personnel hired for vessels equipped with COWsystems have the required experience or training. 15. <T3>Definitions: </T3>Two commenters want ``Cargo engineer'' added sincethere is such a position on liquefied natural gas (LNG) tankships. Severalcommenters want ``work shift'' more clearly defined. The Coast Guard agreesand has revised the list of definitions. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">(New 13.103; Old 13.01-3) 16. <T3>Shore based personnel: </T3>Two commenters are concerned that the proposedregulations in the original notice did not address shore based personnel.Tankermen hired by barge companies or terminal personnel who come ontobarges and transfer cargoes must meet the proposed regulations. Personnelin charge of the transfer facility only, and not the tank barge, duringtransfer operations do not need to meet the proposed regulations. 17. <T3>Tankerman endorsements: </T3>One commenter suggests the Coast Guarduse the term ``endorsement'' rather than ``certificate'' to describe theendorsement on an MMD. The Coast Guard agrees. One commenter is concerned that applicants for a proposed tankerman endorsementwould be required to possess MMDs before they could apply for a proposedtankerman endorsement. An MMD is not a prerequisite for a tankerman endorsement.Applicants who have not previously been issued an MMD will receive onewith the tankerman endorsement if they meet all the requirements. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">(New 13.107; Old 13.01-5) 18. <T3>Tankerman endorsements: authorized cargoes: </T3>Fifteen commentersargue that the skills required to transfer Flammable/Combustible Liquids(FC) and Dangerous Liquids (DL) are so similar they should be combinedor say that their operations will require their personnel to obtain bothFC and DL endorsements. The Coast Guard agrees the two cargo classificationsare very similar. Transferring bulk liquid cargoes in these classificationsrequires similar skills; however particular hazards are associated witheach different product. When discussing particular hazards, people normallythink about DL cargoes, but with the recent concern over benzene many ofthe FC cargoes are beginning to be treated with similar caution. For thisreason and the fact that the liquid cargo training courses are designedto give tankerman applicants a broad working knowledge of tank vessel operationsand cargo characteristics and hazards, the Coast Guard has decided to combineFC and DL cargoes into a single DL cargo classification. Three commenters want the Liquefied Gas classification broken into severalsmaller subdivisions because of the variety of characteristics the differentproducts in the classification have. The Coast Guard disagrees. Even thoughthe products in this classification may have a wide range of special characteristics,the intent of the required training is to give people a broad understandingof the vessels, operations, equipment, and special cargo characteristicsassociated with this cargo classification. The vessel operator or agentis responsible for designating the persons-in-charge and ensuring thatthe designated person-in-charge has the training and experience neededto safely conduct the transfer of a cargo having particular hazards. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">New 33 CFR 155.700; Old 13.01-6) 19. <T3>Tankerman certificated under prior regulations: </T3>The NPRM proposedto allow personnel who held a tankerman certificate or were authorizedto transfer bulk liquid cargoes to continue to serve under their previousauthority for five years. During this five year period they would haveto apply for one of the new tankerman endorsements. They would have toshow service on tankships or tank barges prior to the effective date andwithin three years of application, and have attended a firefighting course.Personnel in charge of transferring liquefied gas cargo were not goingto be grandfathered. Eighteen commenters want tankermen for liquefied gas tank vessels to begrandfathered like the other tankermen. They make the point that the personnelcurrently responsible for transferring liquefied gas cargoes are speciallytrained for these cargoes and that grandfathering liquefied gas personnelwill not impact transfer safety. The Coast Guard agrees and has modifiedthe proposed regulations. Two commenters want foreign flag officers and tankermen to be grandfatheredjust like U.S. tankermen. In principle, if they possess the same levelof qualifications and experience as U.S. officers and tankermen, the CoastGuard will consider grandfathering them. Foreign flag personnel from countriesthat have ratified STCW may be handled according to the STCW transitionguidelines in Article VII, which depend on when these countries ratifiedthe Convention. The Coast Guard is not sure it will establish a grandfatheringprovision for foreign flag personnel from countries not signatory to STCW.If it does, the provision will probably require these people to presentletters of service documenting the service that qualifies them for thegrandfathering provision. The Coast Guard would like comments on the possiblegrandfathering of foreign flag personnel and suggestions on how this mightbe done. There is disagreement over the length of the grandfathering period. Threecommenters want the period shortened, one commenter wants the period shortenedunless applicants take a bulk liquid cargo training course, three commenterslike the five year period proposed in the NPRM, and one commenter wantsa longer period. The Coast Guard believes a five year grandfathering periodis appropriate. One commenter is against requiring grandfathered personnel to take liquidcargo and firefighting training courses. The Coast Guard partially agrees.Grandfathered personnel will be required to complete a firefighting trainingcourse prior to applying for a new tankerman endorsement because the trainingplays an important role in fire safety and responding to emergencies. However,grandfathered applicants applying for restricted endorsements for the productsthey are currently authorized to transfer would not be required to attendthe liquid cargo training. Grandfathered applicants who receive the proposedDL and/or LG endorsements would normally be authorized to handle a muchbroader range of cargoes than they have experience in handling. For thisreason the Coast Guard has proposed that grandfathered applicants mustattend a liquid cargo training course to qualify for an unrestricted endorsement.Applicants presenting course completion certificates for liquid cargo trainingcourses completed up to ten years prior to the effective date of the finalrule would be considered to have satisfied the liquid cargo training requirementif the Coast Guard determines that the course covered a substantial portionof the material required for the DL or LG course. Three commenters want to know what kind of documentation will be neededto qualify for grandfathering. The Coast Guard agrees that this needs tobe clarified and has revised the proposed regulations to explain the requirements.Basically, an applicant would be required to present a letter of serviceor, in some cases, certificate(s) of discharge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">(New 13.111; Old 13.01-7) 20. <T3>Restricted tankerman endorsements: </T3>Although TSAC is against allowinga restricted tankerman endorsement, ten commenters want restricted tankermanendorsements to recognize the special situations where a tankerman handlesonly a few different cargoes or product families. The Coast Guard agreesand has made allowance in the proposed regulations for Officers in Charge,Marine Inspection (OCMIs), with regional examination centers to reduceor modify the requirements needed to qualify for a ``Tankerman-PIC'' ora ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'' endorsement limited to specific cargoes, cargofacility, employer, and/or vessel. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">(New 13.107; Old 13.01-5)21. <T3>Renewal of tankermen endorsements:</T3> Four commenters think a fiveyear renewal period is unnecessary and excessively costly. Five additionalcommenters recommend a ten year renewal period. TSAC supports a five yearrenewal period. Two commenters also state they do not believe the CoastGuard has the personnel resources to process the renewals. As proposed,all tankermen endorsements would be placed on MMDs which are not requiredto be renewed.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">(New 13.119; Old 13.01-9)22. <T3>Vision requirements:</T3> One commenter feels that the requirementfor 20/200 uncorrected vision in each eye is too severe and should be dropped.The Coast Guard disagrees. The U.S. visual acuity requirements for allmarine personnel are already among the most liberal in the world. The requirementsfor tankerman have always been the same as Qualified Members of the EngineDepartment (QMED) and licensed engineers. The duties of a tankerman anda QMED are equivalent as far as the need for visual acuity is concerned.The Coast Guard sees no compelling reason for a more liberal standard fortankerman. The standards were just relaxed two years ago when 46 CFR part10 was revised.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">(New 13.301; Old 13.01-12)23. <T3>Service requirements:</T3> Nineteen commenters want to reduce the totalnumber of on board transfers required for a tankerman endorsement. Onegroup is concerned about the time needed to obtain 10 transfers, whileanother group wants credit for simulated transfers. The Coast Guard partiallyagrees. The Coast Guard believes that at least 10 transfers, five loadingand five discharging, are required for a person to become fully familiarwith the transfer procedures. These required transfers must include atleast one commencement and one completion of both a loading operation anda discharge operation. On the other hand, the Coast Guard believes thatsimulated transfers can be a very valuable way to gain transfer experience,although some actual transfers are still needed to round out an applicant'sexperience. For these reasons the Coast Guard has revised the proposedregulations to allow simulated transfers to be substituted for a substantialportion of the ten required transfers. Four commenters want a transfer credit for each four-hour watch even ifthe watches were stood during one continuous transfer operation. The GoastGuard partially agrees. The Coast Guard is concerned that applicants coulduse consecutive four-hour work shifts to significantly reduce the numberof transfers they have participated in or have observed. If an applicant participates in the commencement and the completion ofa transfer, they will get credit for the commencement and the completion,but they will still receive credit for only one transfer. For example,an applicant's first transfer experience is standing two, four-hour workshifts during one loading transfer operation, including participation inthe commencement and the completion operations. The applicant would getcredit for participating in a loading commencement transfer and a loadingcompletion transfer but would only receive credit for one loading transfer.This means the applicant would have to complete the normal five dischargetransfers and four more loading transfer operations, but, since the applicanthas already met the loading commencement and completion requirements, noneof these additional four loading transfers would have to be a commencementor a completion. Two commenters want a transfer credit for each chemical or product thata product carrier is transferring during a work shift. The Coast Guardpartially agrees. If a vessel is loading and discharging products duringa work shift, the demands of the two different operations should warrantcredit for one loading and one discharging transfer. If a vessel is loadingor discharging multiple products the Coast Guard believes the operationshould be considered a single loading transfer or discharge transfer andshould not receive multiple transfer credit. When loading or discharging,the operation is basically the same whether one tank is involved or several.One commenter thinks there should be a minimum service requirement as wellas a transfer requirement. This is also supported by TSAC. The Coast Guardagrees, and a service requirement has been proposed for all ``Tankerman-PIC''and ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'' endorsements. A tankerman needs to have somebackground experience in tank vessel operations. Applicants working ata very busy terminal may obtain all the required transfer experience ina very short period of time, but may not develop a good understanding oftank vessel operations. In some cases, the regulations provide for a reductionin the service requirement if the applicant has attended a liquid cargotraining course. Two commenters feel engineers will not be able to get the required transfers.The Coast Guard agrees, since engineers do not normally participate inbulk liquid cargo transfers. The Coast Guard has proposed a ``Tankerman-Engineer''endorsement that would not require transfer experience. One commenter is concerned a master may have difficulty obtaining the transferexperience required for a ``Tankerman-PIC'' endorsement because of thenormal duties and responsibilities that must be performed while the vesselis in port. The Coast Guard agrees that it may be difficult for the masterto get transfer experience. If, however, a master attends a liquid cargotraining course approved by the Coast Guard for equivalent transfers, theequivalent transfers earned by completing the course can be used to reducethe number of shipboard transfers required. At a minimum, an applicantmust participate in or observe at least two actual transfers. The transferexperience is an important part of gaining the skills needed to be a person-in-chargeof liquid cargo transfer operations. One commenter is concerned that a dangerous situation may develop if toomany people try crowding into a cargo control room to obtain their transferrequirements. The Coast Guard agrees, but it is the responsibility of theperson-in-charge to make sure that observing personnel do not become ahazard.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">(New 13.203, 13.303, 13.403, and 13.503; Old 13.01-13)24. <T3>Documentation of service:</T3> Three commenters want the service documentationrequirements for the proposed tankerman endorsements clarified. The CoastGuard agrees and has revised the proposed regulations. One commenter wants the Coast Guard to generate a standard form, preferablyin a sign-off format. The Goast Guard disagrees. As long as the serviceinformation required for the endorsement is provided, there is no mandatoryformat for the service documentation. One commenter wants only a master to be authorized to verify an applicant'sservice. The Coast Guard partially agrees. It is the master's responsibilityto appoint the persons-in-charge on the vessel, so it should be the master'sresponsibility to document a tankerman applicant's service. There are,however, many tank vessels that are not required to have a master. Therewill also be situations where the master may be busy or unavailable. Theproposed regulations have been revised to allow several methods of documentingservice. One commenter wants a transfer facility operator to be authorized to documentan applicant's service. The Coast Guard partially agrees. The proposedregulations have been revised to allow this option for service involvingtank barges, since many facilities directly control the loading and dischargingof the tank barges.Two commenters want the required documentation of service dropped becausethey are concerned the applicants cannot compel employers to generate serviceletters, and employers are not required to keep the service records soapplicants can get a service letter at some later date. The Coast Guarddisagrees. Companies who use tankermen have a vested interest in documentingthe service of their employees since they need to ensure a supply of tankermenfor their operations. Applicants should collect their service letters asservice is accumulated. One commenter wants the Coast Guard to allow an applicant to submit a singleletter to document their service because tankermen normally get their servicefrom a wide variety of employers and because it would be difficult forapplicants to keep track of many service letters. The Coast Guard partiallyagrees. The proposed regulations would allow applicants who work for atankering service that transfers liquid cargo for a wide variety of companiesto present a letter of service from the tankering company, since the tankeringcompany has direct knowledge of all the applicant's experience. Applicantswho obtain their service from a wide variety of employers because theyhave worked for a lot of different companies will still have to keep trackof the service letters issued by each company, since none would be ableto attest to service acquired outside of their employ.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">(New 13.205, 13.305, 13.405, and 13.505; Old 13.01-14)25. <T3>Course approvals:</T3> Eleven commenters are concerned the Coast Guardis going to require company personnel to attend formal schools, separatefrom employer training programs. Formal schools are not the only organizationsthat can apply for Coast Guard approval of a training course. The CoastGuard will review any training program submitted for approval. The CoastGuard recognizes that there are many well-run training programs being offeredby companies for their employees and expects to review and approve manycompany training programs that already come close to satisfying the requiredtraining discussed in the proposed regulations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">(New 13.121; Old 13.05-2)26. <T3>Shipboard firefighting training courses:</T3> Four commenters wantfirst aid deleted from the required firefighting training courses containedin the NPRM because it would take too much time to adequately cover thematerial. The Coast Guard agrees. First aid is not in currently approvedbasic and advanced shipboard firefighting courses. One commenter wants the firefighting course to discuss and demonstratethe large dry chemical extinguishers used as the primary firefighting systemon LNG tankers. The Coast Guard agrees that the use of these extinguishersshould be discussed, but does not feel there is a need to include thisequipment in field exercises since they are currently only used on LNGvessels. One commenter wants recognition for shipboard firefighting training. Ifa company has a regular shipboard firefighting training program, it maysubmit it for Coast Guard review and approval. The firefighting training requirements can be broken into two parts, classroomtraining and field training. It is possible for a school to offer onlyone of the two parts of the training. An applicant satisfying the firefightingtraining requirement by attending two different schools, each teachinga different portion of the required training, must take the two portionswithin a specified time limit. Three commenters want the Coast Guard toincrease this time limit because winter weather can close fire fields andacademic scheduling problems can prevent an applicant from meeting theNPRM time limit. The Coast Guard agrees and has developed firefightingtraining course guidelines without a time limit. However, both portionsof the firefighting training requirement must have been completed withinfive years of the date of application. Three commenters are concerned that the firefighting training course willcover the use of the canister type oxygen breathing apparatus (OBA), sincethey are ignition sources and are a potential hazard on tank vessels. Theapproved basic and advanced firefighting training courses are not specificallydesigned for tank vessels. This hazard is recognized and should be coveredin any approved course. The Coast Guard will consider placing increasedemphasis on this subject in approving and monitoring existing firefightingcourses.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">(Old 13.05-6)27. <T3>Tank barge firefighting training course: </T3>Fourteen commenters wantthe tank barge firefighting training course eliminated; and six commenterswant local company training accepted. Twenty-seven commenters want thetank barge firefighting training course requirement reduced in length andmodified to reflect the special operating conditions of tank barges. Severalcommenters feel existing fire companies at waterfront facilities couldbe relied upon to respond if a fire occurred. The Coast Guard agrees thatthe tank barge firefighting training course should reflect the industry'sspecial requirements, and the tank barge firefighting training course requirementshave been modified accordingly. Four commenters want the tank barge firefighting training course requirementseliminated for tankermen who will not be handling liquid cargoes that areflammable or combustible. This is a factor that will be considered by theOCMI when evaluating an application for a restricted tankerman endorsement.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">(Old 13.05-7)28. <T3>Liquid cargo training courses:</T3> Four commenters only want coursesto cover Federal regulations, not state or local regulations that may bechanged without wide notification and should be learned on the job. TheCoast Guard agrees and has modified the proposed course requirements. One commenter wants the tankship training course to cover internationalregulations. The Coast Guard agrees and has modified the proposed courserequirements. One commenter indicates that the course outlines in the NPRM only mentionedtank cleaning once, and that was addressing crude oil washing which isnot used on all tank vessels. The commenter believes this area should beexpanded. The Coast Guard agrees and has modified the proposed course requirements.Nine commenters want non-barge topics eliminated from the tank barge liquidcargo course as being inappropriate. The Coast Guard agrees and has modifiedthe proposed course requirements for this course. Two commenters indicate that not all products listed in the NPRM proposedTable 13.01-6(a) are discussed in the Chemical Data Guide or the CHRISManual. This is true, but the liquid cargo training courses are not designedto cover all the specific products listed. The manufacturers normally provideproduct safety cards that indicate the cargo-specific hazards and precautions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">(Old 13.05-11 and 13.05-12)29. <T3>Manning requirements on tank vessels:</T3> One commenter supports andeleven commenters oppose requiring all personnel assisting in the liquidcargo transfer operation to be fully qualified tankermen. The Goast Guardagrees that not all personnel involved in a transfer need the same levelof training the person-in-charge must have. The proposed regulations havebeen modified to require personnel assisting with the transfer who willnot be under the direct supervision of the person-in-charge to hold anMMD endorsed as ``Tankerman-Assistant.'' This proposed endorsement indicatesthe person has had a required amount of service on a tankship or has takenthe required training that will allow the person to safely carry out cargorelated duties without the direct supervision of the person-in-charge.The Coast Guard is interested in suggestions on how we should define ``directsupervision.'' One commenter opposes requiring engineers to be fully qualified tankermen.Two commenters only want ``Cargo engineers'' to be tankermen. One commenterproposes allowing all engineers to be tankermen. The NPRM requirement forengineers to be fully qualified tankermen went beyond the STCW requirements.The STCW only requires the chief and first assistant engineer to have experienceon tankships and the special training they need to perform their engineeringduties on tankships. The Coast Guard agrees that engineers do not needto be fully qualified tankermen because they are not normally directlyinvolved in cargo transfer operations, unless they have been designatedas a person-in-charge of a bulk liquid cargo transfer. Engineers who wishto take the liquid cargo training course and obtain the service and transferrequirements may qualify for a ``Tankerman-PIC'' endorsement. A proposedrequirement for cargo engineers to have at least a ``Tankerman-Engineer''endorsement has been added. Three commenters oppose specifying the number of tankermen on the Certificateof Inspection. The Coast Guard disagrees since 46 U.S.C. 8703 requiresthe number of certificated tankermen be placed on the Certificate of Inspection.The Certificate of Inspection specifies the minimum safe manning levelsrequired on U.S. vessels and is the appropriate place to specify the minimumnumber of ``Tankerman-PIC,'' ``Tankerman-Engineer,'' and ``Tankerman-Assistant''required for safe operation of the vessel.Five commenters express concern about how a master will be able to verifya person's previous experience on ``similar'' cargo systems. One additionalcommenter wants the proposed regulations to be modified to let the masteruse his or her own judgment in this evaluation. The Coast Guard agrees,and the proposed regulations have been modified to require the master toverify to his or her satisfaction that the person-in-charge has sufficienttraining and/or experience with the cargo containment system, the vaporcontrol system, the cargo system, and the control and monitoring systemson the tankship to safely conduct a transfer operation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">(New 31.15-1; Old 31.15-1)30. <T3>Riding tankerman for tank barges: </T3>Fifty-two commenters opposethe requirement for a tankerman to be on a towing vessel while towing abarge subject to these regulations. Most feel having a tankerman on thetowboat will not alleviate a spill caused by improper navigation. Manyother factors may prevent quick and efficient transfer of liquid cargofrom a leaking tank barge even if a tankerman was available. There is noguarantee that there will be an empty barge available, and even if thereis, many tank barges have no pumps or hoses. The Coast Guard agrees. TheCoast Guard believes the operator or individual in charge of the watchon the towboat has the responsibility for the proper monitoring of anytank barges in the tow, ensuring that the crew of the towboat understandsthe hazards associated with the cargoes in the tank barges, and reportingcargo spills to the Coast Guard.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">(New 46 CFR 31.15-5 and 151.45-3; Old 46 CFR 13.01-3, 31.15-5 and151.45-3)31. <T3>Foreign personnel's need to understand English: </T3>One commenterconsiders the proposed requirement to understand, in English, all instructionsrelative to cargo and vessel operations to be reasonable if there is uniformand reasonable interpretation by enforcement officials. Two commentersfeel the requirement is much more than necessary to ensure a safe transfer.The Coast Guard has modified the proposed regulations to reflect only instructionsrelative to cargo transfer operations. One commenter thinks the ability to speak English is just as importantas the ability to understand English in ensuring a safe transfer operation.The Coast Guard agrees and has modified the proposed regulations to requirethat personnel be able to understand and speak, in English, instructionsrelative to cargo transfer operations. One commenter wants the Coast Guard to require an interpreter during atransfer operation. The Coast Guard partially agrees. The proposed regulationshave been modified to permit the use of an interpreter to meet the Englishrequirement, but an interpreter is not required.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">(New 33 CFR 155.710; Old 33 CFR 155.710)32. <T3>Tank cleaning and gas freeing operations: </T3>Seven commenters wanta marine chemist to be able to supervise tank cleaning and gas freeingoperations, while three other commenters also want a ``competent person''to be able to supervise these operations. The Coast Guard agrees and hasrevised the proposed regulations accordingly. A marine chemist must gothrough an extensive training program before receiving a marine chemist'scertificate issued by the National Fire Protection Association. For thisreason the Coast Guard does not propose to have them get a Goast Guardendorsement. The regulations covering the selection of a ``competent person''do not have any specific training requirements. For this reason it is proposedthat a ``competent person'' must hold a Coast Guard endorsement, so theCoast Guard can take effective action to withhold service authority ifcompetence comes into question. A ``competent person'' not meeting therequirements for ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'' may obtain a restricted ``Tankerman-PIC(Barge)'' endorsement restricted to the tank cleaning operations by a specifiedcompany. When the Coast Guard districts were surveyed about allowing ``competentpersons'' to supervise these operations, the districts indicated that thesafety record of ``competent persons'' was about the same as marine chemists.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">(New 33 CFR 155.710; Old 33 CFR 155.710) <ITAG tagnum="84">Training Course Requirements </ITAG>An organization seeking Coast Guard approval of a course required for atankerman endorsement will have to apply in accordance with 46 CFR 10.302and meet the general requirements of 46 CFR 10.303. In addition the CoastGuard proposes that, except for the firefighting course, each instructormust hold an MMD with a tankerman endorsement appropriate for the course,or establish equivalent qualifications to the satisfaction of the CoastGuard. The firefighting course must include actual practice in extinguishingfires, all other courses may include field training or simulation in meetingthe course requirements. Satisfactory completion of an approved coursewill be evidenced by a certificate issued by the organization and signedby the head of the training organization or a designated representative.Courses including simulated cargo transfer operations will be evaluatedto determine the amount of credit that will be allowed towards meetingthe proposed service requirements, and the certificates will reflect thecredit granted. The Coast Guard maintains a listing of organizations conductingapproved training courses. This information is available upon request bywriting to Commandant (G-MVP) U.S. Goast Guard, 2100 Second Street SW.,Washington, DC 20593-0001 or calling (202) 267-0224. Comments are specifically invited on the proposed subject matters to becovered; the appropriate minimum amount of instruction; and the inclusionof hands-on practice or drills, or the use of simulated transfers thatshould be required. Tankship Dangerous Liquid Cargo Training Course (a) The curriculum will be evaluated for adequate coverage of the requiredsubjects. Training methods may include classroom instruction, demonstrations,simulated or actual operations. (b) The course shall include as a minimum the following: (1) General characteristics, compatibility, reaction, firefighting proceduresand safety precautions for the bulk liquid cargoes defined as DangerousLiquids in 46 CFR part 13. (2) General arrangement of cargo tanks, vapor control, and venting. (3) Cargo piping systems and valves, including remote control, excess flowand pressure-vacuum valves. (4) Operation of cargo pumps. (5) Operations connected with the loading and discharging of cargo including:(i) Lining up the cargo and vapor control systems. (ii) Pre-transfer inspections. (iii) Pre-transfer conference and completion of the Declaration of Inspection.(iv) Hooking up cargo hose and loading arms. (v) Starting liquid flow. (vi) Calculation of loading rates. (vii) Discussion of the loading operation itself. (viii) Ballasting and deballasting operations. (ix) Topping off the cargo tanks. (x) Discussion of the discharging operation itself. (xi) Stripping the cargo tanks.(xii) Monitoring transfer operations. (xiii) Tank gauging (open andamp; closed). (xiv) Disconnecting cargo hoses or loading arms. (6) Stability and stress considerations when loading, discharging, andballasting or deballasting a tankship. (7) Loadline, draft, and trim considerations. (8) Rules and regulations (tankship and tank barge, both internationaland Federal) pertaining to operational procedures and pollution prevention.(9) Pollution prevention and control. (10) Emergency procedures for the following: (i) Fire. (ii) Collision. (iii) Equipment failure. (iv) Groundings. (v) Leaks and spills. (vi) Emergency shutdown. (11) Safety precautions relative to: (i) Testing tank atmospheres for oxygen and hydrocarbon vapor. (ii) Entering cargo tanks and pump room. (iii) Dangers of skin contact. (iv) Inhalation of vapors. (v) Protective clothing and equipment. (vi) Hot work procedures. (vii) Electrical and static electricity hazards and precautions. (12) Oil and chemical tankship and tank barge terminology. (13) Principles and procedures of Crude Oil Washing (COW) and Inert GasSystems (IGS), including: (i) Purpose. (ii) Equipment and design. (iii) Operations. (iv) Safety precautions. (v) Maintenance of plant and equipment. (14) Tank cleaning operations, procedures, and precautions. (15) Principles and procedures of vapor control systems, including: (i) Purpose. (ii) Coast Guard regulations. (iii) System principles. (iv) Hazards. (v) Active system components. (vi) Passive system components. (vii) Operating procedures. (viii) Emergency procedures. (16) Cargo hazard information systems. Tankship Liquefied Gas Cargo Training Course (a) The curriculum will be evaluated for adequate coverage of the requiredsubjects. Training methods may include classroom instruction, demonstrations,simulated or actual operations. (b) The course shall include as a minimum the following: (1) General characteristics, compatibility, reaction, firefighting proceduresand safety precautions for the bulk liquefied gas cargoes and their vaporsdefined as Liquefied Gases in 46 CFR part 13. (2) Physical phenomena of liquefied gas, including: (i) Basic concept. (ii) Compression and expansion. (iii) Mechanism of heat transfer.  (3) Potential hazards of liquefied gas, including: (i) Chemical and physical properties. (ii) Combustion characteristics. (iii) Hot work procedures. (iv) Results of gas release to the atmosphere. (v) Health hazards (skin contact, inhalation and ingestion). (vi) Protective clothing and equipment. (vii) Tank entry procedures and precautions. (viii) Control of flammability range with inert gas. (ix) Thermal stress in vessel structure and piping. (4) Cargo systems, including: (i) Principles of containment systems. (ii) Tank construction, materials, coatings and insulation. (iii) General arrangement of cargo tanks. (iv) Venting and vapor control systems. (5) Cargo handling systems, including: (i) Piping systems, valves, pumps and expansion systems. (ii) Operating characteristics. (6) Instrumentation systems, including: (i) Cargo level indicators. (ii) Gas detecting systems. (iii) Hull and cargo temperature monitoring systems. (iv) Automatic shut down systems. (7) Auxiliary systems, including: (i) Ventilation, inerting. (ii) Valves, including: (A) Quick closing.(B) Remote control. (C) Pneumatic. (D) Excess flow. (E) Safety relief. (F) Pressure vacuum. (iii) Cofferdam and ballast tank heating systems. (8) Operations connected with the loading and discharging of cargo including:(i) Lining up the cargo and vapor control systems. (ii)-(iii) Pre-transfer inspections and completion of the Declaration ofInspection. (iv) Hooking up cargo hose and loading arms. (v) Starting liquid flow. (vi) Calculation of loading rates. (vii) Discussion of the loading operation itself. (viii) Ballasting and deballasting operations. (ix) Topping off the cargo tanks. (x) Discussion of the discharging operation itself. (xi) Stripping the cargo tanks. (xii) Monitoring transfer operations. (xiii) Tank gauging. (xiv) Disconnecting cargo hoses or loading arms. (9) Operating procedures and sequence for the following: (i) Inerting cargo tanks and void spaces. (ii) Tank cool down and tank warm up. (iii) Gas freeing. (iv) Loaded or ballasted voyages. (v) Testing tank atmospheres for oxygen and cargo vapor. (10) Stability and stress considerations connected with the loading anddischarging of cargo. (11) Loadline, draft, and trim considerations. (12) Boil-off disposal, including: (i) System design. (ii) Safety features. (13) Emergency procedures for the following: (i) Leaks and spills. (ii) Fires. (iii) Collisions. (iv) Groundings. (v) Structural failures. (vi) Emergency cargo discharge. (vii) Emergency shut down of cargo operations. (viii) Emergency cargo valve closing systems. (14) Rules and regulations (tankship and tank barge, both internationaland Federal) pertaining to operational procedures and pollution prevention.(15) Pollution prevention, including: (i) Procedures to be followed to prevent air and water pollution. (ii) Measures to be taken in the event of spillage. (iii) Danger from vapor cloud drift. (16) Tankship and tank barge terminology. (17) Principles and procedures of the inert gas system, including: (i) Purpose. (ii) Equipment and design. (iii) Operations. (iv) Safety precautions. (v) Maintenance of plant and equipment. (18) Principles and procedures of vapor control systems, including: (i) Purpose. (ii) Coast Guard regulations. (iii) System principles. (iv) Hazards. (v) Active system components. (vi) Passive system components. (vii) Operating procedures. (viii) Emergency procedures. (19) Cargo Hazard information systems.Dangerous Liquid Tankship Familiarization Training Course (a) The curriculum will be evaluated for adequate coverage of the requiredsubjects. Training methods may include classroom instruction, demonstrations,simulated or actual operations. (b) The course shall include as a minimum the following: (1) General characteristics, compatibility, reaction, firefighting proceduresand safety precautions for bulk liquid cargoes defined as Dangerous Liquidsin 46 CFR part 13. (2) Oil and chemical tankship terminology. (3) General arrangement of cargo tanks, vapor control, and venting. (4) Cargo piping systems and valves. (5) General operation of cargo pumps. (6) General discussion of operations connected with the loading and dischargingof cargo including: (i) Pre-transfer inspections/conference and Declaration of Inspection.(ii) Lining up the cargo and vapor control systems and start of liquidflow. (iii) Connecting/disconnecting cargo hose/loading arms.(iv) Loading operations. (v) Ballasting and deballasting operations. (vi) Discharging operations. (vii) Tank gauging (open andamp; closed). (7) Coast Guard tankship rules and regulations pertaining to operationalprocedures and pollution prevention. (8) Pollution prevention and control. (9) Emergency procedures. (10) Safety precautions relative to: (i) Entering cargo tanks and pump room. (ii) Dangers of skin contact. (iii) Inhalation of vapors. (iv) Protective clothing and equipment. (v) Hot work procedures. (vi) Electrical and static electricity hazards and precautions. (11) General principles and procedures of Crude Oil Washing (COW) and InertGas Systems (IGS). (12) Tank cleaning operations, procedures, and precautions. (13) Principles and procedures of vapor control systems. (14) Cargo hazard information systems. Liquefied Gas Tankship Familiarization Training Course (a) The curriculum will be evaluated for adequate coverage of the requiredsubjects. Training methods may include classroom instruction, demonstrations,simulated or actual operations. (b) The course shall include as a minimum the following: (1) General characteristics, compatibility, reaction, firefighting proceduresand safety precautions for cargoes defined in 46 CFR part 13 as LiquefiedGases. (2) Liquefied gas tankship terminology. (3) Physical phenomena/properties of liquefied gas. (4) Safety precautions and potential hazards of liquefied gas, including:(i) Combustion characteristics. (ii) Hot work procedures. (iii) Results of gas release to the atmosphere. (iv) Health hazards (skin contact, inhalation and ingestion). (v) Protective clothing and equipment. (vi) Tank entry procedures and precautions. (vii) Thermal stresses. (viii) Electrical and static electricity hazards and precautions. (5) Cargo containment systems. (6) General arrangement and construction of cargo tanks. (7) Cargo piping and valves. (8) Instrumentation systems, including: (i) Cargo level indicators. (ii) Gas detecting systems. (iii) Hull and cargo temperature monitoring systems. (iv) Automatic shut down systems. (9) Cofferdam and ballast tank heating systems. (10) General discussion of operations connected with the loading and dischargingof cargo including: (i) Pre-transfer inspections/conference and Declaration of Inspection.(ii) Lining up the cargo and vapor control systems and start liquid flow.(iii) Connecting/disconnecting cargo hose/loading arms. (iv) Loading operations. (v) Ballasting and deballasting operations.(vi) Discharging operations. (11) Boil-off disposal. (12) Emergency procedures. (13) Coast Guard tankship rules and regulations pertaining to operationalprocedures and pollution prevention. (14) Pollution prevention. (15) Principles and procedures of inert gas systems. (16) Tank cleaning operations and procedures. (17) Principles and procedures of vapor control systems. (18) Cargo hazard information systems. Tank Barge Firefighting Training Course (a) The curriculum will be evaluated for adequate coverage of the requiredsubjects. Training methods must include actual practice in extinguishingthe listed fires and may include classroom instruction, demonstrations,simulated or actual operations. (b) The course shall include as a minimum the following: (1) Fire safety. (i) Basic elements of fire. (A) Fire triangle. (B) Fire classifications. (ii) Ignition sources applicable to barge operations. (iii) Basic flammability/combustibility definitions. (A) Ignition point. (B) Burning temperature.(C) Lower flammable limit. (D) Upper flammable limit. (E) Flammable range. (F) Inerting. (G) Static electricity. (H) Flash point. (I) Autoignition. (iv) Main causes of fires. (A) Oil leakage. (B) Smoking. (C) Spontaneous ignition. (D) Hot work. (E) Reactivity. (F) Overheating pumps. (v) Spread of fire. (A) By radiation. (B) By convection. (C) By conduction. (vi) Fire prevention. (A) General. (B) Fire hazards of DL and LG general cargo classifications as definedin 46 CFR part 13. (C) Means for gas freeing tanks. (vii) Firefighting equipment. (A) Required equipment. (B) Characteristics of available extinguishing agents. (C) Limitations of portable and semiportable extinguishers. (2) Emergency procedures. (i) Initial procedures. (A) Evacuation. (B) Stopping leakage of product. (ii) Basic firefighting techniques. (A) Sounding alarm. (B) Locating and isolating fires. (C) Sizing up situation. (D) Locating information on cargo. (E) Extinguishing with portable units. (F) Setting reflash watch. (G) Using additional personnel. (iii) Extinguisher use on: (A) Flammable/combustible liquids. (B) Manifold flange fire. (C) Drip pan fire. (D) Pump fire. (iv) Fire drills for typical fires. (c) Field exercise training shall include the use of portable extinguisherson the following fires: (i) Electrical fire. (ii) Manifold flange fire. (iii) Drip pan fire. (iv) Pump fire. Tank Barge Dangerous Liquid Cargo Training Course (a) The curriculum will be evaluated for adequate coverage of the requiredsubjects. Training methods may include classroom instruction, demonstrations,simulated or actual operations. (b) The course shall include as a minimum the following: (1) General characteristics, compatibility, reaction, firefighting proceduresand safety precautions for the bulk liquid cargoes defined as DangerousLiquids in 46 CFR part 13. (2) General arrangement of cargo tanks, vapor control, and venting. (3) Cargo piping systems and valves, including remote control, excess flowand pressure-vacuum valves. (4) Operation of cargo pumps. (5) Operations connected with the loading and discharging of cargo including:(i) Lining up the cargo and vapor control systems. (ii) Pre-transfer inspections. (iii) Pre-transfer conference and completion of the Declaration of Inspection.(iv) Hooking up cargo hose and loading arms. (v) Starting liquid flow. (vi) Calculation of loading rates. (vii) Discussion of the loading operation itself. (viii) Ballasting and deballasting operations. (ix) Topping off the cargo tanks. (x) Discussion of the discharging operation itself. (xi) Stripping the cargo tanks. (xii) Monitoring transfer operations. (xiii) Tank gauging (open andamp; closed). (xiv) Disconnecting cargo hoses or loading arms. (6) Practical stress considerations when loading, discharging, and ballastingor deballasting a tank barge. (7) Stability letter requirements. (8) Loadline, draft, and trim considerations. (9) Rules and regulations (tank barge, international and Federal) pertainingto operational procedures and pollution prevention. (10) Pollution prevention and control. (11) Emergency procedures for the following: (i) Fire. (ii) Collision. (iii) Groundings. (iv) Equipment failure. (v) Leaks and spills. (vi) Emergency shutdown. (12) Safety precautions relative to: (i) Testing tank atmospheres for oxygen and hydrocarbon vapors. (ii) Entering cargo tanks, cofferdams and voids. (iii) Dangers of skin contact. (iv) Inhalation of vapors. (v) Protective clothing and equipment. (vi) Hot work procedures. (vii) Electrical and static electricity hazards and precautions. (13) Oil and chemical tank barge terminology. (14) Tank cleaning operations, procedures, and precautions. (15) Cargo hazard information systems. Tank Barge Liquefied Gas Cargo Training Course (a) The curriculum will be evaluated for adequate coverage of the requiredsubjects. Training methods may include classroom instruction, demonstrations,simulated or actual operations. (b) The course shall include as a minimum the following:(1) General characteristics and safety precautions of those liquefied gasesand their vapor defined as Liquefied Gas in 46 CFR part 13. (2) Physical phenomena of liquefied gas, including: (i) Basic concept. (ii) Compression and expansion. (iii) Mechanism of heat transfer. (3) Potential hazards of liquefied gas, including: (i) Chemical and physical properties. (ii) Combustion characteristics. (iii) Hot work procedures. (iv) Results of gas release to the atmosphere. (v) Health hazards (skin contact, inhalation and ingestion). (vi) Protective clothing and equipment. (vii) Tank entry procedures and precautions. (viii) Control of flammability range with inert gas. (ix) Thermal stress in vessel structure and piping. (4) Cargo systems, including: (i) Principles of containment systems. (ii) Tank construction, materials, coatings and insulation. (iii) General arrangement of cargo tanks. (iv) Venting and vapor control systems. (5) Cargo handling systems, including: (i) Piping systems, valves, pumps and expansion systems. (ii) Operating characteristics. (6) Instrumentation systems, including: (i) Cargo level indicators. (ii) Gas detecting systems. (iii) Hull and cargo temperature monitoring systems. (iv) Automatic shut down systems. (7) Auxiliary systems, including: (i) Ventilation, inerting. (ii) Valves, including: (A) Quick closing. (B) Remote control. (C) Pneumatic. (D) Excess flow. (E) Safety relief. (F) Pressure-vacuum. (iii) Cofferdam and ballast tank heating systems. (8) Operations connected with the loading and discharging of cargo including:(i) Lining up the cargo and vapor control systems. (ii) Pre-transfer inspections. (iii) Pre-transfer conference and completion of the Declaration of Inspection.(iv) Hooking up cargo hose and loading arms. (v) Starting liquid flow. (vi) Calculation of loading rates. (vii) Discussion of the loading operation. (viii) Ballasting and deballasting operations. (ix) Topping off the cargo tanks. (x) Discussion of the discharging operation. (xi) Stripping the cargo tanks. (xii) Monitoring transfer operations. (xiii) Disconnecting cargo hoses or loading arms. (9) Practical stress considerations when loading, discharging, and ballastingor deballasting a tank barge. (10) Stability letter requirements. (11) Loadline, draft, and trim considerations. (12) Boil-off disposal, including: (i) System design. (ii) Safety features. (13) Operating procedures and sequence for the following: (i) Inerting cargo tanks and void spaces. (ii) Tank cool down and tank warm up. (iii) Gas freeing. (iv) Loaded or ballasted voyages. (v) Testing tank atmospheres for oxygen and cargo vapor. (14) Emergency procedures for the following: (i) Leaks and spills. (ii) Fires. (iii) Collisions. (iv) Groundings. (v) Structural failures. (vi) Emergency cargo discharge. (vii) Entering cargo tanks. (viii) Emergency shut down of cargo operations. (ix) Emergency cargo valve closing systems. (15) Rules and regulations (tank barge, international and Federal) pertainingto operational procedures and pollution prevention. (16) Pollution prevention, including: (i) Procedures to be followed to prevent air and water pollution.(ii) Measures to be taken in the event of spillage. (iii) Danger from vapor cloud drift. (17) Tank barge terminology. (18) Principles and procedures of vapor control systems, including: (i) Purpose; (ii) Coast Guard regulations. (iii) System principles. (iv) Hazards. (v) Active system components. (vi) Passive system components. (vii) Operating procedures. (viii) Emergency procedures. (19) Cargo hazard information systems. <ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory Evaluation </ITAG>The Coast Guard has evaluated this proposal under Executive Order 12291and the Department of Transportation's regulatory policies and procedures(44 FR 11034; February 26, 1979) and has determined that it is neithera major nor a significant rulemaking. The proposed regulations serve toimplement the intent of the Port and Tanker Safety Act of 1978. A draft regulatory analysis accompanied publication of the previous NPRMconcerning Tankerman in the December 18, 1980, <T4>Federal Register</T4> (45 FR 83290). The impact section of the draftregulatory analysis reviewed costs and benefits which may result from theproposed regulations. A draft Environmental Impact Statement was developed and placed into thedocket for the NPRM and remains essentially unchanged. The proposed tankermanregulations will reduce the number of incidents and volume of bulk liquidcargoes released by tankships and tank barges in United States waters.The Coast Guard estimates that the number of pollution incidents resultingfrom tankerman personnel errors could be reduced between 10% and 30%. Thevolume of pollution resulting from tankerman personnel error could be reducedbetween 10% and 30%. How fast this reduction occurs rslates to the numberof individuals obtaining training and when this training is received. The overall effect of these regulations will be to reduce the amount ofoil entering the navigable waters of the United States. The Coast Guardbelieves that there are no adverse environmental effects resulting fromthe proposed actions. So far as the Coast Guard can determine, these regulationsdo not involve any tradeoffs between short-term environmental gains atthe expense of long-term losses or vice versa, nor are any future optionsforeclosed. No significant irreversible and irretrievable commitments ofresources are involved in this proposed action. It was determined that almost all of the costs resulting from the regulationswould be in the area of training tankermen, a discounted cost of 38.3 million1980 dollars for the first ten years. Several changes to the proposed rulemakingand recent regulatory changes have reduced this projected impact. A revisedregulatory evaluation has been prepared and is included in the docket file.One of the two new major training requirements proposed for tankermen inthe NPRM was the firefighting training requirement. Firefighting trainingbecame a Coast Guard license qualification requirement for licensed personnelin December 1988. For 92% of the licensed personnel effected by the proposedtankerman regulations, the cost of firefighting training is a cost of beinglicensed, not a cost of becoming a qualified tankerman. The proposed firefightingtraining will mainly increase the costs for unlicensed personnel applyingfor the proposed tankerman endorsements. The Maritime Administration (MARAD) has reduced its role in the operationof firefighting training courses. In 1980 MARAD operated the majority ofthe firefighting training courses attended by merchant marine personnel.In the last nine years private industry has begun providing a major portionof the firefighting training. MARAD now operates only one of the 17 CoastGuard approved firefighting courses, and this has reduced MARAD's costs.The NPRM proposed that all personnel having anything to do with bulk liquidcargo or cargo equipment on tank vessels have the experience and trainingneeded to be a person-in-charge (PIC) of a bulk liquid cargo transfer.This required an excessive amount of training and experience for thoseindividuals in the crew supervised by the PIC or not involved in cargotransfer operations. The Coast Guard is now proposing tankerman endorsementswhose experience and training requirements are directly related to thecargo responsibilities the endorsement would authorize. This will ensureapplicants have the experience and training necessary to safely carry outthe responsibilities of their endorsement while avoiding the excessiveexperience and training requirements included in the NPRM.The SNPRM has reduced the number of people who need a tankerman endorsementand the overall amount of training required, without sacrificing safety.The Coast Guard has also dropped the NPRM's mandatory course lengths andexpects this will slightly shorten the training courses. In addition, unlikethe NPRM, the SNPRM does not call for tankermen to attend firefightingor bulk liquid cargo refresher training. The Coast Guard also intends toevaluate and approve company in-house training courses. These changes considerablyreduced the projected training costs.As a result of these and other changes the total cost over the first tenyears has been reduced from 38.3 million 1980 dollars in the draft regulatoryanalysis (estimated 52 million 1988 dollars at 4% inflation) to 15.7 million1988 dollars for the SNPRM. Therefore, this proposal is not consideredto have a significant economic impact on the private or public sectors.Quantifiable benefits resulting from the proposed regulations will accruefrom reductions in vessel casualties, reductions in personnel injuries/deaths,and reductions in pollution incidents and the associated clean up costs.Non-quantifiable benefits resulting from the proposed regulations willbe improved tankerman qualifications that will be standardized nationwideand improved safety and firefighting procedures. The draft regulatory analysis prepared for the NPRM estimated that therewould be an overall reduction of 10 to 30% in tank vessel casualties, injuriesand deaths, and pollution incidents. It is the Coast Guard's view that catastrophic marine casualties resultingfrom tankerman errors will be more likely to result in monetary lossessimilar to the total loss of the SS SANSINENA, National TransportationSafety Board (NTSB) report of November 25, 1977, than the $300,000 lossresulting from the M/V VENUS casualty, NTSB report of August 16, 1974.The Coast Guard believes the proposed regulations will prevent at leastone catastrophic casualty in the first ten years that the regulations arein effect, a $25.5 million savings. The reductions in injuries and deaths brought about by the proposed regulationscould be larger than the estimated overall reduction of 10 to 30%. A largerreduction in this area is possible because catastrophic casualties causea disproportionate share of the injuries and deaths. By preventing evenone of these casualties a significant reduction could be realized, on theorder of 10 to 60%. Without considering the impact of a catastrophic incident,there would be an estimated six to seventeen lives saved and seven to twentyinjuries prevented over the first ten years that the proposed regulationsare in force. The associated hospital costs saved would be relatively insignificant.The amount of money saved through reduced pollution incidents can onlybe estimated. The NPRM draft regulatory analysis estimated a savings ofbetween $1,052,450 and $3,224,047 in 1980 dollars over the first ten yearsthat the regulations are in effect. Over the last five years the CoastGuard Pollution Fund has averaged an annual clean up expenditure of $4,793,747.This expenditure is only for pollution cases where the Federal governmenthas assumed control of the clean up. This cost does not reflect Coast Guardsalary costs or the Coast Guard expense for monitoring third party cleanup operations. The cost to the Coast Guard is only a small portion of thecost of cleaning up pollution, since the vast majority of pollution casesare cleaned up by third parties. There has never been formalized systematic training for tankermen as agroup. The qualification requirements for tankermen have been vague andnot fully documented. This has resulted in a variety of qualification standardsbeing enforced by Coast Guard regional examination centers around the country.By establishing a clear set of tankerman qualification standards and asystematic training requirement the overall quality and effectiveness oftankermen will be increased. This will increase preparedness for emergenciesand the use of proper safety procedures, and result in an increase in theoverall safety of liquid cargo transfer operations. Several alternatives to the proposed regulations, discussed in the NPRM,were considered and the alternative selected is considered the least burdensomeand most effective. This alternative meets the various legislative requirementsfor more stringent and comprehensive standards regarding tankerman imposedby the Port and Tanker Safety Act of 1978 with a minimal disruption inthe operation of the United States Merchant Marine. In accordance with 5 U.S.C. 605(b), the Coast Guard certifies that theseproposed rules will not have a significant economic impact on a substantialnumber of small entities. The cost for training qualified tankerman isrelated to the number of tankermen used, which is in turn related to sizeof the operation a business conducts. <ITAG tagnum="84">Paperwork Reduction Act </ITAG>This proposed rulemaking contains information collection requirements in46 CFR sections 13.113 , 13.115, 13.117, 13.121, 13.201, 13.301, 13.401,and 13.501. With the exception of the requirement to submit a course completioncertificate from a firefighting, a tankship familiarization, and/or a liquidcargo training course, the proposed rule contains no new information collectionrequirements when applying for a tankerman endorsement. The information collection requirements are being submitted to the Officeof Management and Budget for review under the Paperwork Reduction Act (44U.S.C. 3501 <T3>et seq.</T3>). The control numbers listed in 46 CFR 13.105 are controlnumbers assigned by the Office of Management and Budget (OMB) under thePaperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-511) for similar reportingand record keeping requirements. These numbers will be revised as neededin the final rule when the information collection requirements have beenapproved by OMB. The new collection requirements will only affect applicants for tankermanendorsements in that they must provide a certificate as evidence of training.The certificate will be supplied by the training facility which providesthe course(s). The time required to comply with this requirement is inconsequential.<ITAG tagnum="84">Federalism Implications </ITAG>This action has been analyzed in accordance with the principles and criteriacontained in Executive Order 12612, and it has been determined that theproposed rules do not have sufficient federalism implications to warrantthe preparation of a Federalism Assessment. <ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory Information Number </ITAG>A regulatory information number (RIN) is assigned to each regulatory actionlisted in the Unified Agenda of Federal Regulations. The Regulatory InformationService Center publishes the Unified Agenda in April and October of eachyear. The RIN number contained in the heading of this document can be usedto cross reference this action with the Unified Agenda. <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects </ITAG>33 CFR Part 155 Environmental protection, Oil pollution, Vessels, Water pollution control.46 CFR Part 12 Seamen. 46 CFR Part 13 Seamen, Tank vessels, Barges. 46 CFR Part 15 Seamen, Vessels. 46 CFR Part 30 Administrative practice and procedure, Foreign relations, Hazardous materialstransportation, Penalties, Tank vessels, Barges. 46 CFR Part 31 Marine safety, Tank vessels, Barges, Law enforcement, Flammable materials.46 CFR Part 35 Marine safety, Navigation (water), Reporting requirements, Tank vessels,Barges, Seamen. 46 CFR Part 78 Passenger vessels, Marine safety, Foreign trade, Treaties. 46 CFR Part 90 Cargo vessels, Marine safety, Administrative practice and procedure, Authoritydelegation. 46 CFR Part 97 Cargo vessels, Marine safety, Reporting requirements. 46 CFR Part 98 Cargo vessels, Hazardous materials transportation, Marine safety. 46 CFR Part 105 Cargo vessels, Fishing vessels, Hazardous materials transportation, Marinesafety, Petroleum. 46 CFR Part 151 Hazardous materials transportation, Marine safety, Flammable material,Tank vessels, Barges. 46 CFR Part 153 Hazardous materials transportation, Marine safety, Tank vessels, Barges.46 CFR Part 154 Hazardous materials transportation, Marine safety, Tank vessels.In consideration of the foregoing the Coast Guard proposes to amend part155 to title 33, Code of Federal Regulations and parts 12, 13, 15, 30,31, 35, 78, 90, 97, 98, 105, 151, 153, and 154 to title 46, Code of FederalRegulations as set forth below: <ITAG tagnum="72">TITLE 33_NAVIGATION AND NAVlGABLE WATERS </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">SUBCHAPTER O_POLLUTION </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 155_OIL POLLUTION PREVENTION REGULATIONS FOR VESSELS </ITAG>1. The authority citation for part 155 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 33 U.S.C. 1321(j)(1)(C), 1902(c) and 1903(b); E.O.11735; 49 CFR 1.46(m), unless otherwise noted.</ITAG>2-3. Section 155.700 is revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 155.700 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Designation of person-in-charge. </ITAG>The operator or agent of each vessel that has a capacity for 250 or morebarrels of oil or any material that is determined to be hazardous, exceptliquefied gases, under 46 CFR 153.40 (a), (b), (c), or (e), shall designatethe person-in-charge of each transfer operation. Prior to conducting tankcleaning operations on vessels with residues of these products, the operatoror agent of each vessel shall designate the person-in-charge of the tankcleaning operation. 4. Section 155.710 is revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 155.710 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Qualifications of person-in-charge. </ITAG>(a) On a tankship documented under the laws of the United States, the vesseloperator, or his or her agent, shall verify to his or her satisfactionthat an individual designated as a person-in-charge: (1) Of a bulk liquid cargo transfer operation: (i) Has sufficient training and experience with the cargo to be transferred;the cargo containment system; the cargo system; the control and monitoringsystems; and, if installed, the crude oil washing, inert gas, and vaporcontrol systems on the tankship to safely conduct a transfer operation;(ii) Except on tankships not certificated for voyages beyond the BoundaryLine, holds a license issued under 46 CFR part 10 authorizing service asa licensed officer aboard that tankship; and (iii) Holds a ``Tankerman-PIC'' endorsement issued under 46 CFR part 13which authorizes the holder to supervise the handling and transfer of theparticular cargo involved. (2) Of a cargo tank cleaning operation meets paragraph (a)(1) of this section,except: (i) A Coast Guard license is not required; and (ii) If the tankship is at a tank cleaning facility or shipyard, the individualmay hold a marine chemist's certificate issued by the National Fire ProtectionAssociation, in lieu of a ``Tankerman-PIC'' endorsement. (b) On a tank barge required to be inspected under 46 U.S.C. 3703, thevessel operator, or his or her agent, shall verify to his or her satisfactionthat an individual designated as a person-in-charge: (1) Of a bulk liquid cargo transfer operation:(i) Has sufficient training and experience with the cargo to be transferred;the cargo containment system; the cargo system; the control and monitoringsystems; and, if installed, the crude oil washing, inert gas, and vaporcontrol systems on the tank barge to safely conduct a transfer operation;and (ii) Holds a ``Tankerman-PIC'' or ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'' endorsementissued under 46 CFR part 13 which authorizes the holder to supervise thehandling and transfer of the particular cargo involved. (2) Of a cargo tank cleaning operation meets paragraph (b)(1) of this section,except if the tank barge is at a tank cleaning facility or shipyard, heor she may hold a marine chemist's certificate issued by the National FireProtection Association, in lieu of a ``Tankerman-PIC'' or ``Tankerman-PIC(Barge)'' endorsement. (c) On a foreign tankship, the vessel operator, or his or her agent, shallverify to his or her satisfaction that an individual designated as a person-in-chargeof a bulk liquid cargo transfer or cargo tank cleaning operation: (1) Has sufficient training and experience with the cargo to be transferred;the cargo containment system; the cargo system; the control and monitoringsystems; and, if installed, the crude oil washing, inert gas, and vaporcontrol systems on the tankship to safely conduct a transfer operation;(2) Holds a license or other documentation, issued by the vessel's flagstate or its authorized agent, authorizing service as master, mate, engineer,or operator on that vessel; (3) Holds a document acceptable to the Coast Guard attesting to the holder'squalifications to act as a person-in-charge of an oil, chemical or liquefiedgas transfer or cargo tank cleaning operation, as appropriate to the cargo;and (4) Is capable of clearly understanding and speaking, in English, all instructionsneeded to commence, conduct, and terminate cargo transfer operations. Aninterpreter may be used to meet this requirement if the interpreter isimmediately available to the person-in-charge at all times during the cargotransfer operation. (d) On a foreign tank barge, the vessel operator, or his or her agent,shall verify to his or her satisfaction that an individual designated asa person-in-charge of a bulk liquid cargo transfer or cargo tank cleaningoperation: (1) Has sufficient training and experience with the cargo to be transferred;the cargo containment system; the cargo system; the control and monitoringsystems; and, if installed, the crude oil washing, inert gas, and vaporcontrol systems on the tank barge to safely conduct a transfer operation;(2) Holds a document acceptable to the Coast Guard issued by the vessel'sflag state or its authorized agent attesting to the holder's qualificationsto act as a person-in-charge of an oil, chemical or liquefied gas transferor cargo tank cleaning operation, as appropriate to the cargo; and (3) Is capable of clearly understanding and speaking, in English, all instructionsneeded to commence, conduct, and terminate cargo transfer operations. Aninterpreter may be used to meet this requirement if the interpreter isimmediately available to the person-in-charge at all times during the cargotransfer operation. (e) The vessel operator or agent of each vessel to which this section appliesshall verify to his or her satisfaction that an individual designated asa person-in-charge of a fuel oil transfer operation: (1) On a vessel required by 46 CFR chapter I to have a licensed officeron board, holds a valid license issued under 46 CFR part 10 as a master,mate, pilot, engineer, or operator authorizing service as a licensed officeror operator aboard that vessel. (2) On an uninspected vessel of 100 or more gross tons, must have beeninstructed in his or her duties and the Federal Water Pollution laws andregulations that apply to the vessel by the individual in charge of thevessel. (f) On non-tank vessels, the vessel operator, or his or her agent, shallverify to his or her satisfaction that an individual designated as a person-in-charge:(1) Of a bulk liquid cargo transfer operation: (i) For cargo of grades D or E, holds a valid license issued under 46 CFRpart 10 as a master, mate, pilot, engineer, or operator authorizing serviceas a licensed officer or operator aboard that vessel. A ``Tankerman-PIC''endorsement is not required; or (ii) For cargo of grades C and above, cargoes regulated under 46 CFR part153, or liquefied gases, holds a ``Tankerman-PIC'' endorsement for theclassification of cargo carried. (2) Of a cargo tank cleaning operation, meets paragraph (f)(1) of thissection, but if vessel is at a tank cleaning facility or shipyard, he orshe may hold a marine chemist's certificate issued by the National FireProtection Association, in lieu of the requirements of paragraph (f)(1)of this section. <ITAG tagnum="72">TITLE 46_SHIPPING </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">SUBCHAPTER B_MERCHANT MARINE OFFICERS AND SEAMEN </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 12_CERTIFICATION OF SEAMEN </ITAG>5. The authority citation for part 12 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 46 U.S.C. 7301, 7701, 8105, 10104; 49 CFR 1.46. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 12.01-5 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended] </ITAG>6.-7.Paragraph (d) of andSection; 12.01-5 is removed.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;andSection; 12.20-1 through 12.20-5 (Subpart 12.20) </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Removed]</ITAG>8. Subpart 12.20, consisting of andSection; 12.20-1 through andSection; 12.20-5,is removed. 9. Part 13 is added to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 13_CERTIFICATION OF TANKERMEN </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart A_General </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.101 Purpose. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.103 Definitions. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.105 Paperwork approval. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.107 Tankerman endorsements. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.109 Tankerman endorsements: authorized cargoes. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.111 Restricted endorsements. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.113 Tankerman certificated under prior regulations. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.115 Licensed engineers with service on tankships prior to [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>]. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.117 Personnel with service on tankships prior to [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>]. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.119 Expiration date. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.121 Tankerman training courses. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.123 Recency of service. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.125 Physical requirements. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart B_Requirements for ``Tankerman-PIC'' Endorsements </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.201 Original application for ``Tankerman-PIC'' endorsements. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.203 Eligibility requirements: service. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.205 Documentation of service for ``Tankerman-PIC'' endorsements.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.207 Eligibility requirements: firefighting training. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.209 Eligibility requirements: cargo training. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart C_Requirements for ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'' Endorsements</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.301 Original application for ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'' endorsements.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.303 Eligibility requirements: service. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.305 Documentation of service for ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'' endorsements.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.307 Eligibility requirements: firefighting training. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.309 Eligibility requirements: cargo training or examination. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.311 ``Competent person'' requirements for restricted ``Tankerman-PIC(Barge)'' endorsements. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart D_Requirements for ``Tankerman-Assistant'' Endorsements </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.401 Original application for ``Tankerman-Assistant'' endorsements.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.403 Eligibility requirements: service. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.405 Documentation of service for ``Tankerman-Assistant'' endorsements.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.407 Eligibility requirements: firefighting training. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.409 Eligibility requirements: cargo training. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart E_Requirements for ``Tankerman-Engineer'' Endorsements </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.501 Original application for ``Tankerman-Engineer'' endorsements.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.503 Eligibility requirements: service. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.505 Documentation of service for ``Tankerman-Engineer'' endorsements.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.507 Eligibility requirements: firefighting training. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13.509 Eligibility requirements: cargo training.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>46 U.S.C. 3703, 7317, 8105, 8703, 9102; 49 CFR 1.46.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart A_General </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.101 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Purpose. </ITAG>This part describes the various tankerman endorsements that are issuedby the Coast Guard and prescribes the requirements for obtaining a ``Tankerman-Assistant,''``Tankerman-PIC,'' ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge),'' or ``Tankerman-Engineer''endorsement on a merchant mariner's document. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.103</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Definitions. </ITAG>As used in this part: <T3>``Bulk liquid cargo''</T3> means a liquid or liquefied gas listed in46 CFR 153.40 carried as liquid cargo or cargo residue in integral or fixedtanks. <T3>``Cargo engineer''</T3> means an individual on a liquefied gas tankshipwhose primary responsibility is maintaining the cargo system and equipment.<T3>``Competent person''</T3> means a person designated a ``competent person''in accordance with 29 CFR 1915.7. <T3>``Dangerous Liquid''</T3> or ``DL'' means a liquid listed in 46 CFR153.40 that is not a liquefied gas as defined in this part. Bulk liquidcargoes in 46 CFR Part 153 Table 2 are not considered Dangerous Liquidcargoes when carried by non-oceangoing barges. <T3>``Equivalent transfers''</T3> means transfer experience gained in aliquid cargo training course that uses simulation training that can beused to meet a portion of the tankerman transfer service required by andSection;13.203 or andSection; 13.303. <T3>``Liquefied Gas''</T3> or ``LG'' means a cargo having a vapor pressureof 172 kPa (25 psia) or more at 37.8 anddegrees;C (100 anddegrees;F). <T3>``MMD''</T3> is an abbreviation for merchant mariner's document. <T3>``Participation''</T3> when used with regard to gaining the tankermantransfer service required by andSection; 13.203 or andSection; 13.303, meansa person has participated in the transfer operation or has closely observedhow the transfer operation is conducted and supervised. <T3>``PIC''</T3> is an abbreviation for person-in-charge. <T3>``Tank barge''</T3> means a non-self-propelled tank vessel.<T3>``Tank vessel''</T3> means a vessel especially constructed or convertedto carry liquid bulk cargo in tanks.<T3>``Tankerman-Assistant''</T3> means a person holding a valid ``Tankerman-Assistant''endorsement to their Coast Guard issued MMD.<T3>``Tankerman-Engineer''</T3> means a person holding a valid ``Tankerman-Engineer''endorsement to their Coast Guard issued MMD. <T3>``Tankerman-PIC''</T3> means a person holding a valid ``Tankerman-PIC''endorsement to their Coast Guard issued MMD. <T3>``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)''</T3> means a person holding a valid ``Tankerman-PIC(Barge)'' endorsement to their Coast Guard issued MMD.<T3>``Tankship''</T3> means any tank vessel propelled by power or sail.<T3>``Work shift''</T3> means a period of at least four hours during whichan individual participates in a liquid cargo transfer operation. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.105</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Paperwork approval. </ITAG>(a) This section lists the control numbers assigned by the Office of Managementand Budget under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (Pub. L. 96-511) forthe reporting and record keeping requirements in this part. (b) The following control numbers have been assigned to the sections indicated:(1) OMB 2115-0514_46 CFR 13.113, 13.115, 13.117, 13.201, 13.203, 13.205,13.301, 13.303, 13.305, 13.401, 13.403, 13.405, 13.501, 13.503, 13.505(2) OMB 2115-0111_46 CFR 13.113, 13.121, 13.207, 13.209, 13.307, 13.309,13.407, 13.409, 13.507, 13.509. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.107</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Tankerman endorsements. </ITAG>(a) If an applicant meets the requirements of Subpart B of this Part, theapplicant's MMD is endorsed as ``Tankerman-PIC'' with the appropriate cargoclassification(s). A person with this endorsement and meeting the otherrequirements of 33 CFR 710 may be the person-in-charge of liquid cargotransfer operations on tankships or tank barges. (b) If an applicant meets the requirements of subpart C of this part, theapplicant's MMD is endorsed as ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'' with the appropriatecargo classification(s). A person with this endorsement may be a person-in-chargeof liquid cargo transfer operations only on tank barges. (c) If an applicant meets the requirements of subpart D of this part, theapplicant's MMD is endorsed as ``Tankerman-Assistant'' with the appropriatecargo classification(s). A ``Tankerman-Assistant'' is not authorized tobe in charge of liquid cargo transfer operations. A ``Tankerman-Assistant''may, however, perform cargo and cargo equipment duties assigned by theperson-in-charge of liquid cargo transfer operations without being underthe PIC's direct supervision. (d) If an applicant meets the requirements of subpart E of this part, theapplicant's MMD is endorsed as ``Tankerman-Engineer.'' A ``Tankerman-Engineer''is not authorized to be in charge of liquid cargo transfer operations ontank vessels. An individual with this endorsement may serve as a chiefengineer, first assistant engineer or cargo engineer on board a tankshipwhen bulk liquid cargo or cargo residue is carried, if the person holdsthe appropriate Coast Guard license issued under 46 CFR part 10 requiredfor the position. (e) A tankerman wishing to qualify for a tankerman endorsement that hedoes not currently hold must make application at a regional examinationcenter (REC) listed in 46 CFR 10.105. If the applicant satisfies all requirementsfor the new endorsement, a new MMD will be issued including the desiredtankerman endorsement. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.109</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Tankerman endorsements: authorized cargoes. </ITAG>(a) Each tankerman endorsement described in andSection; 13.107 will expresslylimit the holder's service under that endorsement to transfers involvingone or both of the following cargo classifications: (1) Dangerous Liquids (DL). (2) Liquefied Gas (LG). (b) No tankerman endorsement is required to handle or transfer the bulkliquid cargoes listed in 46 CFR Part 153 Table 2 when those cargoes arecarried on non-oceangoing barges. (c) A tankerman qualified in one cargo classification wishing to qualifyfor an additional cargo classification must make application at a regionalexamination center (REC) listed in 46 CFR 10.105. If the applicant satisfiesall requirements for the cargo classification desired, a new MMD will beissued with the appropriate endorsement. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.111</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Restricted endorsements. </ITAG>Applicants for tankerman endorsements may apply for endorsements that arerestricted to specific cargoes or groups of cargoes, specific vessels,specific transfer facilities, specific employers, etc. The Officer in ChargeMarine Inspection (OCMI) will evaluate these applications, and may reducethe applicable requirements for the endorsement, making allowance for specialcircumstances and the limitations that will be placed in the endorsement.The specific requirements for a restricted endorsement for a ``competentperson'' are contained in andSection; 13.311. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.113</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Tankerman certificated under prior regulations. </ITAG>(a) A person who holds a ``Tankerman'' endorsement issued prior to [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>] or holds a Coast Guard license issued under46 CFR part 10 and as a PIC transferred bulk liquid cargoes before [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>] may continue to serve as a PIC under the``Tankerman'' endorsement or previous transfer authority authorized bythe individual's license until [<T3>Insert the date five years after the Effective Date</T3>].(b) Personnel qualifying under paragraph (a) of this section may act as``Tankerman-Assistant,'' ``Tankerman-PIC,'' or ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge),''as appropriate, during the five year transition period that ends [<T3>Insert the date five years after the Effective Date</T3>] as follows:(1) Personnel with an existing tankerman endorsement may act as a ``Tankerman-Assistant''or ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'' for the cargoes on the endorsement. If a personwith an existing tankerman endorsement applies for some non-tankerman endorsementthat requires the issuance of a new MMD the existing endorsement will beretained. (2) A licensed individual qualifying under paragraph (a) of this sectionand not having an MMD with a new tankerman endorsement may act as a ``Tankerman-Assistant''or ``Tankerman-PIC'' if they can produce a service letter documenting theirqualifying service as required in paragraph (c) of this section. (3) Personnel who have been the person-in-charge for the transfer of SubchapterO bulk liquid cargoes which did not require a tankerman document becausethe cargoes were non-flammable and/or non-combustible liquids may act asa ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'' if they can produce a service letter documentingtheir qualifying service as required in paragraph (d) of this section.(4) Competent persons shall obtain a new tankerman endorsement prior to[<T3>Insert the date six months after the Effective Date</T3>]. (5) Individuals who cannot obtain a service letter to document their qualifyingservice may submit relevant documentation to an REC for evaluation. Ifthe OCMI determines that the individual does qualify under paragraph (a)of this section, the OCMI will issue a letter of acknowledgment as a substitutefor a letter of service. (c) A person who holds a ``Tankerman'' endorsement issued prior to [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>] or holds a Coast Guard license issued under46 CFR part 10 and as a PIC transferred bulk liquid cargoes before [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>] may, at any time prior to [<T3>Insert the date five years after the Effective Date</T3>], apply fora ``Tankerman-PIC'' endorsement under this Subpart. (1) To qualify for a ``Tankerman-PIC'' endorsement, the applicant mustmeet the following training and service requirements: (2) Present a certificate of completion from a Coast Guard approved shipboardfirefighting training course. Completion of a marine firefighting trainingcourse prior to [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>] may be accepted as meeting the shipboardfirefighting training course requirement if the Coast Guard finds thatthe course is in substantial compliance with the basic shipboard firefightingtraining requirements of International Maritime Organization (IMO) ResolutionA.437 (XI) ``Training of Crews in Fire Fighting''; (ii) Present a certificate of completion from a Coast Guard approved liquidcargo training course, appropriate to the desired endorsement. Completionof a course up to ten years prior to [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>] may be accepted as meeting this liquidcargo training course requirement if the Coast Guard finds that the courseis in substantial compliance with the course guidelines established bythe Coast Guard as the basis for approval of a Tankship Dangerous LiquidCargo Training Course or a Tankship Liquefied Gas Cargo Training Courseas appropriate for the cargo classification applied for; and (iii) Present evidence of service as follows: (A) Present a letter of service on company letterhead documenting: (<T3>1</T3>) That the applicant acted as the person-in-charge of bulk liquidcargo transfer operations on tankships prior to [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>] and has done so within three years of thedate of application;(<T3>2</T3>) The applicant's tankship service; (<T3>3</T3>) The applicant's transfer experience; and (<T3>4</T3>) The cargo classification, DL and/or LG, and grades handled.(B) Applicants who wish to present evidence of service in the form of dischargesfrom tankships rather than a letter of service from a company must: (<T3>1</T3>) Present discharges totaling at least 30 days of service asmaster or chief mate prior to [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>]. Time documented by discharges from a tankshipas second or third mate will be counted on a two for one basis; and (<T3>1</T3>) Present at least one discharge from a tankship where the dischargedate is within three years of the date of application. (<T3>2</T3>) To qualify for a DL cargo endorsement an applicant must havebeen a person-in-charge of a DL cargo transfer, or have the equivalentof at least 30 days service as a master or chief mate on tankships certificatedto carry DL cargoes. (3) To qualify for an LG cargo endorsement an applicant must have beena person-in-charge of an LG cargo transfer, or have the equivalent of atleast 30 days service as a master or chief mate on tankships certificatedto carry LG cargoes. (4) Applicants seeking a ``Tankerman-PIC'' endorsement restricted, basedon the individual's cargo handling experience, to the cargo grades thatthey have handled must meet all the requirements of paragraphs (c)(1) through(c)(3) of this section except the liquid cargo training course requirements.(d) A person who holds a ``Tankerman'' endorsement issued prior to [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>] or holds a Coast Guard license issued under46 CFR Part 10 and as a PIC transferred bulk liquid cargoes before [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>] may, at any time prior to [<T3>Insert the date five years after the Effective Date</T3>], apply fora ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'' endorsement under this Subpart.(1) To qualify for a ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'' endorsement, the applicantmust meet the following training and service requirements: (i) Present evidence of firefighting training in the form of: (A) A certificate of completion from a Coast Guard approved shipboard firefightingtraining course. Completion of a marine firefighting training course priorto [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>] may be accepted as meeting the shipboardfirefighting training course requirement if the Coast Guard finds thatthe course is in substantial compliance with the basic shipboard firefightingtraining requirements of IMO Resolution A.437 (XI) ``Training of Crewsin Fire Fighting''; (B) A certificate of completion from a Coast Guard approved tank bargefirefighting training course. Completion of a marine firefighting trainingcourse prior to [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>] may be accepted as meeting the tank bargefirefighting training course requirement if the Coast Guard finds thatthe course is in substantial compliance with the requirements of the tankbarge firefighting training course guidelines established by the GoastGuard; or (C) A letter on company letterhead certifying that the applicant has receivedflammability hazard awareness and firefighting training in the form ofa training program, lecture, or seminar which also included hands-on firefightingtraining; (ii) Present a certificate of completion from a Coast Guard approved liquidcargo training course, appropriate to the desired endorsement. Completionof a course up to ten years prior to [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>]) may be accepted as meeting this liquidcargo training course requirement if the Coast Guard finds that the courseis in substantial compliance with the course guidelines established bythe Coast Guard as the basis for approval of a Tankship or Tank Barge DangerousLiquid Cargo Training course or a Tankship or Tank Barge Liquefied GasCargo Training course as appropriate for the cargo classification appliedfor; and (iii) Present a letter of service on company letterhead documenting: (A) That the applicant acted as the person-in-charge of bulk liquid cargotransfer operations on tank vessels prior to [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>] and has done so within three years of thedate of application; (B) The applicant's tank vessel service; (C) The applicant's transfer experience; and (D) The cargo classification, DL and/or LG, and grades handled. (2) To qualify for a DL cargo endorsement an applicant must have been aperson-in-charge of a DL cargo transfer, or have the equivalent of at least30 days service as a master or chief mate on tank vessels certificatedto carry DL cargoes. Time documented by discharges from a tankship as secondor third mate will be counted on a two for one basis. (3) To qualify for an LG cargo endorsement an applicant must have beena person-in-charge of an LG cargo transfer, or have the equivalent of atleast 30 days service as a master or chief mate on tank vessels certificatedto carry LG cargoes. Time documented by discharges from a tankship as secondor third mate will be counted on a two for one basis. (4) Applicants seeking a ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'' endorsement restricted,based on the individual's cargo handling experience, to the cargo gradesthat they have handled must meet all the requirements of paragraphs (d)(1)through (3) of this section except the liquid cargo training course requirements.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.115 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Licensed engineers with service on tankships prior to [Insert EffectiveDate]. </ITAG>(a) A person who has service as chief, first assistant, or cargo engineeron tankships before [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>] may, at any time prior to [<T3>Insert the date five years after the Effective Date</T3>], apply fora ``Tankerman-Engineer'' endorsement under this Subpart if the applicant:(1) Presents a letter of service on company letterhead documenting: (i) That the applicant served as a chief, first assistant, or cargo engineeron a tankship prior to [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>]; (ii) The cargo classifications, DL and/or LG, and cargo grades carriedby the vessels; and (iii) That the applicant has served as an engineer on a tankship withinthree years of the date of application. The applicant may use a certificateof discharge to meet this requirement; or (2) Presents discharges from tankships: (i) Totaling 30 days of service as chief, first assistant, or cargo engineerprior to [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>]; and (ii) At least one discharge for service as an engineer on tankships wherethe discharge date is within three years of the date of application. (b) To qualify for a DL cargo endorsement, the applicant must documentat least 30 days service as a chief or first assistant engineer on tankvessels certificated to carry DL cargoes. (c) To qualify for an LG cargo endorsement, the applicant must documentat least 30 days service as a chief, first assistant, or cargo engineeron tank vessels certificated to carry LG cargoes. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.117 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Personnel with service on tankships prior to [Insert Effective Date].</ITAG>(a) A person who has deck service on tankships before [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>] may, at any time prior to [<T3>Insert the date five years after the Effective Date</T3>], apply fora ``Tankerman-Assistant'' endorsement under this subpart if the applicantdischarges from tankships totaling at least 30 days of deck service priorto [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>] with at least one discharge for deck serviceon a tankship where the discharge date is within three years of the dateof application. (b) To qualify for a DL endorsement, the applicant must document at least30 days deck service on tankships certificated to carry DL cargoes. (c) To qualify for an LG endorsement, the applicant must document at least30 days deck service on tankships certificated to carry LG cargoes. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.119 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Expiration date. </ITAG>A tankerman endorsement on a merchant mariner's document does not expire.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.121 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Tankerman training courses. </ITAG>(a) This section prescribes the requirements, in addition to those containedin 46 CFR 10.302 and 10.303, applicable to organizations offering coursesrequired for a tankerman endorsement or courses that are a substitute forthe service required for such an endorsement. (b) Upon satisfactory completion of an approved course of instruction,students shall receive a certificate, signed by the head of the organizationor a designated representative, in a form approved by the Commandant, indicatingthe title of the course, its duration, and any credit allowed towards meetingthe transfer service requirements of this part. (c) Liquid cargo training and tankship familiarization training coursesthat use simulation or other equivalent training techniques which allowstudents to be trained in, and practice, tank vessel loading and dischargetransfer operations will be evaluated to determine whether this trainingmay be substituted for any of the transfers required for a ``Tankerman-PIC''or ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'' endorsement. The Coast Guard course approvalletter will state the number and type of equivalent transfers to be grantedto an applicant upon successful completion of a particular training course.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.123</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Recency of service.</ITAG>Except for applicants under andSection; 13.113, an applicant for any tankermanendorsement must have at least 25% of the required qualifying service andat least two of the qualifying transfers, if the endorsement requires transferexperience, required by the applicable sections of this Part within thethree years immediately preceding the date of application.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.125</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Physical requirements.</ITAG>(a) All applicants for an original tankerman endorsement must pass an examinationgiven by a licensed physician or a licensed physician assistant and presentto the OCMI a completed Coast Guard physical examination form, or the equivalent,executed by the physician. This form must provide information on the applicant'sacuity of vision, color sense, and general physical condition. This examinationmust have been completed prior to submission of the application and notmore than 12 months prior to issuance of the endorsement.(b) The applicant must have correctable vision to at least 20/50 in eacheye and uncorrected vision of at least 20/200 in each eye, and the abilityto distinguish the colors of red, green, blue, and yellow.(c) Where an applicant does not possess the vision, hearing, or generalphysical condition necessary, the OCMI, after consultation with the examiningphysician or physician's assistant, may recommend a waiver to the Commandantif extenuating circumstances warrant special consideration. Applicantsmay submit to the OCMI, additional correspondence, records and reportsin support of this request. In this regard, recommendations from agenciesof the Federal Government operating government vessels, as well as ownersand operators of private vessels, made in behalf of their employees, willbe given full consideration. Waivers are not normally granted to an applicantwhose corrected vision in the better eye is not at least 20/50.<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart B_Requirements for ``Tankerman-PIC'' Endorsements</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.201</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Original application for ``Tankerman-PIC'' endorsements.</ITAG>To qualify for a ``Tankerman-PIC'' endorsement, an applicant must:(a) Be at least 18 years of age;(b) Apply in writing on a Coast Guard form;(c) Present evidence of a physical examination as required by andSection;13.125;(d) Present evidence of service on tankships in accordance with andSection;13.203;(e) Meet the shipboard firefighting training course requirements in andSection;13.207;(f) Meet the liquid cargo training course requirements in andSection; 13.209;and(g) Be capable of clearly understanding and speaking, in English, all instructionsneeded to commence, conduct, and terminate cargo transfer operations.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.203</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Eligibility requirements: service.</ITAG>Each applicant for a ``Tankerman-PIC'' DL or LG endorsement must:(a) Present evidence of the following service:(1) At least 30 days of licensed deck service on tankships certificatedto carry DL or LG cargoes as appropriate for the endorsement applied for;(2) At least 60 days of unlicensed deck service on tankships certificatedto carry DL or LG cargoes as appropriate for the endorsement applied for;or(3) A mixture of licensed and unlicensed deck service, which is the equivalentof at least 30 days of licensed deck service, wherein the unlicensed servicemay count as licensed service on a two for one basis; and(b) Present evidence of participation, under the supervision of a ``Tankerman-PIC,''in at least ten bulk liquid cargo transfer operations of the cargo classificationdesired on tankships, including:(1) At least five loading transfer operations and five discharge transferoperations;(2) At least one loading transfer operation commencement and one loadingtransfer operation completion; and(3) At least one discharge transfer operation commencement and one dischargetransfer operation completion.(c) If the applicant already has a ``Tankerman-PIC'' DL or LG endorsementand is applying for the other cargo classification endorsement, that individualmust:(1) Provide only half the evidence of service required in paragraph (a)of this section; and(2) Meet the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section except thatthe applicant need only provide evidence of three loading and three dischargetransfer operations.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.205</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Documentation of service for ``Tankerman-PIC'' endorsements.</ITAG>(a) Service must be documented by a letter from the owner, operator, ormaster of the vessel on which the service was obtained. The letter mustspecify:(1) The grades of cargo (DL, LG, or specific products for a restrictedendorsement) handled while the applicant accumulated the service;(2) The number and types of transfer operations that the applicant hasparticipated in, and the number of such operations which involved the commencementor completion of the transfer.(3) That the applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the signerthat they are fully capable of supervising liquid cargo transfer operationsincluding:(i) Pre-transfer inspections;(ii) Pre-transfer conference and execution of the Declaration of Inspection;(iii) Connection of cargo hoses or loading arms;(iv) Line up of the cargo system for loading and discharging;(v) Start of liquid flow during loading;(vi) Cargo pump startup and increase to full pressure for a discharge operation;(vii) Calculation of loading rates;(viii) Monitoring cargo transfer operations;(ix) Topping off the cargo tanks during loading;(x) Stripping out the cargo tanks;(xi) Ballasting and deballasting, if appropriate; and(xii) Disconnecting the cargo hoses or loading arms upon completion ofthe transfer.(b) For the purpose of evaluating the transfer service requirements ofandSection; 13.203(b) of this subpart:(1) A transfer must involve the loading or discharge of at least one ofthe vessel's tanks to or from a shore facility or another vessel. An internaltransfer of cargo from one tank to another is not a transfer for purposesof meeting the transfer service requirements for a ``Tankerman-PIC'' endorsement.(2) A 4-hour work shift must be worked to obtain credit for a transferoperation. If, during the course of a single transfer operation, a personstands more than one 4-hour work shift, they will only receive credit forone transfer operation.(3) If, during the course of a single transfer operation, a person standsmore than one 4-hour work shift and participates in the commencement andthe completion of the operation, they will receive credit for one commencementand one completion.(4) If different products are being loaded or discharged at the same time,a person will only receive credit for one transfer operation.(5) If different products are being loaded and discharged at the same time,a person will receive credit for one loading transfer operation and onedischarging transfer operation.(6) Credit for a partial 4-hour work shift is received only if the shiftincludes either the hooking up and commencement of transfer or the completionof transfer and disconnecting.(7) Credit for a loading transfer operation commencement is received onlyif the person participates in the pre-transfer inspection, the pre-transfermeeting and execution of the Declaration of Inspection, the connectionof hoses or loading arms, the line up of the cargo system for the transfer,the start of liquid flow, and the calculation of the loading rate(s).(8) Credit for a discharge transfer operation commencement is receivedonly if the person participates in the pre-transfer inspection, the pre-transfermeeting and execution of the Declaration of Inspection, the connectionof hoses or loading arms, the line up of cargo system for the transfer,the cargo pump start up and increase to the normal discharge pressure,and the calculation of the discharge rate(s).(9) Credit for a transfer operation completion is received only if theperson participates in the topping off operation in the loading port, orthe stripping of cargo tanks and commencement of ballasting, if requiredby the vessel's transfer procedures, in the discharge port.(c) Applicants may present certificates of completion from a Coast Guardapproved tankship liquid cargo training or tankship familiarization coursethat indicate that the training was equivalent to a specified number andtype of transfers. These equivalent transfers will be counted for purposesof meeting the tankerman transfer service requirements of this section.An applicant may not use equivalent transfers to meet the entire transferservice requirements. At least one loading transfer and one dischargingtransfer must have been obtained on-board a tankship.(d) Letters attesting to only part of the applicant's total service requirementsunder andSection; 13.203 of this subpart must state the grades of cargo handled,how many of the different types of transfers the applicant participatedin, and the number of such operations which involved the commencement orcompletion of the transfer. If the applicant demonstrated any of the skillsrequired in paragraph (a)(3) of this section, this must be documented inthe letter.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.207</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Eligibility requirements; firefighting training.</ITAG>To be eligible for a ``Tankerman-PIC'' endorsement, each applicant must:(a) Present a certificate of completion from a Coast Guard approved basic,or basic and advanced shipboard firefighting training course, completedwithin five years of the date of application for the ``Tankerman-PIC''endorsement, unless a certificate of completion for one of these courseshas been previously submitted for a license or tankerman endorsement; or(b) Present a certificate of completion from a marine firefighting trainingcourse during the five years preceding [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>] that the Coast Guard finds in substantialcompliance with the firefighting training course guidelines establishedby the Coast Guard as the basis for approval of a shipboard firefightingcourse under andSection; 13.302 of this subchapter.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.209</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Eligibility requirements; cargo training.</ITAG>(a) To be eligible for an original ``Tankerman-PIC-DL'' endorsement, eachapplicant must:(1) Present a certificate of course completion from a Coast Guard approvedtraining course for tankships for DL cargoes within two years of the dateof application; or(2) Present a certificate of completion from a DL cargo training courseduring the five years preceding [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>] that the Coast Guard finds in substantialcompliance with the tankship DL cargo training course guidelines establishedby the Coast Guard as the basis for approval of a DL cargo course underandSection; 10.302 of this subchapter.(b) To be eligible for an original ``Tankerman-PIC-LG'' endorsement, eachapplicant must:(1) Present a certificate of course completion from a Coast Guard approvedtraining course for tankships for LG cargoes as defined by this Part withintwo years of the date of application; or(2) Present a certificate of completion from an LG cargo training courseduring the five years preceding [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>] that the Coast Guard finds in substantialcompliance with the tankship LG cargo training course guidelines establishedby the Coast Guard as the basis for approval of an LG cargo course underandSection; 10.302 of this subchapter.<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart C_Requirements for ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'' Endorsements</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.301</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Original application for ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'' endorsements.</ITAG>To qualify for a ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'' endorsement, an applicant must:(a) Be at least 18 years of age;(b) Apply in writing on a Coast Guard form;(c) Present evidence of a physical examination as required by andSection;13.125;(d) Present evidence of service on tank barges in accordance with andSection;13.303;(e) Meet the shipboard firefighting training course requirements in andSection;13.307;(f) Meet the liquid cargo training course requirements in andSection; 13.309of this Subpart or successfully pass a Coast Guard examination on the knowledgeand skills needed to be a ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)''; and(g) Be capable of clearly understanding and speaking, in English, all instructionsneeded to commence, conduct, and terminate cargo transfer operations.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.303</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Eligibility requirements; service.</ITAG>An applicant for a ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'' DL or LG endorsement must:(a) Present evidence of the following service:(1) At least six months service on tankships or tank barges certificatedto carry DL or LG cargoes as appropriate for the endorsement applied for;or(2) At least 60 days service on tankships or tank barges certificated tocarry DL or LG cargoes as appropriate for the endorsement applied for andpresent a certificate of completion from a cargo training course as appropriatefor the endorsement applied for as prescribed in andSection; 13.309; and(b) Present evidence of participation, under the supervision of a ``Tankerman-PIC''or ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'', in at least ten bulk liquid cargo transferoperations of the cargo classification desired on tankships or tank barges,including:(1) At least five loading transfer operations and five discharge transferoperations;(2) At least one loading transfer operation commencement and one loadingtransfer operation completion; and(3) At least one discharge transfer operation commencement and one dischargetransfer operation completion.(c) If the applicant already has a ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'' DL or LG endorsementand is applying for the other cargo classification endorsement, that individualmust:(1) Provide only half the evidence of service required in paragraph (a)of this section; and(2) Meet the requirements of paragraph (b) of this section except thatthe applicant need only provide evidence of three loading and three dischargetransfer operations.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.305 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Documentation of service for ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'' endorsements.</ITAG>(a) Service must be documented by a letter from a terminal owner or operator;a tank barge owner or operator; a tankering services employer; or the owner,operator, or master of a tankship on which the service was obtained. Theletter must specify:(1) The grades of cargo (DL, LG, or specific products for a restrictedendorsement) handled while the applicant accumulated the service;(2) The number and types of transfer operations that the applicant hasparticipated in, and the number of such operations which involved the commencementor completion of the transfer.(3) That the applicant has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the signerthat they are fully capable of supervising liquid cargo transfer operationsincluding:(i) Pre-transfer inspections;(ii) Pre-transfer conference and execution of the Declaration of Inspection;(iii) Connection of cargo hoses or loading arms;(iv) Line up of the cargo system for loading and discharging;(v) Start of liquid flow during loading;(vi) Cargo pump start up and increase to full pressure for a dischargeoperation;(vii) Calculation of loading rates;(viii) Monitoring cargo transfer operations;(ix) Topping off the cargo tanks during loading;(x) Stripping out the cargo tanks; (xi) Ballasting and deballasting, if appropriate; and(xii) Disconnecting the cargo hoses or loading arms upon completion ofthe transfer.(b) For the purpose of evaluating the transfer service requirements ofandSection; 13.303(b) of this subpart:(1) A transfer must involve the loading or discharge of at least one ofthe vessel's tanks to or from a shore facility or another vessel. An internaltransfer of cargo from one tank to another is not a transfer for purposesof meeting the transfer service requirements for a ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)''endorsement.(2) A 4-hour work shift must be worked to obtain credit for a transferoperation. If, during the course of a single transfer operation, a personstands more than one 4-hour work shift, they will only receive credit forone transfer operation.(3) If, during the course of a single transfer operation, a person standsmore than one 4-hour work shift and participates in the commencement andthe completion of the operation, they will receive credit for one commencementand one completion.(4) If different products are being loaded or discharged at the same time,a person will only receive credit for one transfer operation.(5) If different products are being loaded and discharged at the same time,a person will receive credit for one loading transfer operation and onedischarging transfer operation.(6) Credit for a partial 4-hour work shift is received only if the shiftincludes either the hooking up and commencement of transfer or the completionof transfer and disconnecting.(7) Credit for a loading transfer operation commencement is received onlyif the person participates in the pre-transfer inspection, the pre-transfermeeting and execution of the Declaration of Inspection, the connectionof hoses or loading arms, the line up of the cargo system for the transfer,the start of liquid flow, and the calculation of the loading rate(s).(8) Credit for a discharge transfer operation commencement is receivedonly if the person participates in the pre-transfer inspection, the pre-transfermeeting and execution of the Declaration of Inspection, the connectionof hoses or loading arms, the line up of cargo system for the transfer,the cargo pump start up and increase to the normal discharge pressure,and the calculation of the discharge rate(s).(9) Credit for a transfer operation is received only if the person participatesin the topping off operation in the loading port, or the stripping of cargotanks and commencement of ballasting, if required by the vessel's transferprocedures, in the discharge port.(c) Applicants may present certificates of completion from a Coast Guardapproved tankship or tank barge liquid cargo training course, or a tankshipfamiliarization training course that indicate that the training was equivalentto a specified number and type of transfers. These equivalent transferswill be counted for purposes of meeting the tankerman transfer servicerequirements of this section. An applicant may not use equivalent transfersto meet the entire transfer service requirements. At least one loadingtransfer and one discharging transfer must have been obtained on-boarda tankship or tank barge.(d) Letters attesting to only part of the applicant's total service requirementsunder andSection; 13.303 must state the grades of cargo handled, how manyof the different types of transfers the applicant participated in, andthe number of such operations which involved the commencement or completionof the transfer. If the applicant demonstrated any of the skills requiredin paragraph (a)(3) of this section, this must be documented in the letter.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.307 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Eligibility requirements: firefighting training.</ITAG>To be eligible for a ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'' endorsement, each applicantmust:(a) Present a certificate of completion from a Coast Guard approved basic,or basic and advanced shipboard firefighting training course, completedwithin five years of the date of application for the ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)''endorsement, unless a certificate of completion for one of these courseshas been submitted for a previous license or tankerman endorsement;(b) Present a certificate of completion from a Coast Guard approved tankbarge firefighting training course, completed within five years of thedate of application for the ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'' endorsement, unlessa certificate of completion for this course has been submitted for a previoustankerman endorsement; or(c) Present a certificate of completion from a marine firefighting trainingcourse or tank barge firefighting training course during the five yearspreceding [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>] that the Coast Guard finds in substantialcompliance with the firefighting training course or tank barge firefightingtraining course guidelines established by the Coast Guard as the basisfor approval of a tank barge firefighting course under andSection; 10.302of this subchapter.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.309 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Eligibility requirements: cargo training or examination.</ITAG>(a) To be eligible for an original ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)-DL'' endorsement,each applicant must:(1) Present a certificate of course completion from a Coast Guard approvedtraining course for tankships or tank barges for DL cargoes as definedin this part within two years of the date of application; or(2) Present a certificate of completion from a DL cargo training courseduring the five years preceding [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>] that the Coast Guard finds in substantialcompliance with the tankship or tank barge DL cargo training course guidelinesestablished by the Coast Guard as the basis for approval of a DL cargocourse under andSection; 10.302 of this subchapter; or(3) Pass a Coast Guard examination for ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge).''(b) To be eligible for an original ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)-LG'' endorsement,each applicant must:(1) Present a certificate of course completion from a Coast Guard approvedtraining course for tankships or tank barges for LG cargoes as definedby this part within two years of the date of application; or (2) Present a certificate of completion from an LG cargo training courseduring the five years preceding [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>] that the Coast Guard finds in substantialcompliance with the tankship or tank barge LG cargo training course guidelinesestablished by the Coast Guard as the basis for approval of an LG cargocourse number andSection; 10.302 of this subchapter.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.311 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">``Competent person'' requirements for restricted ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)''endorsements.</ITAG>(a) For a person designated as a ``competent person'' by the operator ofa tank cleaning facility to qualify for a restricted ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)''endorsement, the applicant must:(1) Meet the age and physical requirements in andSection; 13.301; and(2) Present evidence in the form of a letter from the operator of the facilityon company letterhead stating that the person is a ``competent person''for the facility and has the knowledge necessary to supervise tank cleaningand gas freeing operations.(b) The restricted ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'' endorsement on a competentperson's MMD is only valid while the individual is employed by the operatorof the facility that provided the letter of service required in paragraph(a) of this section and this and any other appropriate restrictions willbe included in the endorsement.<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart D_Requirements for ``Tankerman-Assistant'' Endorsements</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.401</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Original application for ``Tankerman-Assistant'' endorsements.</ITAG>To qualify for a ``Tankerman-Assistant'' endorsement, an applicant must:(a) Be at least 18 years of age;(b) Apply in writing on a Coast Guard form;(c) Present evidence of a physical examination as required by andSection;13.125;(d) Meet the shipboard firefighting training course requirements in andSection;13.407;(e) Document experience or training as follows:(1) Present evidence of service on tankships in accordance with andSection;13.403; or(2) Meet the training course requirements in andSection; 13.409; and(f) Be capable of clearly understanding and speaking, in English, all instructionsneeded to commence, conduct, and terminate cargo transfer operations.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.403</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Eligibility requirements; service.</ITAG>(a) An applicant for a ``Tankerman-Assistant'' endorsement must:(1) Present evidence of at at least 90 days deck service on tankships certificatedto carry DL or LG cargoes as appropriate for the endorsement applied for;or(2) Present a certificate of completion from a cargo training course asappropriate for the endorsement applied for as prescribed in andSection;13.409.(b) Applicants who already have a ``Tankerman-Assistant'' DL or LG endorsementand are applying for the other cargo classification endorsement must provideonly half the evidence of service required in paragraph (a)(1) of thissection.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.405</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Documentation of service for the ``Tankerman-Assistant'' endorsements.</ITAG>(a) When using letters of service to document service:(1) The letter must be from the owner, operator, or master of the vesselon which the service was obtained.(2) The letter must specify:(i) The grades of cargo, DL or LG, carried while the applicant accumulatedthe service;(ii) The number of days of service the applicant had on deck on the tankship;and(iii) That the applicant has demonstrated an understanding of cargo transferoperations and a sense of responsibility that, in the opinion of the signer,will allow the applicant to safely carry out cargo and cargo equipmentduties and responsibilities assigned by the person-in-charge of the transferoperation without direct supervision from the person-in-charge.(3) Letters attesting to only part of the applicant's total service requirementsunder andSection; 13.403 must state the grades of cargo handled, the daysof service, and whether or not the applicant has demonstrated an understandingof cargo transfer operations and a sense of responsibility that, in theopinion of the signer, the applicant is fully capable of safely carryingout cargo and cargo equipment duties and responsibilities without directsupervision from the person-in-charge of the transfer operation.(b) When using discharges to document service:(1) The applicant must present discharges from tankships totaling 90 daysservice on tankships certificated to carry DL or LG cargoes.(2) The applicant must also present a letter from the owner, operator,or master of one of the vessels issuing a discharge to the applicant statingthat the applicant has demonstrated an understanding of cargo transferoperations and a sense of responsibility that, in the opinion of the signer,will allow the applicant to safely carry out cargo and cargo equipmentduties and responsibilities assigned by the person-in-charge of the transferoperation without direct supervision from the person-in-charge.(3) If discharges are used to document service, the cargo endorsement willbe based on the cargoes the vessels are certificated to carry.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.407</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Eligibility requirements: firefighting training.</ITAG>To be eligible for a ``Tankerman-Assistant'' endorsement, each applicantmust:(a) Present a certificate of completion from a Coast Guard approved basic,or basic and advanced firefighting training course, completed within fiveyears of the date of application for the ``Tankerman-Assistant'' endorsement,unless a certificate of completion for one of these courses has been submittedfor a previous license or tankerman endorsement; or(b) Present a certificate of completion from a marine firefighting trainingcourse during the five years preceding [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>] that the Coast Guard finds in substantialcompliance with the shipboard firefighting training course guidelines establishedby the Coast Guard as the basis for approval of a shipboard firefightingtraining course under andSection; 10.302 of this subchapter.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.409</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Eligibility requirements; cargo training.</ITAG>(a) Each applicant for a ``Tankerman-Assistant-DL'' endorsement that hasnot presented the required service must:(1) Present a certificate of course completion from a Coast Guard approvedtankship DL cargo training course, or DL tankship familiarization trainingcourse, for DL cargoes as defined in this part, within two years of thedate of application; or(2) Present a certificate of completion from a liquid cargo training courseduring the five years preceding [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>] that the Coast Guard finds in substantialcompliance with the tankship DL cargo training course or DL tankship familiarizationtraining course guidelines established by the Coast Guard as the basisfor approval of a DL cargo course under andSection; 10.302 of this Subchapter.(b) Each applicant for a ``Tankerman-Assistant-LG'' endorsement that hasnot presented the required service must:(1) Present a certificate of course completion from a Coast Guard approvedtankship LG cargo training course, or LG tankship familiarization trainingcourse, for LG cargoes as defined in this part, within two years of thedate of application; or(2) Present a certificate of completion from an LG cargo training courseduring the five years preceding [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>] that the Coast Guard finds in substantialcompliance with the tankship LG cargo training course or LG tankship familiarizationtraining course guidelines established by the Coast Guard as the basisfor approval of an LG cargo course under andSection; 10.302 of this Subchapter.<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart E_Requirements for ``Tankerman-Engineer'' Endorsements</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.501 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Original application for ``Tankerman-Engineer'' endorsements.</ITAG>To qualify for a ``Tankerman-Engineer'' endorsement, an applicant must:(a) Be at least 18 years of age; (b) Apply in writing on a Coast Guard form;(c) Present evidence of a physical examination as required by andSection;13.125;(d) Present evidence of service on tankships in accordance with andSection;13.503;(e) Meet the shipboard firefighting training course requirements in andSection;13.507;(f) Meet the liquid cargo training course requirements in andSection; 13.509;and (g) Be capable of clearing understanding and speaking, in English, allinstructions needed to commence, conduct, and terminate cargo transferoperations. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.503 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Eligibility requirements; service.</ITAG>(a) An applicant for a ``Tankerman-Engineer-DL'' endorsement must: (1) Present evidence of at least 90 days of service as a licensed engineeringofficer on tankships certificated to carry DL cargoes; (2) Present evidence of at least 30 days of service as a licensed engineeringofficer on tankships certificated to carry DL cargoes and present a certificateof completion from a cargo training course as appropriate for the endorsementapplied for as prescribed in andSection; 13.509(a); or (3) Present evidence of at least 60 days of service as an unlicensed cargoengineer on tankships certificated to carry DL cargoes and present a certificateof completion from a cargo training course as appropriate for the endorsementapplied for as prescribed in andSection; 13.509(a). (b) An applicant for a ``Tankerman-Engineer-LG'' endorsement must: (1) Present evidence of at least 30 days service as a licensed engineeringofficer on tankships certificated to carry LG cargoes and present a certificateof completion from a cargo training course as appropriate for the endorsementapplied for as prescribed in andSection; 13.509(b); or (2) Present evidence of at least 60 days of service as an unlicensed cargoengineer on tankships certificated to carry LG cargoes and present a certificateof completion from a cargo training course as appropriate for the endorsementapplied for as prescribed in andSection; 13.509(b). (c) Applicants who already have a ``Tankerman-Engineer'' DL or LG endorsementand are applying for the other cargo classification endorsement must provideonly half the evidence of service required in paragraphs (a) or (b) ofthis section, as appropriate for the cargo classification applied for.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.505 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Documentation of service for ``Tankerman-Engineer'' endorsements.</ITAG>(a) When using letters of service to document service: (1) The letter must be from the owner, operator, chief engineer, or masterof the vessel on which the service was obtained. (2) The letter must specify: (i) The grades of cargo, DL or LG, carried while the applicant accumulatedthe service; and (ii) The number of days of service the applicant has as a licensed engineeringofficer or unlicensed cargo engineer on the tankship; and (3) Letters attesting to only part of the applicant's total service requirementsunder andSection;13.503 of this subpart must state the grades of cargo handledand the days of service.(b) When using discharges from tankships to document service: (1) For a DL cargo classification endorsement, an applicant must: (i) Present discharges totaling at least 90 days service as a licensedengineering officer on tankships certificated to carry DL cargoes; or (ii) If the applicant presents a certificate of completion for a CoastGuard approved DL cargo course: (A) Present discharges totaling at least 30 days of service as a licensedengineering officer on tankships certificated to carry DL cargoes; or (B) Present discharges totaling at least 60 days of service as an unlicensedcargo engineer on tankships certificated to carry DL cargoes. (2) For an LG cargo classification endorsement, an applicant must: (i) Present discharges totaling at least 30 days of service as a licensedengineering officer on tankships certificated to carry LG cargoes; or (ii) Present discharges totaling at least 60 days service as an unlicensedcargo engineer on tankships certificated to carry LG cargoes. (c) If an applicant has a mixture of licensed and unlicensed service, theunlicensed service may count as licensed service on a two for one basis;<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.507 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Eligibility requirements: firefighting training. </ITAG>To be eligible for a ``Tankerman-Engineer'' endorsement, each applicantmust: (a) Present a certificate of completion from a Coast Guard approved basic,or basic and advanced shipboard firefighting training course, completedwithin five years of the date of application for the ``Tankerman-Engineer''endorsement, unless a certificate of completion for one of these courseshas previously been submitted for a license or tankerman endorsement; or(b) Present certificate of completion from a marine firefighting trainingcourse during the five years preceding [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>] that the Coast Guard finds in substantialcompliance with the firefighting training course guidelines establishedby the Coast Guard as the basis for approval of a shipboard firefightingtraining course under andSection; 10.302 of this subchapter. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 13.509 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Eligibility requirements: cargo training. </ITAG>(a) To take advantage of a reduction in required service, as provided inandSection; 13.503, an applicant for an original ``Tankerman-Engineer-DL''endorsement may: (1) Present a certificate of course completion from a Coast Guard approvedtraining course for the DL cargoes for tankships within two years of thedate of application; or (2) Present a certificate of completion from a DL cargo training courseduring the five years preceding [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>] that the Coast Guard finds in substantialcompliance with the tankship DL cargo training course guidelines establishedby the Coast Guard as the basis for approval of a DL cargo training courseunder andSection; 10.302 of this subchapter. (b) To be eligible for an original ``Tankerman-Engineer-LG'' endorsement,each applicant must: (1) Present a certificate of course completion from a Coast Guard approvedtraining course for the LG cargoes as for tankships within two years ofthe date of application; or (2) Present a certificate of completion from an LG cargo training courseduring the five years preceding [<T3>Insert Effective Date</T3>] that the Coast Guard finds in substantialcompliance with the tankship LG cargo training course guidelines establishedby the Coast Guard as the basis for approval of an LG cargo training courseunder andSection; 10.302 of this subchapter. <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 15_MANNING REQUIREMENTS</ITAG>10. The authority citation for part 15 continues to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>46 U.S.C. 2103, 3703, 8105; 49 CFR 1.45, 1.46.</ITAG>11.-12. Section 15.301 is amended by revising paragraph (c) and addinga new paragraph (d) to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 15.301 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definition of terms in this part. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(c) The following categories of ratings are established in part 12 of thischapter. When used in this part, the following terms mean an individualholding a valid merchant mariner's document to serve in that capacity issuedunder part 12 of this chapter. (1) Able seaman; (2) Ordinary seaman; (3) Qualified member of the engine department; (4) Lifeboatman; (5) Wiper; (6) Steward's department (F.H.). (d) The following categories of ratings are established in part 13 of thischapter. When used in this part, the following terms mean an individualholding a valid merchant mariner's document to serve in that capacity issuedunder part 13 of this chapter. (1) Tankerman-PIC; (2) Tankerman-PIC (Barge); (3) Tankerman-Assistant; (4) Tankerman-Engineer. 13. Section 15.860 is added to subpart G to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 15.860 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Tankermen. </ITAG>(a) The Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, shall enter in the certificateof inspection issued to any manned tank vessel subject to the regulationsin this chapter, the number of the crew required to have endorsements as``Tankerman-PIC,'' ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge),'' ``Tankerman-Assistant,''and ``Tankerman-Engineer,'' as follows: (1) For tankships certified for voyages beyond the Boundary Line: (i) For tankships of more than 5,000 gross tons: (A) The number of ``Tankerman-PICs'' required shall not be less than two.(B) The number of ``Tankerman-Assistants'' required shall not be less thanthree. (C) The number of ``Tankerman-Engineers'' required shall not be less thantwo. (ii) For tankships of 5,000 gross tons or less: (A) The number of ``Tankerman-PICs'' required shall not be less than two.(B) The number of ``Tankerman-Engineers'' required shall not be less thantwo, unless only one engineer is required, then only one ``Tankerman-Engineer''is required. (2) For tankships not certificated for voyages beyond the Boundary Line,if the total crew complement is: (i) One or two individuals, only one ``Tankerman-PIC'' is required. (ii) In excess of two individuals, only two ``Tankerman-PICs'' are required.(3) For tank barges certificated for voyages beyond the Boundary Line,if the total crew complement is: (i) One or two individuals, only one ``Tankerman-PIC'' or ``Tankerman-PIC(Barge)'' are required. (ii) In excess of two individuals, only two ``Tankerman-PIC'' or ``Tankerman-PIC(Barge)'' are required.(b) The following personnel aboard tankships certificated for voyages beyondthe Boundary Line shall possess the following tankerman endorsements forthe classification of cargo carried: (1) The master and chief mate shall have ``Tankerman-PIC'' endorsements.(2) The chief, first assistant, and cargo engineer shall have ``Tankerman-Engineer''endorsements or ``Tankerman-PIC'' endorsements. (3) A licensed individual acting as the person-in-charge of bulk liquidcargo transfer operations shall have a ``Tankerman-PIC'' endorsement. (4) Licensed or unlicensed personnel assigned duties and responsibilitiesrelated to the cargo or cargo equipment during a bulk liquid cargo transferoperation and who are not directly supervised by the person-in-charge shallhave a ``Tankerman-Assistant'' endorsement. (c) The tankermen endorsements required by the provisions of this sectionshall be for the cargo classification of the bulk liquid cargo or cargoresidue being carried. (d) Tank barges subject to the provisions of this chapter need not be mannedunless in the judgment of the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, manningis necessary for the protection of life, property, the environment or thesafe operation of the barge. <ITAG tagnum="72">SUBCHAPTER D_TANK VESSELS </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 30_GENERAL PROVISIONS </ITAG>14. The authority citation for part 30 continues to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>46 U.S.C. 3306, 3703; 49 U.S.C. App. 1804; 49 CFR 1.45,1.46; andSection; 30.01-2 also issued under the authority of 44 U.S.C. 3507.</ITAG>15. Section 30.10-71 is revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 30.10-71 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Tankerman_TB/ALL. </ITAG>(a) <T3>``Tankerman-Assistant'' </T3>means an individual holding a valid ``Tankerman-Assistant''endorsement issued under part 13 of this chapter. (b) <T3>``Tankerman-Engineer'' </T3>means an individual holding a valid ``Tankerman-Engineer''endorsement issued under part 13 of this chapter. (c) <T3>``Tankerman-PIC'' </T3>means an individual holding a valid ``Tankerman-PIC''endorsement issued under part 13 of this chapter. (d) <T3>``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'' </T3>means an individual holding a valid``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'' endorsement issued under part 13 of this chapter.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 31_INSPECTION AND CERTIFICATION </ITAG>16. The authority citation for part 31 is revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>33 U.S.C. 1321(j); 46 U.S.C. 3306, 3703, 5115, 8105,9101; 49 U.S.C. App. 1804; E.O. 12234, 45 FR 58801, 3 CFR, 1980 Comp.,p. 277; E.O. 11735, 38 FR 21243, 3 CFR, 1971-1975 Comp., p. 793; 49 CFR1.46. </ITAG>17. Section 31.15-1 is revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 31.15-1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Licensed officers and crews_TB/ALL. </ITAG>The Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, who inspects the vessel, shallenter in the certificate of inspection for each tank vessel the complementof officers and crew as required by law and regulations in this subchapter,and which in the judgment of the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection,will be necessary for her safe operation. The complement may be changedfrom time to time by endorsement on such certificate by an Officer in Charge,Marine Inspection, by reason of change of conditions or employment. <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 35_OPERATIONS </ITAG>18. The authority citation for part 35 is revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>33 U.S.C. 1321(j); 46 U.S.C. 3306, 3703, 6101, 9101;49 U.S.C. App. 1804; E.O. 11735, 38 FR 21243, 3 CFR, 1971-1975 Comp., p.793; E.O. 12234, 45 CFR 58801, 3 CFR, 1980 Comp., p. 277; 49 CFR 1.46.</ITAG>19.-20. Section 35.05-15 is amended by revising the section heading andparagraph (b)(1) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 35.05-15 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Tank vessel security_TB/ALL.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(b) * * *(1) The owner, managing operator, master, or person in charge of a vesseltowing a tank barge that is not required to be manned shall be responsiblefor monitoring the security and integrity of the tank barge, and ensuringthat the proper safety precautions are followed. These responsibilitiesinclude, but are not limited to:(i) Ensuring that any tank barge added to the tow has all tank openingsproperly secured; has its freeing ports, if any, unobstructed; meets anyloadline or freeboard requirements; and has no leakage into the water,voids, or cofferdams.(ii) Ensuring that all tank barges are properly secured in the tow.(iii) Ensuring that periodic checks are made of every tank barge in thetow for leakage into the water, voids, or cofferdams.(iv) Obtaining information on the cargo content of all tank barges addedto or contained in the tow, any hazards associated with the cargo(es),and what action should be taken if a leak is discovered.(v) Ensuring that the crew of the vessel is informed of the cargo contentof all tank barges in the tow, any hazards associated with the cargo(es),and what action should be taken if a leak is discovered.(vi) Reporting any cargo leaks from a tank barge in the tow into the waterto the Coast Guard as required in 33 CFR 151.15.(vii) Ensuring that the crew of the vessel and other personnel in the vicinityof the tank barges in the tow follow the normal safety precautions fortank vessels, and that no activity takes place in the vicinity of the bargewhich would create a hazard.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>21. Section 35.35-1 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 35.35-1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Men on duty_TB/ALL.</ITAG>(a) On a tankship documented under the laws of the United States:(1) The owner, managing operator, master, or person in charge of the vesselshall ensure that a sufficient number of ``Tankerman-PICs'' and ``Tankerman-Assistants''endorsed for the classification of cargo carried are on duty to safelyperform a bulk liquid cargo transfer or cargo tank cleaning operation.(2) The owner, managing operator, master, or person in charge of the vesselshall ensure that a bulk liquid cargo transfer or cargo tank cleaning operationis supervised by an individual designated as a person-in-charge of thecargo transfer or cargo tank cleaning operation under subpart C of 33 CFRpart 155.(b) On an inspected United States tank barge:(1) The owner, managing operator, master, or person in charge of the vesselshall ensure that a bulk liquid cargo transfer or cargo tank cleaning operationdoes not take place unless under the supervision of a qualified individualwho has been designated as the person-in-charge of the cargo transfer orcargo tank cleaning operation under subpart C of 33 CFR part 155.(2) The person-in-charge of the operation shall ensure that:(i) A sufficient number of individuals are on duty to safely perform abulk liquid cargo transfer or cargo tank cleaning operation; and(ii) The approved portable extinguishers required by Table 34.50-10(a)of this Chapter are on board and readily available prior to the transferof cargo or operation of barge machinery or boilers.(c) On a foreign tankship:(1) The owner, managing operator, master, or person in charge of the vesselshall ensure that a sufficient number of personnel qualified for the classificationof cargo carried are on duty to safely perform the bulk liquid cargo transferor cargo tank cleaning operation.(2) The owner, managing operator, master, or person in charge of the vesselshall ensure that a cargo transfer or cargo tank cleaning operation issupervised by an individual designated as a person-in-charge of the cargotransfer or cargo tank cleaning operation under subpart C of 33 CFR part155.(d) On a foreign tank barge:(1) The owner, managing operator, master, or person in charge of the vesselshall ensure that a bulk liquid cargo transfer or cargo tank cleaning operationdoes not take place unless under the supervision of a qualified individualwho has been designated as the person-in-charge of the cargo transfer orcargo tank cleaning operation under subpart C of 33 CFR part 155.(2) The person-in-charge of the operation shall ensure that a sufficientnumber of individuals are on duty to safely perform a bulk liquid cargotransfer or cargo tank cleaning operation.(e) The person-in-charge of the bulk liquid cargo transfer on the tankvessel is responsible for the safe loading and discharging of the bulkliquid cargo.(f) The person-in-charge of a bulk liquid cargo transfer operation on aUnited States tank vessel, of lightering to or from a foreign tank vessel,shall ensure that the person-in-charge on the foreign tank vessel, or hisor her interpreter, has sufficient command of the English language to allowa safe transfer operation.22. Section 35.35-10 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 35.35-10 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Closing of scuppers and sea valves_TB/ALL.</ITAG>The designated person-in-charge of the cargo transfer operation shall seethat all scuppers are properly plugged during transfer operations excepton tank vessels using water for deck cooling. Sea valves shall be closedand lashed or sealed to indicate that they should not be opened duringcargo transfer operations. Under no circumstances shall such valves besecured by locks.23. Section 35.35-15 is amended by revising paragraph (b) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 35.35-15 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Connecting for cargo transfer_TB/ALL.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(b) When cargo connections are supported by ship's tackle, the designatedperson-in-charge of the cargo transfer operation shall determine the weightsinvolved in order to insure that sufficient tackles are used.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>24. The introductory text of andSection; 35.35-20 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 35.35-20 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Inspection prior to transfer of cargo_TB/ALL.</ITAG>Prior to the transfer of cargo, the designated person-in-charge of thecargo transfer operation shall inspect the vessel to ensure that the followingconditions exist:<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>25. Section 35.35-25 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 35.35-25 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Approval to start transfer of cargo_TB/ALL.</ITAG>When the designated person-in-charge of the cargo transfer operation hasensured that the requirements of andSection;andSection; 35.35-20 and 35.35-30have been met, he or she may give approval to start cargo transfer operations.26. Section 35.35-30 is amended by revising the first sentence of paragraph(a), and the introductory text of the ``Declaration Of Inspection PriorTo Bulk Cargo Transfer'' of paragraph (b) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 35.35-30 ``Declaration of Inspection'' for tankships_T/ALL.</ITAG>(a) After an inspection under andSection; 35.35-20 but before cargo transfer,the designated person-in-charge of the operation shall prepare, in duplicate,a Declaration of Inspection.* * *(b) * * *<ITAG tagnum="71">Declaration of Inspection Prior to Bulk Cargo Transfer</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">Date</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">Vessel</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">Port of</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">I, <T2>XXXX</T2>, the designated person-in-charge of the bulk liquid cargotransfer about to be undertaken, do certify that I have personally inspectedthis vessel with reference to the following requirements set forth in 46CFR 35.35-20, and that opposite each of the applicable items listed belowI have indicated whether the regulations have been complied with.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>27. Section 35.35-35 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 35.35-35 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Duties of the designated person-in-charge of the transfer during transferoperations_TB/ALL.</ITAG>The designated person-in-charge of the cargo transfer operation shall controlthe operations as follows:(a) Supervise the operations of cargo system valves.(b) Start transfer of cargo slowly.(c) Observe cargo connections for leakage.(d) Observe operating pressure on cargo system.(e) Observe rate of loading for the purpose of avoiding overflow of tanks.28. Section 35.35-42 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 35.35-42 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Restrictions on vessel coming alongside a tank vessel while loadingGrade A, B, or C cargo_TB/ALL.</ITAG>(a) No vessel shall come alongside or remain alongside a tank vessel inway of its cargo tanks while it is loading Grade A, B, or C cargo withouthaving the permission of the designated person-in-charge of the cargo transferoperation on the vessel which is loading.(b) No vessel shall come alongside or remain alongside a tank vessel inway of its cargo tanks while it is loading Grade A, B, or C cargo unlessthe conditions then prevailing are mutually acceptable to the designatedpersons-in-charge of cargo handling on both vessels.29. Section 35.35-55 is amended by revising paragraph (a) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 35.35-55 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Transfer of other cargo or stores on tank vessels_TB/ALL.</ITAG>(a) Package goods, freight, and ships' stores shall not be loaded or dischargedduring the loading of Grade A, B, or C cargoes except by permission ofthe designated person-in-charge of the cargo transfer operation. Explosivesas cargo shall not be loaded or carried on any tank vessel containing GradeA, B, or C cargo.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">SUBCHAPTER H_PASSENGER VESSELS</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 78_OPERATIONS</ITAG>30. The authority citation for part 78 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>33 U.S.C. 1321(j); 46 U.S.C. 3306, 6101, 8105; 49 U.S.C.App. 1804, E.O. 11735, 38 FR 21243; 3 CFR, 1971-1975 Comp., p. 793; E.O.12234, 45 FR 58801, 3 CFR, 1980 Comp., p. 277; 49 CFR 1.46.</ITAG>31.-32. Subpart 78.95 is added to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart 78.95_Persons-In-Charge of Bulk Liquid Cargo Transfers</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 78.95-1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">General.</ITAG>The person-in-charge of a bulk liquid cargo transfer operation must bedesignated in accordance with subpart C of 33 CFR part 155.<ITAG tagnum="72">SUBCHAPTER I_CARGO AND MISCELLANEOUS VESSELS</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 90_GENERAL PROVISIONS</ITAG>33. The authority citation for part 90 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>46 U.S.C. 3306, 3703: 49 U.S.C. App. 1804; E.O. 12234,45 FR 58801, 3 CFR, 1980 Comp., p. 277; 49 CFR 1.46.</ITAG>34.-35. Section 90.10-42 is added to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 90.10-42 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Tankerman-PIC.</ITAG>``Tankerman-PIC'' means an individual holding a valid ``Tankerman-PIC''endorsement issued under part 13 of this chapter.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 97_OPERATIONS</ITAG>36. The authority citation for part 97 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>33 U.S.C. 1321(j); 46 U.S.C. 3306, 6101: 49 U.S.C.App. 1804; E.O. 11735, 38 FR 21243, 3 CFR, 1971-1975 Comp., p. 793; E.O.12234, 45 FR 58801, 3 CFR, 1980 Comp., p. 277; 49 CFR 1.46.</ITAG>37.-38. Subpart 97.95 is added to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart 97.95_Persons-in-Charge of Bulk Liquid Cargo Transfers</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 97.95-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">General.</ITAG>The person-in-charge of a bulk liquid cargo transfer operation must bedesignated in accordance with subpart C of 33 CFR part 155.<ITAG tagnum="56">PART 98_SPECIAL CONSTRUCTION, ARRANGEMENT, AND OTHER PROVISIONS FORCERTAIN DANGEROUS CARGOES IN BULK</ITAG>39. The authority citation for part 98 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>33 U.S.C. 1903; 46 U.S.C. 3306, 3703; 49 U.S.C. App.1804; E.O. 12234, 45 FR 58801, 3 CFR, 1980 Comp., p. 277; 49 CFR 1.46.</ITAG>40. Section 98.30-17 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 98.30-17</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Qualifications of person-in-charge.</ITAG>(a) The vessel operator or his or her agent shall designate the person-in-chargeof a transfer of bulk liquid cargoes to or from a portable tank.(b) An individual designated as person-in-charge of the transfer of bulkliquid cargoes to or from portable tanks shall:(1) On tank barges, hold a ``Tankerman-PIC'' or ``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)''endorsement authorizing transfer of the classification of cargo involved.(2) On self-propelled tank vessels, hold:(i) A license authorizing service as a master, mate, pilot, operator orengineer aboard that vessel; and (ii) A ``Tankerman-PIC'' endorsement authorizing transfer of the classificationof cargo involved.(3) On vessels other than tank vessels required by this chapter to havea licensed officer on board, hold:(i) A license authorizing service as a master, mate, pilot, operator orengineer aboard that vessel; and(ii) If the bulk liquid cargo is grade C or above or regulated under 46CFR part 153, a ``Tankerman-PIC-DL'' endorsement.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 105_COMMERCIAL FISHING VESSELS DISPENSING PETROLEUM PRODUCTS</ITAG>41. The authority citation for part 105 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>33 U.S.C. 1321(j); 46 U.S.C. 3306, 3703; 49 U.S.C.App. 1804; E.O. 11735, 38 FR 21243, 3 CFR, 1971-1975 Comp., p. 793; 49CFR 1.46.</ITAG>42.-43. Section 105.45-1 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 105.45-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Loading or dispensing petroleum products.</ITAG>A commercial fishing vessel must have a valid letter of compliance (seesubpart 105.15) on board and must be in compliance with the requirementstherein while dispensing petroleum products.44. Subparts 105.50 and 105.60 are removed.<ITAG tagnum="72">SUBCHAPTER O_CERTAIN BULK DANGEROUS CARGOES</ITAG>45. The heading for part 151 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="56">PART 151_BARGES CARRYING BULK LIQUID HAZARDOUS MATERIAL CARGOES</ITAG>46. The authority citation for part 151 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>33 U.S.C. 1903; 46 U.S.C. 3703; 49 CFR 1.46.</ITAG>47. Section 151.03-53 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 151.03-53</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Tankerman.</ITAG>(a) <T3>``Tankerman-PIC''</T3> means a person holding a valid ``Tankerman-PIC''endorsement issued under part 13 of this chapter.(b) <T3>``Tankerman-PIC (Barge)'' </T3>means a person holding a valid ``Tankerman-PIC(Barge)'' endorsement issued under part 13 of this chapter.48. Paragraph (f)91)k of andSection; 151.45-2 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 151.45-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Special operating requirements.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(f) * * *(1) The master, licensed operator, or individual in command of a vesseltowing tank barge that is not required to be manned shall be responsiblefor monitoring the security and integrity of the tank barge, and ensuringthat the proper safety precautions are followed. These responsibilitiesinclude, but are not limited to:(i) Ensuring that any tank barge added to the tow has all tank openingsproperly secured; has its freeing ports, if any, unobstructed; meets anyloadline or freeboard requirements; and has no leakage into the water,voids, or cofferdams.(ii) Ensuring that all tank barges are properly secured in the tow.(iii) Ensuring that periodic checks are made of every tank barge in thetow for leakage into the water, voids, or cofferdams.(iv) Obtaining information on the cargo content of all tank barges addedto or contained in the tow, any hazards associated with the cargo(es),and what action should be taken if a leak is discovered.(v) Ensuring that the crew of the vessel is informed of the cargo contentof all tank barges in the tow, any hazards associated with the cargo(es),and what action should be taken if a leak is discovered.(vi) Reporting any cargo leaks from a tank barge in the tow into the waterto the Coast Guard as required in 33 CFR 151.15.(vii) Ensuring that the crew of the vessel and other personnel in the vicinityof the tank barges in the tow follow the normal safety precautions fortank vessels, and that no activity takes place in the vicinity of the bargewhich would create a hazard.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>49. Section 151.45-4 is amended by revising paragraph (a) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 151.45-4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Cargo handling.</ITAG>(a) On an inspected United States tank barge:(1) The vessel operator, or his or her agent, shall ensure that:(i) A bulk liquid cargo transfer or cargo tank cleaning operation doesnot take place unless under the supervision of a qualified individual whohas been designated as the person-in-charge of the cargo transfer or cargotank cleaning operation under subpart C of 33 CFR part 155;(ii) When cargoes regulated under this Part are to be transferred, thedesignated person-in-charge of the transfer has received special trainingin the particular hazards associated with the cargo(es) and any specialhandling procedures; and(iii) The Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, in whose zone the transferwill take place, is provided with satisfactory, documentary evidence thatthe designated person-in-charge has received this training and is capableof performing competently the necessary operation which relates to thespecific cargo.(2) The person-in-charge of the operation shall ensure that a sufficientnumber of individuals are on duty to safely perform a bulk liquid cargotransfer or cargo tank cleaning operation.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">PART 153_SHIPS CARRYING BULK LIQUID, LIQUEFIED GAS, OR COMPRESSEDGAS HAZARDOUS MATERIALS</ITAG>50. The authority citation for part 153 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>46 U.S.C. 3703, 9101; 49 U.S.C. App. 1804; 33 U.S.C.1903; 49 CFR 1.46.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">51.-52. Section 153.957 is revised to read as follows: </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 153.957</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Person-in-charge of cargo transfer or cargo tank cleaning operations.</ITAG>The vessel operator, or his or her agent, shall ensure that:(a) A sufficient number of ``Tankerman-PICs'' and ``Tankerman-Assistants''endorsed for the classification of cargo carried are on duty to safelyperform a bulk liquid cargo transfer or cargo tank cleaning operation;(b) A bulk liquid cargo transfer or cargo tank cleaning operation is supervisedby an individual designated as a person-in-charge of the cargo transferor cargo tank cleaning operation under subpart C of 33 CFR part 155; (c) When cargoes regulated under this part are to be transferred, the designatedperson-in-charge of the transfer has received special training in the particularhazards associated with the cargo(es) and any special handling procedures;(d) The Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, in whose zone the transferwill take place, is provided with satisfactory, documentary evidence thatthe designated person-in-charge has received this training and is capableof performing competently the necessary operation which relates to thespecific cargo; and (e) On foreign vessels, the designated person-in-charge understands hisor her responsibilities as described in this subchapter. <ITAG tagnum="56">PART 154_SAFETY STANDARDS FOR SELF-PROPELLED VESSELS CARRYING BULKLIQUEFIED GASES</ITAG>53. The authority citation for part 154 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>46 U.S.C. 3703, 9101; E.O. 12234, 45 FR 58801, 3 CFR,1980 Comp., p. 277; 49 CFR 1.46.</ITAG>54.-55. Section 154.1831 is revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 154.1831</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Person-in-charge of cargo transfer or cargo tank cleaning operations.</ITAG>The vessel operator, or his or her agent, shall ensure that: (a) A sufficient number of ``Tankerman-PICs'' and ``Tankerman-Assistants''endorsed for the classification of cargo carried are on duty to safelyperform a bulk liquid cargo transfer or cargo tank cleaning operation.(b) A bulk liquid cargo transfer or cargo tank cleaning operation is supervisedby an individual designated as a person-in-charge of the cargo transferor cargo tank cleaning operation in accordance with subpart C of 33 CFRpart 155; (c) When cargoes regulated under this part are to be transferred, the designatedperson-in-charge of the transfer has received special training in the particularhazards associated with the cargo(es) and any special handling procedures;(d) Provide the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection, in whose zone thetransfer will take place, with satisfactory, documentary evidence thatthe individual has received this training and is capable of performingcompetently the necessary operation which relates to the specific cargo;and (e) On foreign vessels, the designated person-in-charge understands hisor her responsibilities as described in this subchapter.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: September 28, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">J. D. Sipes, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Rear Admiral, U.S. Coast Guard Chief, Office of Marine Safety, Securityand Environmental Protection. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-24250 Filed 10-16-89; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-14-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>