<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89217-0022 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.2-17-89.f2.A1021</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">FEDERAL TRADE COMMlSSlON</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">16 CFR Part 13</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[File No. 891 0013] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">KKR Associates, et al.; Proposed Consent Agreement With Analysis ToAid Public Comment </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Federal Trade Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Proposed Consent Agreement. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>In settlement of alleged violations of Federal law prohibitingunfair acts and practices and unfair methods of competition, this consentagreement, accepted subject to final Commission approval, would require,among other things, a food producer and distributor to divest either Beatriceor RJR assets used in the production and sale of packaged nuts, ketchupand Oriental food, following its acquisition of RJR Nabisco, Inc. Respondentwould also be required to hold RJR's assets and operations separate andapart from other entities owned by KKR.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>Comments must be received on or before April 18, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>Comments should be directed to: FTC/Office of the Secretary,Room 159, 6th St. and Pa. Ave., NW., Washington, DC 20580.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Marc G. Schildkraut, FTC/S-3302,Washington, DC 20580. (202) 326-2622.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>Pursuant to section 6(f) of the FederalTrade Commission Act, 38 Stat. 721, 15 U.S.C. 46 and Section 2.34 of theCommission's Rules of Practice (16 CFR 2.34), notice is hereby given thatthe following consent agreement containing a consent order to cease anddesist, having been filed with and accepted, subject to final approval,by the Commission, has been placed on the public record for a period ofsixty (60) days. Public comment is invited. Such comments or views willbe considered by the Commission and will be available for inspection andcopying at its principal office in accordance with andSection; 4.9(b)(6)(ii)of the Commission's Rules of Practice (16 CFR 4.9(b)(6)(ii)). <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 16 CFR Part 13 </ITAG>Food companies, Trade practices. <ITAG tagnum="84">Agreement Containing Consent Order To Cease and Desist </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">In the matter of KKR Associates, a limited partnership; Kohlberg KravisRoberts andamp; Co. L.P., a limited partnership; RJR Acquisition Corporation,a corporation; RJR Associates, L.P., a limited partnership; RJR HoldingsGroup, Inc., a corporation; RJR Holdings Corp., a corporation; Henry R.Kravis, a natural person; Robert I. MacDonnell, a natural person; MichaelW. Michelson, a natural person; Paul E. Raether, a natural person; andGeorge R. Roberts, a natural person.</ITAG>The Federal Trade Commission (the ``Commission''), having initiated aninvestigation of the proposed acquisition (the ``Acquisition'') of thevoting securities of RJR Nabisco, Inc. (``RJR'') by RJR Holdings Corp.(``RJR Holdings''), all of whose voting securities are currently held byRJR Associates, L.P., through the tender offer by, and subsequent mergerwith and into RJR of, RJR Acquisition Corporation (``RJR Acquisition''),a wholly-owned subsidiary of RJR Holdings, and KKR Associates, a New Yorklimited partnership, the general partners of KKR Associates, Kohlberg KravisRoberts andamp; Co. L.P., (``KKR andamp; Co.''), a Delaware limited partnership,the general partners of KKR andamp; Co., RJR Associates, L.P. (``RJR Associates''),a Delaware limited partnership, RJR Holdings, a Delaware corporation, RJRAcquisition Corporation, (``RJR Acquisition''), a Delaware corporation,RJR Holdings Group, Inc. (``RJR Group''), a Delaware corporation, (collectively,``the Proposed Respondents''), having been furnished with a copy of a draftcomplaint that the Bureau of Competition has presented to the Commissionfor its consideration and which, if issued by the Commission, would chargethe Proposed Respondents and RJR with violations of the Clayton Act andFederal Trade Commission Act, and it now appearing that the Proposed Respondentsare willing to enter into an agreement containing an Order to divest certainassets and to cease and desist from certain acts: <T3>It is hereby agreed </T3>by and among the Proposed Respondents by theirduly authorized officers and their attorneys, and counsel for the Commissionthat: 1. Proposed respondent KKR Associates is a New York limited partnershipwith its office and principal place of business at 9 West 57th Street,New York, New York 10019. 2. Proposed respondent KKR andamp; Co. is a Delaware limited partnershipwith its office and principal place of business at 9 West 57th Street,New York, New York 10019. 3. Proposed respondent RJR is a corporation organized under the laws ofthe State of Delaware with its office and principal place of business at300 Galleria Parkway, Atlanta, Georgia 30039. 4. Proposed respondent RJR Holdings is a corporation organized under thelaws of the State of Delaware with its office and principal place of businessat 9 West 57th Street, New York, New York 10019. 5. Proposed respondent RJR Associates is a Delaware limited partnershipwith its office and principal place of business at 9 West 57th Street,New York, New York 10019. 6. Proposed respondent RJR Acquisition is a corporation organized underthe laws of the State of Delaware with its office and principal place ofbusiness at 9 West 57th Street, New York, New York 10019. 7. Proposed respondent RJR Group is a corporation organized under the lawsof the State of Delaware with its office and principal place of businesslocated at 9 West 57th Street, New York, New York 10019. 8. Proposed respondent Henry R. Kravis is a general partner in KKR Associatesand KKR andamp; Co. and is President of RJR Holdings, RJR Acquisition, andRJR Group with his office and principal place of business at 9 West 57thStreet, New York, New York 10019. 9. Proposed respondent George R. Roberts is a general partner in KKR Associatesand KKR andamp; Co. with his office and principal place of business at 101California Street, San Francisco, California 94111. 10. Proposed respondent Robert I. MacDonnell is a general partner in KKRAssociates and KKR andamp; Co. with his office and principal place of businessat 101 California Street, San Francisco, California 94111.11. Proposed respondent Paul E. Raether is a general partner in KKR Associatesand KKR andamp; Co. with his office and principal place of business at 9West 57th Street, New York, New York 10019. 12. Proposed respondent Michael W. Michelson is a general partner in KKRAssociates and KKR andamp; Co. with his office and principal place of businessat 101 California Street, San Francisco, California 94111. 13. The Proposed Respondents admit all jurisdictional facts set forthin the attached draft of complaint. 14. The Proposed Respondents waive:<ITAG tagnum="15"> a. Any further procedural steps;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15"> b. The requirement that the Commission's decision contain a statementof findings of fact and conclusions of law;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15"> c. All rights to seek judicial review or otherwise challenge or contestthe validity of the Order entered pursuant to this agreement; and</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15"> d. All rights under the Equal Access to Justice Act.</ITAG> 15. This agreement shall not become a part of the public record of theproceeding unless and until it is accepted by the Commission. If this agreementis accepted by the Commission, it, together with the draft of complaintcontemplated thereby, will be placed on the public record for a periodof sixty (60) days and information in respect thereto publicly released.The Commission thereafter may either withdraw its acceptance of this agreementand so notify the Proposed Respondents, in which event it will take suchaction as it may consider appropriate, or issue and serve its complaint(in such form as the circumstances may require) and decision, in dispositionof the proceeding. 16. This agreement is for settlement purposes only and does not constitutean admission by the Proposed Respondents that the law has been violatedas alleged in the draft of complaint attached hereto. 17. This agreement contemplates that if it is accepted by the Commission,and if such acceptance is not subsequently withdrawn by the Commissionpursuant to the provisions of andSection; 2.34 of the Commission's Rules,the Commission may, without further notice to the Proposed Respondents,(1) issue its complaint corresponding in form and substance with the draftof complaint attached hereto and its decision containing the followingOrder to divest and to cease and desist in disposition of the proceedingand, (2) make information public with respect thereto. When so entered,the Order to divest and to cease and desist shall have the same force andeffect, and may be altered, modified, or set aside in the same manner andwithin the same time provided, by statute for other orders. The Order shallbecome final upon service. Delivery by the U.S. Postal Service of the complaintand decision containing the agreed-to Order to a Proposed Respondent'saddress as stated in this agreement shall constitute service on that ProposedRespondent. The Proposed Respondents waive any right they may have to anyother manner of service. The complaint may be used in construing the termsof the Order, and no agreement, understanding, representation or interpretationnot contained in the Order or the agreement may be used to vary or contradictthe terms of the Order. 18. The Proposed Respondents have read the draft of complaint and Ordercontemplated hereby. The Proposed Respondents understand that once theOrder has been issued, they will be required to file one or more compliancereports showing that they have fully complied with the Order. The ProposedRespondents further understand that they may be liable for civil penaltiesin the amount provided by law for each violation of the Order after itbecomes final.Order <ITAG tagnum="84">I </ITAG>As used in this Order, the following definitions shall apply: a. ``Respondents'' means KKR Associates, KKR andamp; Co., RJR Acquisition,RJR Associates, RJR Group, and RJR Holdings, their predecessors and successors,and any corporations, partnerships, joint ventures, companies, subsidiaries,divisions, groups or affiliates that any Respondent controls directly orindirectly, and their respective directors, officers, employees, agents,representatives, and their respective successors and assigns, as well asHenry R. Kravis, George R. Roberts, Robert I. MacDonnell, Paul E. Raetherand Michael W. Michelson, and any partnerships that they individually orcollectively control. b. ``Acquisition'' means any of the Respondents' acquisitions of outstandingshares of RJR Nabisco, Inc. c. ``Beatrice/Hunt-Wesson, Inc.'' is a Delaware corporation, with its principalplace of business at 1645 W. Valencia Drive, Fullerton, California 92634and its predecessors and successors, and any corporations, partnerships,joint ventures, companies, subsidiaries, divisions, groups or affiliatesthat Beatrice/Hunt-Wesson, Inc. controls directly or indirectly, and theirrespective directors, officers, employees, agents, representatives, andtheir respective successors and assigns. d. ``Beatrice Parties'' means BCI Associates, L.P., BCI Associates II,L.P., KKR Partners II L.P., BCI Equity Associates, L.P., BCI Securities,L.P. and Beatrice Company and their predecessors and successors, and anycorporations, partnerships, joint ventures, companies, subsidiaries, divisions,groups or affiliates that any Beatrice Party controls directly or indirectly,and their respective directors, officers, employees, agents, representatives,and their respective successors and assigns. e. ``Branded'' products as used herein includes all products other thanproducts offered as generic products or with a retail establishment's privatelabel. f. ``Chun King'' means the Chun King business of Nabisco Foods Companyand includes all of RJR's assets and businesses associated with the development,production, distribution and sale of shelf-stable oriental entrees, shelf-stableoriental noodles, shelf-stable oriental vegetables, and soy sauce. Associatedassets and businesses are further delineated in the subparagraphs of ScheduleA. g. ``Commission'' means the Federal Trade Commission. h. ``Control'' includes any situation in which any Respondent or any ofits principals, partners, directors, officers, employees, agents, representatives,or any of their respective successors or assigns constitutes a majorityof a board of directors. i. ``Food Assets and Businesses'' means Chun King, Del Monte Foods USA,the Planters LifeSavers Company and any other assets or businesses usedin the product development, manufacture, distribution or sale of any edibleproducts by Chun King, Del Monte Foods USA, or the Planters LifeSaversCompany. j. ``Henry R. Kravis'' means Henry R. Kravis, a natural person, generalpartner in KKR andamp; Co. and KKR Associates, and President of RJR Holdings,RJR Acquisition, and RJR Group. k. ``KKR Associates'' means KKR Associates, a New York limited partnership.l. ``KKR andamp; Co.'' means Kohlberg Kravis Roberts andamp; Co. L.P., a Delawarelimited partnership. m. ``Robert I. MacDonnell'' means Robert I. MacDonnell, a natural personand general partner in KKR andamp; Co. and KKR Associates. n. ``Michael W. Michelson'' means Michael W. Michelson, a natural personand general partner in KKR andamp; Co. and KKR Associates. o. ``Paul E. Raether'' means Paul E. Raether, a natural person and generalpartner in KKR andamp; Co. and KKR Associates. p. ``Relevant Products'' means branded: catsup/ketchup, shelf-stable orientalentrees, shelf-stable oriental noodles, shelf-stable oriental vegetables,soy sauce and packaged nuts. q. ``RJR'' means RJR Nabisco, Inc., its predecessors and successors, andany corporations, partnerships, joint ventures, companies, subsidiaries,divisions, groups or affiliates that RJR controls directly or indirectly,and their respective directors, officers, employees, agents and representatives,and their respective successors and assigns. r. ``RJR Acquisition'' means RJR Acquisition Corporation, a Delaware corporationand subsidiary of RJR Holdings. s. ``RJR Associates'' means RJR Associates, L.P., a Delaware limited partnershipof which KKR Associates is the general partner. t. ``RJR Group'' means RJR Holdings Group, Inc., a Delaware corporationand subsidiary of RJR Holdings.u. ``RJR Holdings'' means RJR Holdings Corp., a Delaware corporation. v. ``George R. Roberts'' means George R. Roberts a natural person, anda general partner in KKR andamp; Co. and KKR Associates. w. ``Schedule A Properties'' means the assets and businesses listed inSchedule A. x. ``Schedule A-1 Properties'' means the assets and businesses listed inSchedule A-1. y. ``Schedule B Properties'' means the assets and businesses listed inSchedule B. z. ``Successors'' includes any partnership in which two or more of thegeneral partners in KKR Associates or KKR andamp; Co. are partners. <ITAG tagnum="84">II </ITAG><T3>It is ordered </T3>That: (A) The Respondents shall divest, absolutely and in good faith, withintwelve (12) months of the date this Order becomes final, either the ScheduleA Properties or the Schedule A-1 properties, as well as any additionalFood Assets and Businesses that (i) the Respondents may at their discretioninclude as a part of the assets to be divested and are acceptable to theacquiring entity and the Commission, or (ii) the Commission shall requireto be divested to ensure the divestiture of the Schedule A Properties orthe Schedule A-1 Properties as ongoing, viable enterprises, engaged inthe businesses in which the Properties are presently employed. (B) The Agreement to Hold Separate, attached hereto and made a part hereofas Appendix I, shall continue in effect until such time as the Respondentshave completed all of the Commission-approved divestitures of the ScheduleA Properties or the Schedule A-1 Properties, or until such other time asthe Agreement to Hold Separate provides, and the Respondents shall complywith all terms of said Agreement. (C) Divestiture of the Schedule A Properties or the Schedule A-1 Propertiesshall be made only to a buyer or buyers that receive the prior approvalof the Commission, and only in a manner that receives the prior approvalof the Commission. The purpose of the divestiture of the Schedule A Propertiesor the Schedule A-1 Properties is to ensure the continuation of the assetsas ongoing, viable enterprises engaged in the same businesses in whichthe Properties are presently employed, and to remedy the lessening of competitionresulting from the Acquisition as alleged in the Commission's complaint.(D) The Respondents shall take such action as is necessary to maintainthe viability and marketability of the Schedule A Properties, and to preventthe destruction, removal or impairment of any assets or businesses to bedivested except in the ordinary course of business and except for ordinarywear and tear. (E) The individual Respondents shall take no action that diminishes theviability or marketability of the Schedule A-1 Properties, or permits thedestruction, removal or impairment of any assets or businesses to be divestedexcept in the ordinary course of business and except for ordinary wearand tear. To the extent any individual Respondent has any direct or indirectresponsibility or fiduciary duty with regard to the A-1 Properties, thatRespondent shall take such action as is necessary to maintain the viabilityand marketability of the Schedule A-1 Properties. <ITAG tagnum="84">III </ITAG><T3>It is further ordered </T3>That: (A) If the Respondents have not divested the Schedule A Properties or theSchedule A-1 Properties within the twelve-month period, the Respondentsshall consent to the appointment by the Commission of a trustee to divestthe Schedule B Properties. In the event that the Commission brings an actionpursuant to section 5(1) of the Federal Trade Commission Act, 15 U.S.C.45(1), or any other statute enforced by the Commission, the Respondentsshall consent to the appointment of a trustee in such action. The appointmentof a trustee shall not preclude the Commission from seeking civil penaltiesor any other relief available to it for any failure by Respondents to complywith this Order. (B) If a trustee is appointed by the Commission or a court pursuant toPart III(A) of this Order, the Respondents shall consent to the followingterms and conditions regarding the trustee's duties and responsibilities: (1) The Commission shall select the trustee, subject to the consent ofthe Respondents, which consent shall not be unreasonably withheld. Thetrustee shall be a person with experience and expertise in acquisitionsand divestitures. (2) The trustee shall have the power and authority to divest the ScheduleB Properties. Provided, however, the trustee shall not have the power todivest the Planters Lifesavers Company if the Commission has approved andthe Respondents have divested, pursuant to this Order, either (i) the assetsand businesses associated with the development, production, distributionand sale of all Relevant Products within the Planters Lifesavers Companyor (ii) the assets and businesses associated with the development, production,distribution and sale of all Relevant Products within Beatrice/Hunt-Wessonthat develop, produce, distribute or sell the same Relevant Products asthe Planters Lifesavers Company. Provided, further, the trustee shall nothave the power to divest Del Monte Foods USA if the Commission has approvedand the Respondents have divested, pursuant to this Order, (a) either (i)Chun King or (ii) the assets and businesses associated with the development,production, distribution and sale of all Relevant Products within Beatrice/Hunt-Wessonthat develop, produce, distribute or sell the same Relevant Products asChun King, and (b) either (i) the assets and businesses associated withthe development, production, distribution and sale of all Relevant Productswithin Del Monte Foods USA or (ii) the assets and businesses associatedwith the development, production, distribution and sale of all RelevantProducts within Beatrice/Hunt-Wesson that develop, produce, distributeor sell the same Relevant Products as Del Monte Foods USA. Provided, further,the trustee shall not have the power to divest Chun King if the Commissionhas approved and the Respondents have divested, pursuant to this Order,the assets and businesses associated with the development, production,distribution and sale of all Relevant Products within Beatrice/Hunt-Wessonthat develop, produce, distribute or sell the same Relevant Products asChun King. (3) The trustee shall have eighteen (18) months from the date of appointmentto accomplish the divestiture, which shall be subject to the prior approvalof the Commission and, if the trustee is appointed by a court, subjectalso to the prior approval of the court. If, however, at the end of theeighteen-month period the trustee has submitted a plan of divestiture orbelieves that divestiture can be achieved within a reasonable time, thedivestiture period may be extended by the Commission, or by the court fora court-appointed trustee. Provided, however, that the Commission or courtmay only extend the divestiture period two (2) times. (4) The trustee shall have full and complete access to the personnel,books, records and facilities of any businesses that the trustee has theduty to divest.The Respondents shall develop such financial or other information as suchtrustee may reasonably request and shall cooperate with the trustee. TheRespondents shall take no action to interfere with or impede the trustee'saccomplishment of the divestitures. (5) The trustee shall use his or her best efforts to negotiate the mostfavorable price and terms available in each contract that is submittedto the Commission, subject to the Respondents, absolute and unconditionalobligation to divest at no minimum price and the purpose of the divestituresas stated in Paragraph II C. (6) The trustee shall serve at the cost and expense of the Respondents,on such reasonable and customary terms and conditions as the Commissionor a court may set, including the employment of accountants, attorneysor other persons reasonably necessary to carry out the trustee's dutiesand responsibilities. The trustee shall account for all monies derivedfrom the sale and all expenses incurred. After approval by the Commissionand, in the case of a court-appointed trustee, by the court, of the accountof the trustee, including fees for his or  her services, all remainingmonies shall be paid at the direction of the appropriate Respondent andthe trustee's power shall be terminated. The trustee's compensation shallbe based at least in significant part on a commission arrangement contingenton the trustee's divesting the Schedule B Properties. (7) Within sixty (60) days after appointment of the trustee, and subjectto the prior approval of the Commission and, in the case of a court-appointedtrustee, of the court, the Respondents shall execute a trust agreementthat transfers to the trustee all rights and powers necessary to permitthe trustee to effect the divestiture. (8) If the trustee ceases to act or fails to act diligently, a substitutetrustee shall be appointed in the same manner as provided in Part III (A)of this Order. (9) The trustee shall report in writing to the Respondents and the Commissionevery sixty (60) days concerning the trustee's efforts to accomplish divestiture.<ITAG tagnum="84">IV </ITAG><T3>It is further ordered </T3>That, within sixty (60) days after the datethis Order becomes final, and every sixty (60) days thereafter until theRespondents have fully complied with the provisions of paragraph II ofthis Order, each Respondent shall submit to the Commission a verified writtenreport setting forth in detail the manner and form in which it intendsto comply, is complying with, or has complied with that provision. TheRespondents shall include in compliance reports, among other things thatare required from time to time, a full description of the contracts ornegotiations for the divestiture of properties specified in paragraph IIof this Order, including the identity of all parties contacted. The Respondentsalso shall include in their compliance reports copies of all material writtencommunications to and from such parties, and all internal memoranda, reportsand recommendations concerning the required divestitures. <ITAG tagnum="84">V </ITAG><T3>It is further ordered </T3>That, for a ten (10) year period commencingon the date this Order becomes final, each Respondent (but in the caseof an individual Respondent, only so long as he remains a general partner,officer, director, or employee of a nonindividual Respondent) shall ceaseand desist from acquiring, without the prior approval of the Federal TradeCommission, directly or indirectly, through subsidiaries, partnershipsor otherwise, assets used or previously used in (and still suitable foruse in), or any interest in, or the whole or any part of the stock or sharecapital of, any company that is engaged in the production of any RelevantProduct, or that owns or licenses a branded trademark used in connectionwith the sale of any Relevant Product. Provided, however, that the corporateRespondents may, in the ordinary course of business, make purchases ofused equipment for not more than $500,000. Provided further, that the individualand partnership Respondents, and each pension, benefit or welfare planor trust controlled by the corporate Respondents may acquire, for investmentpurposes only, an interest of not more than five (5) percent of the stockor share capital of any concern. For the purposes of this proviso, anypurchase by any such pension, benefit or welfare plan or trust made atthe direction or suggestion of any individual or partnership Respondentshall be included in the five (5) percent of the stock or share capitalthat the individual or partnership Respondents may acquire. <ITAG tagnum="84">VI </ITAG><T3>It is further ordered </T3>That, one (1) year from the date this Orderbecomes final and for each of nine (9) years thereafter, each Respondentshall file with the Commission a verified written report of its compliancewith paragraph V. <ITAG tagnum="84">VII </ITAG><T3>It is further ordered </T3>That, for the purpose of determining orsecuring compliance with this Order, and subject to any legally recognizedprivilege, upon written request and on reasonable notice to any Respondentmade to its offices, the Respondent shall permit any duly authorized representativeof the Commission: (1) Access, during office hours and in the presence of counsel, to inspectand copy all books, ledgers, accounts, correspondence, memoranda and otherrecords and documents in the possession or under the control of the Respondentsrelating to any matters contained in this Order; and (2) Upon five (5) days, notice to any Respondent and without restraintor interference from it, to interview officers, partners or employees ofthe Respondent who may have counsel present regarding such matters.<ITAG tagnum="84">VIII</ITAG> <T3>It is further ordered</T3> That the Respondents notify the Commissionat least thirty (30) days prior to any change in the structure of any ofthe Respondent companies or partnerships such as dissolution, assignmentor sale resulting in the emergence of a successor, the creation or dissolutionof subsidiaries or any other change that may affect compliance obligationsarising out of the Order.Schedule A Unless the Beatrice Parties divest the Schedule A-1 Properties pursuantto the terms of this Order, the Respondents shall divest all of RJR's assetsand businesses associated with the development, production, distributionand sale of the Relevant Products. The divestiture shall include all ofRJR's assets, properties, business and goodwill, tangible and intangible,utilized in the manufacture or sale of such Relevant Products, including,without limitation, the following: (a) All machinery, fixtures, equipment, vehicles, furniture, tools andall other tangible personal property; (b) All customer lists, vendor lists, catalogs, sales promotion literature,advertising materials, research materials, technical information, managementinformation systems, software, inventions, trade secrets, technology, know-how,specifications, designs, drawings, processes and quality control data; (c) Inventory; (d) Accounts and notes receivable; (e) Intellectual property rights, patents, copyrights, trademarks andtrade names, excluding the trademark or trade name ``Nabisco;'' (f) All right, title and interest in and to owned or leased real property,together with appurtenances, licenses and permits; (g) All right, title and interest in and to the contracts entered intoin the ordinary course of business with customers (together with associatedbid and performance bonds), suppliers, sales representatives, distributors,agents, personal property lessors, personal property lessees, licensors,licensees, consignors and consignees; (h) All rights under warranties and guarantees, express or implied; (i) All books, records and files; (j) All items of prepaid expense; and (k) All known or unknown, liquidated or unliquidated, contingent or fixed,rights or causes of action which RJR has or may have against any thirdparty, and all such rights that RJR has or may have in or to any assetor property relating primarily to the particular assets divested, excluding,however, all known or unknown, liquidated or unliquidated, contingent orfixed, causes of action that RJR has or may have to the extent they ariseout of or are related to any liability, obligation or claim not to be assumedby the purchaser of such asset divested. With respect to a class of similar assets (such as trucks) a fractionof the use of which has been devoted to the assets divested, such fractionof such class (or as close an approximation to such fraction as can beseparately transferred) shall be included within the assets divested. Provided, however, if the Beatrice Parties divest the Schedule A-1 Propertiespursuant to the terms of this Order associated with the development, production,distribution and sale of a particular Relevant Product, the Respondentsshall not be required to divest RJR's assets and businesses associatedwith the development, production, distribution and sale of that RelevantProduct, unless such assets and businesses are also assets and businessesassociated with the development, production, distribution or sale of anotherRelevant Product.Schedule A-1 Unless the Respondents divest the Schedule A Properties pursuant to theterms of this Order, the Beatrice Parties shall divest all of the Beatrice/Hunt-Wesson,Inc. assets and businesses associated with the development, production,distribution and sale of the Relevant Products. The divestiture shall includeall of Beatrice/Hunt-Wesson, Inc. assets, properties, business and goodwill,tangible and intangible, utilized in the manufacture or sale of such RelevantProducts, including, without limitation, the following: (a) All machinery, fixtures, equipment, vehicles, furniture, tools andall other tangible personal property; (b) All customer lists, vendor lists, catalogs, sales promotion literature,advertising materials, research materials, technical information, managementinformation systems, software, inventions, trade secrets, technology, know-how,specifications, designs, drawings, processes and quality control data;(c) Inventory; (d) Accounts and notes receivable; (e) Intellectual property rights, patents, copyrights, trademarks and tradenames, excluding the trademark or trade name ``Beatrice;'' (f) All right, title and interest in and to owned or leased real property,together with appurtenances, licenses and permits; (g) All right, title and interest in and to the contracts entered intoin the ordinary course of business with customers (together with associatedbid and performance bonds), suppliers, sales representatives, distributors,agents, personal property lessors, personal property lessees, licensors,licensees, consignors and consignees; (h) All rights under warranties and guarantees, express or implied; (i) All books, records and files; (j) All items of prepaid expense; and (k) All known or unknown, liquidated or unliquidated, contingent or fixed,rights or causes of action which Beatrice/Hunt-Wesson, Inc. has or mayhave against any third party, and all such rights that Beatrice/Hunt-Wesson,Inc. has or may have in or to any asset or property relating primarilyto the particular assets divested, excluding, however, all known or unknown,liquidated or unliquidated, contingent or fixed, causes of action thatBeatrice/Hunt-Wesson, Inc. has or may have to the extent they arise outof or are related to any liability, obligation or claim not to be assumedby the purchaser of such asset divested. With respect to a class of similar assets (such as trucks) a fraction ofthe use of which has been devoted to the assets divested, such fractionof such class (or as close an approximation to such fraction as can beseparately transferred) shall be included within the assets divested. Provided, however, if the Respondents divest the Schedule A Propertiespursuant to the terms of this Order associated with the development production,distribution and sale of a particular Relevant Product, the Beatrice Partiesshall not be required to divest the Beatrice/Hunt-Wesson, Inc. assets andbusinesses associated with the development, production, distribution andsale of that Relevant Product, unless such assets and businesses are alsoassets and businesses associated with the development production, distributionor sale of another Relevant Product.Schedule B The trustee shall divest the following divisions, businesses, or subsidiariesof RJR: 1. Del Monte Foods USA, 2. Planters Lifesavers Company, 3. Chun King. The trustee shall also divest any additional Food Assets and Businessesthat the Commission shall require to be divested to ensure the divestitureof the Schedule B Properties as ongoing, viable enterprises, engaged inthe businesses in which the Properties are presently employed. Notwithstandingthe last paragraph of Schedule A and Schedule A-1, the trustee shall havethe power and authority to divest all the Schedule B Properties, exceptas provided in paragraph III(B)(2) of this Order. Agreement to Hold Separate This Agreement to Hold Separate (the ``Agreement'') is by and among KKRAssociates, a New York limited partnership, the general partners of KKRAssociates (``KKR Partners''), Kohlberg Kravis Roberts andamp; Co. L.P. (``KKRandamp; Co.''), a Delaware limited partnership, the general partners of KohlbergKravis Roberts andamp; Co., L.P. (``KKR andamp; Co. Partners''), RJR Associates,L.P. (``RJR Associates''), a Delaware limited partnership, RJR HoldingsCorp. (``RJR Holdings''), a Delaware corporation, RJR Acquisition Corporation(``RJR Acquisition''), a Delaware corporation and RJR Holdings Group, Inc.(``RJR Group''), a Delaware corporation, (collectively, ``the AcquiringParties''), and the Federal Trade Commission (``the Commission''), an independentagency of the United States Government, established under the Federal TradeCommission Act of 1914, 15 U.S.C. 41 <T3>et seq. </T3>(collectively, ``the Parties''). Premises Whereas, RJR Acquisition, a wholly-owned subsidiary of RJR Holdings, allof whose voting securities are currently held by RJR Associates, commenceda tender offer on October 27, 1988, as amended, for up to 165,509,015 ofthe outstanding shares of RJR Nabisco, Inc. (``RJR''), with the intentof effecting a merger of RJR Acquisition into RJR, pursuant to which RJRwould become a subsidiary of RJR Holdings (the ``Acquisition''), all ascontemplated by and provided for in that certain Merger Agreement enteredinto among RJR Holdings, RJR Acquisition, RJR Group and RJR dated as ofNovember 30, 1988; and Whereas, the Commission is now investigating the transaction to determineif the Acquisition would violate any of the statutes enforced by the Commission;and Whereas, if the Commission accepts the attached Agreement Containing ConsentOrder (``Consent Order''), the Commission must place it on the public recordfor a period of at least sixty (60) days and may subsequently withdrawsuch acceptance pursuant to the provisions of andSection; 2.34 of the Commission'sRules; and Whereas, the Commission is concerned that if an understanding is not reached,preserving the status quo ante of certain of RJR's food assets and businessesduring the period prior to the final acceptance of the Consent Order bythe Commission (after the 60-day public notice period), divestiture resultingfrom any proceeding challenging the legality of the Acquisition might notbe possible, or might be less than an effective remedy; and Whereas, the Commission is concerned that if the Acquisition is consummated,it will be necessary to preserve the Commission's ability to require thedivestiture of properties described in Schedule A, Schedule A-1 and ScheduleB to the Consent Order (the ``Schedule A Properties,'' ``Schedule A-1 Properties,''and ``Schedule B Properties,'' respectively) and the Commission's rightto seek to restore RJR as a viable competitor; and Whereas, the purpose of this Agreement and the Consent Order is to preservethe Chun King business of Nabisco Foods Company as that business is definedin the Consent Order (``Chun King''), Del Monte Foods USA and the PlantersLifeSavers Company as viable food companies pending the divestiture ofthe Schedule A Properties as viable, on-going enterprises, in order toremedy any anticompetitive effects of the Acquisition and to preserve theassets and businesses as viable food companies in the event that divestitureis not achieved; and Whereas, the Acquiring Parties' entering into this Agreement shall in noway be construed as an admission by them that the Acquisition is illegal;and Whereas, the Acquiring Parties understand that no act or transaction contemplatedby this Agreement shall be deemed immune or exempt from the provisionsof the antitrust laws or the Federal Trade Commission Act by reason ofanything contained in this Agreement. Now, therefore, the Parties agree, upon understanding that the Commissionhas not yet determined whether the Acquisition will be challenged, andin consideration of the Commission's agreement that, unless the Commissiondetermines to reject the Consent Order, it will not seek further relieffrom the Acquiring Parties with respect to the Acquisition, except thatthe Commission may exercise any and all rights to enforce this Agreementand the Consent Order to which it is annexed and made a part thereof, andin the event the required divestitures are not accomplished, to seek divestitureof such assets as are held separate pursuant to this Agreement, as follows:1. The Acquiring Parties agree to execute and be bound by the attachedConsent Order. 2. The Acquiring Parties agree that, until the first to occur of (i) threebusiness days after the Commission withdraws its acceptance of the ConsentOrder pursuant to the provisions of andSection; 2.34 of the Commission'sRules; or (ii) if the Commission issues the Consent Order finally, untilall of the divestitures required by the Consent Order have been completed,the Acquiring Parties shall hold all of RJR's assets and business operationsseparate and apart on the following terms and conditions: a. All of RJR's assets and businesses shall be operated independently ofthe Acquiring Parties and independently of any other Parties owned in wholeor in part by any of the Acquiring Parties.b. Except as permitted to the Acquiring Parties sitting on the ``New Board''(as defined in subparagraph (h)), and as is necessary to assure compliancewith this Agreement, the Acquiring Parties shall not exercise directionor control over, or influence directly or indirectly, any of RJR's assetsand businesses. c. Except as required by law, and except to the extent that necessary informationis exchanged in the course of evaluating the Acquisition, defending investigationsor litigation, preventing a default under the terms of the Credit Agreementamong RJR Holdings and certain banks entered into in connection with theAcquisition (the ``Credit Agreement'') or negotiating an agreement to disposeof assets, the Acquiring Parties shall not receive or have access to, orthe use of, any ``material confidential information'' relating to RJR's``Food Assets and Businesses'' not in the public domain, except as suchinformation would be available to the Acquiring Parties in the normal courseof business if the Acquisition had not taken place. Any such informationthat is obtained pursuant to this subparagraph shall only be used for thepurposes set out in this subparagraph. ``Material confidential information,''as used herein, means competitively sensitive or proprietary informationnot independently known to the Acquiring Parties from sources other thanRJR, and includes but is not limited to customer lists, price lists, marketingmethods, patents, technologies, processes, or other trade secrets. ``FoodAssets and Businesses'' as used herein, means any assets and businessesused in the product development, manufacture, distribution or sale of any``Relevant Product'' as the Consent Order defines that term. Provided,however, that assets and businesses associated with a particular RelevantProduct shall not continue to be Food Assets and Businesses for the purposesof this Agreement to Hold Separate when the trustee loses the power todivest such assets and businesses, pursuant to paragraph III(B)(2) of theConsent Order. d. The Acquiring Parties shall not change the composition of the managementof RJR's assets and businesses except that the directors serving on the``New Board'' (as defined in subparagraph (h)), excluding directors whoare officers, partners, employees or agents of KKR andamp; Co. or KKR Associates,shall have the power to remove employees for cause, and the New Board shallhave the power to remove any RJR employees not employed by or assignedto Chun King, Del Monte Foods USA, and the Planters LifeSavers Company.e. The Acquiring Parties shall do nothing to diminish the viability andmarketability of Chun King, Del Monte Foods USA, and the Planters LifeSaversCompany, and shall not sell, transfer, encumber, or otherwise impair themarketability or viability of their assets (other than in the normal courseof business). f. The Acquiring Parties shall do nothing to diminish the normal workingcapital of the Food Assets and Businesses. g. All material transactions out of the ordinary course of business andnot otherwise precluded shall be subject to a majority vote of the NewBoard (as defined in subparagraph (h)). h. The Acquiring Parties may adopt new Articles of Incorporation and By-laws,provided that they are not inconsistent with other provisions of this Agreement,and may cause the election of a new board of directors of RJR (``New Board'')once they are majority shareholders of RJR. The Acquiring Parties may electthe directors to the New Board. Except as permitted by this Agreement,the directors of RJR who are also partners, officers, employees or agentsof KKR andamp; Co. or KKR Associates shall not receive in their capacityas directors of RJR material confidential information relating to RJR'sFood Assets and Businesses, and shall not disclose any such informationreceived under this Agreement to the Acquiring Parties or to any companyowned in whole or in part by any of the Acquiring Parties. Nor shall suchdirectors use such information to obtain any advantage for the AcquiringParties or for any company owned in whole or in part by the Acquiring Parties.Said directors shall also not disclose to RJR any material confidentialinformation relating to the Food Assets and Businesses of any company ownedin whole or in part by any of the Acquiring Parties. Said directors ofRJR shall enter into a confidentiality agreement prohibiting disclosureof confidential information. Such directors may participate in mattersthat come before the New Board that do not concern Chun King, Del MonteFoods USA, and the Planters LifeSavers Company. Such directors may participatein matters that come before the New Board concerning Chun King, Del MonteFoods USA, and the Planters LifeSavers Company only for the limited purposeof considering: (i) Capital expenditures in excess of $5,000,000; (ii)sale of any capital assets for more than $5,000,000; (iii) any decisionrelating to financing, restructuring or the issuance of indebtedness inthe aggregate sum of more than $5,000,000; (iv) preventing a default underthe terms of the Credit Agreement; (v) negotiating incentive compensationarrangements for key managers solely for the purpose of facilitating thedivestitures; or (vi) carrying out the Acquiring Parties, and RJR's responsibilityto assure that the Schedule A and Schedule B Properties and such otherproperties as the Commission may elect to add under paragraph II of theConsent Order are maintained in such manner as will permit their divestitureas on-going, viable assets. Except as permitted by this Agreement, suchdirector shall not participate in, or attempt to influence the vote ofany other director with respect, to any matters that would involve a conflictof interest if the Acquiring Parties and RJR were separate and independententities. Meetings of the Board during the term of this Agreement shallbe stenographically transcribed and the transcripts shall be retained fortwo (2) years after the termination of this Agreement. i. Nothing herein shall prevent the New Board from negotiating or enteringinto agreements to dispose of RJR's assets, provided that any such dispositionwith respect to properties potentially subject to the divestiture of thetrustee under the Consent Order shall be made only to a buyer or buyersthat receive the prior approval of the Commission and only in a mannerthat receives the prior approval of the Commission.j. The Board of RJR Holdings, RJR Group, or RJR Acquisition shall neitherdeclare any cash dividend on any class of its stock nor permit the repaymentof the principal of any loan from any Acquiring Party, other than RJR Holdings,RJR Group or RJR Acquisition, until the divestitures required pursuantto the Consent Order have been completed. The Acquiring Parties shall notborrow funds or issue dividends if the result would be to impair the FoodAssets' and Businesses' viability, marketability, or ability to operateat their previously budgeted 1989 levels of expenditure on an annualizedbasis. k. Should the Commission seek in any proceeding to compel the AcquiringParties to divest themselves of the shares of RJR stock they shall acquire,or to compel the Acquiring Parties to divest any assets or businesses theymay hold, or to seek any other injunctive or equitable relief, the AcquiringParties shall not raise any objection based upon the expiration of theapplicable Hart-Scott-Rodino Antitrust Improvements Act waiting periodor the fact that the Commission has permitted RJR stock to be acquired.The Acquiring Parties also waive all rights to contest the validity ofthis Agreement. 3. In the event the Commission has not finally approved and issued theConsent Order within one hundred twenty (120) days of its publication inthe <T4>Federal Register</T4>, the Acquiring Parties may, at their option,terminate this Agreement to Hold Separate by delivering written noticeof termination to the Commission, which termination shall be effectiveten (10) days after the Commission's receipt of such notice, and this Agreementshall thereafter be of no further force and effect. If this Agreement isso terminated, the Commission may take such action as it deems appropriate,including but not limited to an action pursuant to section 13(b) of theFederal Trade Commission Act, 15 U.S.C. 53(b). Termination of this Agreementto Hold Separate shall in no way operate to terminate the Agreement ContainingConsent Order to Cease and Desist that the Acquiring Parties have enteredinto in this matter. 4. For the purpose of determining or securing compliance with this Agreement,subject to any legally recognized privilege, and upon written request withreasonable notice to the Acquiring Parties made to their offices, the AcquiringParties shall permit any duly authorized representative or representativesof the Commission: a. Access during the office hours of the Acquiring Parties and in the presenceof counsel to inspect and copy all books, ledgers, accounts, correspondence,memoranda, and other records and documents in the possession or under thecontrol of the Acquiring Parties relating to compliance with this Agreement;and b. Upon five (5) days notice to the Acquiring Parties, and without restraintor interference from them, to interview partners, officers, directors oremployees of the Acquiring Parties, who may have counsel present, regardingany such matters. No information or documents obtained by the Commission pursuant to thisAgreement shall be divulged by any representative of the Commission toanyone outside the Commission, except in the case of legal proceedings,in the case of a request from Congress, a Congressional Committee, or CongressionalSubcommittee, for the purpose of securing compliance with this Agreementor as otherwise required by law. Upon the termination of this Agreement,all such information and documents shall, at the request of the AcquiringParties, be returned to the Acquiring Parties or destroyed. If, at any time, information or documents are furnished by the AcquiringParties and the Acquiring Parties identify such documents as ``Confidential,''then the Commission shall provide to the Acquiring Parties ten (10) daysnotice or, if ten (10) days is  not possible, as many days notice as possibleprior to divulging such material. 5. This agreement shall not be binding until approved by the Commission.Analysis To Aid Public Comment on Consent Order Accepted Subject to FinalApproval The Federal Trade Commission (``Commission'') has accepted for publiccomment from KKR Associates, Kohlberg Kravis Roberts andamp; Co. L.P., RJRAcquisition Corporation, RJR Associates, L.P., RJR Holdings Group, Inc.,RJR Holdings Corp., Henry R. Kravis, Robert I. MacDonnell, Michael W. Michelson,Paul E. Raether, and George R. Roberts (collectively ``KKR'') an agreementcontaining consent order. The Commission is placing the agreement on thepublic record for sixty (60) days for reception of comments from interestedpersons. Comments received during this period will become part of the public record.After sixty (60) days, the Commission will again review the agreement andthe comments received and will decide whether it should withdraw from theagreement or make final the agreement's proposed order. The Commission's investigation of this matter concerned the proposed acquisitionby KKR of RJR Nabisco, Inc. (``RJR''). RJR is a food and cigarette manufacturingconglomerate. KKR representatives hold the majority of the seats on theboard of directors of Beatrice Company, another food manufacturing conglomeratethat competes with RJR. The Commission has reason to believe that KKR's acquisition of RJR wouldsubstantially lessen competition in three branded markets: packaged nuts,shelf-stable oriental foods, and catsup, in the United States, in violationof section 7 of the Clayton Act and section 5 of the Federal Trade CommissionAct. The Agreement containing Consent Order (``Order'') would, if issued bythe Commission, settle the complaint that alleges anticompetitive effectsin the branded packaged nuts market, the shelf-stable oriental foods market,and the catsup market. Under the terms of the proposed Order, KKR must divest either: (1) RJR'sassets and businesses associated with the development, production, distributionand sale of packaged nuts, shelf-stable oriental foods, and catsup; or(2) all of the Beatrice/Hunt-Wesson, Inc. assets and businesses associatedwith the development, production, distribution and sale of packaged nuts,shelf-stable oriental foods, and catsup. If KKR fails to complete the requireddivestitures within the twelve-month period, the Commission may authorizea trustee to divest the following divisions, businesses, or subsidiariesof RJR: Del Monte Foods USA, Planters Lifesavers Company, and Chun King.The Order also requires that, until all divestitures required by the Orderare approved by the Commission, KKR must hold RJR's assets and operationsseparate and apart from other entities owned in whole or in part by KKR. For a period of ten (10) years from its effective date, the proposed Orderprohibits KKR from making substantive acquisitions, without prior Commissionapproval, of assets or businesses that produce packaged nuts, shelf-stableoriental foods, or catsup. It is anticipated that the Order would resolve the competitive problemsalleged in the Complaint. The purpose of this analysis is to invite publiccomment concerning the Order, in order to aid the Commission in its determinationof whether it should make final the Order contained in the agreement. This analysis is not intended to constitute an official interpretationof the agreement and Order, nor is it intended to modify the terms of theagreement and Order in any way.<ITAG tagnum="6">Donald S. Clark,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-3770 Filed 02-16-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6750-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>