<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89817-0001 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.8-17-89.f2.A1000</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4700"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 158 / Thursday, August 17, 1989/ Rules and Regulations<ITAG tagnum="1">Vol. 54, No. 158 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Thursday, August 17, 1989</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">FEDERAL HOME LOAN BANK BOARD</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">12 CFR Part 545</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[No. 89-2350]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="91">RIN 3068-AA86 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Release of Customer Financial Records by Federal Associations</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Date: August 8, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY:</T2> Federal Home Loan Bank Board.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION:</T2> Final rule. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY:</T2> The Federal Home Loan Bank Board (the ``Bank Board''or ``Board'') is amending its regulations governing the release of customerfinancial records by federally chartered savings and loan associationsand savings banks (``Federal associations'' or ``associations''). Thisfinal rule would generally authorize a Federal association, whether charteredas a mutual association (``Federal mutual association''), or as a stockassociation (``Federal stock association''), to disclose, unless the customerobjects, the names and addresses of its customers and their savings orloan records (``customer information'') to any wholly-owned subsidiaryof the Federal association or to other persons if the information to bedisclosed is limited to the customers' names and addresses (``customeridentification'') or is recorded in the public records. The regulationalso authorizes a Federal association to disclose to persons other thanwholly-owned service corporations customer information that is not recordedin the public records on the prior condition that the Federal associationobtains the affirmative consent of the customer prior to the disclosure.Specific exceptions are provided to authorize the release of customer informationto third persons under various situations prohibited by the general rule.The amendment would replace the current requirement that Federal mutualassociations obtain the prior approval of either the Board or a SupervisoryAgent before releasing customer information. Through this amendment, theBoard seeks to balance the legitimate business interests of Federal associationsin disclosing customer information with reasonable customer expectationsof privacy.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE:</T2> December 15, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2> Jeffrey Ross Williams, Attorney,(202) 906-6559, Jerome Edelstein, Deputy Director, (202) 906-7057, Regulationsand Legislation Division, Office of General Counsel, Federal Home LoanBank Board, 1700 G Street NW., Washington, DC 20552; or Ben F. Dixon, PolicyAnalyst, (202) 331-4599, Policy Division, Federal Home Loan Bank System,801 17th Street NW., Washington, DC 20006.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2> <ITAG tagnum="84">A. Current Regulations and Office of General Counsel Interpretations</ITAG>Section 545.131(a) of the Board's regulations sets forth limitations onpublic disclosure by a Federal mutual association of its ``membership list.''As used in  andSection; 545.131, a ``membership list'' includes a list ofthe names of the members of the association, their addresses, their savingsaccount or loan account records, or any data from which information reasonablycould be constructed. 12 CFR 545.131(a) (1988). Section 545.131(a)(2) generallyprohibits Federal mutual associations from disclosing membership listswithout the prior written approval of the Board. The regulation containsexceptions for disclosure to officers of the association and to those personsemployed by them in the usual course of the association's business. Section545.131(a) permits a Supervisory Agent to approve or disapprove an applicationby a Federal mutual association to release such lists and to specify anyterms or conditions for such release. <T3>Id. </T3>andSection; 545.131(a)(3). Section 545.131(b) gives a memberof a Federal mutual association the right to inspect only those recordsof the association pertaining to his or her own savings or loan accounts.\1\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ Section 545.131(c) gives members of a Federal mutual associationthe right to communicate with other members of the association only inthe manner prescribed in paragraph (d). Paragraph (d) of andSection; 545.131establishes procedures for communications between members of a Federalmutual association. Finally, andSection; 545.131(e) defines the term ``impropercommunications'' for purposes of paragraph (d) of that section. Section544.5(b)(6) contained in part 544, concerning the charter and bylaws ofFederal mutual associations, provides that communications between membersshall be consistent with andSection; 545.131. These sections are not alteredby the regulations adopted herein. In construing the provisions of andSection; 545.131, the Board's Office ofGeneral Counsel (``OGC'') has interpreted the regulation to permit disclosureto an ``agent'' of the association, pursuant to a written agency agreement,where the agent acts as the functional equivalent of an officer or employeeconducting the business of the association in its usual course. Disclosurealso has been permitted to an association's wholly owned service corporationsor its wholly owned subsidiaries, when such release been approved by theSupervisory Agent. Under the authority of Supervisory Agents to specifythe terms and conditions of such approval, approval has been conditionedprimarily upon the membership list being released to the service corporationor subsidiary pursuant to a written agreement that would protect the members'privacy. <T3>See, e.g., </T3>OGC Ops. by R. Stewart (Feb. 27, 1985); J. Williams(March 17, 1986) and J. Williams (March 21, 1986). While no Board regulationspecifically applies to the release of customer lists by a Federal stock  association, other than 12 CFR 552.11(d) prohibiting release of depositorlists to stockholders, the Office of General Counsel has by interpretiveopinion applied to Federal stock associations the same limitations concerningrelease of customer lists as are applied to Federal mutual associations.<T3>Id</T3>. <ITAG tagnum="84">B. Description of the Proposed Rule </ITAG>On January 29, 1989, the Board proposed for public comment a revision ofthe regulation governing the release of membership lists by Federal associations,giving much consideration to the competing interests of customer privacyand the business needs and practices of Federal associations. <T3>See </T3>54 FR 5629 (February 6, 1989) (``proposed rule''). The proposed rule applied to customers, defined as depositors in, borrowersfrom, or other patrons of both Federal stock associations and Federal mutualassociations. It addressed the issue of the release of information aboutcustomers but distinguished between two types of such information: ``Customeridentification,'' defined as a list of the names and addresses of customers;and ``customer records,'' which also encompassed information about thecontents and particulars of their savings or loan accounts or other financialtransactions with the association.The proposed rule can be summarized in the following manner: (a) With certainenumerated exceptions, only a customer of a Federal association, and noother person or entity, had the right to inspect or obtain a customer'sown customer records; (b) Unless a customer affirmatively and in writingprohibits release of the customer identification, a Federal associationmay, in its discretion, voluntarily release customer identification toany person or entity; provided that any release of customer identificationshall consist only of a complete list of all customers who have not objectedto the release of their customer identification. Under the proposed rule,Federal associations could not, therefore, release a partial or incompletelist of customer identification, such as, for example, a list of only depositors,or borrowers, or customers with account balances over $50,000; and (c)With certain enumerated exceptions, a Federal association would be prohibitedfrom releasing its customer records, other than customer identification,unless the Federal association procured from the customer written authorizationfor such release. The obligation to inform the customer of his or her rightto object to the release of customer identification and to obtain writtenauthorization from the customer to release customer records was specificallyimposed upon the Federal association. While the Board specifically requestedcomment on the methods available to Federal associations to implement thisaffirmative responsibility, the Board proposed the following procedure:As to the release of customer identification, the proposed rule requiredthat associations, in a timely manner, must notify customers of the association'sintent to release customer identification. In this context, the Board described``timely'' as allowing a customer sufficient time to receive the notice,review it, consider the alternatives, and decide whether to object to thedisclosure of his or her customer identification. Federal associationsdesiring to release customer identification would be required to providethe notice to new customers at the time an account is opened, before aloan is made, or other financial transaction is entered into. The proposalrequired that written notice containing the opportunity to object to therelease of customer identification must be provided to existing customersalong with a self-addressed envelope needing no postage in which the customercould return his or her objection to the Federal association. Federal associationswould then be authorized to release customer identification no sooner thanthirty (30) days after providing existing customers with such notice andopportunity to object to the release of customer identification. If noticewas mailed, the thirty days would begin from the date of mailing. In anyevent, Federal associations would not be authorized to release customeridentification for those customers that objected in writing to the release.As to customer records, the Board proposed to require an association toprocure a customer's informed consent before customer records could bereleased. No release of customer records would be permitted unless a customerwhose records were intended to be released was provided notice that releasewas contemplated, that the customer need not approve the release and thatwithout the customer's express written authorization for release, the associationwould not disclose customer records, except in certain enumerated circumstances.Furthermore, the association must receive and retain a copy of the customer'sauthorization for its records. In this way, the proposal would permit associationsto sell or make publicly available their customer records, and third partieswould be able to conduct direct mail solicitations aimed at customers ofa Federal association in a manner that respects the privacy of its customers.Accordingly, the Board proposed that associations could use a standardizedprinted notice and authorization form to solicit the consent to releasecustomer records before such records would be released. This document wouldbe separate from any and all other documents that are provided to customerspursuant to law or regulation. The Board's proposed rule would have required associations desiring torelease customer records to provide such document to the customer at thetime an account is opened, before the customer becomes obligated for aloan, or at the time the customer enters into another form of transactionwith the association. Federal associations that currently release customerrecords or that desire to release customer records pertaining to existingcustomers would be required to provide the notice to each existing customerand to receive that customer's authorization before that customer's recordscould be released. While the Board noted that there may be various methodsavailable to accomplish this requirement, it believed that a mailing toall customers, including a self-addressed envelope needing no postage,would be the most expedient method. Such a document, for example, may beprovided to the customer with the customer's monthly account statement.The Board specifically sought comment on the cost of compliance with thisrequirement by Federal associations, on the effect such costs would haveon the ability of Federal associations to disclose customer identificationor records for business purposes or for a fee, and on the comparative effectssuch costs would have on large and small associations. In proposing these requirements, the Board stated that circumstances maychange in regard to the release of customer records, both from the perspectiveof the Federal association and of the customer. Therefore, the Board proposedthat at least every two years after the initial provision of the noticeto customers, Federal associations desiring to release customer identificationand records shall mail to each customer new consent forms for the purposeof giving customers the opportunity to object to the release of customeridentification and of obtaining reauthorization for the release of customerrecords. If reauthorization from the customer for release of customer recordswas not received, the Federal association could no longer continue to releasesuch customer records. Of course, associations could provide such noticemore frequently than every two years. The proposed rule also reflected the Board's belief that customers mustbe informed not only of the consequences of their decision to consent tothe release of customer records, but also of the intended use of such records.The proposal noted that there were several methods available to achievethis requirement, such as requiring the disclosure of the names of theintended recipients of customer records, or requiring a general disclosurethat the Federal association intends to release customer records to thirdparties. The Board proposed that an appropriate balance between these twoalternatives is that Federal associations should specify in the noticedocument the type or nature of business(es) that may receive customer recordsfrom the Federal association, e g., insurance companies, credit card companies,department stores, or marketing agencies.The Board stated that it was aware that alternatives to these approachesexist. For example, associations could be required to procure a customer'sinformed consent to the release of customer records each time the associationintends to release such records and could be required to identify the intendedrecipient, the purpose of the release, and the date the records would bereleased. The Board specifically requested comment on this approach. TheBoard also sought comment on whether the notice should be provided to eachcustomer each time they enter into a transaction with the association (<T3>e.g.</T3>, each time the customer opens a deposit account or takesout a loan) or whether one notice would be sufficient to cover all recordsof the customer during the stated time period. The proposed rule also set out various exceptions to the general non-disclosurerule. In addition to disclosure to the customer or to those authorizedby the customer, disclosure would be permitted to those employees or agentsof Federal associations responsible for preparing or handling customerrecords; officials, employees, or agents of the Board, the Federal Savingsand Loan Insurance Corporation, or a Federal Home Loan Bank in the exerciseof their official duties; other financial institutions or consumer creditreporting agencies as part of a regular exchange of credit information;federal government agencies or entities requiring such information, reports,or returns pursuant to law; those parties who must be informed concerningthe dishonor of a negotiable instrument; appropriate law enforcement authoritieswhen an association reasonably believes it has been the victim of a crime;persons making demand pursuant to a lawful subpoena; and the association'sbond or insurance company relative to a claim under the association's liabilitypolicy. The proposed rule also provided that release of customer records to anyperson not enumerated in the rule was permissible only after the associationreceived the prior written approval of the Board. The Board believed thatthis exception should only apply in unusual and highly exceptional circumstancesin which the ability to release customer lists was not contemplated byany other exception to the non-disclosure rule. The Board specificallyasked for comment on the need to include this exception and, if included,on whether it should apply to the release of customer identification andrecords, where the customer has acted to prohibit release, or whether itshould only apply to the release of customer records where the customer,while not objecting to the release, had not affirmatively authorized release.Because the continued confidentiality of customer records following releaseto the aforementioned excepted parties cannot always be assured, the proposedrule provided that the following parties must execute confidentiality agreementsprior to the release of customer records: (1) Parties to whom a customerhas authorized such release; (2) officers, employees or agents of the Federalassociation responsible for preparing and handling customer records; (3)other financial institutions or credit reporting agencies; and (4) theassociation's bond or insurance companies. These confidentiality agreementswould have to contain a statement of the specific use to be made of therecords and prohibit disclosure by the third party except as required bylaw or in accordance with the exceptions set out in paragraphs (e)(3),(e)(5), (e)(7)-(8) of the proposed rule as if these paragraphs applieddirectly to the recipient of the records. Additionally, the Board requested comments with respect to whether an exceptionto the nondisclosure rule should exist for the disclosure of customer recordswhen state law, not otherwise preempted by Federal law or regulations,requires such disclosure to state governmental authorities in the lawfulexercise of such governmental authority over the customer or other thirdparty. Finally, in order to avoid conflict with or repetition of current regulatoryprovisions dealing with the confidentiality and release of customer records,the Board proposed to delete such conflicting or repetitive provisions.Specifically, the proposed rule would delete paragraphs (a) and (b) ofandSection; 545.131 dealing with the disclosure of membership lists by aFederal mutual association and the right of inspection of a member's ownrecords. It proposed to delete paragraph (d) of andSection; 552.11, whichcontains a prohibition against release to stockholders of Federal stockassociations of confidential depositor information. It also proposed toamend paragraph (d) of andSection; 545.141 to reflect the adoption of thedisclosure procedures and limitations of andSection; 545.132. <ITAG tagnum="84">C. Discussion of the Comments </ITAG>Comments on the proposed rule were solicited during the 60-day period thatexpired on April 7, 1989. Numerous comments were received by the Boardafter that date. These comments were accepted and reviewed and are includedin this discussion of the comments. A total of 156 comments were received by the Board in response to the proposal.One hundred eleven were submitted by Federal associations; and 2 were submittedby state-chartered thrift institutions. Of the remainder, 26 were submittedby insurance companies, most of which were wholly-owned subsidiaries ofFederal associations, 8 were submitted by savings and loan trade associations,6 were submitted by law firms, 2 were submitted by data processing companies,and 1 comment was received from a consumer credit reporting agency. Noconsumers or consumer groups commented. By the number of 155 to 1, the commenters were overwhelmingly and vigorouslyopposed to the proposal, with almost all of the commenters citing the enormouscosts necessary to comply with the proposal's notification requirements.The commenters generally claimed that the proposal would, if adopted, effectivelyforeclose the continued marketing of financial services and products bythe associations or their service corporations, further eroding industryefforts to decrease operating costs and increase profits. Many commentersargued that the financial, administrative and operating costs of compliancewould be so onerous that service corporations would have to be closed ortheir operations severely curtailed. The lone favorable comment only addressedthe Board's decision to impose upon Federal associations a uniform Federalstandard governing the release of customer lists. The major points raisedby the commenters are summarized below.<ITAG tagnum="84">I. Economic Burden To Comply With the Proposed Rule </ITAG>A. Discussion of Comments <ITAG tagnum="81">1. Industry Practice </ITAG>Almost every commenter emphasized that it is a necessary, common, effective,and accepted practice throughout the retail financial services industryto use customer lists as a source of prospects for additional productsand services developed by financial institutions and their service corporations.The commenters stated that customer records constitute a valuable corporateasset, but that compliance with the proposed notification procedure toobtain approval for the release of customer records would be an administrativeand financial burden that would exceed any benefits the Federal associationwould receive from compliance. Commenters uniformly noted that the costof printing the notices and envelopes, mailing the required notices, therecordkeeping resources needed to monitor and update the customer lists,and the costs required to integrate and develop computer data would beexorbitant and would exceed the revenues that could be generated from theproposed rule's limited use of customer records. Moreover, the commentersargued that the rate of response from mailing requests is rarely greaterthan 3 percent. They concluded that such a low rate of response would notjustify the cost of providing the notification and, additionally, wouldnot justify the introduction by service corporations of new products orservices developed for existing customers of the Federal association.\2\<NOTE/>  <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ We emphasize that neither the rule as proposed or thisfinal rule would impact a Federal association's ability to market its ownfinancial services and products through third party agents or direct mailspecialists. Special exceptions contained in the rule permit associationsto continue to use such persons to assist in the marketing of the association'sown services and products. <ITAG tagnum="81">2. Release of Customer Lists to Wholly-Owned Service Corporations</ITAG>Many commenters specifically expressed alarm at the proposed rule's impositionof administrative and financial costs on Federal associations that desireto disclose customer lists to their wholly-owned service corporations.One hundred twenty-two commenters argued against the Board's proposal torequire that, as a condition of releasing customer records to wholly-ownedservice corporations, the association must comply with a costly and time-consumingnotification and consent requirement. Moreover, ninety-one commenters stated that to protect Federal associationsfrom the risk of engaging in certain business activities, many activitiesare required to be conducted and services provided through service corporations,rather than directly by the associations. These commenters felt it unfairthat the board, having required associations to conduct activities throughservice corporations, would then prevent service corporations from havingaccess to marketing information that the association itself could use wereit able to directly offer the product or service. To compete effectivelyand profitably with third-party providers of various financial servicesor products, wholly-owned service corporations must take advantage of informationavailable within their corporate family, commenters argued. Additionally, one hundred three commenters argued that the sharing of informationwith wholly-owned service corporations does not breach the reasonable privacyexpectations of depositors or borrowers. They stressed that, in fact, theopposite is the case_depositors and borrowers expect and trust that theassociation will provide them with information concerning available newservices and innovative products appropriate to their financial needs.<ITAG tagnum="81">3. Release of Public Record Information </ITAG>One hundred twenty-two commenters argued that most of the information thatis classified in the proposed rule as ``customer records'' and that isessential to the marketing efforts of Federal associations is informationrecorded in the public records of the county or other locality. It is illogical,they argued, to restrict or limit the disclosure of this type of informationto any recipient based upon a privacy rationale, when every borrower shouldunderstand that his or her mortgage, deed of trust, financing statement,or other secured loan document will be recorded in the public records ofa particular jurisdiction. <ITAG tagnum="81">4. 30-day Waiting Period </ITAG>The proposed rule also contained a 30-day waiting period after an associationprovides a customer with the required notice and opportunity to objectto the release of customer identification before the association can releasethe customer list. One hundred three commenters complained that the 30-daywaiting period would hamper an association's efforts to provide new customerswith essential services, such as hazard and life insurance, for example.These commenters claimed that such a delay would result in damaged customerrelations and, for example, present real concerns regarding the possibilitythat the Federal association, as mortgagee or lienholder, will be leftuninsured, since a delay in soliciting and contracting for insurance thatprotects the association from financial loss is directly affected. Additionally,commenters claimed that the sooner the association can solicit the customer,the more likely the customer will purchase the product from the association'ssubsidiary rather than from a competitor of the association. The commentersargued that the 30-day delay greatly limits the business competitivenessof the association and its service corporations, since no other Federalbanking regulatory agency imposes a similar requirement. <ITAG tagnum="81">5. Database Marketing </ITAG>One hundred thirty-seven commenters noted that under the proposed rule,only a complete list of all customers' customer identification can be released,even though only a fraction of the customers on the list may be interestedin, or even eligible for, the service or product being offered. These commentersargued that the proposed rule would effectively prevent Federal associationsfrom continuing to engage in database, or target, marketing of their productsand services. Ninety-seven commenters argued, for example, that the entire customer baseof a Federal association would have to receive solicitations from the association'smortgage insurance subsidiary, when only those customers with existingmortgages might be eligible for the coverage. The same logic would applyto, among other examples, offers of catastrophic health care insurancefor the elderly and credit-card accounts for depositors that have a minimumaverage deposit balance. Commenters questioned why an association mustsuffer the expense of providing its entire customer base with notice ofavailable products and services when only a distinct portion of the association'scustomers would reasonably be interested.To adopt the rule as proposed, they argued, would force Federal associationsto suffer severe economic loss as a result of the inability to efficientlymarket their service corporation's products or services. These commentersbelieved that associations should be permitted to continue to release pre-selectedlists of customers for target marketing of financial services and products.B. Response to Comments Upon reflection, the Board now believes that the cost of compliance withthe proposed rule could impair the financial condition of Federal associationsat a time when capital preservation should be encouraged. For this reason,the Board has revised its proposal, as hereafter described, with regardto the type of information to be released and the notification requirementsin a manner that it believes strikes a more reasonable balance betweenthe privacy concerns of the customers and the business needs of Federalassociations. The Board agrees with those commenters who argued that the sharing of informationwith a Federal association's wholly-owned service corporations does notbreach the privacy expectations of depositors or borrowers and that therequirement in the proposal regarding release of information by Federalassociations to their wholly-owned service corporations was unnecessarilyburdensome. It is reasonable to assume that depositors and borrowers, whohave voluntarily established a business relationship with the association,expect that the association will provide them with information concerningnew services and innovative products appropriate to their banking needs.For these reasons, the Board has decided to permit the release of any customerinformation to wholly-owned service corporations of a Federal association,provided that the customers of the association have been provided withwritten notice of their right to object to the release of their customerinformation, and are given a reasonable time to notify the associationof their objection. The Board also agrees with those commenters who urged that any restrictionon the release of information that is contained in the public records,and that is based upon a privacy rationale, is unnecessarily burdensome.As to the disclosure to third parties of non-public customer informationor information constructed from non-public customer information, the Boardadopts the notification requirement applied in the proposed rule to therelease of customer records, with one change. A Federal association maydisclose non-public customer information to third parties provided thatthe association notifies the customer of its intent to disclose such information,provides the customer with a printed form explaining the customer's rightto object to the disclosure, and provides the customer a reasonable timeto object to the disclosure. Unlike the proposed rule, the final rule doesnot contain the requirement that the association provide the customer witha self-addressed envelope needing no postage in which to return the objection.The Board has revised the proposed rule to authorize a Federal associationto release customer identification and public customer information to thirdpersons other than wholly-owned service corporations of the association,provided that the association has provided notice to the customer of theintent to release public customer identification or public customer information,and has provided the customer with a reasonable opportunity to object tothe release. We make special note that the notification requirement establishedfor the release of customer identification and public customer informationto third persons is the same as the requirement established for the releaseof any customer information to a wholly-owned service corporation of aFederal association. With regard to the 30-day waiting period, the Board has decided to retaina waiting period to provide the customer with a reasonable opportunityto object to the release of customer information. The Board is, however,shortening the waiting period to fifteen days, but is convinced that thistime period affords the customer a reasonable opportunity to notify theassociation of any objection to the release of customer information. TheBoard believes that this rule will not hamper a subsidiary's efforts tooffer various insurance or other products and services to the association'scustomers and will not cause the association to suffer economic harm. With regard to the comments concerning database or target marketing, theBoard believes that the changes to the proposed regulation discussed aboveaddress most of the concerns raised by the commenters. As discussed, Federalassociations will be able to release all customer information to wholly-ownedservice corporations, absent objection by the customer. Consequently, listsof selected customers can be provided to a wholly-owned service corporationbased on any distinctions the service corporation deems appropriate. Similarly, Federal associations will be permitted to release customer identificationand public customer information to third parties, absent objection by thecustomer. Thus, lists of selected customers can be provided to third partiesbased on any distinction contained in the public records. The only limitationwould be that lists made available to third parties other than wholly-ownedservice corporations cannot be based on non-public information unless thecustomer has consented to the disclosure of the non-public informationon which the list is based. <ITAG tagnum="84">II. Exceptions to the Rule </ITAG>a. Agents, Independent Contractors, and Providers of Professional ServicesEighty-one commenters urged the Board to clarify its treatment of the disclosureof customer information to third persons who perform functions that permitFederal associations to perform their day-to-day operations. Commentersargued that associations must continue to be permitted to contract withspecialized entities to provide marketing services and related operationalexpertise that would be cost-prohibitive to develop in-house. This is particularlyimperative, many indicated, for smaller associations that cannot performsuch printing, data processing, and other related marketing operationsin-house. Furthermore, many commenters argued that the proposed rule wasambiguous as to the release of customer information to third persons thatprovide professional services to the association, such as attorneys andaccountants. The Board has given much consideration and attention to the competing interestsof customer privacy and the business needs of Federal associations raisedby the comments to the proposed rule. In the proposed rule, the Board providedan exception for agents of an association. The Board did not, however,recognize that many associations use independent contractors for similartasks. The Board now understands that a Federal association cannot conductits day-to-day business operations without freely releasing certain customerrecords to agents or third party independent contractors, such as thosethat print checks and process customer mailings, or to data processingand other entities that provide services pursuant to a contractual agreement.Most frequently, third party vendors or service providers are hired toperform such services. With observance of methods to safeguard customerconfidentiality, as discussed below, the Board believes that customer informationmust be released to such third parties. Accordingly, the Board has providedan exception to the notification requirement authorizing Federal associationsto disclose customer information to agents, independent contractors, andprofessional service providers that provide services to the Federal associationin the ordinary course of the association's business.b. Credit-Related Information Fifty-nine commenters urged that the exception permitting release of ``creditrelated'' customer records to financial institutions, commercial enterprises,and credit reporting agencies should be expanded to include ``deposit related''information as well. Commenters noted that deposit related informationis frequently provided to report involuntarily closed checking accountsdue to overdrafts, confirmations as to account balances when the customerwrites large checks, on credit cards and other credit products, and insimilar circumstances. The Board believes that the exception in the proposed rule permitting therelease of ``credit related'' customer information to commercial enterprises,credit reporting agencies, and financial institutions in the general andordinary course of business is intended to cover most of the situationsdescribed by these commenters. The Board has clarified the regulatory languageto make it clear that any information relevant to the credit standing ofthe customer can be disclosed under this exception. In the event that amerchant or other third person desires to confirm a customer's accountbalance for the purpose of accepting a check, the Board believes that themerchant can require as a condition of accepting the check that a customerexpressly authorize the association to disclose the customer's customerinformation to the merchant. Such authorization can be requested and obtainedon a case-by-case basis. For this reason, we believe an exception for therelease of ``deposit-related'' information is not warranted. c. Secondary Market Transactions Twenty-nine commenters were concerned that the proposed rule would interferewith an association's secondary market transactions. These commenters arguedthat the proposal failed to consider the need by potential buyers of loans,portfolios, and mortgage servicing rights to inspect the loan files priorto consummating a purchase. The inability to sell a portfolio consistingof loans with specific payment characteristics may, according to severalcommenters, have the unintended consequence of paralyzing an association'sasset/liability, or interest rate risk, management, since the sale of loansis used as a method of managing that risk. The Board agrees that an exception to the disclosure limitations is appropriatein this case to ensure that the restrictions on the disclosure of customerinformation do not interfere with secondary market transactions by Federalassociations. Accordingly, the final rule includes an exception for therelease of customer information in the ordinary course of undertaking asecondary market transaction in loans, portfolios, mortgage servicing rights,and related secondary market transactions. <ITAG tagnum="84">III. Other Comments </ITAG>a. Purpose of the Rule A substantial number of commenters contended that the Board, prior to thepublication of the proposed rule, never intimated to the industry thatthe release of customer information was a problem demanding regulatoryrevision. One hundred twenty-eight commenters questioned the motivationbehind the Board's proposal to restrict the use of customer lists, statingthat the Board presented no evidence in the proposed rule that the releaseof such lists by Federal associations was in any manner being abused. Thecomments noted that financial institutions already take great care to avoidunauthorized disclosure of customer information and recognize that, beinga valuable corporate asset, the release of customer lists is always precededby requiring the recipient of customer lists to enter into a confidentialityagreement with the association. The use of the confidentiality agreement,they noted, has been uniformly required by Supervisory Agents pursuantto the authority in andSection; 545.131 that Supervisory Agents ``may specifyterms and conditions of approval'' of the release of membership lists.<T3>See </T3>12 CFR 545.131(a)(3) (1988). Additionally, commenters claimed that the proposed rule is incompatiblewith recent statutory declarations and the Board's own regulatory pronouncements.Forty-four commenters criticized the proposal as inconsistent and violativeof the spirit and substance of the Competitive Equality Banking Act of1987 (``CEBA'') (Pub. L. No. 100-86, 101 Stat. 552) and regulations promulgatedby the Board thereunder. Noting that while the thrust of CEBA was to bringthrifts closer to the regulatory standards and practices governing Federalbanking agencies, the commenters argued that the proposed rule puts Federalassociations on an ``unequal playing field'' as a result of the restrictionsplaced on the ability of service corporations to market products and servicesto their parent's customers. Furthermore, a significant number of commentersargued that the proposed rule clashes with the legislation known as theFinancial Institutions Reform, Recovery and Enforcement Act of 1989 (``FIRREA'')that is intended to restructure the thrift industry. These commenters statedthat the Administration's plan, as well as that of the Congress, is toimpose upon thrifts ``a level playing field'' with the standards of theFederal banking regulators. These commenters concluded that since the proposedrule would give banks and other financial service companies an advantageover associations, it is inconsistent with the spirit of FIRREA.The Board notes that the disclosure of customer information has been regulatedby the Board for many years. This amendment of the long-standing regulatorysection governing the disclosure of membership lists is not a new or suddenconcern of the Board. Rather, the Board's consideration of the matter andthe reasons for the regulatory revision date back to the Board's proposedchanges to the Board's regulations regarding corporate governance of Federalassociations. <T3>See</T3> 50 FR 52482 (December 24, 1985) and 52 FR 25870 (July 9, 1987).Moreover, as described in the proposed rule, the current regulatory schemerequiring approval of release of customer identification and informationby supervisory authorities has resulted in inconsistent pronouncementsby the regional Federal Home Loan Banks concerning the requirements andprocedures for the release of customer information. As a result, the needfor the adoption of a uniform Federal standard for the treatment of customerinformation is advisable and reflects the Board's understanding that customerinformation has become a valuable corporate asset.The final rule also expands the ability of Federal associations to disclosecustomer information without seeking prior approval. As adopted by theBoard, the rule authorizes Federal associations to release any customerinformation to their wholly-owned service corporations and public recordcustomer information to other third persons, subject to compliance witha simple notification requirement. Release of non-public customer informationto third persons also is authorized, subject to compliance with a morecomprehensive notification requirement. Moreover, a list of thirteen exceptionsto the notification requirement is adopted whereby disclosure is permittedwith no notification requirement or prior approval by the Board. b. Examination of Customer's Own RecordsVarious commenters also suggested that the right to obtain a customer'sown records be distinguished from an association's right to release suchrecords voluntarily and also expressed concern about the scope of informationthat a customer could review. The Board is of the view that the right toobtain and inspect customer information belongs only to a customer, andnot to third parties. The Board has determined to retain in this finalrule the principle that the prerogative to obtain and inspect a customer'sown confidential records resides with the customer. The decision to releasecustomer records over the objection of customers or without their consentis left to the Federal associations under specific circumstances. The Board,however, concludes that the customer's right does not extend to the association'sown confidential business records, to communications or correspondencebetween the association and its attorneys or accountants, or to memorandaor other records of the board of directors of the Federal association thatmay relate to the customer.<ITAG tagnum="84">D. The Final Rule</ITAG>After carefully reviewing the comments received, and after thorough considerationof the costs and burdens that would be imposed on Federal associations,the Board has determined to adopt the proposed rule with several significantmodifications as discussed below.Until now, the Board's rules concerning the confidentiality and disclosureof customer records have been separately applicable to Federal stock associationsand Federal mutual associations. As stated in the proposed rule, the Boardhas made the determination that it is more efficacious for these rulesto appear in one regulatory section, applicable to all Federal associations.This determination accords with the OGC opinions, previously mentioned,that, with regard to the release of customer information, the interestsof Federal mutual associations and Federal stock associations are similaras are the interests of depositors in stock associations and members ofmutual associations.In publishing the proposed regulation, the Board proposed that the exclusivestandard for release of customer information should be the nature of theinformation intended to be released. This was the reasoning for the distinctionbetween, and the different procedures for the release of, customer identificationand customer records. The final rule does not contain this distinction.Rather, the final rule focuses on the relationship of the Federal associationto the recipient of the customer information and, with regard to releaseto third persons other than wholly-owned service corporations whether thecustomer information intended to be released is in public records. In placeof the terms used in the proposed rule, the final rule establishes thecategories of ``customer identification,'' defined to mean a customer'sname and address, and ``customer information,'' defined to mean a customer'sname, address, telephone number, savings or loan account records, and anyinformation constructed from those records relating to the customer's relationshipwith the association. In general, customer identification is only relevantwhen the disclosure is to a third person other than a wholly-owned servicecorporation. Disclosure of non-public record customer information to thirdpersons requires the association to procure the affirmative consent ofthe customer.In balancing the business concerns of the association with the privacyconcerns of the customers, the Board is adopting the following compromise:a Federal association may release ``customer information'' in the followingmanner:(a) Only a customer of a Federal association, and no other person or entity,has the right to inspect and obtain a customer's own customer information;(b) Unless a customer affirmatively and in writing prohibits the releaseof customer information, a Federal association may, in its discretion,voluntarily release customer information to (i) wholly-owned service corporations;and (ii) any other persons or entities if the customer information intendedto be released consists only of customer identification and/or is recordedin, or could be constructed from, public records; (c) Federal association'smay release to third persons, other than the association's wholly-ownedservice corporations, customer information that is <T3>not </T3>contained in public records, provided that the associationprocures the consent of the customer after providing the customer withnotice of its intent to release the customer's customer information andthe right of the customer to prevent such release, and supplying a plainlyworded form that the customer may use to provide such consent; and (d)in certain situations set forth in the regulation the association may releasecustomer information regardless of consent or objection by the customer.Each association must notify customers in a timely manner of its intentto release customer information. In this context, the Board views ``timely''as allowing a customer sufficient time to receive the notice, review it,consider the alternatives, and decide whether to object to the disclosureof his or her customer information. Federal associations desiring to releasecustomer information may provide the notice to new customers at the timean account is opened, at the time a loan application is submitted, or othertransaction is entered into, and are authorized to release customer informationno sooner than fifteen (15) days thereafter. Written notice must be providedto existing customers in a timely and conspicuous manner, although a separatemailing or document is not required. A Federal association may, for example,include with or in a monthly account statement, periodic statement, orother mailing a short but conspicuous statement that (a) the associationintends to release customer information, (b) that any customer that objectsmust provide written notice of objection to the association, and (c) theaddress to which a customer may write to register the customer's objection.Federal associations may release customer information pertaining to existingcustomers no sooner than fifteen (15) days after providing existing customerswith such notice and opportunity to object to the release of customer information.If notice is mailed, the fifteen days would begin from the date of mailing.In any event, Federal associations may not release customer informationfor those customers that have provided written objection to such releaseunless otherwise permitted by the regulation. The Board notes that thisprocedure is a substantial deviation from the notification procedure describedin the proposed rule that required the association to obtain the affirmativeconsent of the customer prior to releasing the customer's customer records.The final rule maintains the Board's intent to provide a mechanism forcustomers to ensure their privacy by informing associations of their objectionsto the release of customer information. The Board believes that this revisedprocedure is much less burdensome and costly than the proposed procedureand respects the business interests of Federal associations as well ascustomers' privacy expectations. As to the responsibility of Federal associations to obtain a customer'sauthorization for the intended release of non-public customer informationto a third person other than a wholly-owned service corporation, the Boardis adopting certain procedures requiring an association to procure a customer'sinformed consent before customer information is released. No release toa third person of non-public customer information is permitted unless acustomer whose records the association intends to release is given a printedform stating that release is contemplated, that the customer may objectto the release, and that without the customer's express written authorizationfor release the association will not disclose customer information, exceptin certain limited circumstances. Furthermore, the association must receiveand retain a copy of the customer's authorization for its records. In thisway, associations may sell or make publicly available non-public customerinformation, and third parties can conduct direct mail solicitations aimedat customers of Federal associations in a manner that respects the privacyexpectations of customers of Federal associations. This procedure implementsthe suggestion of a great many commenters that release of non-public customerinformation to third persons may be treated differently than when customerinformation is shared with a member of the same corporate family. More specifically, the Board adopts the notification procedure describedin the proposed rule that was applicable to the release of customer recordsand suggests that associations use a standardized notice and authorizationform to solicit the consent to release non-public record customer informationto third persons before such information is released. This document wouldbe separate from any and all other documents that are provided to customerspursuant to law or regulation. Such a document would contain, for example,the following: 1. The definition of customer information; 2. A statement that the customer has the right, with certain exceptions,to withhold consent to the release of his or her non-public customer informationby the Federal association along with a summary of those exceptions; 3. A description of the types of businesses, organizations, or other personsor entities to whom non-public customer information may be disclosed andthe time period, not to exceed two years, in which such disclosures maybe made; 4. A statement that if the Federal association intends to release non-publiccustomer information after the expiration of the two year period, or ifrelease is contemplated to types of recipients other than those for whichauthorization is sought, the association shall notify the customer of thecustomer's prior consent to release such information, and remind the customerof the customer's continuing right to object to the release at any time.5. A statement that the customer may at any time provide the Federal associationwith written notice withdrawing the customer's prior consent to releasenon-public customer information and how and to whom such notice must begiven; 6. A statement authorizing the release of non-public record customer information;and 7. A space for the customer's signature and for the date the document wasexecuted.The final rule permits associations desiring to release non-public recordcustomer information to third persons to provide this document to the customerat the time an account is opened, at the time a loan application is made,or at the time the customer enters into another form of financial transactionwith the association. While the Board notes that there may be various methodsavailable to accomplish this requirement, such a document, for example,may be provided to the customer with the customer's monthly account statement.The Board believes that the notification requirements established in thisfinal rule apply to each customer, rather than to each transaction by acustomer with the association (<T3>e.g., </T3>one notice regardless of how many deposit accounts or loanaccounts a customer has with a particular association). Of course, in itsdiscretion, an association may tailor its notice to what it intends torelease. For instance, an association only seeking to release non-publicloan information to third parties would not be required to seek authorizationto release deposit information, or an association seeking only to releasenames and addresses to its wholly-owned service corporations could limitits notice to those facts. The Board also believes that to assure the confidentiality of disclosedcustomer information, the intended recipient of the customer informationand the association should enter into a written confidentiality agreementcontaining a statement of the specific use to be made of the information,and prohibiting disclosure of the information by the recipient except asrequired by law or pursuant to the exceptions set out in the final rule.In adopting these notification requirements, the Board recognizes thatcircumstances may change in regard to the release of customer information,both from the perspective of the Federal association and of the customer.Therefore, the Board is requiring that at least every two years after theinitial provision of notice to customers, Federal associations desiringto continue to release either customer information to wholly-owned servicecorporations or public customer information and customer identificationto third persons must provide written notice to such customers explicitlyreminding each customer of the customer's nonobjection or prior consentto release customer information and of the customer's continuing rightto prohibit such release at any time. The notice must contain an addresswhere the customer may register such withdrawal of consent. If the customerprohibits such release, the Federal association shall no longer continueto release customer information except when otherwise authorized by lawor regulation. Associations may provide such notice more frequently thanevery two years. As to the release of non-public customer information to third persons,the two year renewal notification procedure has been revised from the proposedrule. Rather than require the association to affirmatively procure thecustomer's express authorization again, the final rule simply requiresassociations to remind the customer that he or she has previously authorizedthe release of non-public customer information to third persons, and remindthe customer that he or she may withdraw such consent at any time. Federalassociations may comply with this requirement, for example, by providingthe customer with a preprinted and self-addressed form with which the customermay withdraw the authorization. The Board provides in andSection; 545.132(f)(5)of the final rule an example of a renewal notice that would be consideredto be in compliance with this requirement. Associations may, however, developtheir own renewal notices for the release of non-public customer informationto third persons provided that the equivalent information is containedin the notice. The final rule sets out the exceptions to the general disclosure rulesdescribed above and as described in the proposed rule, with three new exceptionshereafter described. In instances covered by the exceptions, associationscould release customer information without complying with the notice requirementsset out by this regulation. In addition to disclosure to the customer orto persons or entities authorized by the customer, disclosure would bepermitted to those directors, officers, and employees of Federal associationsresponsible for preparing or handling customer records in the ordinarycourse of the association's business; and to agents of the Federal association,that, pursuant to an agency agreement, perform activities or transactionsfor the benefit of the association. The Board notes that whether an agencyrelationship exists will be defined under applicable state law. Additionally,disclosure is permitted to officials, employees or agents of the Board,the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation, a Federal Home LoanBank, or the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation in the exercise of theirofficial duties; other financial institutions or consumer credit reportingagencies as defined by the Fair Credit Reporting Act (15 U.S.C. 1681 etseq. (1980 andamp; Supp. VIII 1988)) as part of a regular exchange of informationrelevant to the credit-worthiness of the customer in the ordinary courseof the association's business; federal government agencies or entitiesrequiring such information, reports, or returns pursuant to law; thoseparties who must be informed concerning the dishonor of a negotiable instrument;appropriate law enforcement authorities when an association reasonablybelieves it has been the victim of a crime; persons making demand pursuantto a lawful subpoena; the association's bond or insurance company relativeto a claim under the association's liability policy; and when requiredto complete a secondary market transaction. The final rule also provides that release of customer information to anyperson not expressly enumerated in this section is permissible only afterthe association receives the prior written approval of the Board. The Boardbelieves that this exception should only apply in unusual and highly exceptionalcircumstances. Many commenters also suggested that an exception is needed for releaseof customer information to third party vendors of services to the association,such as those providers of data processing services, printing services,and other services ordinarily provided by independent contractors, as wellas professional service providers such as attorneys and accountants. TheBoard agrees and has added an exception for persons who provide servicesto the association in the ordinary course of the association's business.Commenters also urged that an exception be created to cover the reviewof loan files and records for secondary market transactions. As a result,an exception has been added to assist those persons undertaking a secondarymarket transaction in loans, portfolios, or mortgage servicing rights.Further, the Board is adding an exception for the release of customer informationin connection with civil investigations and proceedings, including forfeitures,conducted by the United States Department of Justice. This exception would,among other things, apply in connection with the exercise of civil authoritiesgranted to the Department of Justice including the assessment of civilmoney penalties for violations of 18 U.S.C. 657 and 1014 in accordancewith amendments currently being considered to such sections. Because of the need for continued confidentiality of customer informationfollowing release to the aforementioned excepted parties, the final ruleprovides, as did the proposed rule, that certain parties must execute writtenconfidentiality agreements prior to the release of customer information:parties to whom a customer has authorized such release; agents and contractorsof a Federal association responsible for preparing, handling, or processingcustomer information; other financial institutions or credit reportingagencies; the association's bond or insurance companies, and persons engagedin secondary market transactions. These confidentiality agreements mustcontain a statement of the specific use to be made of the records and prohibitdisclosure by the third party except as required by law or in accordancewith the exceptions set out in paragraphs (e)(5), (e)(7), (e)(9)-(10) ofthe regulation as if these sections applied directly to the recipient ofthe customer information. The Board has decided, as originally proposed, to preempt state law concerningthe release of customer information by Federal associations.\3\<NOTE/> The Board has extensively reviewed state law concerning theserelated issues and has concluded that it varies widely. Moreover, statelaws do not, for the most part, address the Board's concern about the needto balance customer privacy against the business requirements of Federalassociations. Consequently, pursuant to its authority to regulate the operationsof Federal associations, the Board is adopting the following regulationsto preempt state law and exclusively govern the operations of Federal associationsin this regard. <T3>See </T3>12 U.S.C. 1464(a) (1980 and Supp. VIII 1988); 12 CFR 545.1(1988); <T3>see, _e.g., Fidelity Fed. Sav. and Loan Ass'n </T3>v. <T3>de la Cuesta, </T3>458 U.S. 141, 164 (1983). <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\ The Right to Financial Privacy Act of 1978, 12 U.S.C.3401 <T3>et seq., </T3>provides a federal standard with respect to the releaseof customer records to federal governmental authorities. The Board is also amending section andSection;545.131 to reflect the creationof new andSection;545.132 governing the release of customer information.Section 545.131 continues to govern the right of a member of a Federalmutual association to communicate with other members, and establishes theprocedures for conducting such communication. Finally, the Board is amending andSection; 545.141 pertaining to remote serviceunits. That section authorizes a Federal association to disclose accountdata to various entities that operate, share, or participate in remoteservice units. The final rule amends andSection; 545.141(d) to permit a Federalassociation to release remote service unit account data to persons otherthan the Board in accordance with new andSection; 545.132. The effective date of this regulation is 120 days after its publicationin the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. The Board believes that this delay providesFederal associations with a reasonable time to develop procedures and materialsnecessary for compliance with the final rule.<ITAG tagnum="84">Final Regulatory Flexibility Analysis: </ITAG>Pursuant to section 3 of the Regulatory Flexibility Act, 5 U.S.C. 604 (1982),the Board is providing the following final regulatory flexibility analysis:1. <T3>Reasons, objectives, and legal basis underlying the final rule. </T3>Theseelements are incorporated above in the <T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION </T2>section. 2. <T3>Small entities to which the fina1 rule would apply. </T3>The finalrule would apply to all Federal associations without regard to size. 3. <T3>Impact of the final rule on small entities. </T3>The final rule wouldclarify the circumstances under which all Federal associations may disclosecustomer identification and records for business purposes and for a fee.4. <T3>Overlapping or conflicting federal rules. </T3>As explained in the<T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION </T2>section, the final rule is intendedto streamline the Board's regulations governing a Federal association'srelease of its customer records. Other than the Right to Financial PrivacyAct of 1978, 12 U.S.C. 3401 et seq. (1982 and Supp VI 1988), which is expresslyconsidered in this final rule, there are no other known federal rules thatduplicate, overlap, or conflict with this rule. 5. <T3>Alternatives to the final rule. </T3>As alternatives to the final rule,the Board could retain the present requirement of prior Board or supervisoryapproval contained in andSection; 545.131 for the release of customer records,or the Board could adopt the revisions to andSection;andSection; 545.131, 543.9-3,and 544.9-2 as proposed in the Corporate Governance proposals. <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in CFR Part 545 </ITAG>Accounting, Consumer protection, Credit, Electronic funds transfers, Investments,Manufactured homes, Mortgages, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements,and Savings and loan associations. Accordingly, the Federal Home Loan Bank Board hereby amends part 545, subchapterC, chapter V, title 12 Code of Federal Regulations, as set forth below.<ITAG tagnum="72">SUBCHAPTER C_FEDERAL SAVINGS AND LOAN SYSTEM</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 545_OPERATIONS</ITAG>1. The authority citation for part 545 continues to read as follows.<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> Sec. 5A, 47 Stat. 727, as added by sec. 1, 64 Stat.256, as amended (12 U.S.C. 1425a); sec. 5, 48 Stat. 132, as amended (12U.S.C. 1464); secs. 402-403, 407, 48 Stat. 1256-1257, 1260, as amended(12 U.S.C. 1725-1726, 1730); Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1947, 12 FR 4981, 3 CFR,1943-48 Comp., p. 1071.</ITAG>2. Amend andSection; 545.131 by removing paragraphs (a) and (b); by redesignatingexisting paragraphs (c), (d) and (e) as the new paragraphs (a), (b) and(c); and by revising the newly redesignated paragraphs (a) and (b)(5)(ii)to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 545.131 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Communications between members of a Federal mutual association.</ITAG>(a) <T3>Right of communication with other members.</T3> A member of a Federalmutual association has the right to communicate, as prescribed in paragraph(b) of this section, with other members of the association regarding anymatter related to the association's affairs, except for ``improper'' communications,as defined in paragraph (c) of this section. The association may not defeatthat right by redeeming a savings member's savings account in the association.(b) <T3>Member communication procedures.</T3> * * *(5) * * *(ii) Notification that the association has determined not to mail the communicationbecause it is ``improper'' as defined in paragraph (c) of this section;<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>3. Amend part 545 by adding a new andSection; 545.132 to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 545.132 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Disclosure of customer records. </ITAG>(a) <T3>Definitions.</T3> For purpose of this section:(1) The term ``Agent'' means any person authorized to transact businessfor a principal, as defined by the laws of the appropriate jurisdiction.(2) The term ``Customer'' means a depositor in, borrower from, and anyother person patronizing a Federal savings association and utilizing itsservices.(3) The term ``Customer identification'' means the original or any copyor summary of any document, including any evidence of a transaction conductedby electronic terminal, that contains the name and/or address of any customerof a Federal savings association, or any data from which such informationcould be constructed.(4) The term ``Customer information'' means the original or any copy orsummary of any document, including any evidence of a transaction conductedby means of an electronic terminal, that contains a customer's customeridentification and any information concerning a customer's individual savingsor loan accounts or the details of other types of transactions betweenthe customer and the association, or any data from which such informationcould be constructed. (5) The term ``Financial institution'' means any office of a bank, savingsbank, savings association, industrial loan company, trust company, savingsand loan, building and loan, or homestead association (including cooperativebanks), credit union, or consumer finance institution, located in any stateor territory of the United States, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico,Guam, American Samoa, or the Virgin Islands. (6) The term ``Person'' includes, an individual, partnership, corporation,association, trust, or any other legal entity organized under the lawsof any state or of the United States, or of any foreign state. (7) The term ``Public record'' means a written document that is filedand recorded in the official public records of a governmental unit andwhich is available for public inspection.(8) The term ``Service corporation'' has the meaning provided in 12 CFR545.74 (1988), and includes its wholly-owned subsidiaries. (9) The term ``Third person'' means a person other than the customer, theFederal savings association, or its wholly-owned service corporation, towhom disclosure is restricted by this regulation.(b) <T3>Right to obtain and inspect customer's own customer information.</T3>A customer of a Federal association or his duly authorized agent has theright to obtain and inspect customer information pertaining solely to thecustomer's own savings account(s) or loan account(s) records, or informationpertaining to other financial transactions with the association. A customerdoes not have the right under this section to obtain internal businesspapers, memoranda, or other confidential correspondence or communicationsbetween the association and others including its attorneys, accountants,and board of directors that may relate to the customer.(c) <T3>Disclosure of customer identification and customer information.</T3>(1) A Federal association may disclose a customer's customer informationto:(i) A wholly-owned service corporation of the Federal association, or(ii) To third persons if the customer information intended to be releasedis limited to information recorded in the public records and/or a customer'scustomer identification, provided that in either case the Federal associationhas given written notice to the customer of the intent of the Federal associationto release such information, and that the customer has the right to prohibitthe release of this information by notifying the association in writingof his or her objection, or (iii) To third persons if the customer information to be disclosed is customerinformation not contained in a public record provided that the Federalassociation has complied with paragraph (f) of this section.(2) Any disclosure pursuant to paragraph (c)(1) (i) and (ii) of this sectionmay be made no sooner than fifteen (15) days after the customer receivedthe notice, if the notice was given in person, or fifteen days after thenotice was mailed to the customer, and shall be limited to those customersof the Federal association who have not objected to the release of hisor her customer information pursuant to those provisions.(3) At least once every two years after a Federal association releasesa customer's customer information pursuant to paragraph (c)(1) of thissection, a Federal association that desires to continue to release customerinformation shall provide written notice to such customers reminding themthat the association may release such customer information and of the customer'scontinuing right to withdraw such authorization at any time.(d) <T3>Exceptions.</T3> Notwithstanding paragraph (c) of this section, a Federalassociation may disclose its customer information to the following: (1) Any person to whom the customer has affirmatively authorized suchdisclosure in writing;(2) Any director, officer, or employee of a Federal association havingthe duty to prepare, examine, handle, maintain, or process customer informationin the ordinary course of conducting the association's business;(3) Any agent of the association, any independent contractor providinga service to the association in the ordinary course of the association'sbusiness, or any person providing professional services to the association,including, but not limited to, an accountant engaged by the associationto prepare an independent audit or an attorney performing a service onbehalf of the association;(4) Any officer, employee, or agent of the Board, the Federal Savings andLoan Insurance Corporation, a Federal Home Loan Bank, or the Federal DepositInsurance Corporation for use solely in the exercise of his or her duties;(5) A financial institution, commercial enterprise, or credit reportingagency, when such disclosure is part of an exchange in the regular courseof business of information pertaining to the credit-worthiness of the customerbetween a Federal association and another financial institution or commercialenterprise, directly or through a credit reporting agency; (6) Persons to whom reports or returns must be made or information disclosedpursuant to Federal law or regulations including, but not limited to, theInternal Revenue Service, or any government authority acting pursuant tothe Right to Financial Privacy Act of 1978, 12 U.S.C. 3401 <T3>et seq.</T3>, or the Bank Secrecy Act, 31 U.S.C. 5311 <T3>et seq.</T3> (7) Persons to whom information is permitted to be disclosed under statelaw concerning the dishonor of a negotiable instrument; (8) An appropriate law enforcement authority when the Federal associationreasonably believes, pursuant to andSection; 563.18(d) of this chapter, thatit has been the victim of a crime or has a known factual basis for a beliefthat a crime has been committed;(9) Persons making demand pursuant to a lawful subpoena, summons, warrant,or court order or in response to a subpoena from a federal or state grandjury served upon the Federal association;(10) The association's bond or insurance companies when the associationhas information relative to a claim pursuant to its bond or director'sand officer's liability insurance policy or other insurance coverage;(11) Any person for the purpose of engaging in a secondary market transaction;(12) Representatives of the United States Department of Justice conductingcivil investigations, pursuing civil actions for the purpose of assessingcivil money penalties, or pursuing forfeitures for violations of financialinstitution criminal statutes.(13) Any person not expressly permitted by this section if the associationreceives the prior written approval of the Board, which may establish theterms and conditions governing such release.(e) <T3>Confidentiality agreement. </T3>Prior to the release by a Federal associationof its customer information authorized by paragraphs (c)(1) of this sectionor by exceptions (d)(1), (d)(3), (d)(5), (d)(10)-(11) of this section,the association shall require intended recipients of customer informationto execute an agreement stating at a minimum the specific use to be madeof the customer information and prohibiting subsequent disclosure of thecustomer information to a third party, except if such disclosure is requiredby law or pursuant to the circumstances set forth in paragraphs (d)(4),(d)(6), (d)(8)-(9), and (d)(11) of this section, and, if the recipientof the customer information is a credit reporting agency, subsequent disclosuresmay be made in the regular course of the credit reporting agency's business.(f) <T3>Informed consent form and procedure. </T3>(1) Before releasing anycustomer information pursuant to paragraph (c)(1)(iii) of this section,an institution shall:(i) Provide a copy of an ``Informed Consent Form'' to all new and existingcustomers of the association whose customer information is not containedin the public records intended to be disclosed to third persons. The consentform shall contain:(A) A definition of customer information not contained in a public record(``non-public customer information'');(B) A statement that the customer has the right to withhold consent tothe release of his or her non-public customer information by the Federalassociation;(C) A description of the types of businesses, organizations, or other personsor entities to whom non-public customer information may be disclosed andthe time period, not to exceed two years, in which such disclosures maybe made;(D) A statement that the Federal association may seek to release non-publiccustomer information for a longer period than two years, and if an extensionis sought, the association shall provide a notice explicitly remindingthe customer of the customer's prior authorization and the customer's continuingright to withdraw that authorization.(E) A statement that if release is contemplated to types of recipientsother than those for which authorization is sought the association mustobtain new authorization for the release;(F) A statement that the customer may at any time provide the Federal associationwith written notice withdrawing the customer's prior consent to releasenon-public customer information and how and to whom such notice must begiven;(G) A statement that non-public customer information may be released pursuantto statute or regulation even when not authorized by the customer;(H) A statement authorizing the release of non-public customer information;and(I) A space for the customer's signature and for the date the documentwas executed. (ii) Receive a signed and dated consent form from the customer; and (iii) Retain a copy of each consent form in an appropriate file maintainedfor the customer providing the authorization. (2) A Federal association shall fulfill the requirement that it obtainconsent from its customers before disclosing customer information not containedin a public record under paragraph (c)(1)(iii) of this section by providinga clear and conspicuous document containing the information set forth inparagraph (f)(1) of this section. The following complies with this requirement,but associations are permitted to develop their own forms containing therequired information: <ITAG tagnum="74">Authorization to Disclose Customer Information </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Customer Name] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Account/Loan Number(s)] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Under applicable Federal law and regulations [name of institution]must obtain your consent to disclose non-public information concerningyour account balances, loans, or other financial activities to variousentities. This information that pertains to your financial transactionsis known as non-public customer information. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">[Name of institution] desires to disclose such information duringthe next [period of time not to exceed two years] to [insert types of personsor entities to which the customer records are intended to be disclosed].These persons or entities may contact you to offer you a product or service.These persons or entities have agreed, or will be required to agree, notto disclose this information to any other person or business, except aspermitted by law and regulation, and have agreed that non-public customerinformation shall remain confidential. [Name of institution] may receivea fee for the release of customer records. In the event that the associationwishes to disclose such information to persons or entities not describedabove, the association will seek reauthorization. In the event the associationwishes to disclose this information beyond two years, it will provide youwith notice. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Without your consent, [Name of institution] cannot disclose your non-publiccustomer information except as provided for by law and regulation. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">If you provide your consent to disclose this information now or inthe future, you may withdraw your consent at any time. You may withdrawyour consent by writing [name of institution] at the following address:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Name of institution] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Address of institution] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Attn:             ] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">If, after reading the following statement, you consent to the releaseof non-public customer information, sign your name on the space providedand return this form to [name of institution]. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">AUTHORIZATION </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">I hereby provide my consent to [name of institution] to release mynon-public customer information to third persons, and understand that Imay withdraw such consent at any time. I have been informed of my rightto withhold my consent for [name of institution] to release my non-publiccustomer information and I have read the information printed above.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">_  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">Name of customer</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">_</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">Date</ITAG>(3) Federal associations shall not release any person's non-public customerinformation and shall take such affirmative steps as may be necessary toinsure that such customer information is not released: (i) If the customer has not authorized the disclosure of such information;(ii) If at any time, the Federal association receives written notificationof a customer's withdrawal of consent to release customer information pursuantthis section. (4) A customer may, at any time, withdraw the consent by writing to theFederal association and informing it of the withdrawal of consent. (5) For the purpose of compliance with the renewal notice requirement ofparagraph (c)(3) of this section for release of non-public customer informationto third persons, the following notice will be considered to be in compliancewith that section, but associations may develop their own notices providedthat the equivalent information is contained therein: <ITAG tagnum="74">Renewal Notice for Release of Non-Public Information </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Name of customer] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Account/Loan number(s)]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">You previously gave [name of association] your consent to disclosenon-public information concerning your account balances, loans, or otherfinancial activities to [types of persons or entities to which the customerinformation has been disclosed]. This information that pertains to yourfinancial transactions is known as non-public customer information. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">[Name of association] is required by law or regulation to inform youat least every two years of your right to withdraw your consent at anytime. If you decide to withdraw your consent, your non-public customerinformation will no longer be disclosed once we receive a written noticewithdrawing your consent. You may withdraw your consent by writing to thefollowing address: </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Name of association] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Address of association] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">Attn: [appropriate employee of association] </ITAG>4. Section 545.141(d) is revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 545.141</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Remote Service Units (RSUs).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(d) <T3>Privacy of account data. </T3>A Federal association shall allow accountholdersto obtain any information concerning their RSU accounts. Except for genericdata or data necessary to identify a transaction, no Federal associationmay disclose account data to third parties other than the Board or itsrepresentatives except in accordance with andSection; 545.132 of this part.Information disclosed to the Board will be kept in a manner to ensure compliancewith the Privacy Act, 5 U.S.C. 552a. A Federal association may operatean RSU according to an agreement with a third party or shared computersystems, communications facilities, or services or another financial institutiononly if such third party or institution agrees to abide by this sectionas to information concerning RSU accounts in the Federal association. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">By the Federal Home Loan Bank Board.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">John F. Ghizzoni,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-19276 Filed 8-16-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6720-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>