<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89428-0088 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.4-28-89.f2.A1087</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">NUCLEAR REGULATORY COMMISSION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 50-313]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Arkansas Power and Light Co.; Consideration of Issuance of Amendmentto Facility Operating License and Proposed No Significant Hazards ConsiderationDetermination and Opportunity for Hearing</ITAG>The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is consideringissuance of an amendment to Facility Operating License No. DPR-51, issuedto Arkansas Power and Light Company (APandamp;L or the licensee), for operationof the Arkansas Nuclear One. Unit 1 (ANO-1) located in Russellville, Arkansas.The amendment would change the ANO-1 license condition to increase theauthorized steady state reactor core power levels to a maximum of 2054megawatts thermal (80% of full power). Recently, the licensee informed the NRC of a newly postulated small breakin the High Pressure Injection (HPI) System which had not been boundedby existing small break loss of cooling accident (LOCA) analyses. In responseto a subsequent APandamp;L request, the Commission issued emergency AmendmentNo. 119 authorizing operation for ANO-1 up to an authorized power levelof 50% of full power (1284 megawatts thermal), and informed the licenseethat a full 10 CFR Part 50 Appendix K analysis of the postulated HPI LOCAwould be required as part of an amendment request to increase power abovethe 50% level. APandamp;L is currently having Babcock andamp; Wilcox performsuch an analysis for an 80% power level and plans to provide the resultsto the Commisson by May 8, 1989. APandamp;L has requested exigent processingof this amendment for the following reasons. APandamp;L was unaware of the consequences of this new limiting break beforeMarch 18, 1989 and could not avoid the current situation. Prior to thattime, previous LOCA analyses were considering bounding. Further, APandamp;Lquickly undertook measures to respond to this condition and promptly requestedthe previous and the current amendment. Exigent processing would facilitatethe amendment of this ANO-1 operating license to reflect 80% maximum powerpromptly following conformation of the results of the Babcock andamp; WilcoxLOCA analysis by the Commission. This would permit a timely increase inpower level to minimize the impact of continued derated operation. Thestaff agrees with the licensee's justification for exigent processing andbelieves the amendment should be issued promptly. Before issuance of the proposed license amendment, the Commission willhave made findings required by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended(the Act) and the Commission's regulations. Under the Commission's regulations in 10 CFR 50.92, an amendment requestinvolves no significant hazards considerations if operation of the facilityin accordance with the proposed amendment would not (1) involve a significantincrease in the probability or consequence of an accident previously evaluated;or (2) create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident fromany accident previously evaluated; or (3) involve a significant reductionin a margin of safety. In accordance with 10 CFR 50.92, APandamp;L has assessed whether the proposedchange involves no significant hazards considerations. APandamp;L has concludedthat the proposed change to limit operation to 80% of full power involvesno significant hazards considerations because operation of Arkansas NuclearOne, Unit 1 in accordance with this change would not: (1) Involve a significant increase in the probability or consequences ofan accident previously analyzed. First, this change does not alter the probability of any previously analyzedaccident occuring. The change merely addresses a particular accident scenariowithout impacting accident-initiating events. Further, this proposed changewill not adversely affect the consequences of accidents which have beenpreviously analyzed. Any effect on previously analyzed accidents will remainpositive as the reactor will still trip from a lower maximum power levelthan for accidents previously considered. Further, the proposed change does not adversely affect the probabilityof consequences of the postulated HPI small break at issue here. Becausean ANO-1 specific ECCS analysis per 10 CFR Part 50 Appendix K has beenperformed, it has been demonstrated that this break will be fully addressedby available emergency core cooling system (ECCS) mechanisms consistentwith applicable ECCS requirements. Overall, therefore, this change will neither reduce nor adversely impactthe probability or consequences of accidents previously analyzed. (2) Create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident fromany previously analyzed. First, the ECCS response to other previously postulated accidents remainsunchanged and within previously assessed limits of flow paths and flowdistributions. Further, all systems and ECCS coolant delivery mechanismsremain, respectively, within their applicable performance limits and flowdelivery capabilities. Thus, system and component performance is not adverselyaffected by this change, thereby assuring that design capabilities of thosesystems are not challenged in a manner not previously assessed so as tocreate the possibility of a new or different kind of accident. The increasein maximum allowable power level would not create the possibility of anew or different kind of accident from any previously analyzed as the possibilityof reactor trips at lower power levels had already be considered in previousaccident analyses. (3) Involves a significant margin of safety. The proposed change to the maximum operating power level would increasethe maximum power level at which any transient could occur. However, thisproposed power level is still below the level at whch ANO-1 was originallylicensed. The response to transients terminated at lower power levels istypically milder and more easily controlled than the response to transientsterminated at the higher power level at which ANO-1 was originally evaluated.Therefore, this increase of the maximum permissible power level would notinvolve a significant reduction in the margin of safety previously provided.With respect to the HPI break at issue, the margin of safety provided bythe proposed maximum power level now reflects the margins provided by specificapplication of the conservative assumptions and analytical approaches of10 CFR 50.46 and 10 CFR Part 50 Appendix K to ANO-1. Thus the inherentmargins of safety provided by those criteria are provided for this postulatedbreak. The staff has reviewed the licensee's assessment and agrees that the proposedamendment involves no significant hazards considerations. The Commission is seeking public comments on this proposed determination.Any comments received within 15 days after the date of publication of thisnotice will be considered in making any final determination. The Commissionwill not normally make a final determination unless it receives a requestfor a hearing. Written comments may be submitted by mail to the Regulatory PublicationsBranch, Division of Freedom of Information and Publications Services, Officeof Administration, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, D.C.20555, and should cite the publication date and page number of the FEDERALREGISTER notice. Written comments may also be delivered to Room P-223, Phillips Building,7920 Norfolk Avenue, Bethesda, Maryland from 8:15 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Copiesof written comments received may be examined at the NRC Public DocumentRoom, the Gelman Building, 2120 L Street, NW., Washington, DC. The filingof requests for hearing and petitions for leave to intervene is discussedbelow. By May 15, 1989, the licensee may file a request for a hearing with respectto issuance of the amendment to the subject facility operating licenseand any person whose interest may be affected by this proceeding and whowishes to participate as a party in the proceeding must file a writtenrequest for hearing and a petition for leave to intervene. Requests fora hearing and petitions for leave to intervene shall be filed in accordancewith the Commission's ``Rule of Practice for Domestic Licensing Proceedings''in 10 CFR Part 2. If a request for a hearing or petition for leave to interveneis filed by the above date, the Commission or an Atomic Safety and LicensingBoard, designated by the Commission by the Chairman of the Atomic Safetyand Licensing Board Panel, will rule on the request and/or petition; andthe Secretary or the designated Atomic Safety and Licensing Board willissue a notice of hearing or an appropriate order. As required by 10 CFR 2.714, a petition for leave to intervene shall setforth with particularity the interest of the petitioner in the proceeding,and how that interest may be affected by the results of the proceeding.The petition should specifically explain the reasons why intervention shouldbe permitted with particular reference to the following factors: (1) Thenature of the petitioner's right under the Act to be made a party to theproceeding; (2) the nature and extent of the petitioner's property, financial,or other interest in the proceeding; and (3) the possible effect of anyorder which may be entered in the proceeding on the petitioner's interest.The petition should also identify the specific aspect(s) of the subjectmatter of the proceeding as to which petitioner wishes to intervene. Anyperson who has filed a petition for leave to intervene or who has beenadmitted as a party may amend the petition without requesting leave ofthe Board up to fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, but such an amended petition must satisfythe specificity requirements described above. Not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, a petitioner shall file a supplement to thepetition to intervene, which must include a list of the contentions thatare sought to be litigated in the matter, and the bases for each contentionset forth with reasonable specificity. Contentions shall be limited tomatters within the scope of the amendment under consideration. A petitionerwho fails to file such a supplement which satisfies these requirementswith respect to at least one contention will not be permitted to participateas a party. Those permitted to intervene become parties to the proceeding, subjectto any limitations in the order granting leave to intervene, and have theopportunity to participate fully in the conduct of the hearing, includingthe opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. If the amendment is issued before the expiration of 30-days, the Commissionwill make a final determination on the issue of no significant hazardsconsiderations. If a hearing is requested, the final determination willserve to decide when the hearing is held. If the final determination is that the amendment request involves no significanthazards considerations, the Commission may issue the amendment and makeit effective, notwithstanding the request for a hearing. Any hearing heldwould take place after issuance of the amendment. If the final determination is that the amendment request involves significanthazards considerations, any hearing held would take place before the issuanceof any amendment. Normally, the Commission will not issue the amendment until the expirationof the 15-day notice period. However, should circumstances change duringthe notice period, such that failure to act in a timely way would result,for example, in derating or shutdown of the facility, the Commission mayissue the license amendment before the expiration of the 15-day noticeperiod, provided that its final determination is that the amendment involvesno significant hazards considerations. The final determination will considerall public and State comments received. Should the Commission take thisaction, it will publish a notice of issuance. The Commission expects thatthe need to take this action will occur very infrequently. A request for a hearing or a petition for leave to intervene must be filedwith the Secretary of the Commission, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, Attention: Docketing and Service Branch, or may bedelivered to the Commission's Public Document Room, the Gelman Building,2120 L Street, NW., Washington, DC, by the above date. Where petitionsare filed during the last ten (10) days of the notice period, it is requestedthat the petitioner promptly so inform the Commission by a toll-free telephonecall to Western Union at 1-(800) 325-6000 (in Missouri 1-(800) 342-6700).The Western Union operator should be given Datagram Identification Number3737 and the following message addressed to Jose A. Calvo: petitioner'sname and telephone number; date petition was mailed; plant name; and publicationdate and page number of this <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice. A copy of the petition should also besent to the Office of the General Counsel, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, and to Nicholas S. Reynolds, Esq., Bishop, Cook,Percell andamp; Reynolds, 1400 L Street, NW., Washington, DC 20005-3502Nontimely filings of petitions for leave to intervene, amended petitions,supplemental petitions and/or requests for hearing will not be entertainedabsent a determination by the Commission, the presiding officer or thepresiding Atomic Safety and Licensing Board that the petition and/or requestshould be granted based upon a balancing of the factors specified in 10CFR 2.714(a)(1)(i)-(v) and 2.714(d).For further details with respect to this action, see the application foramendment dated April 24, 1989, which is available for public inspectionat the Commission's Public Document Room, the Gelman Building, 2120 L Street,NW., Washington, DC 20555, and at the Local Public Document Room, TomlinsonLibrary, Arkansas Tech University, Russellville, Arkansas 72801.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 25th day of April 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Chester Poslusny, Jr.,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Project Manager, Project Directorate_IV, Division of Reactor Projects_III,IV, V and Special Projects, Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-10233 Filed 4-27-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>