<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR891013-0029 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.10-13-89.f2.A1028</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="52">46 CFR Part 67</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[CGD 88-031]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="91">RIN 2115-AC99</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Documentation of Vessels; Controlling Interest</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Coast Guard, DOT.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Supplemental Notice of proposed rulemaking.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Coast Guard published a notice of proposed rulemakingon October 20, 1988 (53 FR 41211), proposing to amend the vessel documentationregulations to implement the American control provisions of the CommercialFishing Industry Vessel Anti-Reflagging Act of 1987 (the ``Anti-ReflaggingAct''). The rulemaking also proposed to conform controlling interest requirementsfor partnerships to the Anti-Reflagging Act's requirements for corporations.Based on comments received in response to the notice of proposed rulemaking,and the Coast Guard's own administrative experience, the Coast Guard hasdetermined that a complete revision of the regulations concerning citizenshiprequirements for vessel documentation is needed. This supplemental noticeof proposed rulemaking proposes to revise these citizenship regulations,which set out the standards for determining what foreign participationin the control of vessel owning entities will disqualify those entitiesfrom documenting a vessel under U.S. law, or result in the loss of eligibilityto obtain a coastwise or fishery license endorsement. The proposed revisionswill result in regulations that are more informative and uniform.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>Comments must be received on or before December 12, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>Comments may be mailed to the Executive Secretary,Marine Safety Council (G-LRA-2/3600)(CGD 88-031), U.S. Coast Guard, 2100Second Street, SW., Washington, DC 20593-0001.Comments will be available for examination or copying at, and may be deliveredto, the Marine Safety Council (G-LRA-2), Room 3600, at the above address,between 8 a.m. and 3 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays. Thetelephone number is (202) 267-1477.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Lieutenant Commander Robert Bruce,Vessel Documentation Branch, Merchant Vessel Inspection and DocumentationDivision, Office of Marine Safety, Security and Environmental Protection,(202) 267-1492. Normal office hours are between 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m.,Monday through Friday, except holidays.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>A notice of proposed rulemaking waspublished on October 20, 1988 (53 FR 41211), followed by a comment periodthrough November 21, 1988. Seven comments were received and based on thosecomments, and a thorough review of the regulations explaining citizenshiprequirements for documentation, the Coast Guard proposes to extensivelyrevise 46 CFR subpart 67.03. The public is invited to participate in thisrulemaking by submitting written views, data or arguments. Comments shouldinclude the name and address of the person making them, identify this notice(CGD 88-031) and the specific section of the proposal to which each commentapplies, and give the reason for each comment. If an acknowledgment isdesired, a stamped, self-addressed post card or envelope should be enclosed.The rules as proposed may be changed in light of the comments received.All comments received before the expiration of the comment period willbe considered before final action is taken on this proposal.No public hearing is planned. However, one may be held if written requestsfor a public hearing are received and it is determined that the opportunityto make oral presentations will be beneficial to the rulemaking process.<ITAG tagnum="84">Drafting Information</ITAG>The principal persons involved in drafting this regulation are LieutenantCommander Robert Bruce, Project Manager, and Lieutenant Commander Don M.Wrye, Project Counsel, Office of Chief Counsel.<ITAG tagnum="84">Background</ITAG>Documentation of vessels under federal law is a type of national registrationwhich, among other things, serves to establish a vessel's nationality andqualification to be employed in specified trades. The evidence of nationalityis the Certificate of Documentation. One or more endorsements on the Certificateof Documentation serve as evidence of the vessel's qualification to engagein the specified trade. The Coast Guard is the agency which (a) acceptsapplications for documentation of vessels; (b) determines whether a vesselwhich is the subject of an application is eligible for documentation generallyand eligible for the endorsement or endorsements requested; and (c) issuesCertificates of Documentation to eligible vessels.Eligibility requirements for documentation are set out at 46 U.S.C. 12102,as amended. One of the eligibility requirements for documentation is UnitedStates citizenship. For corporations, partnerships, and associations, citizenshiprequirements include certain American control provisions. For example,the earliest American control provision applied to corporations, partnerships,and associations seeking to document vessels for coastwise trade. The requirementthat at least a 75 percent interest in the entity be owned by U.S. citizens,found in 46 U.S.C. App. 802, was made applicable to such corporations,partnerships, and associations by 46 U.S.C. App. 883. Coastwise trade is,more or less, domestic transportation of passengers and merchandise.Until 1982, this American control requirement had little practical effecton partnerships because unless all of the partners, general or limited,were U.S. citizens the partnership was not eligible to document vessels.This requirement was relaxed by section 10 of the Coast Guard AuthorizationAct of 1982 which amended 46 U.S.C. 12102(a)(3), permitting partnershipsto document vessels if all general partners were U.S. citizens and thecontrolling interest in the partnership was owned by U.S. citizens. The75 percent American control requirement for a coastwise license remained,and to this extent the American control requirements for corporations andpartnerships were already alike. As a matter of administrative practice,the Coast Guard took the position that, when it was reasonable to do so,the same meaning would be given to ``controlling interest'' in both thecorporate and partnership contexts. On May 17, 1988, a final rule was publishedrevising 46 CFR 67.03-5 to implement the American control requirementsfor partnerships of 46 U.S.C. 12102(a)(3).On January 11, 1988, the President signed into law the Commercial FishingIndustry Vessel Anti-Reflagging Act of 1987 (Pub. L. 100-239, 101 Stat.1778 (1988)). Among other things, this law adds a new American controlprovision for corporations seeking to document fishing vessels. The newrequirement is retroactively effective from July 28, 1987, but includessavings provisions exempting many vessels operating, or under contractfor purchase, as fishing industry vessels prior to that date. The statutesuperseded certain regulations in 46 CFR part 67 that were directly inconflict with it and, to carry out the purpose of the statute, the CoastGuard has been applying the standards in the statute as a matter of administrativepractice. All of the changes to documentation regulations mandated by theAnti-Reflagging Act, not relating to controlling interest, have been implementedby prior rulemaking (53 FR 41166, October 20, 1988).<ITAG tagnum="84">Discussion of Comments</ITAG>Five comments regarding the NPRM were received during the comment period.Two comments were received after the comment period closed, but have beenconsidered nevertheless. Comments were received from United States Senators,law firms, an industry association, a company with a financial interestin fishing industry vessels and individual attorneys interested in maritimelaw. One comment expressed general agreement with the Coast Guard's interpretationof the American control provisions and the procedures for enforcing them.Another generally encouraged the implementation of regulations addressingcontrolling interest requirements for partnerships. Otherwise, the commentswere focused more narrowly on the basis for changes to the American controlregulations for partnerships, the lack of a regulation implementing theAnti-Reflagging Act's controlling interest savings clause, the Coast Guard'sinterpretation of the Anti-Reflagging Act's controlling interest savingsclause, and the lack of more complete guidance detailing all the factorsthe Coast Guard may consider in arriving at a determination regarding Americancontrol. Six of the comments suggested changes. The changes suggested andthe Coast Guard's position concerning each follows.a. Three comments stated that the proposed regulations should have includedregulations implementing the Anti-Reflagging Act's controlling interestsavings provisions. A law firm, writing on behalf of clients who are fishingindustry companies, expressed the view that the Anti-Reflagging Act createdtwo classes of fishing industry vessels; those subject to the new Americancontrol provisions, and those that qualify under the savings clause forexemption from the new requirements_including virtually the entire commercialfishing industry fleet as of July 28, 1987. They stated that regulationsimplementing the savings provisions are needed because theere are so many``grandfathered'' vessels and because the absence of implementing regulationsimplies that the new controlling interest requirements apply to all fisheryvessels. The comment suggested language for a regulation implementing thesavings clause which closely followed the statutory language. However,it addressed only corporations. Under the Coast Guard's administrativepractice both corporations and partnerships need to be addressed. Finally,the comment agreed with the Coast Guard's position that the savings provisions'protection runs with a qualifying vessel, regardless of ownership.A company with a financial interest in fishing industry vessels also commentedon the lack of an implementing regulations for the controlling interestsavings clause. This comment assumed that without an implementing regulationno fishing industry vessel owner could benefit from the savings clause.The comment stated that this constituted an unfair taking of an owner'sright to sell its interest in the vessels to whomever it wished and wouldreduce the potential demand for the vessels, with a corresponding lossin market value.The third comment, from an association representing the domestic tug andbarge industry, stated that the controlling interest savings clause wasvery extensive and should be addressed by rulemaking. This comment disagreedwith the Coast Guard's position that the savings provisions run with aqualifying vessel, regardless of ownership; arguing that ``grandfathering''should be lost at the first sale of the vessel to a new owner. In supportof its position, this comment cited language in the report of the HouseMerchant Marine and Fisheries Committee, House Report 100-423, November5, 1987, at page 17, indicating that the savings clause does not applyonce ownership or the vessel changes.The Coast Guard agrees with the comments that implementing regulationsfor the controlling interest savings clause should be included in the proposedrules. Therefore, a new andSection; 67.03-15 has been included in this supplementalnotice of proposed rulemaking. This new section largely adopts the languagesuggested by one comment and closely follows the statute. However, languagehas been added to make the regulation applicable to qualifying vesselswhether owned by partnerships or corporations. This is consistent withthe Coast Guard's administrative practice of giving the same meaning tocontrolling interest in both the partnership and corporate contexts, tothe extent reasonable. A partnership which wants to document a vessel willstill have to meet previously existing American control requirements, includingthe requirement that no more than 50 percent of the equity of the partnershipbe owned by non-citizens, even if its vessel qualifies under the regulationfor exemption from the controlling interest requirements for fishing vessels.Proposed andSection; 67.03-15, no less so than the statute, makes clear itis the vessel that qualifies for protection under the savings clause. Therefore,the exemption from the new American control requirement runs with the vessel,regardless of ownership. As has been previously stated, two of the commentsagreed with the Coast Guard's position that the savings clause's protectionruns with the vessel and one did not. The Coast Guard has adhered to itsposition because the language of the statute is clear and unambiguous inthis regard; it does not require interpretation.There is strong support for the position that the literal language of thestatute should guide our implementation of the law. When Title 46 was partiallycodified in 1983_a codification that included Chapter 121 governing thedocumentation of vessels_the Report of the House Merchant Marine and FisheriesCommittee, House Report No. 98-338, August 1, 1983, stated, at page 120,that the Committee intended that ``the interpretation of the maritime safetylaws as codified and enacted by this bill will be based on the languageof the bill itself.'' Moreover, it stated, ``the literal language of thestatute should control *** [t]here is no mandate in logic or in case lawfor reliance on legislative history to reach a result contrary to the plainmeaning of the statute, particularly where that plain meaning is in noway unreasonable.''The same rule of construction ought to be applied to statutes, such asthe Anti-Reflagging Act, which subsequently amend the ``maritime safetylaws as codified'' in title 46. The continuing validity of this rule ofconstruction is demonstrated by the recent inclusion of almost identicallanguage in House Report No. 100-918, September 15, 1988, dealing withthe codification of the Ship Mortgage Act as Chapter 313 of Title 46. Accordingly,it would be incorrect for the Coast Guard to base its regulation_as onecomment urged_on the statement in House Report 100-423 that the savingsclause's protection should end when a vessel is sold.The Anti-Reflagging Act also contains savings clauses with respect to itsrebuilding requirements, which were the subject of earlier rulemaking.Under those regulations the protection of the rebuilding savings provisionsrun with the vessel. The rebuilding savings clauses are indistinguishablefrom the controlling interest savings clause in terms of their applicabilityto qualifying vessels, without regard for ownership. Based on their language,there is no reason to interpret these savings provisions in different wayswhen it comes to determining if sale of a vessel should end its protection.An examination of the legislative history, for purposes of interpretingthe rebuilding savings clauses, reveals nothing to support the conclusionthat a qualifying vessel should lose its protection it it is sold.The savings clauses are meant to fully protect the financial interestsof vessel owners. As one comment pointed out, these financial interestsare not fully protected if the vessel loses fishing privileges when itis sold. The value of a vessel would certainly be less if, for example,as a foreign rebuilt fishing vessel it would permanently lose entitlementto engage in the U.S. fisheries when it was sold. Some financial harm couldsimilarly befall the owner of a vessel that, once sold, could only be operatedas a fishing vessel under the new American control requirements.b. Two comments questioned the authority for revision of the controllinginterest requirements for partnerships. They noted that the Anti-ReflaggingAct did not specifically address American control requirements for partnerships,and stated that the Anti-Reflagging Act provides no basis for applyingits American control requirement for corporations to partnerships. A thirdcomment stated that although the Anti-Reflagging Act did not address partnerships,this should not be viewed as an indication that Congress opposed regulationsaddressing controlling interest requirements for partnerships based onother authority. While the notice of proposed rulemaking stated that the Coast Guard wouldimplement a more than 50 percent controlling interest test for partnershipsdocumenting fishing vessels, no implementing language was included. Thissupplemental notice of proposed rulemaking includes amendments to andSection;67.03-5needed to carry out this previously stated inention. The comments are concurred with only to the extent that they assert theAnti-Reflagging Act does not require a controlling interest test for partnerships.However, there is authority for the proposed amendments to andSection;67.03-5revising the American control requirements for partnerships. Authorityto issue regulations addressing controlling interest in partnerships isbased on section 10 of the Coast Guard Authorization Act of 1982 (Pub.L. 97-136), which amended 46 U.S.C. 12102(a)(3). That provision permitspartnerships to document vessels if ``the controlling interest in the partnershipis owned by citizens of the United States.'' The Coast Guard publisheda final rule, on May 17, 1988, amending andSection;67.03-5 to give more meaningto the phrase ``controlling interest in the partnership.'' That rulemakingwas based solely on our interpretation of 46 U.S.C. 12102(a)(3), as amendedin 1982. Work on those regulations commenced long before passage of theAnti-Reflagging Act. Those regulations describe equity and control testsapplicable to partnerships seeking documentation with any type of endorsement,including a fishery endorsement. Among those tests is a requirement thatat least 50 percent of the equity in the partnership be owned by partnerswho are U.S. citizens. Those regulations were not based on the Anti-ReflaggingAct.When 46 U.S.C. 12102(a)(3) was amended in 1982, the Coast Guard took theposition that, so far as was reasonable, the same meaning would be givento ``controlling interest'' in both the partnership and corporate contexts.The Anti-Reflagging Act has mandated a more than 50 percent controllinginterest test for corporations seeking to document vessels for the fisheries,without addressing partnerships. Since, under current regulations, at least50 percent of the equity in a partnership must be owned by U.S. citizensfor it to document a vessel for any purpose, the Coast Guard's positionis that it is reasonable to follow its administrative practice by conformingthe regulations for partnerships documenting fishing vessels with the regulationsfor corporations doing the same; making both meet a more than 50 percentAmerican control test. This less than 1 percent change in the Americancontrol requirements for partnerships is a result of the Anti-ReflaggingAct only to the extent that its new American control requirement for corporationscaused the Coast Guard to consider and propose a conforming change to theexisting American control requirements for partnerships, in accordancewith past administrative practice.c. One comment correctly observed that the new paragraph to be added toandSection;67.17-9 should be paragraph (d), since another paragraph (c) alreadyexists. This correction has been made in this supplemental notice of proposedrulemaking. This comment also suggested that andSection;67.17-9 should statethat fishing privileges are temporarily lost while the vessel's owner failsto meet the citizenship requirements of new andSection; 67.03-9(d), ratherthan any section of subpart 67.03. Section 67.03-9(d) contains only thestock interest requirements for qualification as a corporation entitledto document vessels for the fisheries. While it is true that a vessel wouldlose its entitlement to engage in the fisheries for as long as its ownerfails to meet the requirements of andSection;67.03-9(d), failure to meetany of the citizenship requirements for documenting vessels in the fisheries,wherever found in subpart 67.03, will similarly result in a loss of entitlement.For instance, a partnership with a non-citizen general partner is ineligibleto document vessels for any purpose. If such a partnership owned a vesselotherwise eligible for a fishery license, the vessel would suffer a lossof that eligibility until its owner met the citizenship requirements.Finally, this comment stated that the proposed rule does not fully addressall the factors the Coast Guard may consider in making determinations aboutAmerican control. The comment specifically raised issues about the meaningof ``voting shares'' and ``aggregation'' as those terms are used in theAnti-Reflagging Act, and 46 U.S.C. 12102 (b)(1) and (b)(2). Another issueraised was whether the Coast Guard would look beyond the ownership of votingshares and consider the other restrictions on controlling interest in 46U.S.C. App. 802(b). For purposes of documenting fishing vessels, 46 U.S.C. 12102(b)(2) leavesno doubt that the Coast Guard must apply the restrictions on controllinginterest in 46 U.S.C. App. 802(b), in addition to the requirement thatU.S. citizens own a majority of voting shares. However, the prominenceof the requirement that a majority of voting shares be owned by U.S. citizensindicates that that is intended to be the primary means of determiningAmerican control. Other factors to be considered under 46 U.S.C. App. 802(b)generally do not permit such a straightforward finding that the requirementhas been met or not. They usually require case-by-case analysis to resolvethe ultimate question of whether an impermissible degree of control overthe corporation is being exercised by non-citizens.The Coast Guard's documentation offices have never had the resources tocompletely analyze every aspect of the American control issue for everyowner seeking to document vessels for coastwise and fisheries trades. Inaccordance with 46 U.S.C. 12122, an owner who knowingly falsifies or concealsa material fact, or makes a false statement or representation about thedocumentation of a vessel, makes its vessel subject to forfeiture. SinceAmerican control is a material fact about documentation with a coastwiseor fisheries endorsement, an owner who fails to provide information abouta disqualifying factor is liable for this severe penalty. Therefore, asa matter of administrative practice the Coast Guard has specifically requestedfrom owners only information about broad ranges of stock ownership; i.e.100 percent U.S. owned, 75-50 percent U.S. owned, etc. Naturally, if thereis reason to suspect that a particular vessel owner is violating the Americancontrol provisions the Coast Guard will investigate and require the ownerto provide information sufficient to demonstrate that it qualifies to documentits vessel with the endorsement obtained or requested.The Coast Guard's administrative practice in this regard is in keepingwith the design of the documentation laws in general. Documents and endorsementsare usually issued on the basis of self-certification by the applicant,subject to severe penalties for making false representations or concealingmaterial facts. In view of this policy, it would be an unwarranted burdenon the public to require all owners applying for a coastwise or fisherieslicense to supply detailed information about every fact that might be consideredunder 46 U.S.C. App. 802(b) in determining if there is American control. The Coast Guard usually does not make further inquiries about controllinginterest without reasonable suspicion of a problem with compliance, Moreover,resolution of American control issues under 46 U.S.C. App. 802(b) oftendepends upon unique factual circumstances. Therefore, detailed rules addressingspecific factual situations would be of limited value to the general publicand probably could not improve on the statute itself in terms of informinginterested parties of what the law requires in any particular case. Providingmore detailed guidance about specific terms such as ``voting shares'',as the comment suggests, poses the same problems. No regulation could possiblyencompass every conceivable application of these terms to the virtuallyendless variety of situations which present themselves.  Although regulations providing the kind of detailed guidance the commentsuggested are impractical, the Coast Guard has determined that a thoroughrevision of subpart 67.03 is needed to better explain the American controlrequirements. Accordingly, this supplemental notrice of proposed rulemakingincludes an extensive revision of subpart 67.03.  A newly proposed andSection;67.03-2 collects general guidance regarding thestock or equity interest requirements of subpart 67.03. Section 67.03-2(b)explains the Coast Guard's administrative practice regarding the citizenshiprequirements for entities which own a stock or equity interest in a vesselowning entity, such as a corporation or partnership, comprised of otherentities. This is a longstanding rule of administrative practice, basedon the Coast Guard's interpretation of the citizenship requirements of46 U.S.C. App. 833 and 46 U.S.C. 12102. This rule applies to all stockor equity interest requirements, including the requirement for 75 percentownership by U.S. citizens to qualify for documenting vessels for coastwisetrade, the Anti-Reflagging Act's requirement for more than 50 percent ownershipby U.S. citizens to qualify for documenting vessels for fisheries, andthe equity interest requirements for documentation of vessels owned bypartnerships.  The Coast Guard has not fully developed its interpretation of the ``aggregation''requirement included in 46 U.S.C. 12102(b)(1) by the Anti-Reflagging Act,and has not proposed an implementing regulation in this rulemaking. Commentsfrom the public regarding how the aggregation requirement should be interpretedare particularly desired. Although no implementing regulation is proposed, at this time, the statutoryaggregation requirement cannot be ignored. This rulemaking is not intendedto preclude the Coast Guard from requiring vessel owners to provide informationneeded to determine that they are qualified to document their vessels witha fisheries endorsement, if there is reason to suspect that they do notmeet the aggregation requirement. However, as with the other American controlrequirements discussed above, requiring every owner of a fishing vesselto provide information showing that it meets the aggregation requirementwould be an unwarranted burden on the public. Where appropriate, the CoastGuard will apply the aggregation requirement, on a case-by-case basis,to determine if a vessel owner is qualified to document vessels with afisheries endorsement.The administrative practice reflected in proposed andSection;67.03-2(b),like the aggregation requirement, is intended to ensure that if a vesselowning entity is owned by other entities there is American control amongthose entities, and if those entities, in turn, are owned by other entitiesthere is American control among them, and so on. The aggregation requirementis, therefore, likely to be largely duplicative of the requirements ofandSection;67.03-2(b). Unlike andSection;67.03-2(b), however, the aggregationrequirement applies only to the documentation of fishing vessels.<ITAG tagnum="84">Discussion of the Proposed Rule </ITAG>The authority citation for 46 CFR part 67 is amended to remove 46 U.S.C.App. 927 and 983, and 46 U.S.C. 12121, which were repealed by Public Law100-710. Those statutes, which authorized regulations relating to documentation,and recording of ship mortgages and maritime liens, were repealed becauseCongress found them to be redundant with authority contained in 46 U.S.C.2103 and 49 U.S.C. 322. The authority citation is also amended to add 46U.S.C. 2103 and 49 U.S.C. 322. Other authorities are unchanged.  Subpart 67.03 is extensively revised. Section 67.01-1 states that onlyvessels owned by United States citizens can qualify for Certificates ofDocumentation. That section is unchanged.  Section 67.03-2 is new. It collects general guidance regarding stock orequity interest requirements for citizenship. Current paragraphs (d) and(e) of andSection;67.03-5, which include some of the same guidance, but applyonly to partnerships, are superseded by andSection;67.03-2. Since the stockor equity interest requirements apply to corporations, as well as partnerships,these provisions are placed in andSection;67.03-2 as rules of general applicability.Paragraph (a) explained the interests encompassed by the American controlrequirements. These include title to all classes of stock as a whole, titleto voting stock or ownership of equity. Additional factors are describedwhich can cause a corporation or partnership, which otherwise qualifies,to fail to meet stock or equity interest requirements for citizenship. Paragraph (a) is based on 46 U.S.C. App. 802, which is made applicableto documentation of vessels for coastwise trade by 46 U.S.C. App. 883,and to documentation of vessels for fisheries trade by 46 U.S.C. 12102.The Coast Guard considers the American control requirements to 46 U.S.C.App. 802 and the American control requirements for partnerships in 46 U.S.C.12102(a)(3) to be provisions which must be construed with reference toeach other and, when reasonable, given the same interpretation. Therefore,paragraph (a) also applies to the American control requirements for documentationof vessels, for any purpose, by partnerships.  Paragraph (a)(1) explains the Coast Guard's interpretation of control,as the term is used in andSection;67.03-2(a) in connection with non-citizencontrol of a corporation or partnership. A similar provision, now at andSection;67.03-5(e),but applicable only to partnerships, is superseded by andSection;67.03-2(a)(1).Paragraph (a)(1) explains that  the Coast Guard does not interpret restrictionson non-citizen control to prohibit all participation in the activitiesof the corporation or partnership, or prohibit non-citizens from makingloans and receiving interest in transactions that do not involve controlof the corporation or partnership.  Paragraph (b) explains the Coast Guard's administrative practice in applyingAmerican control requirements to a vessel owning entity which is owned,in turn, by other entities which are not individuals. A similar provision,previously proposed as andSection;67.03-1(b), is superseded by andSection;67.03-2(b).In keeping with longstanding Coast Guard practice, the American controlprovisions are interpreted to require American control among all the entitieswhich have an ownership interest in a vessel owning entity. The purposeto be achieved by this rule is basically the same as that which apparentlyunderlies the aggregation requirement of 46 U.S.C. 12102(b)(1). By requiringthat each entity contributing to the stock or equity interest requirementsof the vessel owning entity be a citizen eligible to document vessels inits own right with the type of license sought, the Coast Guard assuresthat the vessel owning entity is effectively controlled by entities whichmeet the applicable standard of American control.Section 67.03-2(b) achieves its purpose, without being overly restrictive,by taking account of the practical limitations that ownership structuresplace on entities having a minority interest in the ownership of anotherentity, such as a vessel owning corporation or partnership. Such a structuregenerally prevents parties with a minority interest in an entity from exercisingany greater control over other participating entities than they exercisewithin their own entity. Parties which do not have control within theirown entity usually have no effective means of exercising control throughthat entity's ownership of stock or equity in the vessel owning entity.They generally have no effective means of combining with minority interestsin other participating entities to enhance their power within the vesselowning entity. Accordingly, if each entity contributing to the stock orequity interest requirements of the vessel owning entity is American controlled,the vessel owning entity will be American controlled. Minority foreigninterests within those American controlled entities will not be able tocontrol the vessel owning entity. Similarly, entities with too small astock or equity interest in the vessel owning entity to exercise control,even if they are wholly foreign controlled, will not jeopardize Americancontrol. The theoretical possibility that minority foreign interest mightovercome the limitations of the ownership structure and combine to exercisecontrol, does not justify a more onerous rule because andSection; 67.03-2(b)is applied along with, rather than in place of, the restriction againstnon-citizen control of andSection; 67.03-2(a).Section 67.03-3 states the requirements and individual must meet to bea citizen eligible to document vessels. That section is unchanged.Section 67.03-5 states the requirements a partnership, association or jointventure must meet to be a citizen eligible to document vessels. Paragraphs(b) and (c), dealing with associations and joint ventures, are unchanged.As discussed above, former paragraphs (d) and (e) have been supersededby rules of general applicability in andSection; 67.03-2. Paragraph (a),dealing with partnerships, has been revised. In accordance with 46 U.S.C.12102(a)(3), paragraph (a) initially requires that all general partnersbe citizens for the partnership to be eligible to document vessels forany purpose. Based on the same statute, paragraph (a)(1) also requiresthat at least 50 percent of the equity in the partnership be owned by citizensfor the partnership to be eligible to document vessels for any purpose.In accordance with 46 U.S.C. App. 802, which is made applicable here by46 U.S.C. App. 883, paragraph (a)(2) states that for a partnership to beeligible to document vessels with a coastwise of Great Lakes endorsement,all of the general partners must be citizens and at least 75 percent ofthe equity in the partnership must be owned by citizens. Paragraph (a)(2)states that for a partnership to be eligible to document vessels with afisheries endorsement, all of the general partners must be citizens andmore than 50 percent of the equity in the partnership must be owned bycitizens. As discussed above, the paragraph implements the intention statedin the original notice of proposed rulemaking, to conform the citizenshiprequirements for partnerships eligible to document vessels with a fisheryendorsement to the citizenship requirements for corporations enacted bythe Anti-Reflagging Act. This conforming change requires a change of lessthan one percent in the equity interest requirement for partnerships eligibleto document vessels for fisheries. All of the equity interest requirementsin andSection; 67.03-5(a) are subject to the requirements of andSection; 67.03-2.The requirement that all general partners be citizens is not an equityinterest requirement, it is a distinct citizenship requirement for documentingvessels.Section 67.03-9 states the requirements a corporation must meet to be acitizen eligible to document vessels. In accordance with 46 U.S.C. 12102(a)(4),paragraph (a) states the requirements a corporation must meet to be eligibleto document vessels for any purpose. It is unchanged except that fisheriesendorsements are not covered by paragraph (d) and ``recreational license''has been substituted for ``pleasure license'' to conform to current terminology.Paragraph (a)(1) has been revised to make clear that the requirement ismet by incorporation under the laws of a State of the United States andto remove the phrase ``including and federal scheme of incorporation'',which is redundant. In accodance with 46 U.S.C. App. 802, which is madeapplicable here by 46 U.S.C. App. 883, paragraph (b) states that for acorporation to be eligible to document vessels with a coastwise or a GreatLakes endorsement, it must meet the requirements of paragraph (a) and atleast 75 percent of the stock interest in the corporation must be ownedby citizens. This paragraph is unchanged except ``citizen'' is substitutedfor ``United States citizen'' and the parenthetical reference to 46 U.S.C.App. 802 has been removed. In subpart 67.03, ``citizen'' and ``United Statescitizen'' are equivalent terms having the specific meaning given than inandSection; 67.03-1. The reference to 46 U.S.C. App. 802 is no longer necessarybecause its citizenship requirements have been incorporated into andSection;67.03-2, and the stock interest requirements of andSection; 67.03-8 are subjectto the requirements of andSection; 67.03-2.Paragraph (c) refers to regulations in 46 CFR part 68 which implement 46U.S.C. App. 883-1. That statute permits certain corporations that do nototherwise qualify as a citizen eligible to document vessels for coastwisetrade to qualify for limited coastwise trading privileges. Paragraph (c)is unchanged.Proposed paragraph (d) is new. In accordance with 46 U.S.C. 12102(b)(1),paragraph (d) states that for a corporation to be eligible to documentvessels with a fisheries endorsement, it must meet the requirements ofparagraph (a) and more than 50 percent of the stock interest in the corporationmust be owned by citizens. A smilar provision was proposed in the originalnotice of proposed rulemaking. That provision indicated that more than50 percent of the voting stock, rather than more than 50 percent of thestock interest as described in andSection; 67.03-2, had to be owned by citizens.The change incorporated in the present rule was made to comply with 46U.S.C. 12102(b)(2). The requirement that a majority of voting shares mustbe owned by citizens is still emphasized, but the stock interest requirementin subject to all of the requirements of andSection; 67.03-2.Paragraph (e) is similar to current paragraph (d). It states that whereMaritime Administration approval is required for a corporation to acquirea vessel the Coast Guard will not document the vessel, even though thecorporation is otherwise eligible to document the vessel in accordancewith paragraph (a), unless the corporation provides evidence of MaritimeAdministration approval. Paragraph (f) implements an exemption to paragraph(e) for vessels that have been operated exclusively as recreational andfishing industry vessels. The new exemption was added to comply with arecent amendment to 46 U.S.C. App. 808 is Public Law 100-710, November23, 1988.Section 67.03-11 states the requirements a governmental entity must meetto be a citizen eligible to ducument vessles. That section is unchanged.Section 67.03-13 states the rule that an original form CG-1258, the applicationfor documentation form, establishes a rebuttable presumption of citizenship.That section is unchanged.Section 67.03-15 is new. It implements the Anti-Reflagging Act's Americancontrol savings provisions. As discussed above, this proposed rule hasbeen added because of comments received in response to the original noticeof proposed rulemaking. The proposed rule closely follows the statutorylanguage, but since the Coast Guard has conformed the American controlrequirements for partnerships to the Anti-Reflagging Act's requirementsfor corporations, language has been added to exempt partnerships from thoseAmerican control requirements in circumstances where a corporation wouldsimilarly be exempt pursuant to the savings provisions. Under the proposedrule, a corporation of partnership that meets citizenship requirementsfor documenting a vessel for the fisheries, except for the specific stockor equity requirement for fisheries (i.e. more than 50 percent), may nonethelessbe eligible to document a vessel for the fisheries if before July 28, 1987,the vessel was documented and operating as a fishing industry vessel inthe United States fisheries, or was contracted for purchase for use asa fishing industry vessel in the United States fisheries. Even if thissection applies, at least 50 percent of the equity in a partnership mustbe owned by citizens for it to be eligible to document vessels for anypurpose. This rule applies to qualifying vessels without regard to changesin ownership.Sections 67.17-5(c)(1) and 67.17-7(c)(1) are unchanged except for a conformingchange to their references to andSection; 67.03-5, required by the proposedamendments to andSection; 67.03-5.Section 67.17-9 is amended by adding a new paragraph (d). A similar rulewas proposed in the original notice of proposed rulemaking. The proposedrule explains that a vessel temporarily loses its eligibility to engagein the fisheries trade during any period it is owned by an entity thatfails to meet citizenship requirements. However, a vessel which qualifiesfor exemption from the specific stock or equity interest requirements fora fisheries endorsement in accordance with andSection; 67.03-15, will notlose its eligibility for a fisheries endorsement because it is owned byan entity which fails to meet those specific stock or equity requirements,if its owner otherwise qualifies as a citizen.Section 67.23-9(a)(3) is unchanged except for a conforming change to itsreferences to andSection; 67.03-5, required by the proposed amendments toandSection; 67.03-5.<ITAG tagnum="84">E.O. 12291 and DOT Regulatory Policies and Procedures</ITAG>This rulemaking is considered to be non-major under Executive Order 12291and nonsignificant under the DOT regulatory policies and procedures (44FR 11034; February 26, 1979). The economic impact of this rulemaking hasbeen found to be so minimal that further evaluation is unnecessary. Theonly significant substantive changes proposed in this rulemaking are changesin American control requirements for vessel documentation mandated by statute.<ITAG tagnum="84">Federalism</ITAG>This rulemaking has been analyzed in accordance with the principles andcriteria contained in Executive Order 12612, and it has been determinedthat these proposed rules do not have sufficient federalism implicationsto warrant the preparation of a Federalism Assessment.<ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory Flexibility Act</ITAG>Since the impact of this rulemaking is expected to be minimal, the CoastGuard certifies that it will not have a significant economic impact ona substantial number of small entities. It is recognized that a substantialnumber of small entities are involved in the commercial fishing industryand other vessel operations within the ambit of these regulations. Thereis no significant economic impact, however, because the proposed rulemakingimplements the Anti-Reflagging Act's American control savings provisions.The savings provisions protect those who were operating fishing industryvessels under documentation in the United States fisheries, or who madeverifiable commitments to purchase vessels for use as fishing industryvessels in the United States fisheries, based on the laws and regulationsin existence prior to enactment of the Anti-Reflagging Act.<ITAG tagnum="84">Paperwork Reduction Act</ITAG>This rulemaking imposes no new paperwork burden on the public.<ITAG tagnum="84">Environmental Assessment</ITAG>The Coast Guard has considered the environmental impact of this rulemakingand concludes that under the categorical exclusion provision in andSection;2-B-3.1. of Commandant Instruction M16475.1B, the preparation of an EnvironmentalAssessment, and an Environmental Impact Statement, or a finding of No SignificantImpact for this rulemaking is not required. This rulemaking involves administrativeand procedural regulations which clearly have no environmental impact.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 46 CFR Part 67</ITAG>Vessels.For the reasons set out in the preamble, 46 CFR part 67 is proposed tobe amended as follows:<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 67_DOCUMENTATION OF VESSELS</ITAG>1. The authority citation for part 67 is amended to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>31 U.S.C. 9701; 42 U.S.C. 9118; 46 U.S.C. 2103; 46U.S.C. App. 841a, 876, 49 U.S.C. 322; 49 CFR 1.46.</ITAG>2. Subpart 67.03 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="52">SUBPART 67.03_CITIZENSHIP REQUIREMENTS FOR VESSEL DOCUMENTATION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 67.03-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Requirement for citizen owner.</ITAG>Certificates of Documentation are available only to vessels which are whollyowned by United States citizens. For purposes of obtaining a Certificateof Documentation, the persons and entities discussed in andSection;andSection;67.03-3 through 67.03-9 of this subpart are citizens.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 67.03-2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Stock or equity interest requirements.</ITAG>(a) The stock or equity interest requirements for citizenship under thissubpart encompass: title to all classes of stock as a whole; title to votingstock; and ownership of equity. An otherwise qualifying corporation orpartnership may fail to meet stock or equity interest requirements because:stock is subject to trust or fiduciary obligations in favor of non-citizens;non-citizens exercise, directly or indirectly, voting power; or non-citizens,by any means, exercise control over the entity. The applicable stock orequity interest requirement is not met if the amount of stock subject toobligations in favor of non-citizens, non-citizen voting power or non-citizencontrol exceeds the percentage of the non-citizen interest permitted.(1) For the purpose of this section, control includes an absolute rightto direct corporate or partnership business, to limit the actions of orreplace the chief executive officer, a majority of the board of directorsor any general partner, to direct the transfer or operations of any vesselowned by the corporation or partnership, or otherwise to exercise authorityover the business of the corporation of partnership, but not the rightto simply participate in these activities or the right to receive a financialreturn, i.e., interest or the equivalent of interest, on a loan or otherfinancing obligations.(b) For purposes of meeting the stock or equity interest requirements forcitizenship under this subpart where title to a vessel is held by an entitycomprised, in whole or in part, of other entities which are not individuals,each entity contributing to the stock or equity interest qualificationsof the entity holding title must be a citizen eligible to document vesselsin its own right with the license sought.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 67.03-3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Individual.</ITAG>An individual is a citizen if he is a native-born, naturalized, or derivativecitizen of the United States, or otherwise qualifies as a United Statescitizen.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 67.03-5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Partnership, association, or joint venture.</ITAG>(a) A partnership is a citizen if all its general partners are citizens,and:(1) For the purpose of obtaining a registry or a recreational license,at least 50 percent of the equity interest in the partnership is ownedby citizens;(2) For the purpose of obtaining a coastwise of Great Lakes license, atleast 75 percent of the equity interest in the partnership is owned bycitizens;(3) For the purpose of obtaining a fishery license, more than 50 percentof the equity interest in the partnership is owned by citizens.(b) An association is a citizen if each of its members is a citizen.(c) A joint venture is a citizen if each of its members is a citizen.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 67.03-7</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Trust.</ITAG>A trust arrangement fulfills the citizenship requirements if each of itstrustees and each of its beneficiaries is a citizen.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;67.03-9 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Corporation.</ITAG>(a) A corporation is a citizen for the purposes of obtaining a registryor a recreational license if:(1) It is incorporated under the laws of the United States or of a State;(2) Its chief executive officer, by whatever title, is a citizen;(3) Its chairman of the board of directors is a citizen; and(4) No more of its directors are non-citizens than a minority of the numbernecessary to constitute a quorum.(b) A corporation is a citizen for the purposes of obtaining a coastwiseor Great Lakes license endorsement if:(1) It meets all the requiremets of paragraph (a) of this section; and(2) At least 75 percent of the stock interest in the corporation is ownedby citizens.(c) A corporation which does not meet the requirements of paragraph (b)of this section may qualify for limited coastwise trading privileges bymeeting the requirements of subpart 68.01 of this subchapter.(d) A corporation is a citizen for the purpose of obtaining a fishery licenseendorsement if:(1) It meets all the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section; and(2) More than 50 percent of the stock interest in the corporation includinga majority of voting shares in the corporation is owned by citizens.(e) Although a corporation meets the requirements of paragraph (a) of thissection, if a majority of the stock interest in the corporation is notheld by U.S. citizens it may not document a vessel, except as permittedby paragraph (f) of this section, which it acquired from a U.S. citizenowner, as defined in 46 U.S.C. App. 802, and which is documented underthe laws of the United States, unless it evidences that the Maritime Administrationapproved that corporation's acquisition of the vessel. (See 46 U.S.C. 802,808).(f) A corporation prohibited from documenting a vessel by paragraph (e)of this section may document a vessel that has been operated only as afishing vessel, fish processing vessel, fish tender vessel or for recreation.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;67.03-11 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Governmental entity.</ITAG>A governmental entity is regarded as a citizen if it is a government ofthe United States as defined in andSection;67.01-1 of this part.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;67.03-13 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Evidence.</ITAG>An original form CG-1258 established a rebuttable presumption that theapplicant is a United States citizen.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;67.03-15 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Citizenship savings provision for fishing vessels.</ITAG>A corporation that meets the requirements of paragraph (d)(1) of andSection;67.03-9of this subpart but does not meet the requiremets of paragraph (d)(2) ofthat section, or a partnership that meets the requirements of paragraph(a)(1) of andSection;67.03-5 of this subpart but does not meet the requirementsof paragraph (a)(3) of that section, may nonetheless be eligible to obtaina fishery license endorsement for a vessel if, prior to July 28, 1987,the vessel:(a) Was documented under chapter 121 of title 46, U.S.C., and operatingas a fishing, fish processing, or fish tender vessel in the navigable watersor the Exclusive Economic Zone of the United States, as defined by 46 U.S.C.2101(10a); or(b) Was contracted for purchase for use as a fishing, fish tender or fishprocessing vessel in the navigable waters or the Exclusive Economic Zoneof the United States, as defined by 46 U.S.C. 2101(10a), if the purchaseis shown by the contractor similarly reliable evidence to have been madefor the purpose of using the vessel in the fisheries.3. Section 67.17-5 is amended by revising paragraph (c)(1) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;67.17-5 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Coastwise license.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(c) * * *(1) It is thereafter sold in whole or in part to an owner that is not acitizen as defined in andSection;andSection; 67.03-3; 67.03-5 (a)(1), (b),(c); 67.03-7; 67.03-9(a); or 67.03-11 of this part; <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>4. Section 67.17-7 is amended by revising paragraph (e)(1) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;67.17-7 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Great Lakes license.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(c) * * *(1) It is thereafter sold in whole or in part to an owner that is not acitizen as defined in andSection;andSection; 67.03-3; 67.03-5 (a)(1), (b),(c); 67.03-7; 67.03-9(a); or 67.03-11 of this part;<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>5. Section 67.17-9 is amended by adding a new paragraph (d) to read asfollows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;67.17-9 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Fishery license.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(d) A vessel otherwise eligible for a fishery license endorsement underparagraph (b) of this section loses that eligibility during any periodin which it is owned by any entity which does not meet the citizenshiprequirements of subpart 67.03 of this part, except that a vessel eligiblefor a fishery license endorsement in accordance with andSection;67.03-15of this part does not lose its eligibility for a fishery license endorsementduring any period it is owned by an entity that fails to meet the stockor equity interest requirements of andSection;andSection; 67.03-5(a)(3) or67.03-9(d)(2) of this part but otherwise qualifies as a citizen.6. Section 67.23-9 is amended by revising paragraph (a)(3) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;67.23-9 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Requirement for deletion.</ITAG>(a) * * *(3) Any owner of the vessel ceases to be a citizen within the meaning ofandSection;andSection; 67.03-3; 67.03-5 (a)(1), (b), (c); 67.03-7; 67.03-9(a);or 67.03-11 of this part;<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: September 28, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">J. D. Sipes, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Rear Admiral, U.S. Coast Guard Chief, Office of Marine Safety, Securityand Environmental Protection.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-24251 Filed 10-12-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-14-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>