<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89124-0109 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.1-24-89.f2.A1108</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Rel. No. IC-16757; 812-7141]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="44">January 17, 1989.</ITAG><T3>Agency</T3>: Securities and Exchange Commission (``SEC'').<T3>Action</T3>: Notice of Application for Exemption under the InvestmentCompany Act of 1940 (``1940 Act'').<T3>Applicant</T3>: Sears Mortgage Funding Corporation (``Applicant'' orthe ``Company'').<T3>Relevant 1940 Act Sections</T3>: Exemption requested under section6(c) from all provisions of the 1940 Act.<T3>Summary of Application</T3>: Applicant seeks a conditional order, onbehalf of itself and certain trusts (``Issuer Trusts'') to be created bythe Company, exempting the Company and the Issuer Trusts from all provisionsof the 1940 Act in connection with the proposed issuance of collateralizedmortgage obligations and the sale of beneficial ownership interests inthe Issuer Trusts.<T3>Filing Date</T3>: The application was filed on October 4, 1988, andamended on November 14, 1988, December 30, 1988 and January 9, 1989.<T3>Hearing or Notification of Hearing</T3>: If no hearing is ordered,the application will be granted. Any interested person may request a hearingon this application, or ask to be notified if a hearing is ordered. Anyrequest must be received by the SEC by 5:30 p.m., on February 6, 1989.Request a hearing in writing, giving the nature of your interest, the reasonfor the request, and the issues you contest. Serve the Applicant with therequest, either personally or by mail, and also send it to the Secretaryof the SEC, along with proof of service by affidavit or, for lawyers, bycertificate. Request notification of the date of a hearing by writing tothe Secretary of the SEC.<T3>Addresses</T3>: Secretary, SEC, 450 5th Street, NW., Washington, DC20549. Applicant, 2500 Lake Cook Road, Riverwoods, Illinois 60015.<T3>For Further Information Contact</T3>: Jeremy N. Rubenstein, Staff Attorney,at (202) 272-2847, or Stephaine M. Monaco, Branch Chief, at (202) 272-3030(Office of Investment Company Regulation, Division of Investment Management).<T3>Supplementary Information</T3>: Following is a summary of the application.The complete application is available for a fee from either the SEC's PublicReference Branch in person or the SEC's commercial copier who can be contactedat (800) 231-3282 (in Maryland (301) 258-4300).<ITAG tagnum="84">Applicant's Representations:</ITAG>1. The Company is a wholly-owned, limited purpose finance subsidiary ofSears Mortgage Securities Corporation, a wholly-owned indirect subsidiaryof Sears Roebuck and Company. The Company was organized as a Delaware corporationon April 23, 1986 to facilitate the financing of mortgage loans, and isnot empowered to engage in any business or investment activities unrelatedto such purpose. The requested relief is sought to permit the Company,directly or through one or more Issuer Trusts, to issue evidences of indebtedness(``Bonds'') in one or more series (``Series'').2. The Bonds will be collateralized primarily by mortgage pass-throughcertificates (``Mortgage Certificates'') consisting of either Agency Certificatesor Non-Agency Certificates (together, ``Mortgage Collateral''). ``AgencyCertificates'' are defined as (1) fully-modified pass-through mortgage-backedcertificates guaranteed by the Government National Mortgage Association(``GNMA Certificates''), (2) mortgage participation certificates issuedby the Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation (``FHLMC Certificates''),and (3) guaranteed mortgage pass-through securities issued by the FederalNational Mortgage Association (``FNMA Certificates''). ``Non-Agency Certificates''are defined as pass-through certificates and participation certificateswhich are neither issued nor guaranteed by an agency or instrumentalityof the United States and which evidence the entire undivided interest inpools of mortgage loans secured by single family (one-to-four unit) residences.All or a portion of the Agency Certificates securing a Series of Bondsmay be backed by mortgage loans that provide for payments during the initialportion of their term that are less than the actual amount of principaland interest payable thereon on a level debt service basis (``GPM GNMACertificates''). In addition to the Mortgage Collateral directly securingthe Bonds, a Series may have additional collateral which may include certaincollection accounts and reserve funds as specified in the related Indenture.3. Each Series of Bonds will be issued under the terms of a separate TrustIndenture (the ``Indenture'') between the Company, if the Bonds are issueddirectly by the Company, or a bank, trust company or other fiduciary actingon behalf of an Issuer Trust (the ``Owner Trustee''), and the IndentureTrustee (the ``Indenture Trustee''). The Indentures will be qualified underthe Trust Indenture Act of 1939 unless an appropriate exemption is available.4. In the case of each Series of Bonds: (a) The Company or the Owner Trustee(with respect to an Issuer Trust) will hold no substantial assets otherthan Mortgage Collateral and cash; (b) the Bonds will be secured by MortgageCollateral or cash having a collateral value determined under the Indenture,at the time of issuance and following each payment date for such Bonds,equal to or greater than the outstanding principal balance of the Bonds;(c) distributions of principal and interest received on the Mortgage Collateralsecuring the Bonds and any applicable reserve funds, plus reinvestmentincome thereon, will be sufficient to pay all interest on the Bonds andto retire each class of Bonds by its stated maturity; and (d) the MortgageCollateral will be assigned to the Indenture Trustee and will be subjectto the lien of the related Indenture.5. Without the consent of the holder of each outstanding Bond affectedthereby, no party may (a) change the stated maturity of the principal of,or any installment of interest on, any Bond or reduce the principal amountthereof, the interest rate specified thereon, the redemption price withrespect thereto or the earliest date on which such Bonds may be redeemedat the option of the Company or the Owner Trustee (with respect to an IssuerTrust), or change any place of payment where, or the coin or currency inwhich, such Bond or any interest thereon is payable, or impair the rightto institute suit for the enforcement of certain provisions of the Indentureregarding payment, (b) reduce the percentage of the aggregate amount ofthe outstanding bonds of such Series, the consent of the holders of whichis required for any such change, or the consent of the holders of whichis required for any waiver of compliance with certain provisions of theIndenture or of certain defaults thereunder and their consequences as providedfor in the Indenture, (c) modify the provisions of the Indenture specifyingthe circumstances under which the provisions of the Indenture may not bechanged without the consent of each outstanding Bondholder affected thereby,or the provisions of the Indenture with respect to certain remedies availablein the event of default, except to increase any percentage specified thereinor to provide that certain other provisions of the Indenture cannot bemodified or waived without the consent of the holder of each outstandingBond affected thereby, (d) modify or alter the provisions of the Indentureregarding the voting of Bonds held by the Company or the Owner Trustee,if any, the manager of the Bonds, any owner of the Company or an affiliateof any such party, (e) permit the creation of any lien ranking prior to,or on a parity with, the lien of the Indenture with respect to any partof the property subject to the lien under the Indenture, or terminate thelien of the Indenture on any property at any time subject thereto or deprivethe holder of any Bond of the security afforded by the lien of the Indenture,or (f) modify any of the provisions of the Indenture in such manner asto affect the calculation of the debt service requirement for any Bondor the rights of the Bondholders to the benefits of any provisions forthe mandatory redemption of Bonds of such Series contained therein.6. Subject to the conditions contained in the application, the Companymay sell or assign its beneficial interests (the ``Beneficial Interests'')in an Issuer Trust. The interests of the Bondholders will not be compromisedor impaired by the sale of Beneficial Interests in any Issuer Trust. Thesale of Beneficial Interests in any Issuer Trust will not alter the paymentof cash flows under the Indenture, including the amounts to be depositedin the collection account or any reserve fund created under the Indentureto support the payment of principal and interest on the Bonds.7. Except to the extent permitted by the limited right to substitute collateral,it will not be possible for the Company, its parent, Sears Mortgage SecuritiesCorporation, the Beneficial Interest holders, or the Owner Trustee, ifany, to alter the collateral initially pledged to secure a Series of Bonds,and in no event will such right to substitute collateral result in a diminutionin the value or qualify of such collateral. Although it is possible thatany collateral substituted for collateral initially pledged may have adifferent prepayment experience than the original collateral, the interestsof the Bondholders will not be impaired because: (a) the prepayment experienceof any collateral will be determined by market conditions beyond the controlof the Company, its parent, Sears Mortgage Securities Corporation, or theOwner Trustee, if any, which market conditions are likely to affect allmortgage certificates of similar payment terms and maturities in a similarfashion; and (b) the interests of the Company, its parent, Sears MortgageSecurities Corporation, or the Owner Trustee, if any, are not likely tobe greatly different from those of the Bondholders with respect to collateralprepayment experience. No Mortgage Certificates may be released from thelien of the Indenture prior to retirement in full of all Bonds of any Seriesexcept to the extent permitted by the limited right to substitute collateralas described herein.8. Subject to the conditions in the application, the Company may issueBonds of a Series which bear interest at rates which vary in relation toan index specified in the related prospectus supplement for a Series ofBonds.<ITAG tagnum="85">Applicant's Conditions</ITAG>Applicant agrees that if an order is granted it will be expressly conditionedon the following:A. Conditions Relating to the Bonds1. Each Series of Bonds will be registered under the Securities Act of1933 (``1933 Act''), unless offered in a transaction exempt from registrationunder section 4(2) of such Act.2. The Bonds will be ``mortgage-related securities'' within the meaningof section 3(a)(41) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934. In addition,the mortgage collateral underlying the Bonds will be limited to GNMA Certificates,FNMA Certificates, FHLMC Certificates or Non-Agency Certificates as describedherein.3. New Mortgage Collateral will not be substituted for more than 40% ofthe aggregate face amount of the Mortgage Collateral initially pledgedto secure the Bonds. If new Mortgage Collateral is substituted, the substitutecollateral will: (i) Be of equal or better quality than the collateralreplaced; (ii) have similar payment terms as, and a cash flow not lessthan, the collateral replaced; (iii) be sufficient to satisfy all interestand principal obligations on the Bonds when due; (iv) be insured or guaranteedto the same extent as the collateral replaced; (v) be similar in kind tothe substituted for Mortgage Certificates; and (vi) meet the conditionsset forth in Conditions A(2), A(4) and A(6). In addition, a substitutionwill be made only if the Bonds will continue to be rated in the ratingcategory which they originally rated by the rating agency rating such Bonds.In no event will any right to substitute Mortgage Collateral result ina diminution in the value or quality of such Mortgage Collateral. New Non-AgencyCertificates may be substituted for Non-Agency Certificates initially pledgedas Mortgage Collateral only in the event of a default, late payment orother defect in the Mortgage Collateral being replaced.4. The Company or the Owner Trustee (in the case of an Issuer Trust) willpledge all Mortgage Collateral, funds, accounts or other collateral securinga Series of Bonds to the Indenture Trustee under the related Indenturein order to secure the Bonds and such collateral will be held at all timesby the Indenture Trustee, or a custodian on behalf of the Indenture Trustee.Neither the Indenture Trustee, the custodian, if any, nor the Owner Trustee(in the case of an Issuer Trust) will be an affiliate (as the term ``affiliate''is defined in Rule 405 under the 1933 Act, 17 CFR 230.405) of the Companyor of the master servicer or originating lender of any mortgage underlyingthe Mortgage Collateral. The Indenture Trustee will be provided with afirst priority perfected security or lien interest in and to all collateralsecuring the Series of Bonds.5. Each Series of Bonds will be rated in at least the second highest bondrating category by at least one nationally recognized statistical ratingorganization that is not affiliated with the Company or the Owner Trustee(in the case of an Issuer Trust). The Bonds will not be ``redeemable securities''within the meaning of section 2(a)(32) of the 1940 Act.6. The master servicer of any mortgages underlying Non-Agency Certificatesthat are pledged as collateral will not be an affiliate of the IndentureTrustee, and, in the event that there is no master servicer, no servicerof such mortgages will be an affiliate of the Indenture Trustee. The masterservicer and servicer of such mortgages will be approved by FNMA or FHLMCas an ``eligible seller/servicer'' of conventional, residential mortgageloans. The agreement governing the servicing of such mortgages shall obligatethe servicer to provide substantially the same services with respect tothose mortgages as it is then currently required to provide in connectionwith the servicing of mortgage loans insured by FHA, guaranteed by theUnited States Veterans Administration or eligible for purchase by FNMAor FHLMC.7. No less often than annually, an independent public accountant will auditthe books and records of the Company and each Issuer Trust (including thebooks and records of each Indenture Trustee as such relate to each Seriesof Bonds) and will report that it has no exceptions to the calculationsas set forth in any statements made by the Company, each Issuer Trust andeach Indenture Trustee to the Bondholders, or that all such exceptionsare set forth in such report, and in addition will report on whether theanticipated payments of principal and interest on the Mortgage Collateralrelating to each Series of Bonds continues to be adequate to pay the principaland interest on such Bonds in accordance with their terms. Upon completion,copies of the auditor's reports will be provided to the Indenture Trustee.8. Beneficial and legal ownership of all Mortgage Collateral depositedwith the Indenture Trustee will not be transferred until such time as theIndenture Trustee releases such Mortgage Collateral from the Indenture.B. Conditions Relating to Variable Rate Bonds1. Bonds bearing interest at a variable rate will be subject to maximuminterest rates (``interest rate caps'') and may or may not have minimuminterest rates (interest rate floors). The maximum and minimum interestrates may vary from period to period, and always will be specified in therelated prospectus supplement. The cash flow generated by the related MortgageCollateral securing such Series of Bonds (together with other collateral)plus income received thereon at the assumed reinvestment rate specifiedin the related prospectus supplement will be sufficient to provide forthe full and timely payment of the Bonds of such Series (even if the interestrates on variable rate Bonds were the maximum applicable interest ratesfor each specified period).2. In addition to those mechanisms referred to in the application, theCompany or an Issuer Trust may utilize additional mechanisms to ensurethe adequacy of the Mortgage Collateral notwithstanding the issuance ofBonds bearing interest at variable rates. The Company will give the staffof the SEC notice by letter of any such additional mechanisms before theyare utilized to give the staff an opportunity to raise any questions asto their appropriateness.C. Conditions Relating to REMIC Election 1. If the Company elects to have a Series of Bonds treated as a REMIC,it will provide for the payment of administrative fees and expenses incurredin connection with the issuance of the Bonds and the administration ofthe Bonds by one of the following methods or a combination of one or moreof such methods: (a) A third party, whose credit is acceptable to the agency rating theBonds and the Indenture Trustee, will guaranty the payment of such feesand expenses;  (b) One or more reserve funds will be established to provide for the paymentof fees and expenses. In establishing such fund or funds, maximum feestypically will be projected, assuming current inflation scenarios requiredby the rating agency at the time of the issuance of the Bonds and the establishmentof such reserve funds. Thereafter, the Indenture Trustee will look solelyto such reserve funds for the payment of certain fees and expenses. Theprocedure used to calculate the anticipated level of fees and expenseswill be reasonable and will have been successfully used in the past byother issuers to calculate the amount of available funds sufficient topay administrative fees and expenses and to ensure that such funds willbe adequate to cover future administrative fees and expenses;  (c) The Bonds will be secured by Mortgage Collateral, the value of whichis in excess of the amount necessary to make payments of principal andinterest on the Bonds. Such excess or a portion thereof will be appliedto the payment of administrative fees and expenses and may be used in combinationwith any of the other methods described herein; and  (d) The owners of the beneficial or residual interests of each Series willbe personally liable pursuant to the provisions of the Indenture for thefees and expenses of the issuer with respect to such Series not otherwisepayable from one of the sources described above.  The Company will insure that the anticipated level of fees and expenseswill be more than adequately provided for regardless of which of the methodsdescribed above (which methods may be used in combination) are selectedby the Company to provide for the payment of such fees and expenses. 2. The election by the Company to be treated as a REMIC will not increasethe level of the expenses that would be incurred by the Company. Furthermore,should the Company elect for a Series of Bonds to be treated as a REMIC,all administrative fees and expenses in connection with the administrationof the Series will be paid or provided for in a manner satisfactory tothe agency rating the Bonds.D. Conditions Relating to the Transfer of Beneficial Interests 1. Applicant will sell or assign Benefical Interests only in Issuer Trustsin which the Mortgage Collateral is limited to Agency Certificates. BeneficialInterests will be sold to no more than 100 investors who are either institutionalinvestors or non-institutional investors who are ``accredited investors''as defined in Rule 501(a) under the 1933 Act. Institutional investors willhave such knowledge and experience in financial and business matters asto be able to evaluate the risks of purchasing Beneficial Interests andto understand the volatility of interest rate fluctuations as they affectthe value of mortgages, mortgage-related securities and beneficial intereststherein. Non-institutional investors will be limited to not more than 15,be required to purchase at least $200,000 of such Beneficial Interestsand will have a net worth at the time or purchase that exceeds $1,000,000(exclusive of their primary residence). Non-institutional investors willhave such knowlege and experience in financial and business matters, specificallyin the field of mortgage-related securities, as to be able to evaluatethe risk of purchasing Beneficial Interests and will have direct, personaland significant experience in making investments in mortgage-related securities.Owners of Beneficial Interests will be limited to mortgage lenders, thriftinstitutions, commerical and investment banks, savings and loan associations,pension funds, employee benefit plans, insurance companies, real estateinvestment trusts, open-end management investment companies or other institutionalor non-institutional investors as described above which customarily engagein the purchase or origination of mortgages and mortgage-related securities.Each open-end management investment company will be required to satisfyitself that any purchase of a Beneficial Interests will be incompliancewith the provisions of section 12(d)(1) of the 1940 Act.2. Each sale of a Beneficial Interest will be in a transaction exempt fromthe registration requirements of the 1933 Act under section 4(2) thereof.3. Each purchase of a Beneficial Interest will be required to representthat it is purchasing such Beneficial Interest for investment purposesand not for distribution, and that it will hold such Benefical Interestin its own name and not as nominee for undisclosed investors. 4. Each purchaser of a Beneficial Interest will agree that it will notresell such interest unless (i) the subsequent purchase would have beeneligible to purchase the Beneficial Interest directly under the terms ofCondition D(1), (ii) after the sale there would be no more than 100 holdersof Beneficial Interests, and (iii) the subsequent purchaser agrees to besubject to the same representations and undertakings as are applicableto the reselling purchaser. In addition, the Indenture relating to eachIssuer Trust will prohibit the transfer of any Beneficial Interests inany Issuer Trust if there would be more than 100 owners of Beneficial Interestsat any time. 5. No owner of a Beneficial Interest will be affiliated with the IndentureTrustee, any custodian of the Mortgage Certificates, or any agency ratingthe Bonds of the relevant Series. 6. No holder of a controlling interest in Applicant (as the term ``control''is defined in Rule 405 under the 1933 Act) will be affiliated with anycustodian of the Mortgage Certificates or any agency rating the Bonds ofthe relevant Series. 7. If the sale of Beneficial Interests results in the transfer of controlof an Issuer Trust (as the term ``control'' is defined in Rule 405 underthe 1933 Act), the relief afforded by any order granted on the applicationwould not apply to any subsequent offerings of securities by such IssuerTrust. 8. Applicant will not deposit in any Issuer Trust Mortgage Collateral witha collateral value, as determined under the Indenture, in excess of 120%of the aggregate principal amount of the related Bonds.E. Special Condition 1. If any of the equity interests in the Company are sold and such saleresults in the transfer of control (as the term ``control'' is definedin Rule 405 under the 1933 Act) of the Company, the relief afforded byany order granted on the application would not apply to subsequent Bondofferings by the Company or any Issuer Trust. For the Commission, by the Division of Investment Management, under delegatedauthority.<ITAG tagnum="6">Jonathan G. Katz,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-1522 Filed 1-23-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 8010-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>