<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89620-0027 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.6-20-89.f2.A1026</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Privacy Act of 1974, System of Records</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Department of Agriculture.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of deletions and revisions of Privacy Act Systemsof Records.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>Notice is hereby given that the United States Departmentof Agriculture (USDA) proposed to delete four notices and revise five noticesdescribing Privacy Act systems of records maintained by the Office of Financeand Management (OFM).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>This notice will be adopted without further publicationin the <T4>Federal Register </T4>on August 4, 1989, unless modified by a subsequentnotice to incorporate comments received from the public. Comments mustbe received by the contact person listed below on or before July 20, 1989,to be assured of consideration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Anita Smith, Freedom of InformationAct/Privacy Act Coordinator, OFM, USDA, New Orleans, Louisiana 70160; telephone(504) 255-5220.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>Pursuant to the Privacy Act, 5 U.S.C.552a, USDA is taking the following action: I. The following systems of records are duplications and are hereby deletedin their entirety: (1) USDA/Oandamp;F-1, ``Administrative Billings and Collections;'' (2) USDA/Oandamp;F-2, ``Travel and Transporation System;'' (3) USDA/Oandamp;F-3, ``Imprest Fund Payment System;'' (4) USDA/Oandamp;F-4, ``Uniform Allowance System;'' II. It is proposed that five systems of records maintained by OFM be revisedas follows: (1) USDA/OAS-1,2,3,4 and 5 would be redesignated as USDA/OFM-3,4,5,6 and7 due to an internal reorganization. (2) USDA/OFM-3,4,5,6 and 7, as redesignated, would be revised to: (a) Replace all references to OAS with OFM; (b) Add information on safeguards regarding on-line acces to information;(c) Provide information regarding change in the retention period for magnetictapes; (d) Add a new routine use for releasing records to agencies invovled ininvestigating, prosecuting or otherwise enforcing the law; (e) Add new routine uses concerning the release of records to the Departmentof Justice and in proceedings before a court or adjudicative body. Thesenew uses are being promulgated to address concerns expressed by the districtcourt in <T3>Krohn vs. Department of Justice</T3>, Civil No. 78-1536 (D.D.C. March19, 1984). In Krohn, an FBI routine use providing for disclosure ``duringappropriate legal proceedings'' was held to be ``vague and capable of beingconstrued so broadly as to encompass all legal proceedings * * * (and)would make disclosure as a routine use the rule rather than the exceptionand thus subvert the purposes of the (Privacy) Act.'' The new routine usesare designed to restrict the amount of information released during litigation;and (f) Add a new routine use for disclosure to a congressional office. (3) USDA/OFM-3 would be revised to add the ``claims data base'' to categoriesof records; add information concerning forwarding of data to consumer reportingagencies pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 3711(f), to debt collection agencies pursuantto 31 U.S.C. 3718, and to the Internal Revenue Service pursuant to 31 U.S.C.3720A; add a routine use for referral of information to Department of Defenseand the United States Postal Service for use in computer matches; and tomake minor changes to previously published information regarding retrievabilityand safeguarding of records. (4) USDA/OFM-4 would be revised to add to the categories of individualscovered by the system. (5) USDA/OFM-6 would be revised to reduce the categories of individualscovered by the system. A ``Report on New System,'' required by 5 U.S.C. 552a(r), as implementedby OMB Circular No. A-130, was sent to the President of the Senate, theSpeaker of the House of Representatives, and the Administrator of the Officeof Information and Regulatory Affairs of the Office of Management and Budgeton June 8, 1989.<ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, on June 8, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Clayton Yeutter,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary of Agriculture.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="66">USDA/OFM-3 </ITAG>SYSTEM NAME: Administrative Billings and Collections, USDA/OFM. SYSTEM LOCATION: National Finance Center, OFM, USDA, New Orleans, Louisiana 70160. CATEGORIES OF INDIVIDUALS COVERED BY THE SYSTEM: Individuals (including current and former USDA employees) who are indebtedto the Department for any reason. CATEGORIES OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM: This automated system establishes a master file containing the debtor'sname, address, social security number of assigned vendor number, amountof indebtedness, amount of current collection, and amount of total billing.Eventually, these records are transferred to a history file for inquiryuse. Information regarding debts subject to IRS offset, claims on traveladvances, and delinquent debtor names and social security numbers usedin computer matches with the Department of Defense and the United StatesPostal Service are kept separate from the administrative billings and collectionsdata base in a manually updated claims data base. AUTHORITY FOR MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM: 31 U.S.C. 3711 through 3719; 4 CFR Chapter II. PURPOSE: The records in this system are used to issue bills and collect funds dueto the Government in compliance with the Debt Collection Act of 1982, Pub.L. No. 97-365, 96 Stat. 1749, as amended by Pub. L. No. 98-167, 97 Stat.1104. ROUTINE USES OF RECORDS MAINTAINED IN THE SYSTEM, INCLUDING CATEGORIESOF USERS AND THE PURPOSES OF SUCH USES: (1) Referral to the appropriate agency, whether Federal, State, local orforeign, charged with the responsibility of investigating or prosecutinga violation of law, or of enforcing or implementing a statute, or rule,regulation or order issued pursuant thereto, of any record within thissystem when information available indicates a violation or potential violationof law, whether civil, criminal, or regulatory in nature, and whether arisingby general statute or particular program statute, or by rule, regulationor order issued pursuant thereto. (2) Referral to the Department of Justice when (a) the agency, or any componentthereof; or (b) any employee of the agency in his or her official capacity;or (c) any employee of the agency in his or her indvidual capacity wherethe Department of Justice has agreed to represent the employee; or (d)the United States, where the agency determines that litigation is likelyto affect the agency or any of its components, is a party to the litigationor has an interest in such litigation, and the use of such records by theDepartment of Justice is deemed by the agency to be relevant and necessaryto the litigation, providing, however, that in each case, the agency determinesthat disclosure of the records of the Department of Justice is a use ofthe information that is compatible with the purpose for which the recordswere collected. (3) Disclosure in a proceeding before a court or adjudicative body beforewhich the agency is authorized to appear, when (a) the agency, or any componentthereof; or (b) any employee of the agency in his or her official capacity;or (c) any employee of the agency in his or her individual capacity wherethe Department of Justice has agreed to represent the employee; or (d)the United States, where the agency determines that litigation is likelyto affect the agency or any of its components, is a party to the litigationor has an interest in such litigation, and the use of such records by theDepartment of Justice is deemed by the agency to be relevant and necessaryto the litigation, providing, however, that in each case, the agency determinesthat disclosure of the records to the Department of Justice is a use ofthe information that is compatible with the purpose for which the recordswere collected. (4) Disclosure may be made to a congressional office from the record ofan individual in response to an inquiry from the congressional office madeon behalf of the individual. (5) Information will be forwarded to another Federal agency when a USDAemployee accepts employment with another Federal agency. (6) Referral of information regarding indebtedness to the Defense ManpowerData Center, Department of Defense, and the United States Postal Servicefor the purpose of conducting computer matching programs to identify andlocate individuals receiving Federal salary or benefit payments and whoare delinquent in their payments of debts owed to the U.S. Government inorder to collect debts by voluntary repayment, administrative or salaryoffset procedures under the provisions of 5 U.S.C. 5514, or through collectionagencies under the provisions of 31 U.S.C. 3718. (7) Information contained in this system of records may be disclosed toa debt collection agency, when USDA determines such referral is appropriatefor collecting the debtor's account as provided for in U.S. Governmentcontracts with collection agencies executed pursuant to 31 U.S.C. 3718.(8) Where prior collection efforts have failed, the USDA will refer tothe Internal Revenue Service (IRS) information from this system of recordsconcerning past-due legally enforceable debts for offset against tax refundsthat may become due the debtors for the tax year in which referral is made,in accordnace with IRS regulation at 26 CFR 301.6402-6T, Offset of Past-dueLegally Enforceable Debt Against Overpayment, and under the authority containedin 31 U.S.C. 3720A. DISCLOSURE TO CONSUMER REPORTING AGENCIES: Information contained in this system of records may be disclosed to a consumerreporting agency in accordance with 31 U.S.C. 3711(f). POLICIES AND PRACTICES FOR STORING, RETRIEVING, ACCESSING, RETAINING, ANDDISPOSING OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM: STORING: Records are maintained on magnetic tape files, disk files, and in filefolders at the National Finance Center addressed above. RETRIEVABILITY: Records in the administrative billings and collections data base are retrievedby social security number and by name of individual; equivalent identifyingnumber in case of non-USDA employees. Records in the claims data base areretrieved by claim number. SAFEGUARDS: Magnetic tape files and disk files are kept in a locked computer room andtape library which can be accessed by authorized personnel only. File foldersare maintained in secured areas with access by authorized personnel only.Disk files are password protected to limit access to authorized personnelonly. On-line access by National Finance Center and other agency personnelis password protected. RETENTION AND DISPOSAL: Master history magnetic tapes are retained in accordance with a tape librarymanagement schedule. Manual records are transferred to the Federal RecordsCenter for storage and disposition in accordance with General ServicesAdministration regulations. SYSTEM MANAGER(S) AND ADDRESS: Director, National Finance Center, OFM, USDA, P.O. Box 60,000, New Orleans,Louisiana 70160. NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE: Any indivdiual may request information regarding this system of records,or information as to whether the system contains records pertaining tohim/her from the System Manager. A request for information pertaining toan individual should be in writing and should contain: Name, address, socialsecurity number and particulars involved (i.e., dates of claims, copiesof correspondence, etc.). RECORD ACCESS PROCEDURES: Any individual may obtain information as to the procedures for gainingaccess to a record in the system which pertains to him/her by submittinga written request to the System Manager. CONTESTING RECORD PROCEDURES: Any individual may obtain information as to the procedures for contestinga record in the system which pertains to him/her by submitting a writtenrequest to the System Manager. RECORD SOURCE CATEGORIES: Information in this system comes primarily from USDA employees, formerUSDA employees, non-USDA employees, agency claimants, and USDA or otherinvestigative personnel. <ITAG tagnum="66">USDA/OFM-4 </ITAG>SYSTEM NAME: Travel and Transportation System, USDA/OFM. SYSTEM LOCATION: National Finance Center, OFM, USDA, New Orleans, Louisiana 70160. CATEGORIES OF INDIVIDUALS COVERED BY THE SYSTEM: Individuals who have funds advanced to them for official travel use, individualswho have U.S. Government Transportation Requests assigned to them for purchasingtickets to be used for official travel, approving officials, and individualswho perform official USDA travel and are reimbursed with Government fundsare included in this system. CATEGORIES OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM: This system consists of complete files on advances to and repayments byindividuals, assignment and use of Government Transportation Requests byindividuals, and payments for official travel to individuals. AUTHORITY FOR MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM: 5 U.S.C. Chapter 57; FPMR 101-7. PURPOSE: The records in this system are used to process employee travel advancesand reimbursements and to process payments for services provided by commoncarriers. ROUTINE USES OF RECORDS MAINTAINED IN THE SYSTEM, INCLUDING CATEGORIESOF USERS AND THE PURPOSES OF SUCH USES:(1) Referral to the appropriate agency, whether Federal, State, local orforeign, charged with the responsibility of investigating or prosecutinga violation of law, or of enforcing or implementing a statute, or rule,regulation or order issued pursuant thereto, of any record within thissystem when information available indicates a violation or potential violationof law, whether civil, criminal, or regulatory in nature, and whether arisingby general statute or particular program statute, or by rule, regulationor order issued pursuant thereto.(2) Referral to the Department of Justice when (a) the agency, or any componentthereof; or (b) any employee of the agency in his or her official capacity;or (c) any employee of the agency in his or her individual capacity wherethe Department of Justice has agreed to represent the employee; or (d)the United States, where the agency determines that litigation is likelyto affect the agency or any of its components, is a party to the litigationor has an interest in such litigation, and the use of such records by theDepartment of Justice is deemed by the agency to be relevant and necessaryto the litigation, providing, however, that in each case, the agency determinesthat disclosure of the records to the Department of Justice is a use ofthe information that is compatible with the purpose for which the recordswere collected.(3) Disclosure in a proceeding before a court or adjudicative body beforewhich the agency is authorized to appear, when (a) the agency, or any componentthereof; or (b) any employee of the agency in his or her official capacity;or (c) any employee of the agency in his or her individual capacity wherethe Department of Justice has agreed to represent the employee; or (d)the United States, where the agency determines that litigation is likelyto affect the agency or any of its components, is a party to the litigationor has an interest in such litigation, and the use of such records by theDepartment of Justice is deemed by the agency to be relevant and necessaryto the litigation, providing, however, that in each case, the agency determinesthat disclosure of the records to the Department of Justice is a use ofthe information that is compatible with the purpose for which the recordswere collected.(4) Disclosure may be made to a congressional office from the record ofan individual in response to an inquiry from the congressional office madeon behalf of that individual.POLICIES AND PRACTICES FOR STORING, RETRIEVING, ACCESSING, RETAINING, ANDDISPOSING OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:STORING:Records are maintained on computer tapes, disks and in file folders atthe National Finance Center addressed above.RETRIEVABILITY:Records are retrieved by Social Security Number and by name of individual.SAFEGUARDS:Magnetic tape files and disk files are kept in a locked computer room andtape library which can be accessed by authorized personnel only. File foldersare maintained in secured areas with access by authorized personnel only.Disk files are password protected to limit access to authorized personnelonly. On-line access by National Finance Center and agency personnel ispassword protected.RETENTION AND DISPOSAL:Master history magnetic tapes are retained in accordance with a tape librarymanagement schedule. Manual records are transferred to the Federal RecordsCenter for storage and disposition in accordance with General ServicesAdministration regulations.SYSTEM MANAGER(S) AND ADDRESS:Director, National Finance Center, OFM, USDA, P.O. Box 60,000, New Orleans,Louisiana 70160.NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE:Any individual may request information regarding this system of records,or information as to whether the system contains records pertaining tohim/her from the System Manager. A request for information pertaining toan individual should be in writing and should contain: Name, address, socialsecurity number and particulars involved.RECORD ACCESS PROCEDURES:Any individual may obtain information as to the procedures for gainingaccess to a record in the system which pertains to him/her by submittinga written request to the System Manager.CONTESTING RECORD PROCEDURES:Any individual may obtain information on procedures for contesting a recordin the system that pertains to him/her by submitting a written requestto the System Manager.RECORD SOURCES CATEGORIES:Information in this system comes primarily from individuals who requestadvances prior to travel, submit Travel Vouchers for reimbursement aftertravel is performed, or request Government Transportation Requests foruse in purchasing passenger tickets. Some of the information is obtainedfrom the payroll and personnel systems maintained by the National FinanceCenter.<ITAG tagnum="66">USDA/OFM-5 </ITAG>SYSTEM NAME: Imprest Fund Payment System, USDA/OFM. SYSTEM LOCATION: National Finance Center, OFM, USDA, New Orleans, Louisiana 70160. CATEGORIES OF INDIVIDUALS COVERED BY THE SYSTEM: All USDA imprest cashiers and alternates and USDA employees designatedas chiefs of field party. CATEGORIES OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM: This automated system establishes master files containing the name, socialsecurity number, employment address and telephone, and amount of advancefor each cashier, alternate cashier, and chief of field party. It alsoincludes records of disbursements, reimbursements, accountability reportsand verification, and audit of funds. AUTHORITY FOR MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM: 31 U.S.C. 3322, and 3321; I TFM 4-3000. PURPOSE: The records in this system are used to process advances and reimbursementvouchers for imprest fund cashiers and chiefs of field parties.ROUTINE USES OF RECORDS MAINTAINED IN THE SYSTEM, INCLUDING CATEGORIESOF USERS AND THE PURPOSES OF SUCH USES: (1) Referral to the appropriate agency, whether Federal, State, local orforeign, charged with the responsibility of investigating or prosecutinga violation of law, or of enforcing or implementing a statute, or rule,regulation or order issued pursuant thereto, of any record within thissystem when information available indicates a violation or potential violationof law, whether civil, criminal, or regulatory in nature, and whether arisingby general statute or particular program statute, or by rule, regulationor order issued pursuant thereto.  (2) Referral to the Department of Justice when (a) the agency, or any componentthereof; or (b) any employee of the agency in his or her official capacity;or (c) any employee of the agency in his or her individual capacity wherethe Department of Justice has agreed to represent the employee; or (d)the United States, where the agency determines that litigation is likelyto affect the agency or any of its components, is a party to the litigationor has an interest in such litigation, and the use of such records by theDepartment of Justice is deemed by the agency to be relevant and necessaryto the litigation, providing, however, that in each case, the agency determinesthat disclosure of the records to the Department of Justice is a use ofthe information that is compatible with the purpose for which the recordswere collected.  (3) Disclosure in a proceeding before a court or adjudicative body beforewhich the agency is authorized to appear, when (a) the agency, or any componentthereof; or (b) any employee of the agency in his or her individual capacity;or (c) any employee of the agency in his or her individual capacity wherethe Department of Justice has agreed to represent the employee; or (d)the United States, where the agency determines that litigation is likelyto affect the agency or any of its components, is a party to the litigationor has an interest in such litigation, and the use of such records by theDepartment of Justice is deemed by the agency to be relevant and necessaryto the litigation, providing, however, that in each case, the agency determinesthat disclosure of the records to the Department of Justice is a use ofthe information that is compatible with the purpose for which the recordswere collected.  (4) Disclosure may be made to a congressional office from the record ofan individual in response to any inquiry from the congressional officemade on behalf of that individual.   POLICIES AND PRACTICES FOR STORING, RETRIEVING, ACCESSING, RETAINING, ANDDISPOSING OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:  STORING: Records are maintained on microfilm cartridges, magnetic tape files, diskfiles, and file folders. RETRIEVABILITY: Records are retrieved primarily by social security number of the individualcashier, alternate cashier, or chief of party; and secondarily by imprestfund number. SAFEGUARDS: Magnetic tapes files and disk files are kept in a locked computer roomand tape library which can be accessed by authorized personnel only. Filefolders are maintained in secured areas with access by authorized personnelonly. Disk files are password protected to limit access to authorized personnelonly. On-line access by National Finance Center and agency personnel ispassword protected. RETENTION AND DISPOSAL: Master history magnetic tapes are retained in accordance with a tape librarymanagement schedule. Manual records are transferred to the Federal RecordsCenter for storage and disposition in accordance with General ServicesAdministration regulations. SYSTEM MANAGER(S) AND ADDRESS: Director, National Finance Center, OFM, USDA, P.O. Box 60,000, New Orleans,Louisiana 70160. NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE: Any individual may request information regarding this system of records,or information as to whether the system contains records pertaining tohim/her from the System Manager. A request for information pertaining toan individual should be in writing and should contain: Name, address, socialsecurity number and particulars involved (i.e., date and type of documentin question, etc.).  RECORD ACCESS PROCEDURES: Any individual may obtain information as to the procedures for gainingaccess to a record in the system which pertains to him/her by submittinga written request to the System Manager. CONTESTING RECORD PROCEDURES: Any individual may obtain information on procedures for contesting a recordin the system that pertains to him/her by submitting a written requestto the System Manager. RECORD SOURCE CATEGORIES: Information in this system is derived from documents submitted by USDAagencies.<ITAG tagnum="66">USDA/OFM-6</ITAG>SYSTEM NAME: </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">Uniform Allowance System, USDA/OFM. SYSTEM LOCATION:National Finance Center, OFM, USDA, New Orleans, Louisiana 70160. CATEGORIES OF INDIVIDUALS COVERED BY THE SYSTEM: All USDA employees (except Forest Service) entitled to and receiving allowancesfor the purchase of uniforms. Forest Service employees are covered by anothersystem of records, USDA/FS-3, Uniform Allowance System, published in the<T4>Federal Register </T4>on October 20, 1986 (Vol. 51, No. 202 p. 37208).CATEGORIES OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM: This system consists of complete files on advances, accruals, and paymentsto individuals within the Department for uniform allowances. AUTHORITY FOR MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM: 5 U.S.C. 301 and 5 U.S.C. 5901 through 5903. PURPOSE: The records in this system are used to process advances, accruals, andpayments of uniform allowance. ROUTINE USES OF RECORDS MAINTAINED IN THE SYSTEM, INCLUDING CATEGORIESOF USERS AND THE PURPOSES OF SUCH USES:(1) Referral to the appropriate agency, whether Federal, State, local orforeign, charged with the responsibility of investigating or prosecutinga violation of law, or of enforcing or implementing the statute, rule,regulation or order issued pursuant thereto, of any record within thissystem when information available indicates a violation or potential violationof law, whether civil, criminal, or regulatory in nature, and whether arisingby general statute or particular program statute, or by rule, regulationor order issued pursuant thereto. (2) Referral to the Department of Justice when (a) the agency, or any componentthereof; or (b) any employee of the agency in his or her official capacity;or (c) any employee of the agency in his or her individual capacity wherethe Department of Justice has agreed to represent the employee; or (d)the United States, where the agency determines that litigation is likelyto affect the agency or any of its components, is a party to the litigationor has an interest in such litigation, and the use of such records by theDepartment of Justice is deemed by the agency to be relevant and necessaryto the litigation, providing, however, that in each case, the agency determinesthat disclosure of the records to the Department of Justice is a use ofthe information that is compatible with the purpose for which the recordswere collected. (3) Disclosure in a proceeding before a court or adjudicative body beforewhich the agency is authorized to appear, when (a) the agency, or any componentthereof; or (b) any employee of the agency in his or her official capacity;or (c) any employee of the agency in his or her individual capacity wherethe Department of Justice has agreed to represent the employee; or (d)the United States, where the agency determines that litigation is likelyto affect the agency or any of its components, is a party to the litigationor has an interest in such litigation, and the use of such records by theDepartment of Justice is deemed by the agency to be relevant and necessaryto the litigation, providing, however, that in each case, the agency determinesthat dislcosure of the records to the Department of Justice is a use ofthe information that is compatible with the purpose for which the recordswere collected. (4) Disclosure may be made to a congressional office from the record ofan individual in response to an inquiry from the congressional office madeon behalf of that individual. POLICIES AND PRACTICES FOR STORING, RETRIEVING, ACCESSING, RETAINING, ANDDISPOSING OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:Storage: Records are maintained on computer tapes, disks and in file folders atthe National Finance Center addressed above. RETRIEVABILITY: Records are indexed by name and social security number of individual employee.SAFEGUARDS: Magnetic tape files and disk files are kept in a locked computer room andtape library which can be accessed by authorized personnel only. File foldersare maintained in secured areas with access by authorized personnel only.Disk files are password protected to limit access to authorized personnel.On-line access by National Finance Center and agency personnel is passwordprotected. RETENTION AND DISPOSAL: Master history magnetic tapes are retained in accordance with a tape librarymanagement schedule. Manual records are transferred for storage and dispositionto the Federal Records Center in accordance with General Services Administrationregulations. SYSTEM MANAGER(S) AND ADDRESS: Director, National Finance Center, OFM, USDA, P.O. Box 60,000, New Orleans,Louisiana 70160. NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE:Any individual may request information regarding this system of records,or information as to whether the system contains records pertaining tohim/her from the System Manager. A request for information pertainig toan individual should be in writing and should contain: Name, address, socialsecurity number and particulars involved. RECORDS ACCESS PROCEDURES: Any individual may obtain information as to the procedures for gainingaccess to a record in the system which pertains to him/her by submittinga written request to the System Manager. CONTESTING RECORD PROCEDURES: Any individual may obtain information asto the procedures for contesting a record in the system which pertainsto him/her by submitting a request to the System Manager.RECORD SOURCECATEGORIES: Information in this system comes from USDA agency records. <ITAG tagnum="66">USDA/OFM-7</ITAG>SYSTEM NAME: SF-1099 Reporting System, USDA/OFM.SYSTEM LOCATION:National Finance Center, OFM, USDA, New Orleans, Louisiana 70160. CATEGORIES OF INDIVIDUALS COVERED BY THE SYSTEM: Individuals (excluding USDA employees) who receive payments in the formof rents, royalties, prizes or awards; individuals (excluding USDA employees)who receive payments for non-personal service contracts, commissions, orcompensation for services which are subject to SF-1099 reporting requirements.CATEGORIES OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM: The automated system establishes a master file containing the individual'sname, address, social security number (or employer identification number),ZIP code, amount of payment, and other information necessary to accuratelyidentify covered payment transactions applicable to SF-1099 reporting requirements.AUTHORITY FOR MAINTENANCE OF THE SYSTEM: 26 U.S.C. 6011 and 6109, and 26 CFR 301.6109-1. PURPOSE: The records in this system are used to accumulate payments made to individualsthat are subject to Form 1099 tax reporting. ROUTINE USES OF RECORDS MAINTAINED IN THE SYSTEM, INCLUDING CATEGORIESOF USERS AND THE PURPOSES OF SUCH USES:(1) Referral to the appropriate agency, whether Federal, State, local orforeign, charged with the responsibility of investigating or prosecutinga violation of law, or of enforcing or implementing a statute, or rule,regulation or order issued pursuant thereto, of any record within thissystem when information available indicates a violation or potential violationof law, whether civil, criminal, or regulatory in nature, and whether arisingby general statute or particular program statute, or by rule, regulationor order issued pursuant thereto. (2) Referral to the Department of Justice when (a) the agency, or any componentthereof; or (b) any employee of the agency in his or her official capacity;or (c) any employee of the agency in his or her individual capacity wherethe Department of Justice has agreed to represent the employee; or (d)the United States, where the agency determines that litigation is likelyto affect the agency or any of its components, is a party to the litigationor has an interest in such litigation, and the use of such records by theDepartment of Justice is deemed by the agency to be relevant and necessaryto the litigation, providing, however, that in each case, the agency determinesthat disclosure of the records to the Department of Justice is a use ofthe information that is compatible with the purpose for which the recordswere collected. (3) Disclosure in a proceeding before a court or adjudicative body beforewhich the agency is authorized to appear, when (a) the agency, or any componentthereof; or (b) any employee of the agency in his or her official capacity;or (c) any employee of the agency in his or her individual capacity wherethe Department of Justice has agreed to represent the employee; or (d)the United States, where the agency determines that litigation is likelyto affect the agency or any of its components, is a party to the litigationor has an interest in such litigation, and the use of such records by theDepartment of Justice is deemed by the agency to be relevant and necessaryto the litigation, providing, however, that in each case, the agency determinesthat disclosure of the records to the Department of Justice is a use ofthe information that is compatible with the purpose for which the recordswere collected. (4) Disclosure may be made to a congressional office from the record ofan individual in response to an inquiry from the congressional office madeon behalf of the individual. (5) Information from this system of records will be forwarded to the InternalRevenue Service for income tax purposes.(6) Release of information to other USDA agencies for internal processingpurposes.POLICIES AND PRACTCES FOR STORING, RETRIEVING, ACCESSING, RETAINING, ANDDISPOSING OF RECORDS IN THE SYSTEM:Storing: Records are maintained on computer tapes, disks and in file folders atthe National Finance Center addressed above. RETRIEVABILITY: Records are retrieved by social security or employee identification number.SAFEGUARDS: Magnetic tape files and disk files are kept in a locked computer room andtape library which can be accessed by authorized personnel only. File foldersare maintained in secured areas with access by authorized personnel only.Disk files are password protected to limit access to authorized personnelonly. On-line access by National Finance Center and agency personnel ispassword protected. RETENTION AND DISPOSAL: Master history magnetic tapes are retained in accordance with a tape librarymanagement schedule. Manual records are transferred to the Federal RecordsCenter for storage and disposition in accordance with General ServicesAdministration regulations. SYSTEM MANAGER(S) AND ADDRESS: Director, National Finance Center, OFM, USDA, P.O. Box 60,000, New Orleans,Louisiana 70160. NOTIFICATION PROCEDURE:Any individual may request information regarding this system of records,or information as to whether the system contains records pertaining tohim/her from the System Manager. A request for information pertaining toan individual should be in writing and should contain: Name, address, socialsecurity number and particulars involved (i.e., transaction dates, copiesof relevant transaction documentation, etc.).RECORD ACCESS PROCEDURES: Any individual may obtain information as to the procedures for gainingaccess to a record in the system which pertains to him/her by submittinga written request to the System Manager. CONTESTING RECORD PROCEDURES: Any individual may obtain information as to the procedures for contestinga record in the system which pertains to him/her by submitting a writtenrequest to the System Manager.RECORD SOURCE CATEGORIES: Information in this system comes primarily from individuals who providecovered goods or services to USDA agencies.<ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-14562 Filed 6-19-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3410-90-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>