<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89123-0091 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.1-23-89.f2.A1090</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[SWH-FRL-3507-5]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Petition for Case-By-Case Extension of the Effective Date of the LandDisposal Restrictions on Certain Spent Solvent Hazardous Wastes</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of petition.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>EPA is proposing to grant E.I. du Pont de Nemours andCo., Inc. (Du Pont) Chambers Works plant's request for an extension ofthe November 8, 1988, effective date of the land disposal restrictionsapplicable to hazardous solvent-containing sludges having less than 1%total F001-F005 solvent constituents. This action responds to a petitionsubmitted under 40 CFR 268.5 which allows any person to request the Administratorto grant, on a case-by-case basis, an extension of the applicable effectivedate based on a showing that adequate alternative treatment, recovery,or disposal capacity for the petitioner's waste cannot reasonably be madeavailable by the effective date due to circumstances beyond the person'scontrol and that the petitioner has entered into a binding contractualcommitment to construct or otherwise provide such capacity. If this proposedaction is finalized, Du Pont can continue to dispose its primary and secondaryspent solvent hazardous sludges in a minimum technology landfill at theChambers Works plant until one year from the publication date of the finalnotice but not later than November 8, 1990, without being subject to therestrictions applicable to such wastes.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>Comments on this notice must be received on or before February22, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>The public must send an original and two copies of theircomments to EPA RCRA Docket (S-2121), Office of Solid Waste (OS-333), U.S.Environmental Protection Agency, 401 M Street, SW., Washington, DC 20460.Place the Docket Number F-89-PCCN-FFFFF on your comments. The OSW docketis located at EPA RCRA Docket (Sub-basement), 401 M Street, SW., Washington,DC 20460. The docket is open from 9:00 to 4:00, Monday through Friday,except for Federal holidays. The public must make an appointment to reviewdocket materials. Call (202) 475-9327 for appointments. The public maycopy a maximum of 50 pages from any regulatory document at no cost. Additionalcopies cost $0.20 per page.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>For general information contractRCRA Hotline, Office of Solid Waste (OS-300), U.S. Environmental ProtectionAgency, 401 M Street, SW., Washington, DC 20460, (800) 424-9346 (toll-free)or (202) 282-3000 locally.For information on specific aspects of this notice contact Lisa E. Faeth,Office of Solid Waste (OS-333), U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, 401M Street, SW., Washington, DC 20460, (202) 382-4770.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>.<ITAG tagnum="84">I. Background</ITAG>A. Congressional Mandate Congress enacted the Hazardous and Solid Waste Amendments (HSWA) of 1984to amend the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA). HSWA imposesadditional responsibilities on persons managing hazardous wastes. Sections3004(d) through (g) prohibit the land disposal of certain hazardous wastesby specified dated in order to protect both human health and the environmentfor as long as the wastes remain hazardous. In particular, section 3004(e)prohibits the land disposal of F001-F005 solvent-containing hazardous wasteseffective 24 months after the enactment of HSWA, section 3004(d) prohibitsthe land disposal of liquid hazardous wastes having a pH of less than orequal to two effective 32 months after the enactment of HSWA, and section3004(g) prohibits the land disposal of at least one-third of all listedhazardous wastes (which includes K044 and K046 wastes) effective 45 monthsafter the enactment of HSWA.Under section 3004(m), wastes which meet treatment standards establishedby EPA are no longer prohibitied from land disposal. These standards mustsubstantially diminish the toxicity of the waste or substantially reducethe likelihood of migration of hazardous constituents from the waste sothat threats to human health and the environment are minimized. EPA hasinterpreted this provision to call for standards developed based on theperformance of the best demonstrated available technology.Congress recognized that adequate alternative treatment, recovery, or disposalcapacity which is protective of human health and the environment may notbe available by the applicable statutory effective dates and authorizedEPA to set effective date variances based on the earliest dates that suchcapactity will be available. Section 3004(h)(2) thus allows the Agencyto grant national variances from the statutory effective dates, not toexceed two years. Hazardous solvent-containing sluges having less than1% total F001-F005 solvent constituents at the point of initial generationwere the subject of a two-year national capacity variance. The varianceexpired November 8, 1988. Under section 3004(h)(3), EPA can grant case-by-caseextensions of the statutory deadlines for up to one year beyond the applicabledeadlines. These extensions are renewable once for up to one additionalyear. On November 7, 1986, EPA published a final rule (51 FR 40572) establishingthe regulatory framework to implement the land disposal restrictions programand promulgated regulations enacting the first phase of the program aswell as the procedures for submitting case-by-case extension petitions.B. Demonstrations Evaluated During Petition ReviewCase-by-case extension petitions must satisfy the requirements outlinedin 40 CFR 268.5. The applicant must demonstrate that adequate alternativetreatment, recovery, or disposal capacity will not be available by theapplicable effective date of the land disposal restrictions by showingthat he has made a good-faith effort to locate and contract with facilitiesnationwide to manage his waste. This demonstration also requires that thepetitioner investigate the availability of adequate alternative on-sitecapacity for his waste (40 CFR 268.5(a)(1)). The applicant must show thathe has entered into a binding contractual commitment to construct or otherwiseprovide adequate alternative treatment, recovery, or disposal capacityfor all his waste, but due to circumstances beyond his control this capacitycannot reasonably be made available by the applicable effective date ofthe land disposal restictions (40 CFR 268.5(a)(2), (3), and (4)). The petitionermust submit a schedule showing the progress which will be made towardscompleting the project to provide adequate alternate capacity by includingdates for obtaining required operating and construction permits and datesfor completing key phases of the project (40 CFR 268.5(a)(5)). The applicantalso is required to show that he has arranged for sufficient capacity tomanage the entire quantity of waste which is the subject of his petitionduring the requested extension period and to document in his applicationthe location of all sites at which the waste will be managed (40 CFR 268.5(a)(6)).During an extension period the restricted waste can be managed in a surfaceimpoundment or landfill provided the unit meets the applicable minimumtechnology (RCRA section 3004(o)) requirements of 40 CFR 268.5(h)(2) whichpertain to ground water monitoring and the installation of two or moreliners and leachate collection systems (40 CFR 268.5(a)(7)). After an applicant has been granted a case-by-case extension, the applicantis required to keep EPA informed of the progress being made towards obtainingadequate alternative treatment, recovery, or disposal capacity. Any changein the demonstrations made in the petition must be immediately reportdto the Agency (40 CFR 268.5(f)). Progress reports also have to be submittedwhich describe the progress being made towards obtaining adequate alternativecapacity, identify any delay or possible delay in developing the capacity,and describe the mitigating actions being taken in response to the event(40 CFR 268.5(g)). <ITAG tagnum="84">II. Petition</ITAG>Du Pont has petitioned EPA to grant an extension of the November 8, 1988,effective date of the land disposal restrictions applicable to certainspent solvent hazardous wastes, namely wastewater treatment sludges derivedfrom treatment of spent solvents, managed at its Chambers Works plant onthe Delaware River estuary in southern New Jersey. Prior to November 8,1988, sludges from the Chambers Works facility, other Du Pont plants, andcommercial facilities were disposed in an on-site landfill which meetsthe minimum technology requirements of section 3004(O) of RCRA. Du Ponthas indicated that, as of the November 8, 1988, effective date of the landdisposal restrictions, it stopped receipt of F001-F005 wastes from outsidesources. Du Pont is presently modifying the wastewater treatment plant(WWTP) at the facility. The company will restore and upgrade a presentlyunused carbon regeneration furnace to treat spent solvent-containing sludgeto levels below the treatment standards. EPA is proposing to grant an extensionof the effective date of the restrictions to one year from the publicationdate of the final notice but not later than November 8, 1990, for the sludge.Du Pont's petition request and supporting documentation are available inthe public docket for this rulemaking. Interested persons are invited tosubmit written data, criticisms, or opinions on the petition. All commentswill be considered by EPA and addesssed in a <T4>Federal Register </T4> notice stating the Agency's final decision togrant or deny the petition. A summary of the Du Pont petition, PetitionNumber 006, follows below. A. Petition Summary<ITAG tagnum="81">1. Waste Treatment Operations as of November 8, 1988 </ITAG>The Du Pont facility manufactures over 750 finished products which areprimarily organic chemicals. The facility treats the wastewaters from theseprocesses, wastewaters and other wastes from off-site Du Pont facilities,as well as wastewaters from commercial (i.e. non-Du Pont) sources. Priorto November 8, 1988, approximately 85% of the wastewaters manifested totreatment facilities in New Jersey were treated at the Chambers Works facility.Wastewaters from Chambers Works, other Du Pont plants, and commercial facilities,as well as ground water and landfill leachate pumped pursuant to a statecompliance order, comprised the influent to the primary treatment stepof the WWTP prior to November 8, 1988. Du Pont has informed EPA that itstopped accepting F001-F005 wastes from outside sources as of Novembler8, 1988. The flow does contain <T3>de minimis</T3> levels of F001-F005 constituents from Chambers Workswhich Du Pont claims are not listed hazardous wastes under 40 CFR 261.3(a)(2)(iv),and it does contain ground water and leachate which carry the EPA hazardouswaste numbers of the wastes disposed in the landfill in accordance with40 CFR 261.3(c)(2).\1\<NOTE/> The wastewaters have an average pH of 1.5 to 2.0 (prohibitedwastes under HSWA section 3004(d)) and presently include K044 and K046wastewaters all of which are prohibited from land disposal unless theymeet the treatment standards in 40 CFR 268.41 and 40 CFR 268.43. An unlimitedsurface impoundment located before the headworks of the treatment systemprovides overflow/surge capacity for plant wastes not subject to the landdisposal restrictions. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ Ground water and leachate contaminated with first-thirdwastes are currently covered by a court ordered stay of the August 8, 1988,land disposal restrictions. The primary treatment step of the WWTP is neutralization using lime. Aftertreatment in the primary neutralization tank the resulting solids are flocculatedand settled in the clarification system and then removed and processedthrough filter presses. Du Pont asserts that the wastewater treatment sludgefrom primary treatment meets the treatment standards for nonexplosive K046wastes and is no longer corrosive. However, the sludge does not meet thetreatment standards for F001-F005 wastes. Since Du Pont believes that theon-site spent solvent waste streams are exempt from regulation under 40CFR 261.3(a)(2)(iv), if spent solvent wastes from outside sources are divertedthe sludge will not have to meet the treatment standards for F001-F005wastes. However, if the state and the EPA regional office find that DuPont is not entitled to the claimed exemption the sludge will have to meetthe relevant treatment standards. The wastewater treatment effluent fromprimary treatment complies with the prohibition on land disposal of liquidhazardous wastes having a pH of less than or equal to two. This wastewaterstream also contains K044; however, this waste is not explosive and, therefore,meets the applicable treatment standards. The secondary treatment step of the WWTP consists of powdered activatedcarbon treatment (PACT) of the flow from the primary clarification system.In aeration tanks, biological organisms break down the organics in thestream to CO<T2>2</T2>-H<T2>2</T2>O. Powdered activated carbon is added to the aerators and allowsadsorption of complex organic compounds. Air provides oxygen and suspendsthe mixed liquor suspended solids, a mix of approximately 50/50 biomassand activated carbon. Flow from the aeration tanks is divided between parallelclarifiers in which the PACT flocculant settles and is pumped back to theaeration tanks. A portion of the flocculant is purged to maintain a constantmixed liquor suspended solids level in aeration. Wasted flocculant is returnedto the primary neutralization tank. The flocculant, secondary sludge, doesnot meet the treatment standards for F001-F005 wastes and is combined withthe primary sludge prior to disposal in the minimum technology landfill.The combined primary and secondary sludges are the subject of Du Pont'spetition. Effluent from the secondary clarifiers is commingled with non-contactcooling water in piping and discharged to the Delaware River estuary inaccordance with a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES)permit. <ITAG tagnum="81">2. Interim Waste Treatment Operations </ITAG>EPA is proposing to grant Du Pont an extension of the effective date ofthe land disposal restrictions for sludges having less than 1% total F001-F005solvent constituents on condition that the facility further explore andimplement, if practicable, certain interim waste treatment operating conditions.These modifications are expected to take one year to complete. First, DuPont is to segregate both off-site Du Pont and commercial spent solventwaste streams so that spent solvents from off-site Du Pont and commercialsources will not be introduced into the primary treatment step and thuswill not contaminate the primary sludge. These wastewaters are to be introduceddirectly into the secondary treatment aeration tanks after the pH is adjustedto meet the pH in the aerators. The primary sludge is to continue to bedisposed in the facility's minimum technology landfill. If the state andthe EPA regional office determine that the sludge is not exempt from regulation,the primary sludge may not continue to be disposed in the minimum technologylandfill, unless the relevant treatment standards are met. The portionof the flocculant from the clarifiers which is not pumped back to the aerationtanks (the secondary sludge) is not to be returned to the primary neutralizationtank. This flocculant is to be filtered and the resulting filter cake sentoff-site for incineration to meet the treatment standards for F001-F005wastes. The secondary sludge will be treated off-site until Du Pont's furnaceis operational. Effluent from the secondary clarifiers is to be commingledwith non-contact cooling water in pipes and discharged directly to theDelaware River estuary subject to NPDES permit limits. <ITAG tagnum="81">3. Future Waste Treatment Operations</ITAG>Du Pont will further modify the current wastewater treatment system byimproving and reactivating a carbon regeneration furnace which allows on-sitetreatment to regenerate carbon from wasted PACT flocculant and to incineratethe flocculant so that the incinerator residue meets the treatment standardsfor this F001-F005 solvent-containing waste. Restoration and modificationof the multi-hearth furnace will include adding two new hearth levels tothe existing furnace to provide increased system flexibility and improvedoperating control. A new waste-flocculant storage tank, new pumps, in-linegrinder, and piping will transfer wasted flocculant to the carbon regenerationfurnace. New belt filters, installed above the furnace, will remove solidsfrom the wasted flocculant (water will be returned to the WWTP). The exhaustgas leaving the furnace will be oxidized in a new afterburner/quencherand scrubbed in a new high-efficiency scrubber before discharge to theatmosphere through an existing stack. Regenerated carbon will be returnedto the aeration tanks used for PACT biotreatment. Secondary solids fromthe carbon regeneration furnace, which Du Pont believes will meet the treatmentstandards, for F001-F005 wastes, will be washed with HC1 and HF in a settlingtank, filtered, and then disposed in the secure landfill. Scrubber waterwill be recirculated. The non-minimum technology surface impoundment willbe closed and replaced by tanks.B. Petitioner's DemonstrationsDu Pont's application for an extension of the effective date of the landdisposal restrictions applicable to its spent solvent primary and secondarysludges must include a showing that it has made a good-faith effort ona nationwide basis to locate and contract for adequate alternative treatment,recovery, or disposal capacity off-site or to establish such capacity on-siteby the effective date of the restrictions. Du Pont specified that approximately94,900 tons per year (wet weight basis) of its wastewater treatment sludge(i.e. the combined sludges from primary and secondary treatment) requiretreatment. The solids are mainly calcium salts, magnesium salts, and silicacompounds contaminated with heavy metals and organic compounds. Du Ponthas submitted data to EPA which shows that the wastewater treatment sludgemeets the treatment standards for metals but not for spent solvents. Therefore,the search for treatment capacity focused on the availability of incineration.<ITAG tagnum="81">1. Incineration Capacity for Residues from Current Wastewater TreatmentOperations</ITAG>Du Pont asked ten incineration facilities located throughout the nationwhether they could treat the waste. Of these ten, only two facilities indicatedthey could accept the waste. Rollins Environmental Services, Inc., in DeerPark, Texas, initially indicated that they had capacity to treat all ofDu Pont's wastewater treatment sludge in a slagging kiln and a rotary reactor,with principal reliance on the new rotary reactor. However, Du Pont questionswhether the rotary reactor can adequately incinerate the extremely largequantity of sludge_an estimated 250 tons per day_generated by the ChambersWorks facility. Du Pont claims that the radically different design andoperation of the rotary reactor may not meet the treatment standards forthe organic constituents. Specifically, Du Pont asserts that since thisreactor recirculates hot sand, the high lime and solids content of thewaste may lead to sand recirculation problems and incomplete burn out oforganic contaminants. Hence, Du Pont maintains that Rollins does not havetreatment capacity for all of the waste. However, Rollins claims theirrotary reactor can meet the treatment standards and there is capacity forall of the waste. EPA believes that Du Pont must support its claim withresults from a trial burn.Ross Environmental Services, Inc., in Grafton, Ohio, and LWD, Inc., inClay, Kentucky, initially indicated that they have capacity for a smallportion of the waste. However, further examination determined that thesefirms are not currently permitted to incinerate this sludge, which carriesthe EPA hazardous waste numbers of the wastes disposed in the landfillin accordance with 40 CFR 261.3(c)(2). Even if the firms were permittedto incinerate this sludge, the little capacity available at the facilities,20,570 tons per year (wet weight basis) combined capacity, would not besufficient to accommodate Du Pont's sludge.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Incineration Capacity for Residues from Interim Wastewater TreatmentOperations  </ITAG>If Du Pont is granted an extension, it will be conditioned on the furtherexploration and implementation, if practicable, of the interim wastewatertreatment operating conditions. The interim operations are estimated toresult in the generation of 21,900 tons per year (wet weight basis) ofsecondary sludge for off-site incineration. At least one facility, Rollins,is believed to have capacity to treat this waste. EPA is requiring Du Pontto show, over the one year period of this extension, that the company ismaking a good-faith effort to complete necessary reconfigurations withinthe facility and to locate and contract for adequate incineration capacityto treat the secondary sludge.  <ITAG tagnum="81">3. Transport of Residues from Current Wastewater Treatment Operations </ITAG>Assuming that adequate alternative off-site treatment capacity at Rollinsis available Du Pont would have to transport the restricted waste to thefacility by railcar or truck. Neither Rollins nor Du Point currently hasa system to load and unload railcar shipments. Du Pont estimated that itwould take more than 18 months to provide such a system. Furthermore, aminimum of 130 railcars, specially lined and covered, would be needed toship the large volume of primary and secondary sludges. Du Pont determinedthat implementing the option to transport the combined primary and secondarysludges by truck would take a minimum of nine months. The company claimsthat in excess of 150 dumpster pans with waterproof lining, 130 flat bedtrailers, and four hydraulic loading and unloading devices would be neededwith procurement of the materials handling equipment alone taking in excessof six months. EPA believes that this assessment of the amount of transportcapacity needed and the time necessary to provide this capacity are reasonableestimates. Hence, EPA is currently of the opinion that Du Pont is unableto locate and contract for adequate alternative incineration capacity off-sitefor its primary and secondary sludges.  <ITAG tagnum="81">4. Transport of Residues from Interim Wastewater Treatment Operations </ITAG>If Du Pont is successful in contracting for sufficient alternative off-sitetreatment capacity for residues from its interim wastewater treatment operations,the necessary transport acquisitions will be made as part of the interimoperations.  <ITAG tagnum="81">5. Other Treatment Capacity  </ITAG>The only other on-site treatment capacity Du Pont has been consideringis stabilization, which has been evaluated since August, 1987. To datestabilization has not been demonstrated to be an effective technolgy fortreatment of organic wastes. Therefore, EPA is of the view that the companyis unable to establish adequate alternative on-site treatment capacity. In addition to demonstrating that a good-faith effort has been made toestablish or locate and contract for adequate alternative capacity to manageits waste by the effective date, Du Pont must show that it has enteredinto a binding contractual commitment to construct or otherwise providesuch capacity. All design and construction work needed to upgrade the WWTPis being done internally. The non-minimum technology surface impoundmentlocated before the headworks of the wastewater treatment system is currentlybeing replaced by tanks. Du Pont's petition includes commitments for thatreplacement in excess of $4 million to provide material, labor, equipment,tools, facilities, supplies, and services not available at Du Pont. Designof the carbon regeneration furnace upgrade and segregation system for spentsolvent wastes from outside sources is also under way. These modificationsare expected to cost $15 to $16 million. Du Pont's extension request showsthat its 1987 capital budget approves $30 million to be authorized in eachof the years 1989 and 1990 for necessary improvements required by the landdisposal restrictions program. Specific projects utilizing these fundswill be authorized no later than January, 1989. EPA is currently of theopinion that Du Pont has demonstrated that it has satisfied the requirementthat it has entered into a binding contractual commitment to upgrade theWWTP.  Du Pont was also required to demonstrate that the proposed on-site wastesegregation and upgrade of the carbon regeneration furnace could not beimplemented by the effective date of the restrictions due to reasons beyondits control. Du Pont has submitted information which indicates that changesto the WWTP have been under way since 1984. Open ditches are being replacedwith an overhead pumped conveyance system and tanks, and the surface impoundmentis being replaced with tanks. The company did, therefore, initiate activitiesat an early date to phase out dependence on land disposal in anticipationof future regulations restricting the land disposal of hazardous wastes.However, Du Pont found that due to complicated multiple-production operationsand the very large volume of waste treated, it has taken considerable timeto devise alternatives, to evaluate their ability to meet all applicablerestrictions (including those imposed under Federal and State air and waterpollution control programs), to establish priorities for projects withrespect to multiple regulatory requirements, and to integrate projectsto modify the WWTP.      Du Pont believes that the primary sludge is exempt from regulation under40 CFR 261.3(a)(2)(iv) once the off-site spent solvent waste streams aresegregated and diverted directly to the secondary treatment step. Du Pontsupports its claim that the capacity of the modified WWTP will be sufficientto manage all the secondary sludge by comparing the volume of secondarysludge the company expects to generate with the design requirements ofthe carbon regeneration furnace. Du Pont claims that the furnace is sizedto treat up to 40 tons per day of secondary sludge which is generated atan average rate of 10 to 15 tons per day (dry weight basis). The furnaceis oversized to accommodate any future increases in waste volume. The schedule for upgrading the WWTP submitted with the application spansa 75-month period from August, 1984, to October, 1990. Upgrades to theWWTP began in August, 1984, when Du Pont reached agreement with the NewJersey Department of Environmental Protection (NJDEP) on final terms andconditions of an Administrative Consent Order for eliminating all unlinedprocess wastewater ditches and surface impoundments associated with theWWTP. The schedule shows that between August, 1988, and August, 1989 (theexpiration date of the air permit for the carbon regeneration furnace),Du Pont will reapply for its air permit by submitting an application forrevisions to the permit and it is anticipated that NJDEP will grant DuPont the revised permit and all building and construction permits willbe issued. Milestone dates for completion of the various activities toupgrade the WWTP are also given. Du Pont states in its application that there is adequate capacity to manageits restricted waste during the extension period in the on-site landfillwhich meets the minimum technology requirements of 40 CFR 268.5(h)(2).The company included in its application a map documenting the locationof the minimum technology landfill. The entire quantity of restricted primaryand secondary sludge generated during the proposed extension, approximately80,000 yd \3\ per year, can be disposed in the landfill. The landfill isdivided into four areas. Area 1 was closed in late 1978. Areas 2 and 3are currently accepting wastes, and the remaining 378,000 yd \3\ of capacityis sufficient to manage the waste over the next five years. Constructionof Area 4 which started in late 1987 will provide additional capacity.Since upgrading the WWTP is expected to take two years, there is adequatecapacity to manage the restricted waste in Areas 2 and 3. The landfillis in compliance with the provisions of 40 CFR 268.5(h)(2), stipulatingthat the unit meet HSWA section 3004(o) requirements relating to groundwater monitoring and the installation of two or more liners and leachatecollection systems. C. EPA's Proposed ActionFor the reasons discussed above it appears that Du Pont's demonstrationshave satisfied all the requirements for a case-by-case extension of theeffective date of the land disposal restrictions applicable to sludgeshaving less than 1% total F001-F005 solvent constituents provided the companypursues the interim plan to segregate wastewater streams and to incineratesecondary sludge off-site. Therefore, EPA is proposing to grant an extensionof the November 8, 1988, effective date of the restrictions on hazardoussolvent-containing sludge having less than 1% total F001-F005 solvent constituents.If the extension is granted, the primary and secondary sludge, which wouldnot be prohibited from land disposal, could be disposed in the landfillover a one-year period starting from the publication date of the finalnotice but not later than November 8, 1990, while the interim plan is beingimplemented. If Du Pont obtains a case-by-case extension, it would have to submit aprogress report six months after the date the extension is granted addressingthe progress being made to modify their furnace. In addition, EPA is requestingmonthly progress reports addressing implementation of the interim plan.The Agency must also be notified of any change in the conditions specifiedin the petition. The extension remains in effect unless Du Pont fails tomake a good-faith effort to meet the schedule for completion, the Agencydenies or revokes any required permit, conditions certified in the applicationchange, or Du Pont violates any laws or regulations implemented by EPA.<ITAG tagnum="20">(Sections 1006, 2002(a), 3001, and 3004 of the Solid Waste DisposalAct, as amended by the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976,as amended (42 U.S.C. 6905, 6912(a), 6921, and 6924))</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: January 11, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Jeffery D. Denit,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Deputy Director.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-1366 Filed 1-19-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6560-50-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>