<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR891025-0070 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.10-25-89.f2.A1069</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">Health Care Financing Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[BPO-084-FNC]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Medicare Program, Data, Standards and Methodology Used To EstablishBudgets for Fiscal Intermediaries and Carriers</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY:</T2> Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA), HHS.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION:</T2> Final notice with comment period.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY:</T2> This notice describes the data, standards, and methodologythat we will use to establish fiscal intermediary and carrier budgets forfiscal year (FY) 1990. Intermediaries and carriers assist in the administrationof the Medicare program by performing numerous functions related to payingfor medical services and equipment.This notice implements section 4035(a) of the Omnibus Budget ReconciliationAct of 1987 (Pub. L. 100-203). Section 4035(a) requires us to publish forpublic comment in the Federal Register data, standards, and methodologywe will use to establish budgets for Medicare intermediaries and carriers.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE:</T2> The provisions for this notice apply to fiscal year 1990,beginning October 1, 1990. We will consider any comments on this noticereceived at the appropriate address, as provided below, by no later than5:00 p.m. on November 24, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS:</T2> Address comments in writing to:<ITAG tagnum="15">Health Care Financing Administration, Department of Health and HumanServices, Attention: BPO-84-FNC, P.O. Box 26676, Baltimore, Maryland 21207</ITAG>Due to staffing and resource limitations, we cannot accept facsimile (FAX)copies of comments.In commenting, please refer to file code BPO-84-FNC.If you prefer, you may deliver your comments to Room 309-G Hubert H. HumphreyBuilding, 200 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, DC or to Room 132,East High Rise Building, 6325 Security Boulevard, Baltimore, Maryland.Comments will be available for public inspection as they are received,beginning approximately three weeks after publication, in Room 309-G ofthe Department's office at 200 Independence Avenue, SW., Washington, DC20201, on Monday through Friday of each week from 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m.(phone 202-245-7890).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION, CONTACT:</T2> J. Thomas Hessenauer (301) 966-7542.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Background</ITAG>Under section 1816 of the Social Security Act (the Act), public or privateorganizations and agencies participate in the administration of Part Aof the Medicare program (Hospital Insurance) under agreements with theSecretary of HHS. These agencies or organizations are known as fiscal intermediaries,and they perform bill processing and benefit payment functions for theMedicare program. Most providers of services (such as hospitals, skillednursing facilities (SNFs), and home health agencies (HHAs)) submit billsto these intermediaries, which determine whether the services are coveredunder Medicare and determine correct payment amounts. The intermediariesthen make payments to the providers on behalf of the beneficiaries.Under section 1842 of the Act, the Secretary of HHS is also authorizedto enter into contracts with entities, known as carriers, to fulfill variousfunctions in the administration of Part B of the Medicare program (SupplementaryMedical Insurance). Beneficiaries, physicians, and other suppliers of servicesor supplies submit claims to these carriers. The carriers determine whetherthe services or supplies are covered under Medicare and the payment amount(usually on the basis of reasonable charges) for the services or suppliesand then make payment to the appropriate party.A. Current Fiscal Intermediary and Carrier Budget ProcessOversight of intermediary and carrier performance by HCFA is exercisedby staff of both the central office and regional office (RO). In general,national policies are addressed at the central office level, and regionaland local policies and operations are addressed by the regional offices.Communication between HCFA and the intermediaries and carriers is continuous.Established consultation workgroups, consisting of representatives of HCFAcentral office, regional offices and Medicare contractors, meet periodically.HCFA central office is responsible for developing a national contractorbudget for both Part A and Part B of the Medicare program. The budget isformulated over a 15-month period, beginning in March of the year precedingthe fiscal year to which it applies. It is formulated after input fromthe contractor community, HCFA's ROs, various central office components,several levels in the Department of HHS, and the Office of Management andBudget (OMB), prior to submittal to the President for approval and forwardingto Congress.Our past practice has involved use of the HCFA ROs in obtaining budgetestimates from the contractors. The ROs' assessment of the contractor'sneeds is reviewed during a budget level determination process based oncurrent claims processing trends, legislative mandates, administrativeinitiatives, current year performance standards and criteria, and the availabilityof funds appropriated by Congress. We subsequently allocate funding withinthese constraints.B. New LegislationSection 4035(a) of Public Law 100-203, the Omnibus Budget ReconciliationAct of 1987 (OBRA 87), amended sections 1816(c)(1) and 1842(c)(1) of theAct by requiring the Secretary to publish in the Federal Register, by nolater than September 1 before each fiscal year, the final data, standards,and methodology to be used to establish budgets for fiscal intermediariesand carriers under these sections for that fiscal year. We also are requiredto publish in the Federal Register for public comment these data, standards,and methodology.<ITAG tagnum="85">II. Overview of Fiscal Year 1990 National Medicare Contractor Budget:Data, Standards and Methodology </ITAG>The FY 1990 Medicare contractor budget request was submitted to Congressin January 1989. In order to determine the amount of the FY 1990 request,we projected a workload growth under Part A of 10 percent and under PartB of 11.7 percent. Our estimate involved the use of a regression modelthat uses the last 36 months of actual contractor workload data. For theFY 1990 projections, we used April 1988 data. These data were the latestavailable at the time. The results of the regression yielded a FY 1990workload of 83.6 million Part A bills and 463.0 million Part B claims.The regression model provides us with not only national totals, but alsoregional workload projections. Based on the projected FY 1989 unit costs for processing bills and claims,we then applied a 3.7 percent inflation factor (the economic assumptionused by the OMB based on changes to the Consumer Price and Wage Index asdeveloped by the Department of Labor). This amount is then further adjustedfor incremental workload efficiencies, cost efficiency benchmarks, savingsachieved by prior and anticipated productivity investments, and costs associatedwith new legislation. This calculation results in a new unit cost, which,when multiplied by the Part A and/or Part B workloads, shows the totalamount to be earmarked for bills and claims payment in FY 1990. A. Medicare Contractor Functional Areas The Medicare contractor budget consists of seven functional area responsibilitiesperformed by intermediaries for Part A and eight functional area responsibilitiesperformed by carriers for Part B. The functional area responsibilitiesfor Part A are: (1) Bills Payment; (2) Reconsiderations and Hearings; (3)Medicare Secondary Payer; (4) Medical Review and Utilization; (5) ProviderAudit (Desk Reviews, Field Audits and Provider Settlements); (6) ProviderReimbursement; and (7) Productivity Investments. The functional area responsibilitiesfor Part B are: (1) Claims Payment; (2) Reviews and Hearings; (3) Beneficiary/PhysicianInquiries; (4) Medical Review and Utilization Review; (5) Medicare SecondaryPayer; (6) Participating Physicians; (7) Professional Relations; and (8)Productivity Investments. These functions are funded from the HospitalInsurance (HI) and Supplementary Medical Insurance (SMI) trust funds andthe Catastrophic Health Insurance (CHI) Program. The data, standards andmethodology used in these functional areas are dicussed in section III.below. In the following national budget summary, we have combined the discussionof functional areas common to both intermediaries and carriers. However,data specific to Part A and Part B are provided under each heading. <ITAG tagnum="81">1. Bills Payment and Claims Payment </ITAG>We currently estimate the Part A workload to be 94.6 million bills in FY1990. A portion of this workload is related to anticipated increase inSNF, HHA, home IV and immunosuppressive drug claims resulting from theenactment of the CHI program. This estimate results from a workload regressionmodel that uses the last 36 months of intermediary data through April 1988with a 10 percent growth factor. Intermediaries are required by section9311 of Pub. L. 99-509, the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1986 (OBRA86), to pay 95 percent of Part A bills within 24 days of receipt. The Part B workload is currently projected at 463 million claims with a11.7 percent growth rate. All Part B claims must be processed within thesame timeframes as Part A bills, except that participating physician claimsmust be paid within 17 days of receipt. Section 4031 of OBRA 87 imposed a 14-day payment floor standard effectiveOctober 1, 1988 for Part A bills and Part B claims. This standard providesthat no payment may be made within 14 calendar days after the date thatthe bill/claim is received. Section 4031 also prohibits the Secretary fromissuing before October 1, 1990, other regulations, instructions or policiesintended to slow down Medicare payments. <ITAG tagnum="81">2. Reconsiderations (Reviews under Part B) and Hearings </ITAG>This function includes all activities related to guaranteeing due processof law as a result of contractor action (i.e., disallowances) on billsand claims. As a result of budget constraints in FY 1990, funding in thisarea has been reduced to approximately 70 percent of the FY 1989 level.Section 4032 of OBRA 1987 amended section 1816(f) of the Act to requirethat intermediaries process 75 percent of reconsiderations within 60 daysfor FY 1990. As a result of the FY 1990 funding levels, we are reevaluatingthe reconsiderations, reviews, and hearings process with an aim to furtherincrease efficiency. <ITAG tagnum="81">3. Medicare Secondary Payer </ITAG>The Medicare Secondary Payer function is the first of three initiatives(Medicare Secondary Payer (MSP), Medical Review and Utilization Review,and Provider Audit) we developed as ``Payment Safeguards'' in an attemptto safeguard the Medicare program against improper payments.The focus of the MSP initiative is to ensure that the Medicare programpays for covered care only after reimbursement from other primary insurershas been made. An intermediary and a carrier must administer the programin a manner that achieves maximum savings and cost avoidance to the Medicaretrust funds. Medicare Secondary Payer activities center on claims involving:the working aged; spousal working aged; beneficiaries with end-stage renaldisease; beneficiaries eligible for payment under automobile, medical liabilityand no-fault insurance; individuals eligible for or receiving workers compensation;and the disabled. By concentrating efforts in these key areas, the Medicareprogram has had tremendous success in recovering and reducing improperprogram payments. Medicare contractors are responsible for identifying MSP situations andaggressively pursuing the recovery of improper payments from the appropriateparty. In conjunction with the actuary, we develop specific savings goalsfor each contractor based on past performance. The standard for determining the amount of MSP funding a contractor willreceive in FY 1990 is based on savings goals, workload volumes, requiredsystems changes, and any special projects that may be assigned to contractors.We gather actual MSP claims volume, overall claims volume for the priorfiscal year, and special project data (e.g., cost of claims, amount ofsavings achieved). We compare a contractor's previous year's data to thecontractor's projections for the next fiscal year and allocate fundingin proportion to the savings goals to be achieved. Additional funding isallocated for specific projects as required. The amounts vary based onthe scope of the project, extent of systems changes if any, and workload.<ITAG tagnum="81">4. Medical Review and Utilization Review </ITAG>In addition to processing and paying claims from providers of servicesand Medicare beneficiaries, the contractors perform a medical review (MR)of claims to determine whether services were medically necessary and constitutedan appropriate level of care. Intermediaries are responsible for medical review of HHA, SNF, outpatienthospital services (excluding surgery), and other outpatient services, suchas those provided by rehabilitation facilities, rural health clinics, etc.This review assures that medical care is necessary and appropriate andthat quality medical services are delivered to Medicare beneficiaries.During FY 1990, the review of HHA and outpatient services will accountfor most of the uses of medical review resources. Medical review of allHHA provider claims will be the responsibility of regional home healthintermediaries. In FY 1990, we will continue efforts in the standard cost analysis systemdeveloped in FY 1987 to evaluate the efficiency of carrier prepayment medicalreview screens. This systematic approach is expected to yield benefitsto the medical review process, such as: (1) a current inventory of thenumber, types, and cost effectiveness of medical review screens; (2) abilityto analyze the current inventory of screens and set a framework that yieldsa high return on investment; (3) ability to target strategies for specificmedical review activities; and (4) measurement of the relative cost effectivenessof screens among different contractors. In FY 1990, we will continue to focus on prepayment review, including additionalmandatory prepayment screens. We also will continue with our efforts withpostpayment medical review.The carrier postpayment process consists of preparing profiles of providersand beneficiaries, identifying patterns of fraud and abuse, correctingprogram abuse or overutilization, preventing futher abuse in service utilizationby educating providers in acceptable norms and proper billing practices,recommending administrative action, where appropriate, and identifyingareas for the development and installation of future prepayment reviewscreens.Carriers must continue to provide support to HHS/Office of Inspector General(OIG) in developing cases of suspected fraud and abuse. This is in additionto the fraud and abuse activities that currently exist in other intermediaryand carrier functions.Intermediaries and carriers are to play a more active role in the detectionand handling of fraud and abuse cases. The primary program integrity roleof intermediaries and carriers is to identify and develop suspected fraudand abuse cases for referral to the OIG.In abuse cases, the contractors have an even greater responsibility thanin the fraud area because correction and prevention of abuse are amongtheir basic functions. In addition to other duties, contractors are requiredto establish and maintain program integrity units; conduct ongoing employeetraining on fraud and abuse goals, techniques, and control; develop guidelinesfor timely processing of all potential fraud and abuse cases; establishand maintain histories and documentation on all program integrity cases;and conduct periodic reviews to identify any patterns of potential fraudand abuse situations for particular providers.The distribution of funding is in proportion to workload, individual contractormedical review/utilization review (MR/UR) projects, and the budget constraintsbrought about by reduced funding availability.The actual and cost avoidance benefits in safeguarding program dollarsare significant. Educational encounters lead to fewer incorrect billingsand administrative cost avoidance in the form of reductions in the numberof requests for reviews and hearings. We will continue to focus on: reviewof providers with demonstrably aberrant billing and practice patterns;review of educational efforts; and development of a methodology for quantifyingthe level of program and administrative cost avoidance resulting from postpaymentmedical review activities.Carrier medical review costs will be offset by avoiding payment for medicallyunnecessary services through proper medical review/utilization review.<ITAG tagnum="81">5. Provider Audit</ITAG>In FY 1990, contractors will perform nondiscretionary audit activities,including desk reviews, and final settlements. Historically, the auditprocess has recovered millions of dollars in improper program paymentseach year.<ITAG tagnum="81">6. Provider Reimbursement (Part A only)</ITAG>In FY 1990, Medicare contractors are required to provide reimbursementservices to 25,145 health care providers. This represents an increase of6 percent over the number of providers requiring reimbursement servicesin FY 1989. Reimbursement services are required for provider-based SNFs,and HHAs in addition to ESRD facilities, comprehensive outpatient rehabilitationfacilities (CORFs), and hospices regardless of whether the provider isaudited on an annual or other basis. The budget provides for the followingactivities:andbullet; Collection of Provider Overpayments_A system must be maintainedto collect and record overpayments made to providers. In addition to collectionand recordkeeping activities, contractors will investigate and provideprofile data on uncollectible overpayment cases and provide monthly reportsto HCFA on the uncollectible accounts.andbullet; Interim Payments_Interim payment rates must be established andperiodically reviewed throughout the fiscal year for all Medicare providers.The interim rates process requires the review of provider cost and utilizationstatistics and the calculation of adjusted rates.andbullet; Consultative Services_Onsite assistance must be provided to anyprovider experiencing difficulties in preparing the cost report, preparingclaims or any other payment area.andbullet; Records and Reports_According to specific instructions from NCFA,files and records must be established and maintained by the contractorsto ensure proper payments to providers. In addition, several differentprovider cost and payment reports must be prepared and submitted quarterlyto HCFA.In determining the amount of reimbursement funding each contractor receives,we analyze provider profiles submitted by contractors. The provider profilesshow types and numbers of periodic interim payment (PIP) and non-PIP providers.We review prior periods of reimbursement funding and assess the contractor'sfuture needs based on projected provider workload and the availabilityof funds. We make every attempt to distribute funds in proportion to workload.<ITAG tagnum="81">7. Productivity Investments</ITAG>The costs of implementing new initiatives designed to improve the effectivenessof Medicare program administration are referred to as productivity investments(PIs). Productivity investments generally provide start-up funds for contractoractivities. Once these projects are operational, funding for these projectsbecomes part of the contractor's ongoing costs. The criteria for selectionof PIs to be implemented vary. For example, some PIs are required by legislationor regulatory requirements. We also fund projects that will improve administrativecost efficiency, for example, the Common Working File and Standard Systems.There is no single distribution methodology for the allocation of PI funds.After we determine the national cost of a PI, funds are divided among thecontractors based on either the contractors' cost estimates or throughHCFA derived formulas based on project specifications. Other PI initiativesrequire equal effort by all contractors regardless of size, and are, therefore,divided equally among contractors. Finally, other PI's, such as the commonworking file and standard systems, are given only to contractors that areinvolved in the specific projects.In FY 1990, we will fund the following PIs: for Part A_common working file,catastrophic health insurance systems changes, and facilities management;and for Part B_common working file, catastrophic health insurance systemschanges, physician identification, and facilities management.<ITAG tagnum="81">8. Beneficiary/Physician Inquiries</ITAG>The Medicare program is complex. It is based on many provisions requiredby law, regulations and policy dealing with entitlement, coverage of services,comprehensive payment rules, and the rights and responsibilities of beneficiaries.Since contractors are the direct link between beneficiaries, physicians,and the program, this activity includes all costs related to beneficiaryand physician and supplier inquires generated by means of telephone calls,correspondence, and personal visits, estimated to be 22.5 million FY 1990.Current contractor performance and evaluation criteria and standards requirethat inquiries be processed within 30 calendar days. For telephone inquiries,the level of service for a busy signal must equate to an ``all trunks busy''of no higher than 20 percent. All calls must be acknowledged in no morethan 20 seconds and must be handled by a telephone representative within120 seconds of acknowledgment. The standards require that 80 percent ofthe calls must be handled to completion during the initial call and thatcall backs must be made within 2 working days. These standards apply toboth toll free and local calls. The funding level for this activity inFY 1990 is to cover the anticipated costs associated with the CatastrophicHealth Insurance program.<ITAG tagnum="81">9. Participating Physicians (Part B only)</ITAG>Participating physicians are those who agree to accept assignment on allMedicare claims in return for certain incentives/benefits. All physiciansmust be given an opportunity to enroll/disenroll in the participation programannually.The participating physician program for carriers includes the followingactivities: monitoring Maximum Allowable Actual Charges (MAAC); producingand distributing Medicare Participating Physician Directory (MEDPARD);monitoring nonparticpating physicians for compliance with section 9332(d)of OBRA 1986; monitoring participating physicians; furnishing toll-freeelectronic media claims lines for participating physicians; respondingto participation related inquiries from beneficiaries in a timely and responsivemanner; enrolling participating physicians and suppliers; monitoring systemschanges for pricing screens and files related to the participating physicianprogram; and monitoring data requests (participation counts).When the Congress initially provided funding for the participation program,we identified each of the activities involved and priced each activitynationally. An algorithm was developed for distributing the funds to eachcontractor for each activity. Some algorithms distributed funds based onworkload and others based on the number of sites with systems changes.One activity was funded based on the participation rates. We then totaledthe cost of the various activities for each carrier and provided fundingaccordingly.Section 9332 of OBRA 1986 requires HCFA to pay carrier bonuses for increasingthe rate of physician participation in the Medicare program. The methodologyused to determine carrier bonuses for FY 1990 will be published in a subsequentnotice.<ITAG tagnum="81">10. Professional Relations</ITAG>The success of the Medicare program depends upon the continuing cooperationof individuals and institutions providing health care services. Carriersmust notify physicians and suppliers, in writing, of policy and procedurechanges prior to the effective dates of changes. They are to develop claimsprior to denial or reduction. Carriers must initiate regular contact withphysicians/suppliers through representative organizations. Scheduling regularand periodic training for new personnel and as part of a continuing educationprogram for previously trained staff on current Medicare coverage, reimbursement,and billing policy is required. Carriers must conduct regular meetingswith beneficiaries or their representative organizations to inform themabout the participation program. Carriers must also provide adequate telephoneservice in order to answer queries concerning claims status and processingquestions. The funding provided in FY 1990 will allow carriers to performthe above activities and others as outlined in the Medicare Carriers Manual,section 4600.<ITAG tagnum="81">11. Printing Claims Forms</ITAG>Although this activity is not among the seven contractor functional areas,it is a part of the national Medicare contractor budget. In the interestof maintaining standard formats and quality of Medicare entitlement andreport forms, intermediaries and carriers supply beneficiary enrollmentand provider cost reporting forms. The use of these forms is essentialto beneficiary notification, effective and efficient contractor operations,and other program purposes.With a steady increase in the number of beneficiaries and providers, weproject a corresponding increase in a substantial number of HCFA forms.An increase in the volume of forms equates to increased printing costsin FY 1990. However, we have decreased our base printing costs for FY 1990by $300,000 by removing the printing requirement for the survey and certificationforms.B. Contractor Unit Cost CalculationsA key step in the contractor budget process is the development of contractorunit costs for processing Part A bills and Part B claims. A factor in thedevelopment of contractor unit costs is a reduction of the unit cost basedupon the application of the cost efficiency benchmark (CEB). The CEB isone of the many adjustments used in determining the unit cost. Followingis a brief description of how we developed the CEB.For FY 1990, we revised the method for developing the CEB. We switchedto a data base comprised of efficient and effective performing cost contractors.We used the average unit cost of the intermediaries or carriers that fallinto the lower half of a unit cost ranking of those contractors in thetop 50 percent of the current FY 1988 Contractor Performance EvaluationProgram (CPEP) ranking. This results in approximately 25 percent of thecost contractors being included in the data base of efficient (low cost)and effective (satisfactory CPEP rank) performers.The CEB for FY 1990 reflects line 1 unit cost only and is the unweighted(simple) average of FY 1988 actual unit cost for those contractors selectedin the process described above.The unit cost data has been normalized for noncontrollable variables forthe contractors in the top 50 percent of the CPEP ranking. This was doneprior to ranking the cost data to determine the lower cost group. Thisprocess avoided setting an efficiency level that is possibly contingenton having (or not having) a unique characteristic. Appropriate adjustments(either + and/or ^) were then made to each contractor's unit cost for statisticallysignificant factors, such as the percent of SNF bills to the total volumeand outpatient/HHA bill mix for intermediaries, prior to ranking the costdata and selecting the lower cost group.The resulting CEB is used in determining the unit cost as described insection III. C. under Bills Payment and Claims Payment below.<ITAG tagnum="85">III. Fiscal Year 1990 National Medicare Contractor Budget: Data, Standards,and Methodology</ITAG>After the President's FY 1990 Medicare contractor budget request was submittedto the Congress in January 1989, HCFA proceeded to develop budget guidelinesto be issued to the contractors. These guidelines outline the scope ofwork that intermediaries and carriers are expected to perform during theupcoming fiscal year in each of the functional areas for which they areresponsible. In May 1989, the budget guidelines were issued to the regionaloffices. The regional offices added information pertinent to intermediariesand carriers within their own region. These final individualized guidelineswere sent to each intermediary and carrier in early June to provide themwith assistance in preparing their FY 1990 budget requests. Intermediariesand carriers must submit their budget requests to HCFA no later than sixweeks after the issuance of the budget guidelines.While intermediaries and carriers were preparing their budget requests,the Division of Contractor Financial Management within HCFA was developingpreliminary budget allocations for the functional areas based upon historicalpatterns, workload growth/inflation assumptions, and any other availableinformation. Both central office and regional office staff review intermediaryand carrier budget requests as they are submitted. Regional office staffwill discuss the differences between the intermediary and carrier requestsand the HCFA derived allocations and negotiate with each intermediary andcarrier a final, mutually acceptable budget within the limits of the fundingavailable to HCFA. The central office prepares a Financial Operating Plan(FOP) for each regional office that provides total regional funding authorityfor each functional area. The regional offices in turn prepare a Noticeof Budget Approval (NOBA) for each intermediary and carrier that providesa full year budget plan subject to quarterly cash draw limitations.A. StandardsIn May 1989, the basic scope of work, along with new and special activities,that intermediaries and carriers will be expected to perform, were describedin the budget guideline package. Intermediaries and carriers are expectedto perform the work as described in the budget guideline package and inaccordance with the standards included in the CPEP for FY 1990. For considerationin developing their initial budget requests, we issued a draft copy ofthe CPEP standards to contractors in June.B. DataIn developing the individual intermediary and carrier budgets for FY 1990,we utilized the following sources of data that contain various workloadvolumes, functional costs, and manpower information: (The basic forms thatsupply the data that are utilized in developing intermediary and carrierbudgets are the HCFA-1523/1524 and the HCFA-1565/1566.) Forms HCFA-1523/1524(a multipurpose form which serves as the Budget Request, Notice of BudgetApproval and Interim Expenditure Report); Forms HCFA-1523/1524A Scheduleof Productivity Investments and Other; Forms HCFA-1523/1524B Schedule ofCredits, EDP and Overhead; Forms HCFA-1523/1524C Schedule of Appeals; FormsHCFA-1523/1524D Schedule of MSP Costs; Forms HCFA-1525/1525A ContractorAudit Settlement Report (CASR); Schedules A, B, andamp; C; Audit PriorityMatrix; Crossover from CASR to Audit Priority Matrix; Provider ReimbursementProfile; Schedule of Providers Serviced; MSP Savings Report; MR/UR SavingsReport; Form HCFA-2580 Cost Classification Report; Form HCFA-3259 Facilitiesand Occupancy Schedule; Forms HCFA-1565/1566 Carrier Performance Report/Monthlyand Intermediary Workload Report; HCFA Actuary's Workload Estimates; OMB'sEconomic Assumption of 3.7 Percent; Incremental Workload Efficiencies;Cost Efficiency Benchmark Reduction; Savings from Prior Productivity Investments;New Legislation Costs; Regional Office Recommendations; and Contract Provisions.C. MethodologyThe Medicare contractor budget is built around the previously listed sevenmajor functions performed by intermediaries for Part A and eight majorfunctions performed by carriers for Part B.<ITAG tagnum="81">1. Bills Payments and Claims Payment</ITAG>The individual intermediary and carrier workload levels for FY 1990 (subjectto the national workload levels and approved funding) are determined bythe regional offices based upon regional forecasted totals that are derivedfrom a statistical forecasting model. We are also projecting the numberof bills/claims an intermediary and carrier expect to have pending at theend of FY 1989 using the same data. We then combine the FY 1990 receiptestimate with the anticipated end of FY 1989 pending level, and subtractthe estimated FY 1990 pending for each intermediary and carrier to establisha processed workload (i.e., Estimated FY 1990 receipts + Estimated endof FY 1989 pending ^ Estimated end of FY 1990 pending = Estimated FY 1990Processed Workload).In order to price individual contractor bill/claims workloads, we developa unit cost that is the cost of processing a single bill/claim. The individualintermediary and carrier unit costs for FY 1990 are calculated based uponunit costs (line 1 of the FY 1989 NOBA HCFA-1523/1524) in effect at thetime that we perform our computations. The calculations include increasesto recognize the cost of new legislation, and 3.7 percent for price inflation.Reductions associated with the application of the Cost Efficiency Benchmark,incremental workload efficiencies, and savings achieved from the commonworking file and other prior Productivity Investments will also be partof the formula employed in computing FY 1990 target unit costs. The regionaloffices will negotiate with intermediaries and carriers to resolve anydifferences between the HCFA target unit cost and the contractors' requestedunit costs, within the limits of the funding available to HCFA.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Reconsiderations (Reviews under Part B) and Hearings</ITAG>We will allocate funding based on the amount of dollars spent (line 2 ofthe NOBA HCFA-1523/1524C) in the prior year, adjusted for inflation andvolume. Specifically, we will adjust the previous year's costs for reconsiderationsand hearings by the percentage change in inflation, which for FY 1990 isa 3.7 percent increase (a rate that reflects productivity gains generallyfor the economy, but which may cause over/understatement of costs dependingon the productivity efficiencies experienced by the individual contractors),and for the percentage change in workload. We have revised these formsto allow us to capture more discrete workload and cost data. We will usethese data to develop budgeted costs for reconsiderations and hearingsas we do for bills payment and claims payment costs, that is, forecastedprocessed volume times unit cost. The individual intermediary and carrierbudget allocations for reconsiderations, reviews, and hearings are determinedby using the old methodology. If sufficient reliable data are collected,then we may redetermine the allocations by multiplying anticipated workloadlevels in FY 1990 times the newly developed unit cost. We will considerthe current pending workload and projected receipts for each intermediaryand carrier. The regional offices will negotiate with intermediaries andcarriers to resolve any differences between the HCFA allocations and thecontractors' requests, within the limits of the funding available to HCFA.<ITAG tagnum="81">3. Beneficiary/Provider Inquiries (Part B only)</ITAG>The prior year's cost is adjusted by the percentage change in inflation,which for FY 1990 will be a 3.7 percent increase, as well as any projectedworkload increase or decrease to establish a budgeted amount for beneficiaryand provider inquiries. We also consider special conditions unique to specificcarriers in negotiating the budget. We are now developing new reportingrequirements that will allow us to capture more discrete workload and costdata. We are beginning the year using the old budgeting methodology untilwe have sufficient reliable data under the new reporting system. We mayuse the data to develop a budgeted cost for beneficiary/provider inquiriesby multiplying forecasted processed volume times unit cost. The regionaloffices will negotiate with the carriers to resolve any differences betweenthe HCFA allocations and carriers' requests, within the limits of the fundingavailable to HCFA.<ITAG tagnum="81">4. Provider Reimbursement (Part A only)</ITAG>In determining individual intermediary budgets for reimbursement activities,we first calculate an FY 1989 unit cost using the funding included on thelatest FY 1989 NOBA (HCFA 1523/1524C) and dividing that amount of moneyby the workload reported on the Schedule of Providers Serviced (SPS) forthe same period.The SPS is a listing of all the facilities serviced by the intermediary.This report offers a more detailed description of the providers becauseit identifies them by type, bed size, and freestanding or provider-basedand whether they are paid on a periodic interim payment basis. The SPSis submitted with each initial budget request so that a part of the analysisis the comparison of the composition of the provider community servicedby the intermediary and any change reported between fiscal years. The unit cost found by dividing the amount of the FY 1989 NOBA by the workloadfrom the SPS for the same period forms the first of the ``raw'' data usedto project the FY 1990 budget. This unit cost is increased by 3.7 percent,which is the rate of inflation provided to HCFA by OMB. This adjusted unitcost is then multiplied by the FY 1990 workload as reported on the SPS.The result is then adjusted based on a review of cost documentation ofspecial initiatives. In order to resolve major differences between the intermediary's budgetrequest and the amount developed by the preceding approach, we analyzethe reimbursement profile that is an addendum to the budget request. Thisprofile shows the cost claimed by type of reimbursement activity (InterimRate Determinations, Overpayment Recoupment, Consulting Services, etc.).The regional offices will negotiate with the intermediaries to resolveany differences between the HCFA allocations and the intermediaries' requests,within the limits of the funding available to HCFA. <ITAG tagnum="81">5. Provider Audit (Part A only) </ITAG>For FY 1990, the provider audit function is divided into two major activities,desk reviews and settlements. The basic report on all audit analysis is based is the Contractor Auditingand Settlement Report (CASR) (HCFA-1525/1525A). This form provides a breakoutof audit activities and costs by type of provider as well as documentsthe savings incurred as a result of audit activity. Using this as a base,the desk review costs are developed by projecting the workload using thetotal count of providers serviced. (All cost reports must be desk reviewed.).The count of providers serviced is compared to the total shown on the Scheduleof Providers Serviced for verification. We then multiply this count bythe unit cost per desk review (developed from the latest CASR for FY 1989)to determine the cost of handling the FY 1990 workload at the FY 1989 unitcost. Settlement costs are based on the workload projected in the intermediary'sbudget request multiplied by the unit cost for settlements found in themost recent CASR for FY 1989. This will cost out the FY 1990 activity atthe FY 1989 level of expenditure. The overriding priority of all audit efforts is comprised of the specialactivities required by legislation (COBRA, OBRA). The second priority isthat all cost reports must be desk reviewed, and, to the extent possible,settled. All of the above costs are adjusted for inflation, which for FY 1990 willbe a 3.7 percent increase. The regional offices will negotiate with intermediaries to resolve anydifferences between the HCFA allocations and the intermediaries' requests,within the limits of the funding available to HCFA. <ITAG tagnum="81">6. Medicare Secondary Payer (MSP) </ITAG>We will extract data, including processed volumes, costs and program savings,from the HCFA-1523/1524D and the MSP Savings Report to determine MSP fundingallocations. In allocating the FY 1990 MSP budget to individual intermediariesand carriers, we consider (1) estimated potential savings goals by categoryand by State (e.g., working aged and spousal working aged insurance, automobile,medical liability and no-fault insurance, end-stage renal disease, disability,and workers compensation); (2) the relationship of available funds to expectedsavings among contractors; and (3) staffing mix differences, levels ofsystems sophistication, and special tasks. The regional offices will consideritem 1, 2, and 3 of this section III. C. when negotiating with intermediariesand carriers within the limits of the funding available to HCFA. <ITAG tagnum="81">7. Medical Review/Utilization Review (MR/UR) </ITAG>The individual intermediary and carrier MR/UR budgets for FY 1990 willbe calculated in three components: prepayment medical review, postpaymentactivities, and medical review policy development (carriers only). As apart of the budget guidelines, we asked intermediaries and carriers toestimate (1) the number of bills/claims to be processed by bill types,(2) the required funding, (3) staff level changes expressed in terms ofpercent of full-time equivalents, and (4) the percent of electronic dataprocessing costs attributable to MR/UR review. We will allocate to eachcontractor prepayment and postpayment medical review funding based uponthe workload that an intermediary or carrier projects will be processedunder the FY 1990 budget guidelines for medical review and the funds requestedby the intermediary or carrier to perform the reviews. Carrier budgetsfor medical review policy development are based on levels of sophisticationof carrier policy development and dissemination and the need for medicaldirection. The funding calculations for all MR/UR activities will includea 3.7 percent factor for price inflation where applicable. The regionaloffices will negotiate with intermediaries and carriers to resolve anydifferences between the HCFA allocations and the contractors' requests,within the limits of the funding available to HCFA.<ITAG tagnum="81">8. Participating Physicians (Part B only)</ITAG>In determining the individual carrier funding levels for the participatingphysician program for FY 1990, we considered the following factors: thenumber of physicians in the carrier's service area; the carrier's currentparticipation rate; the carrier's recent performance in increasing itsparticipation rate; the scope of work to be performed as outlined in thebudget guidelines; and last year's cost experience. Since participatingphysicians are eligible for free electronic media claims (EMC) lines forbilling, allowance has been made for these expenses. Carriers with lowerparticipation rates will receive greater funding for MAAC violation monitoringand monitoring of nonparticipating physicians for compliance with electivesurgery disclosure requirements. Carrier monitoring funds are allocatedbased on the nation percentage of nonparticipating physicians. All carrierswill receive the same funding amount for reporting participation statistics.Our computations of the carrier's budgets for these activities will includean allowance for price inflation. The regional offices will negotiate withthe carriers to resolve any differences between the HCFA allocations andthe carriers' requests, within the limits of the funding available to HCFA.<ITAG tagnum="81">9. Productivity Investments</ITAG>The costs of implementing legislation and new initiatives designed to improvethe effectiveness and efficiency of Medicare program administration arereferred to as Productivity Investments. Several allocation methodologieswill be employed in calculating the Productivity Investment budgets forindividual intermediaries and carriers. For those projects involving onlysingle contractors or small groups of contractors, we will allocate fundsbased upon the specifications of the particular project. For those projectsinvolving all intermediaries and/or carriers in that the costs are drivenby bill/claims volume, we will distribute the funding based upon our workloadprojections for each contractor. Finally, for those projects involvingall intermediaries and/or carriers that require equal effort regardlessof the contractor's size, we derived a standard allocation to be givento all contractors. The regional offices will negotiate with the intermediariesand carriers to resolve any differences between the HCFA allocations andthe contractors' requests, within the limits of the funding available toHCFA.<ITAG tagnum="81">10. Professional Relations</ITAG>In determining the individual carrier funding levels for the professionalrelations function for FY 1990, we considered the number of physiciansand suppliers in the carrier's service area. Distribution of funds madeavailable to HCFA for the performance of the professional relations functionby carriers is made to each carrier based upon the ratio of physiciansand suppliers in the carrier's service area to the national total of physiciansand suppliers.The sum of the preceding functions, plus printing costs, is the FY 1990national Medicare contractor budget. HCFA distributes the funding to intermediariesand carriers in accordance with the established guidelines and allocationsas previously discussed.<ITAG tagnum="85">IV. Waiver of Proposed Notice; Opportunity for Public Comment</ITAG>Section 4035(a) (1) and (2) of Public Law 100-203 provides that we publisha proposal in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> and offer the public opportunity to comment onthe data, standards and methodology that we propose to use to establishbudgets for fiscal intermediaries and carriers before we issue them asfinal. We believe that there is good cause to waive issuing a proposednotice.We have had extensive input from the involved parties, particularly contractors,as a basis for the national contractors budgets that were presented toCongress and that are the basis for the contents of this notice. This inputhas been in the form of detailed presentations by HCFA to fiscal intermediaryand carrier representative groups. Both proposed budget levels and theimpact on their organization of those levels were discussed and, in someinstances, we made modifications to our proposal based on their response.Following this, our regional offices negotiated budgets with each individualintermediary and carrier. Therefore, we find that the depth of this consultationand negotiation with the parties most affected by the content of this noticeserved the same purpose as publishing a proposed notice and publishinga further proposed notice is impracticable.This notice is the second such item required since enactment of PublicLaw 100-203. We have not made substantive changes in the data, standardsand methodologies from the prior fiscal year (see 53 FR 36495), other thannecessary updates, except in one instance_determining target unit costsfor claims. (In this instance, the contractor community has been consultedand their concerns taken into consideration.) We received no public commentson this first notice. We believe the lack of response was tied to the factthat the intermediaries and carriers make up that segment of the generalpopulation with an interest in these matters and to the thoroughness ofour effort to properly inform the affected intermediaries and carriers.Although we have not been able to meet the statutory requirement that wepublish a final notice by September 1, we have contracts with all intermediariesand carriers and budgets that have been negotiated to include the provisionsoutlined in this notice. To issue a proposal, which implies lack of finality,would introduce an element of uncertainty to an ongoing operation and wouldbe contrary to the public interest. Consistent with the requirements ofPublic Law 100-203, should revisions to budgets be made as a result ofcomments on this notice, they would be made prospectively. This would beaccomplished by negotiating any affected areas of the intermediaries' andcarriers' budgets within the level of funding made available by Congress.By doing this, we believe that we can appropriately provide adequate opportunityfor public comment concurrently with issuance of a final, rather than aproposed, notice.For the reasons identified above, we find good cause to dispense with theissuance of a proposed notice, as such notice would be impracticable, unnecessaryand contrary to the public interest. We are, therefore, issuing this finalnotice with a 30 day comment period. Because of the large number of commentswe receive on notices generally, we cannot acknowledge or respond to themindividually. However, we will consider all comments received by the datespecified in the ``DATE'' section of this notice and respond to them appropriately.<ITAG tagnum="84">V. Regulatory Impact Statement and Flexibility Analysis</ITAG>Executive Order 12291Executive Order (E.O.) 12291 requires us to prepare and publish an initialregulatory impact analysis for any final notice that meets one of the E.O.criteria for a ``major rule''; that is, that woud be likely to result in_andbullet; An annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more;andbullet; A major increase in costs or prices for consumers, individualindustries, Federal, State, or local government agencies, or geographicregions; orandbullet; Significant adverse effects on competition, employment, investment,productivity, innovation, or on the ability of United States-based enterprisesto compete with foreign-based enterprises in domestic or export markets.Also, we generally prepare a regulatory flexibility analysis that is consistentwith the Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA) (5 U.S.C. 601 through 612), unlessthe Administrator certifies that a final notice such as this would nothave a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities.For purposes of the RFA, fiscal intermediaries and carriers are not smallentities, although we treat all providers and suppliers as small entities.Additionally, section 1102(b) of the Act requires the Secretary to preparean initial regulatory impact analysis for any final notice such as thisthat may have a significant impact on the operations of a substantial numberof small rural hospitals. Such an analysis must conform to the provisionsof section 603 of the RFA. For purposes of section 1102(b) of the Act,we define a small rural hospital as a hospital with fewer than 50 bedslocated outside a Metropolitan Statistical Area.This final notice does not contain rules. Rather, the purpose of this finalnotice is to fulfill our obligation under section 4035(a) of Pub. L. 100-203to inform the public of our budgeting methodology, the data used in thebudgeting process, and the standards we expect our contractors to achieve;and to permit the public the opportunity to comment on our notice. As apurely informational document, this final notice would not promulgate anyrule or implement any policy. Nor would this final notice be a part of,or substitute for, any negotiations we intend to conduct with the intermediariesand carriers. Although the outcome of our negotiations are expected tohave beneficial effects on contractor operations and on the program (asdescribed earlier in section II.), such effects would be the result ofthese negotiations rather than as a result of this final notice. This,this document, by itself, would not produce an impact either on contractoroperations or on program activities.For these reasons (that is, this final notice does not represent an attemptat rule making, and the publishing of this final notice would have no impacton any aspect of the Medicare program), we believe that the Executive Orderwould not apply to this final notice. Therefore, we have not prepared aregulatory impact analysis.For these same reasons, we also have determined, and the Secretary certifiesthat this final notice would not have a significant impact on a substantialnumber of small entities and would not have a significant effect on theoperations of a substantial number of small rural hospitals. Therefore,we have not prepared a regulatory flexibility analysis or a regulatoryimpact analysis on small rural hospitals.D. Paperwork Reduction ActThis notice contains no information collection requirements subject toOMB approval under the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3501et. seq.).<ITAG tagnum="20">(Sec. 1102, 1816, 1842, and 1871 of the Social Security Act (42 U.S.C.1302, 1395h, 1395u, and 1395hh)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance Program No. 13.773, Medicare-HospitalInsurance Program: No. 13.774, Medicare-Supplementary Medical Insurance)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: May 16, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Louis B. Hays,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator, Health Care Financing Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-25051 Filed 10-24-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4120-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>