<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89327-0022 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.3-27-89.f2.A1021</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 57 / Monday, March 27, 1989 /Proposed Rules<ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Fish and Wildlife Service</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">50 CFR Part 20</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Migratory Bird Hunting; Proposed 1989-90 Migratory Game Bird HuntingRegulations (Preliminary)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Fish and Wildlife Service, Interior.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Proposed rulemaking.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (hereinafter the Service)proposes to establish hunting seasons, daily bag and possession limits,and shooting hours for designated groups or species of migratory game birdsin the conterminous United States, Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and theVirgin Islands during 1989-90. The Service annually prescribes migratorygame bird hunting regulations. These regulations provide hunting opportunities,a popular form of outdoor recreation, to the public and aid Federal andState governments in the management of migratory game birds. Drought, andassociated agricultural impacts, and low duck breeding populations overa period of years have led to reduced fall duck flights. Recovery is likelyto span several years and may require the continuation of restrictive huntingregulations in 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>The comment period for proposed early-season regulationsframeworks for the United States, including Alaska and Hawaii; and PuertoRico, and the Virgin Islands, will end on July 21, 1989; and for late-seasonproposals (seasons opening on or about October 1 or later) on August 28,1989. Public Hearings: Early-Season Regulations, including those for theconterminous United States, Alaska, Hawaii, Puerto Rico, and the VirginIslands_June 22, 1989, at 9 a.m.; Late-Season Regulations_August 3, 1989,at 9 a.m. Both public hearings will be held in the Auditorium, InteriorDepartment Building, 18th and C Streets, NW., Washington, DC.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>Comments and requests to testify may be mailed to Director,(FWS/MBMO), U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior,Room 634_Arlington Square, Washington, DC 20204. Comments received maybe inspected from 8 a.m. to 4 p.m. at the Office of Migratory Bird Management,U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Room 634, 4401 N. Fairfax Drive, Arlington,Virginia.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Byron K. Williams, Acting Chief,Office of Migratory Bird Management, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Departmentof the Interior, Washington, DC 20240 (703) 358-1714.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>The Fish and Wildlife Service proposesto establish hunting seasons, bag and possession limits, and shooting hoursfor migratory game birds during 1989-90 under andSection;andSection;20.101through 20.107, 20.109, and 20.110 of subpart K of 50 CFR Part 20.``Migratory game birds'' are those migratory birds so designated in conventionsbetween the United States and several foreign nations for the protectionand management of these birds. For the 1989-90 hunting season, regulationswill be proposed for certain designated members of the avian families:Anatidae (ducks, geese, brant, and swans); Columbidae (doves and pigeons);Gruidae (cranes); Rallidae (rails, coots, and moorhens and gallinules);and Scolopacidae (woodcock and snipe). These proposals are described underProposed 1989-90 Migratory Game Bird Hunting Regulations (Preliminary)in this document.<ITAG tagnum="84">Review of the Duck Situation</ITAG>Widespread drought, and agricultural impacts on wetlands in Canada andthe north-central United States led to low duck breeding populations andthe second lowest fall duck flight on record in 1988. The problem is notdue to a single year of severe drought in 1988, but the result of severalyears of repeated poor conditions. Some important breeding areas in PrairieCanada have been extremely dry since 1980. Drought has also adversely affectedimportant migration and wintering areas.Agricultural impact on marshes and surrounding habitats in Prairie Canadaaccelerated because of the drought and seriously reduced the capabilitiesof traditional Canadian prairie habitats to produce ducks. Several yearsof good climatic conditions will be required before many drought-strickenareas can recover, revegetate, and produce ducks again. However, becauseof the widespread destruction of natural wetlands and the conversion ofpotential nesting areas to agriculture, many areas once important to breedingducks have been permanently affected. This factor will influence decisionsabout waterfowl harvest management for more than a single year. Our currentwaterfowl situation underscores the importance of the North American WaterfowlManagement Plan, an international agreement of the United States and Canadaaimed at preservation and enhancement of sufficient wetlands and otherhabitats on this continent to support larger fall flights. Reduced breedingpopulations and production reflect the effects of both short and long-termstress on primary habitats.Maintenance of basic duck breeding populations is our primary objective,especially since these populations have not produced well in recent years.Further, it is likely that the impacts will persist for some time evenif weather patterns change. High harvest on populations with poor recruitmentis not in the best interest of the resource, or the future of waterfowlhunting. For these reasons, the Service established restrictive huntingseason frameworks in 1988. The substantial reductions in duck season lengths, framework dates, andbag limits, as well as delayed shooting hours, were strong measures designedto reduce hunting opportunity and harvest. Many of the premises behindspecial seasons and other mechanisms in place prior to the 1988 huntingseason were developed to allow increased harvest opportunity at a timewhen populations were judged capable of providing it. The Service feelsthat many of the regulations suppended last year are not consistent withthe current status of the duck resource. In view of the present duck populationand habitat conditions, and the likelihood of an extended recovery period,the Service proposes to continue the restrictive frameworks in 1989, includingthe suspension of selected harvest management tools and special seasonsand limits. <T3>Depending upon the actual status of waterfowl and habitat in 1989,it may be necessary to further restrict duck season framerworks. </T3>We will, however, review these framework proposals as information on habitat,breeding populations and harvest become available. Several checkpointscan be identified regarding this review. Reports on State hunting seasonsand fall and winter habital conditions presented at the winter TechnicalSection meetings will be cosidered. An assessment of the habitat-precipitationsituation on the prairie breeding grounds will be made at the end of winter(mid-March); principal breeding habitats and duck breeding populationswill be surveyed in May; harvest information from the 1988-89 season willbe available in early July; breeding ground habitat and duck productionwill be surveyed again in July and fall flight forecasts will be issuedin late July. As regulatory decisions approach, all interested parties will have accessto the same basic population and habitat information, and the Service willcontinue to support the annual process whereby Flyway Councils, throughconsultants to the Service, States, organizations and the public provideinformation that is considered in the development of regulations frameworks.<ITAG tagnum="84">Assessment of Regulatory Changes </ITAG>In recognition of the magnitude of the regulatory changes enacted in 1988the Director, in a September 1988 letter to all State Fish and Game Directors,called for a joint effort to assess the impact of the suspension of theSeptember teal season, point system, one half hour before sunrise shootinghours, and bonus duck bags, on the resource and its users. To this endthe Service stated the intent to review existing information on the useof these management tools. In addition, the Service sought a review ofthe Columbia Basin Mallard Management Unit and High Plains Management Unitby the Pacific and Central Flyways, respectively. Further, the Servicehas begun to examine the use of zones and split seasons in the managementof ducks. The Service has been assembling information on each of the suspended managementoptions and duck zones and splits. The Director's September letter alsocalled on the States to review information available to them and work throughthe Flyway Representatives to insure consideration of this added information.To date, a substantial volume of records and reports has been gatheredon the regulatory mechanisms that influence harvest. It has proved to betime-consuming to merely assemble this material. It is unclear how muchanalysis has been done on the available information and how much can bedone. For example, there are a large number of reports on zoning studiesbut much of the material is either not directly comparable or the basedata from which inferences are drawn is limited. The Service believes several steps are required to properly assess theseregulatory suspensions in 1988 and suggests the following schedule andactions to accomplish this task: 1. The Service will list the material available to date for each suspendedregulatory option prior to the Technical Section meetings in February andMarch 1989. 2. The Flyway Representatives will review the listings with the TechnicalSections in February and March 1989. 3. In discussion with the Technical Sections we well seek joint agreementon how best to accomplish a review of existing data, determine what judgementscan be made from the material at hand, and what judgement or mangementquestions require additional information. 4. Full review and assessments cannot be completed at the winter-springTechnical Section meetings. It is suggested that a reasonble schedule isto plan on compiling and distributing a report on each of the regulatoryissues identified for assessment by the end of 1989, so that evaluationmay be made before the 1990 regulations cycle. To repeat, these regulatoryissues are: a. Shooting hours.b. Point system.c. Special seasons including September teal season and bonus birds.d. Zones and splits.5. More complete information exists on the Columbia Basin and High PlainsManagement Units and review is proceeding through the Pacific and CentralFlyways. This will allow full discussion at early 1989 Technical Sectionmeetings.There is no assurance that each or any of the end of year reports willprovide definitive answers to the maangement issues raised. The reportsshould, however, guide our efforts in some areas and identify the informationneeded in other areas. The Service awaits the results of these reviewsbefore offering any proposals concerning support for, or modification of,these management options. Notice of Intention to Establish Open Seasons This notice announces the intention of the Director, U.S. Fish and WildlifeService, to establish open hunting seasons, daily bag and possession limits,and shooting hours for certain designated groups or species of migratorygame birds for 1989-90 in the contiguous United States, Alaska, Hawaii,Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands. Factors Affecting Regulations Process This is the first in a series of proposed and final rulemaking documentsfor migratory game bird hunting regulations. Proposed shooting hours andseason frameworks, including daily bag and possession limits, are set forthfor varous groups of migratory game birds for which these regulations ordinarilydo not vary signficantly year to year.The proposals set forth here and the schedule by which more detailed proposalsfor these and other species will be developed depend upon a number of factors.Among these are the times when various annual population, habitat, andharvest surveys are conducted and results are available for analysis; timesof migration and other biological considerations; and times during whichhunting may be allowed. The regulatory process for migratory game birdsis strongly influenced by the times when the best and latest informationis available for consideration in the development of regulations. For thesereasons, the overall regulations process for hunting seasons and limitsis divided into the following segments: (1) Regulations for migratory gamebirds in Alaska, Puerto Rico, the Virgin Islands, and Hawaii, and seasonsin the remainder of the United States opening prior to October 1 (earlyseasons); (2) seasons opening in the remainder of the United States aboutOctober 1 and later (late seasons) and (3) regulations for migratory gamebirds on certain Indian reservations and ceded lands. Regulations developmentfor each of the three categories will follow similar but independent schedules.Proposals relating to the harvest of migratory game birds that may be initiatedafter publication of this proposed rulemaking will be made available forpublic review in supplemental proposed rulemakings to be published in the<T4>Federal Register</T4>. Also, additional supplemental proposals willbe published for public comment in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>as population, habitat, harvest, and other informationbecomes available. Because of the late dates when certain of these data become available,it is anticipated that comment periods on some proposals will necessarilybe abbreviated. Special circumstances that limit the amount of time whichthe Service can allow for public comment are involved in the establishmentof these regulations. Specifically, two considerations compress the timein which the rulemaking process must operate: the need, on one hand, toestablish final rules at a time early enough in the summer to allow Stateagencies to adjust their licensing and regulatory mechanisms and, on theother hand, the lack before late July of current data on the status ofmost waterfowl. Publication of Regulatory Documents The establishment of migratory game bird hunting regulations in the UnitedStates involves a series of regulatory announcements published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>in accordance with the Administrative ProcedureAct. The publication of these documents is divided into three phases, asfollows: 1. Proposed rulemakings_proposals to amend Subpart K (and other subpartswhen necessary) of 50 CFR Part 20, including supplementary proposed migratorygame bird hunting regulations, and/or regulations frameworks which prescribeshooting hours, season lengths, bag and possession limits, and outsidedates within which States may make season selections. 2. Final rulemakings_frameworks. Final migratory game bird regulationsframeworks which prescribe shooting hours, season lengths, bag and possessionlimits, and outside dates within which States may make season selections.3. Final rulemakings_season selections. Amendments to the various specificsections of Subpart K (and other subparts when necessary) of 50 CFR Part20 based on the final regulations frameworks and on season selections communicatedby the States to the Service. Major steps in the 1989-90 regulatory cycle relating to public hearingsand <T4>Federal Register </T4>notifications are illustrated in the accompanyingdiagram. Dates shown relative to publication of <T4>Federal Register </T4>documents are target dates. All dates shown forframeworks and seasons in the Service's regulatory documents are inclusive.The proposed or final regulations section of this and subsequent documentsoutline hunting frameworks and guidelines that are organized under 30 headings.These headings are: 1. Shooting hours.2. Frameworks for ducks in the conterminous United States_outside dates,season length and bag limits.3. American Black Ducks.4. Wood Ducks.5. Sea Ducks.6. September Teal Seasons.7. Extra Teal Option.8. Experimental September Duck Seasons.9. Special Scaup Season.10. Extra Scaup Option.11. Mergansers.12. Canvasback and Redhead Ducks.13. Duck Zones.14. Frameworks for geese and brant in the conterminous United States_outsidedates, season length and bag limits.15. Tundra Swan.16. Sandhill Cranes.17. Coots.18. Common Moorhens and Purple Gallinules.19. Rails.20. Common Snipe.21. Woodcock.22. Band-tailed Pigeons.23. Mourning Doves.24. White-winged and White-tipped Doves.25. Migratory Bird Hunting Seasons in Alaska.26. Migratory game birds in Puerto Rico and doves and pigeons in the VirginIslands.27. Migratory game bird seasons for falconers.28. Hawaii Mourning Doves.29. Migratory bird hunting on Indian Reservations.30. Other.Subsequent documents will refer only to numbered items requiring attention.Therefore, items requiring no attention will be omitted and the remainingitem numbers will be discontinuous and appear incomplete. Non-toxic shot regulatory proposals and final regulations are publishedseparately under andSection; 20.21 of Subpart C and andSection; 20.108 of SubpartK. <ITAG tagnum="81">Objectives of the Migratory Bird Hunting Regulations </ITAG>The objectives of these annual regulations are as follows: 1. To provide an opportunity to harvest a portion of certain migratorygame bird populations by establishing legal hunting seasons. 2. To limit harvest of migratory game birds to levels compatible with theirability to maintain their populations. 3. To avoid the taking of endangered or threatened species so that theircontinued existence is not jeopardized, and their conservation is enhanced.4. To limit taking of other protected species where there is a reasonablepossibility that hunting is likely to adversely affect their populations.5. To provide equitable hunting opportunity in various parts of the countrywithin limits imposed by abundance, migration, and distribution patternsof migratory game birds. 6. To assist, at times and in specific locations, in preventing depredationson agricultural crops by migratory game birds. The management of migratory birds in North America is international inscope, and involves other nations, notably Canada and Mexico. Within theUnited States, other Federal agencies, State conservation agencies, nationaland regional conservation groups, universities, and the public providemuch support to the achievement of these objectives.Data Used in Regulatory DecisionsThe establishment of hunting regulations for migratory game birds in theUnited States during the 1989-90 season will take into consideration availablepopulation information, data from harvest surveys, and information on habitatconditions. Consideration will also be given to accumulated data and trends.The main sources of data are operational surveys conducted by the U.S.Fish and Wildlife Service in cooperation with the Canadian Wildlife Service,Direccion General de Conservacion Ecologica de los Recursos Naturales ofMexico, State and Provincial wildlife agencies, and others. The Servicewill also consider technical information provided by consultants of thefour waterfowl flyway councils. The information from these sources willbe analyzed by the Service with an opportunity for the public to reviewand provide comments on management rationales and proposed regulations,either in public hearings, by correspondence, or other communications.Various surveys are used to ascertain the status, condition, and trendsof migratory game bird populations. These include annual surveys of majorwaterfowl wintering habitats in the United States and in portions of Mexicoeach January; aerial surveys of major waterfowl production areas in theUnited States and Canada in May and early June for breeding populationdata, and again in July for production information; nationwide surveysin the United States and Canada of waterfowl hunters and the waterfowlharvest, including their geographical and temporal distributions, and species,age, and sex composition of the harvest; and band recovery information.Waterfowl breeding pair and production surveys also provide informationon the abundance, duration, and quality of water and other habitat conditionsin major production areas. Information on waterfowl populations and habitatconditions outside the aerial survey area is furnished by cooperating State,Provincial, and private agencies. Banding information provides insightinto shooting pressures sustained by migratory game bird populations underdifferent population levels and types of regulations. When viewed overmany years, information on harvests and regulations is useful for predictingapproximate harvest levels which may result from various regulations changes.Many of the surveys conducted primarily for ducks also provide informationon geese. In addition, satellite imagery is used to monitor the rate atwhich snow and ice disappear from subarctic and arctic breeding groundstraditionally used by most species and the greatest numbers of North Americangeese. Field observations of geese in the fall and winter also provideinformation on the production success of the past breeding season. Specialpopulation surveys are undertaken for many identifiable populations ofgeese throughout the year.An annual call-count survey conducted nationwide in the United States inlate May and early June provides information on the breeding populationof mourning doves. Information from past years and the current year isused to establish population trends. An annual singing-ground survey isconducted throughout the woodcock breeding range in the eastern UnitedStates and Canada. Insight into reproductive success is obtained from awing-collection survey of woodcock hunters in the United States; data fromthis survey indicates the age and sex composition of the harvest and itsgeographical and temporal distribution. Accumulated and current data areexamined for possible long-term trends in population size and productivity.Information on white-winged dove populations in Texas and the Southwestis provided by cooperating State agencies. Spring surveys of sandhill cranesare conducted annually with emphasis on the key staging area of the speciesalong the Platte River in central Nebraska and the San Luis Valley of Colorado.The Service also solicits information on these and other species from knowledgeableindividuals.Definition of FlywaysFlyways are administrative units with broad biological-ecological similaritiesfrequently used for reference in setting hunting regulations on many migratorygame birds. They are defined as follows:<T3>Atlantic Flyway: </T3>Connecticut, Delaware, Florida, Georgia, Maine,Maryland, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina,Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Vermont, Virginia, and WestVirginia.<T3>Mississippi Flyway: </T3>Alabama, Arkansas, Illinois, Indiana, Iowa,Kentucky, Louisiana, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri, Ohio,Tennessee, and Wisconsin.<T3>Central Flyway: </T3>Kansas, Nebraska, North Dakota, Oklahoma, SouthDakota, and Texas; Colorado and Wyoming east of the Continental Divide;Montana east of Hill, Chouteau, Cascade, Meagher and Park Counties; andNew Mexico east of the Continental Divide but outside the Jicarilla ApacheIndian Reservation.<T3>Pacific Flyway: </T3>Arizona, California, Idaho, Nevada, Oregon, Utah,and Washington; those portions of Colorado and Wyoming lying west of theContinental Divide; New Mexico west of the Continental Divide plus theJicarilla Apache Indian Reservation; and in Montana, the counties of Hill,Chouteau, Cascade, Meagher, and Park, and all counties west thereof. Flightsof most migratory game birds breeding or produced in Alaska are more stronglyoriented to this flyway than to the other flyways.Definitions of Mourning Dove Management UnitsMourning Dove Management Units are administrative units based upon a reasonabledelineation of independent mourning dove population segments encompassingthe principal breeding, migration, and United States wintering areas foreach population. They are used for reference in setting mourning dove huntingregulations and are defined as follows:<T3>Eastern Management Unit: </T3>Alabama, Connecticut, Delaware, Florida,Georgia, Illinois, Indiana, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Maryland, Massachusetts,Michigan, Mississippi, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New York, North Carolina,Ohio, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, Tennessee, Vermont, Virginia,West Virginia, and Wisconsin.<T3>Central Management Unit: </T3>Arkansas, Colorado, Iowa, Kansas, Minnesota,Missouri, Montana, Nebraska, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oklahoma, SouthDakota, Texas, and Wyoming.<T3>Western Management Unit: </T3>Arizona, California, Idaho, Nevada, Oregon,Utah, and Washington.Migratory Bird Hunting on Indian ReservationsIn the September 3, 1985, <T4>Federal Register </T4>(50 FR 35762), the Service implemented guidelinesfor establishing special migratory bird hunting regulations on FederalIndian reservations and ceded lands, and amended andSection; 20.110 of 50CFR Part 20 by prescribing final hunting regulations for certain tribesin past hunting seasons. The guidelines provide appropriate flexibilityfor tribal members to exercise their reserved hunting rights while ensuringthat the migratory bird resources receives necessary protection. Use ofthe guidelines is not necessary if a tribe wishes to observe the huntingregulations established in the State(s) in which the reservation is located.On February 27, 1989, (at 54 FR 8221), the Service gave notice of its intentto establish special migratory bird hunting regulations for interestedIndian tribes in the 1989-90 hunting season.<ITAG tagnum="84">Hearings</ITAG>Two public hearings pertaining to 1989-90 migratory game bird hunting regulationsare scheduled. Both meetings will be conducted in accordance with 455 DM1 of the Departmental Manual. On June 22 a public hearing will be heldat 9 o'clock in the Auditorium of the Department of the Interior Building,on C Street, between 18th and 19th Streets, NW., Washington, DC. This hearingis for the purpose of reviewing the status of mourning doves, woodcock,band-tailed pigeons, white-winged and white-tipped doves, rails, gallinulesand moorhens, common snipe, and sandhill cranes. Proposed hunting regulationswill be discussed for these species plus regulations for migratory gamebirds in Alaska, Puerto Rico, and the Virgin Islands; September teal seasonsin the Mississippi and Central Flyways; special September waterfowl seasonsin designated States; special sea duck seasons in the Atlantic Flyway,and extended falconry seasons. On August 3 a public hearing will be heldat 9 o'clock in the Auditorium of the Department of the Interior Building,address above. This hearing is for the purpose of reviewing the statusand proposed regulations for waterfowl not previously discussed at theJune 22 public hearing. The public is invited to participate in both hearings.Persons wishing to participate in these hearings should write the Director(FWS/MBMO), U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Department of the Interior,Room 634_Arlington Square, Washington, DC 20240, or telephone (703) 358-1714.Those wishing to make statements should file copies of them with the Directorbefore or during each hearing. <ITAG tagnum="84">Public Comments Solicited </ITAG>Based on the results of current migratory game bird studies and havingdue consideration of all data and views submitted by interested parties,the amendments resulting from these proposals will specify open seasons,shooting hours, and bag and possession limits for doves, pigeons, rails,gallinules and moorhens, woodcock, common snipe, cranes, and waterfowlin the contiguous United States; coots, cranes, common snipe and waterfowlin Alaska; certain migratory game birds in Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands;and mourning doves in Hawaii. The policy of the Department of the Interior is, whenever practicable,to afford the public an opportunity to participate in the rulemaking process.Accordingly, interested persons are invited to submit written comments,suggestions, or recommendations regarding the proposed amendments.Final promulgation of migratory game bird hunting regulations will takeinto consideration all comments received by the Director. Such comments,and any additional information received, may lead the Director to adoptfinal regulations differing from these proposals. Interested persons areinvited to participate in this rulemaking by submitting written commentsto the address indicated under the caption <T2>ADDRESS. </T2>Comments received on the proposed annual regulations will be availablefor public inspection during normal business hours at the Service's officein Room 634, 4401 North Fairfax Drive, Arlington, Virginia. The Servicewill consider but may not respond in detail to each comment. Specific commentperiods will be established for each of the four series of proposed rulemakings.All relevant comments will be accepted through the closing date of thelast comment period on the particular proposal under consideration. Asin the past, the Service will summarize all comments received during thecomment period and respond to them. <ITAG tagnum="84">Flyway Council Meetings </ITAG>The Service published a final rule in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>dated December 22, 1981 (46 FR 62077) which establishedcertain procedures in the development of annual migratory game bird huntingregulations. This rule, codified at 50 CFR 20, Subpart N, took effect onJanuary 21, 1982. One provision is to publish notification of meetingsof waterfowl flyway councils where Department of Interior officials willbe in attendance. In this regard, Departmental representative will be presentat the following winter meetings of the various flyway councils: Date: March 19, 1989. Altantic Flyway Council, 9:00 a.m.; Mississippi FlywayCouncil, 9:00 a.m.; Central Flyway Council, 8:30 a.m.; Pacific Flyway Council,12:00 noon; National Waterfowl Council, 3:30 p.m. The Council meetings will be held at The Omni Shoreham Hotel, Washington,DC. <ITAG tagnum="84">NEPA Consideration </ITAG>In 1975 the Service determined that the annual migratory bird hunting regulationsconstituted a major Federal action significantly affecting the qualityof the human environment under the National Environmental Policy Act of1969. Consequently, the ``Final Environmental Statement for the Issuanceof Annual Regulations Permitting the Sport Hunting of Migratory Birds (FES75-54)'' was prepared and filed with the Council on Environmental Qualityon June 6, 1975, and notice of availability was published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on June 13, 1975 (40 FR 25241). In addition,several environmental assessments have been prepared on specific matterswhich serve to supplement the material in the Final Environmental Statement(FES). These have addressed regulations for various species of migratorygame birds and hunting strategies, In 1986 the Service initiated preparationof a supplemental environmental impact statement (SEIS) on the FES. A draftSEIS was released on September 1, 1987, and public hearings were held inseveral locations across the country in mid-November. The final SEIS wascompleted, filed with the Environmental Protection Agency on June 9, 1988,and a Notice of Availability was published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on June 16, 1988 (53 FR 22582). <ITAG tagnum="84">Endangered Species Act Consideration </ITAG>Prior to issuance of the 1989-90 migratory game bird hunting regulations,consideration will be given to provisions of the Endangered Species Actof 1973, as amended, (16 U.S.C. 1531-1543; hereinafter the Act) to insurethat hunting is not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of anyspecies designated as endangered or threatened or modify or destroy itscritical habitat and is consistent with conservation programs for thosespecies. Consultations under section 7 of this Act may cause changes tobe made to proposals in this and future supplemental proposed rulemakingdocuments.<ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory Flexibility Act, Executive Order (E.O.) 12291, and thePaperwork Reduction Act</ITAG>In complying with these requirements during the 1981-82 regulatory developmentcycle, and with Office of Management and Budget concurrence, the Serviceprepared a Determination of Effects, a Preliminary Regulatory Impact Analysis(PRIA), a Final Regulatory Impact Analysis (FRIA), and a Memorandum ofLaw. For further information see the <T4>Federal Register</T4>: March 25, 1981, at 46 FR 18669; August 17, 1981,at 46 FR 41739; August 21, 1981, at 46 FR 42643; and September 18, 1981,at 46 FR 46543. The rules for the 1981-82 hunting season were determinedto be ``major,'' because the expenditures arising from these regulationsexceed $100 million annually and represent a major Federal action.An updated FRIA, focusing on waterfowl hunting, was completed by the Servicein February 1988. Preliminary economic information was utilized from the<T3>1985 National Survey of Fishing, Hunting, and Wildlife-Associated Recreation</T3>which indicated that hunters expended $1072 million for migratory birdhunting in 1985.A Determination of Effects approved by the Assistant Secretary, Fish andWildlife and Parks, on March 1, 1989, concluded that the hunting frameworkbeing proposed for 1989-90 were ``major'' rules, subject to regulatoryanalysis. In accordance with Office of Management and Budget instructions,the Service recently prepared an update of the 1981 Final Regulatory ImpactAnalysis for use in the development of the 1989-90 migratory bird huntingregulations to incorporate new economic information and waterfowl hunteractivity and harvest information from the 1986-87 season. The summary ofthe 1989 update of the 1981 FRIA follows:New information which can be compared to that appearing in the 1988 updateof the 1981 Final Regulatory Impact Analysis (FRIA) includes estimatesof the 1987 fall flight of ducks from surveyed areas, and hunter activityand harvest information from the 1987-88 hunting season. The data indicatethat the total 1987 fall flight of ducks and the fall flights in each flywaywere predicted to be slightly more than those of 1986. Because of the continuedpoor status of ducks, restrictive hunting regulations that were initiatedin 1985 were continued in 1987. Hunter numbers and hunter days decreasedslightly from the previous year, while seasonal trips per hunter remainedconstant. Continuation of the restrictive regulations that were establishedin 1985 was partly responsible for the reduced number of hunters. In spiteof the restrictive regulations, seasonal duck harvest per hunter increased.Copies of the updated FRIA are available upon request from the Office ofMigratory Bird Management, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Department ofthe Interior, Room 634_Arlington Square, 18th and C Streets, NW., Washington,DC 20240.The Department of the Interior has determined that this document is a majorrule under E.O. 12291 and certifies that this document will have a significanteconomic effect on a substantial number of small entities under the RegulatoryFlexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601 <T3>et seq</T3>.). This rule does not contain information collection requirementswhich require approval by the Office of Management and Budget under 44U.S.C. 3501 <T3>et seq</T3>.The Service plans to issue its Memorandum of Law for the migratory gamebird hunting regulations at the time the first of these rules is finalized.<ITAG tagnum="84">Authorship</ITAG>The primary author of the proposed rules on annual hunting regulationsis Morton M. Smith, Office of Migratory Bird Management, working underthe direction of Byron K. Williams, Acting Chief, (703) 358-1714.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 50 CFR Part 20</ITAG>Exports, Hunting, Imports, Transporation, Wildlife.The rules that eventually will be promulgated for the 1988-89 hunting seasonare authorized under the Migratory Bird Treaty Act, sec. 3, Pub. L. 65-186,40 Stat. 755 (16 U.S.C. 701-708h); sec. 3(h), Pub. L. 95-616, 92 Stat.3112 (16 U.S.C. 712).<ITAG tagnum="84">Proposed 1989-90 Migratory Game Bird Hunting Regulations (Preliminary)</ITAG>The following general frameworks and guidelines for hunting certain waterfowl,sandhill cranes, mourning doves, white-winged doves, white-tipped doves,Zenaida doves, scaly-naped pigeons, band-tailed pigeons, moorhens and gallinules,rails, coots, common snipe, and woodcock during the 1989-90 season areproposed. Changes or possible changes, when noted, are in relation to 1988-89final frameworks. In this respect, minor date changes due to annual variationin the calendar dates of specific days of the week, are regarded as ``nochange.'' All mentioned dates are inclusive. Where applicable, informationis provided about proposals for change already submitted to the Serviceor expected to be submitted in the near future. These and the Service'sresponses or comments follow the frameworks being proposed. Service viewson the items in this proposed rulemaking are subject to change dependingon public comments, and additional data and information that may be receivedlater.The proposed frameworks and guidelines, as compared to the 1988-89 finalframeworks, are described below:1. <T3>Shooting hours</T3>. (Change.) In 1988 hunting regulations for earlyseasons permitted shooting for all migratory game birds one-half hour beforesunrise, while late season regulations prohibited the shooting of any waterfowlbefore sunrise.In 1989-90 the Service proposes to restrict the opening of shooting hoursto sunrise and the close of shooting hours to sunset for all migratorygame birds (see numbered items that follow) except as follows:a. Shooting hours for doves and pigeons would remain one-half before sunriseto sunset.b. In all States where migratory game bird seasons fall outside the earliestduck (including sea ducks) season opening date and the latest duck seasonclosing date in the State, these migratory game birds may be taken fromone-half hour before sunrise to sunset.2. <T3>Frameworks for ducks in the conterminous United States_outside dates,season length and bag limits</T3>. (Possible change). In 1988, survey informationindicated low breeding populations and poor production. Breeding habitatwas diminished in quantity and quality by the on-going drought. The Serviceforecasted a low 1988 fall flight of ducks and estimated restrictive regulatoryframeworks designed to reduce the duck harvest by at least an additional25 percent from the average achieved during the 1985-87 period, and thusprotect breeding stock. Pending the availability of current duck population,habitat and harvest information, and the receipt of recommendations fromthe four flyway councils, specific duck framework proposals for openingand closing dates, season lengths and bag limits are deferred. Exceptionsto the regular duck-season frameworks are given in various numbered itemsthat follow.3. <T3>American black ducks</T3>. (Possible change.) Continuation of restrictiveregulations are proposed by the Service. Specific frameworks are deferreduntil after the receipt of current population and habitat data for 1989and the 1988-89 harvest data.Harvest restrictions on black ducks were generally maintained during the1988-89 hunting season as duck season lengths were reduced from 40 daysto 30 days. Although duck seasons were shortened, fewer States in the AtlanticFlyway reduced black duck hunting days within the regular duck seasonsthan in previous years. In the Mississippi Flyway, suspension of the pointsystem may have had some influence on the harvest of black ducks. The effectsof the regulatory changes in 1988 on the harvest of black ducks are notyet known. States in the Atlantic and Mississippi Flyways continue theirgoal of reducing black duck harvest by 25 percent from the 1977-81 period.The Service will consult with Canada concerning the evaluation of their5-year black duck harvest reduction project and will ask them to coordinatetheir black duck harvest plans with us.4. <T3>Wood ducks</T3>. (Possible change.) In 1988, regulations for this speciespermitted an option of an early October hunting season in the southeastwith certain limiting guidelines during which no special wood duck bagand possession limits applied. Regular season frameworks and bag limitguidelines for wood ducks similar to those of 1988 are proposed at thistime. Special seasons and limits, as well as future harvest strategies,are currently under review in the Atlantic and Mississippi Flyways andmay change upon completion of this review. An overall wood duck managementstrategy may be proposed.5. <T3>Sea ducks</T3>. (Change.) A maximum open season of 107 days for takingscoter, eider, and oldsquaw ducks is proposed, with shooting hours fromsunrise to sunset, during the period between September 15, 1989, and January20, 1990, in all coastal waters and all waters of rivers and streams seawardfrom the first upstream bridge in Maine, New Hampshire, Massachusetts,Rhode Island, Connecticut and New York; in any waters of the Atlantic Oceanand in any tidal waters of any bay which are separated by at least 1 mileof open water from any shore, island, and emergent vegetation in New Jersey,South Carolina, and Georgia; and in any waters of the Atlantic Ocean andin any tidal waters of any bay which are separated by at least 800 yardsof open water from any shore, island, and emergent vegetation in Delaware,Maryland, North Carolina, and Virginia; and provided that any such areashave been described, delineated, and designated as special sea duck huntingareas under the hunting regulations adopted by the respective States. Inall other areas of these States and in all other States in the AtlanticFlyway, sea ducks may be taken only during the regular open season forducks and they must be included in the regular duck season conventionalor point-system daily bag and possession limits.The daily bag limit is 7 and the possession limit is 14, singly or in theaggregate of these species. Within the special sea duck areas, during theregular duck season, the States may set, in addition to the regular limits,a daily bag limit of 7 and a possession limit of 14 scoter, eider, andoldsquaw ducks, singly or in the aggregate of these species.Any State desiring its sea duck season to open in September must make itsselection no later than August 9, 1989. Those States desiring their seaduck season to open after September may make their selection at the timethey select their regular waterfowl seasons.6. <T3>September teal season. </T3>(No change.) The Service proposes to continuethe suspension of the September teal season for 1989-90.7. <T3>Extra teal option</T3>. (No change.) The Service proposes to continuethe suspension of the extra teal option for 1989-90.8. <T3>Experimental September Duck Seasons</T3>. (Possible change.) The Servicedoes not propose any change in the experimental September duck seasonsin Kentucky, Tennessee and Florida at this time. These seasons were exclusivelywood duck seasons in 1988. The Service has indicated the need to reviewwood duck harvest strategies, and since current experimental Septemberduck seasons are now wood duck special seasons, they will be included inreviews of both wood duck harvest strategies and special seasons.9. <T3>Special scaup season. </T3>(No change.) The Service proposes to continuethe suspension of the special scaup seasons for 1989-90.10. <T3>Extra scaup option</T3>. (No change.) The Service proposes to continuethe suspension of the extra scaup option for 1989-90.11.<T3> Mergansers</T3>. (No change.) States in the Atlantic and MississippiFlyways may select separate bag limits for mergansers in addition to theregular duck bag limits during the regular duck season. The bag limit is5 mergansers daily and 10 in possession. Elsewhere, mergansers are includedwithin the regular daily bag and possession limits for ducks. The restrictionon hooded mergansers of 1 daily and 2 in possession is continued in theAtlantic, Mississippi, and Central Flyways.12. <T3>Canvasback and redhead ducks</T3>. (No change.) Proposed seasons andbag limits for canvasbacks and redheads are unchanged from those in effectin 1988. The season was closed nationwide for canvasbacks during the 1988-89hunting season. Redhead bag limits were 2 per day in the Atlantic and PacificFlyways and 1 per day in the Central and Mississippi Flyways. The 3-yearaverage breeding population level identified in the environmental assessment<T3>Proposed Hunting Regulations on Canvasback Ducks, 1983 </T3>will guideService actions in 1989 regarding canvasback seasons.13. <T3>Duck Zones</T3>. (Possible change.) In the March 21, 1986, <T4>Federal Register </T4>(51 FR 9862) the Service gave notice that itbelieves present duck hunting zones should not be modified and no new duckhunting zones should be initiated until some better informed judgmentsregarding their cumulative effect on the resource can be made. The issueof duck zones is currently under review by the Service in cooperation withthe 4 flyway councils.States in all flyways may split their waterfowl season into two segments.Previously, States in the Atlantic and Central Flyways, in lieu of zoning,could split their seasons for ducks or geese into three segments. Sinceit is proposed that new duck zones not be authorized, a 3-way split isalso not offered to States not presently utilizing zoning for ducks.14. <T3>Frameworks for geese and brant in the conterminous United States_outsidedates, season length and bag limits</T3>. (No change.) The Canadian WildlifeService, the four waterfowl flyway councils, State conservation agencies,and others traditionally provide population and harvest information usedin setting annual regulations for geese and brant. The midwinter survey,the past season's waterfowl harvest surveys, and satellite imagery andground studies for May and June of 1989 will provide additional information.<T3>All Flyways. </T3>Seasons and bag limits are deferred pending receiptof additional information and recommendations. No significant changes fromthose in effect in 1988-89 are anticipated at this time.15. <T3>Tundra Swan</T3>. (No change.) The following frameworks for tundraswans are proposed. In Utah, Nevada, Montana, North Dakota and South Dakota,an open season for taking a limited number of tundra swans may be selectedsubject to the following conditions:A. Except in the Central Flyway portion of Montana, the season must runconcurrently with the duck season; in the Central Flyway portion of Montana,the season must run concurrent with the goose season.B. In Utah, no more than 2,500 permits may be issued authorizing each permitteeto take 1 tundra swan.C. In Nevada, no more than 650 permits may be issued authorizing each permitteeto take 1 tundra swan in either Churchill, Lyon, or Pershing Counties.D. In Montana (Pacific Flyway portion only), no more than 500 permits maybe issued authorizing each permittee to take 1 tundra swan in either Tetonor Cascade Counties.E. In Montana (Central Flyway portion only), no more than 500 permits maybe issued authorizing each permittee to take 1 tundra swan.F. In North Dakota, no more than 1000 permits may be issued authorizingeach permittee to take 1 tundra swan. The season must run concurrentlywith the season for taking light geese.G. In South Dakota, no more than 500 permits may be issued authorizingeach permittee to take 1 tundra swan. The season must run concurrentlywith the season for taking light geese.H. In North Carolina an experimental season for taking a limited numberof tundra swans may be selected subject to the following conditions:i. The season may be 90 days and must run concurrently with the snow gooseseason.ii. The State must issue permits and obtain harvest and hunter participationdata.iii. No more than 6000 permits may be issued authorizing each permitteeto take 1 tundra swan.I. In New Jersey and Virginia an experimental season for taking tundraswans may be selected subject to the following conditions:i. The season may be 90 days and must run concurrently with the snow gooseseason.ii. The State must issue permits and obtain harvest and hunter participationdata.iii. In New Jersey no more than 200 permits and in Virginia no more than600 permits may be issued authorizing each permittee to take 1 tundra swan.J. In Alaska, in GMU22, an experimental season for taking tundra swansmay be selected subject to the following conditions:i. Season must run concurrently with the duck season.ii. The State must issue permits and obtain harvest and hunter participationdata.iii. No more than 300 permits may be issued authorizing each permitteeto take 1 tundra swan.<T3>Additional information. </T3>A tundra swan hunt plan that addressesallowable harvest and allocation of harvest of Eastern Population tundraswans is available.16. <T3>Sandhill cranes</T3>._<T3>Central Flyway</T3>_<T3>Regular seasons</T3> (No change). Pending evaluation of harvest datafrom the 1988-89 seasons, sandhill crane hunting seasons may be selectedwithin specified areas in Colorado, Kansas, Montana, North Dakota, SouthDakota, Wyoming, New Mexico, Oklahoma and Texas outside the range of theRocky Mountain Population of sandhill cranes, with no substantial changesin dates from the 1988-89 seasons. The daily bag limit will be 3 and thepossession limit 6 sandhill cranes. The provision for a Federal sandhillcrane hunting permit is continued in all of the above areas.<T3>Additional Information</T3>_In a letter from the Texas Parks and WildlifeDepartment dated January 24, 1989, that State requested an expansion ofthe area open to the taking of sandhill cranes in central and north centralTexas. The additional area is proposed to be opened to help reduce cropdepredations by cranes and to provide a limited additional recreationalopportunity. Addition of the new area would move the existing boundaryof Zone B eastward a distance ranging from about 105 miles to about 165miles, making the eastern boundary to approximately coincide with Interstate35. Season opening dates would be delayed in Zone B until December 2 (November25 in 1988) to minimize the chance of a whooping crane being in the areaduring the open sandhill crane season. The Texas request for an expansionof the sandhill crane area needs review by the Central Flyway Council.<T3>Central and Pacific Flyways</T3>_<T3>Special seasons</T3> (No change). Pending evaluation of harvest datafrom the 1988-89 seasons, sandhill crane hunting seasons within the rangeof the Rocky Mountain Population may be selected by Arizona, Colorado,Idaho, Montana, New Mexico, Utah and Wyoming subject to the following conditions:A. Outside dates are September 1-November 30, 1989; except September 1,1989-January 31, 1990, in the Hatch-Deming Zone of southwestern New Mexico.B. Season(s) in any State or zone may not exceed 30 days.C. Daily bag limits may not exceed 3, and season limits may not exceed9.D. Participants must have in their possession while hunting a valid permitissued by the appropriate State.E. Numbers of permits, areas open and season dates, protection plans forother species, and other provisions of seasons are consistent with themanagement plan and approved by the Central and Pacific Flyway Councils.17. <T3>Coots. </T3>(No change.) Within the regular duck season, States inthe Atlantic, Mississippi, and Central Flyways may permit a daily bag limitof 15 and a possession limit of 30 coots; States in the Pacific Flywaymust select their coot season to run concurrent with their duck seasonand may permit 25 coots daily and in possession, singly or in the aggregatewith gallinules.18. <T3>Common Moorhens and Purple Gallinules.</T3> (No change.) States inthe Atlantic and Mississippi Flyways may select hunting seasons of notmore than 70 days between September 1, 1989, and January 20, 1990. CentralFlyway States may select hunting seasons of not more than 70 days betweenSeptember 1, 1989 and January 21, 1990. Any State may split its moorhen/gallinuleseason without penalty. The daily bag and possession limits may not exceed15 and 30 common moorhens and purple gallinules, singly or in the aggregateof the two species, respectively. States may select moorhen/gallinule seasonsat the time they select their waterfowl seasons. In this case, daily bagand possession limits will remain the same.States in the Pacific Flyway must select their moorhen/gallinule huntingseasons to run concurrent with their duck seasons. A moorhen/gallinuleseason selected by any State or portion thereof in the Pacific Flyway maybe the same as but not exceed its waterfowl season, and the daily bag andpossession limits may not exceed 25 coots and moorhens, singly or in theaggregate of the two species.19. <T3>Rails. </T3>(No change.) The States included herein may select seasonsbetween September 1, 1989, and January 20, 1990, on clapper, king, sora,and Virginia rails as follows:The season length for all species of rails may not exceed 70 days, andany State may split its rail season into two segments without penalty.<T3>Clapper and king rails. </T3>A. In Rhode Island, Connecticut, New Jersey,Delaware, and Maryland, the daily bag and possession limits may not exceed10 and 20 clapper and king rails, respectively, singly or in the aggregateof these two species.B. In Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, Georgia, Florida, South Carolina,North Carolina, and Virginia, the daily bag and possession limits may notexceed 15 and 30 clapper and king rails, respectively, singly or in theaggregate of the two species.C. The season will remain closed on clapper and king rails in all otherStates.<T3>Sora and Virginia rails. </T3>In addition to the prescribed limitsfor clapper and king rails, daily bag and possession limits not exceeding25, singly or in the aggregate of sora and Virginia rails, may be selectedin States in the Atlantic, Mississippi, and Central Flyways, and portionsof Colorado, Montana, New Mexico, and Wyoming in the Pacific Flyway. Nohunting season is proposed for rails in the remainder of the Pacific Flyway.20. <T3>Common snipe. </T3>(No change.) States in the Atlantic, Mississippi,and Central Flyways may select hunting seasons between September 1, 1989,and February 28, 1990 not to exceed 107 days, except that in Maine, Vermont,New Hampshire, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, New York, NewJersey, Delaware, Maryland, and Virginia, the season must end no laterthan January 31. Seasons between September 1, 1989, and February 28, 1990,not exceeding 93 days, may be selected in the Pacific Flyway portions ofMontana, Wyoming, Colorado, and New Mexico.All States in the Pacific Flyway, except those portions of Colorado, Montana,New Mexico, and Wyoming in the Pacific Flyway, must select their snipeseason to run concurrently with their duck season. In these Pacific FlywayStates, except portions of the four States noted previously, it will beunlawful to take snipe when it is unlawful to take ducks.Daily bag and possession limits may not exceed 8 and 16, respectively.Any State may split its snipe season into two segments.States or portions thereof in the Atlantic, Mississippi, and Central Flywaysmay defer selection of snipe seasons until they choose their waterfowlseasons in August.21. <T3>Woodcock</T3>. (Possible change.) The Service is reviewing the effectsof February hunting of woodcock in some southern States and the zoningoption for New Jersey. These issues will be discussed with Flyway TechnicalCommittees prior to the 1989-90 hunting season.A. <T3> Central and Mississippi Flyways.</T3> States in the Central and MississippiFlyways may select hunting seasons of not more than 65 days with dailybag and possession limits of 5 and 10, respectively, to occur between September1, 1989 and February 28, 1990. States may split their woodcock season withoutpenalty. B. <T3>Atlantic Flyway.</T3> The population of woodcock in the Atlantic Flywayhas significantly declined since the 1960s. In 1985 the Service initiateda program whereby the hunting regulations for woodcock in the AtlanticFlyway were adjusted to bring harvest opportunities to a level commensuratewith the current population status. No changes in seasons and bag limitsfrom those in effect in 1988-89 are anticipated at this time pending anevaluation of the 1988 wing collection and 1989 singing ground surveys.For the 1989-90 hunting season in the Atlantic Flyway the Service proposesthe following: States in the Atlanic Flyway may select hunting seasons of not more than45 days with daily bag and possession limits of 3 and 6, respectively,to occur between October 1, 1989 and January 31, 1990. States may splittheir woodcock season without penalty. New Jersey may select North and South zone divided by State highway 70.The season in each zone may not exceed 35 days. 22. <T3>Band-tailed pigeons.</T3> (No change.)_<T3>Pacific Coast States</T3> California, Oregon, and Washington and the<T3>Nevada</T3> counties of Carson City, Douglas, Lyon, Washoe, Humboldt,Pershing, Churchill, Mineral and Storey. These States may select huntingseasons not to exceed 16 consecutive days between September 15, 1989, andthe Sunday closest to January 1, 1990. The daily bag and possession limitsmay not excceed 4 band-tailed pigeons. <T3>California</T3> may zone by selecting hunting seasons of 16 consecutivedays for each of the following two zones: A. In the counties of Apline, Butte, Del Norte, Glenn, Humboldt, Lassen,Mendocino, Modoc, Plumas, Shasta, Sierra, Siskiyou, Tehama, and Trinity;and B. The remainder of the State. <T3>Four-Corners States</T3> (Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico and Utah).These States may select hunting seasons not to exceed 30 consecutive daysbetween September 1 and November 30, 1989. The daily bag and possessionlimits may not exceed 5 and 10, respectively. The season shall be openonly in the areas delineated by the respective States in their huntingregulations. New Mexico may divide its State into a North Zone and a SouthZone along a line following U.S. Highway 60 from the Arizona State lineeast to Interstate Highway 25 at Socorro and along Interstate Highway 25from Socorro to the Texas State line. Between September 1 and November30, 1989, in the North Zone, and October 1 and November 30, 1989, in theSouth Zone; hunting seasons not to exceed 20 consecutive days in each zonemay be selected. 23. <T3>Mourning doves.</T3> (No change). Outside framework dates_September1, 1989 and January 15, 1990, except as otherwise provided. States in theEastern (EMU) and Central (CMU) Management Units were offered an optionof a season length of 70 half or full days with daily bag and possessionlimits of 12 and 24, respectively, <T3>or</T3> a season length of 60 half or full days with daily bag andpossession limits of 15 and 30, respectively. EMU and CMU States were allowedto select hunting zones without penalty and to split the season into notmore that 3 time periods. In the Western Management Unit (WMU) Idaho, Nevada,Oregon, Utah and Washington are offered not more than 30 consecutive daysbetween September 1, 1989, and January 15, 1990; and Arizona and Californiaare offered not more than 60 days to be split between 2 periods, September1-15, 1989, and November 1, 1989_January 15, 1990; bag and possession limitsare 10 and 20, respectively. The Service proposes to offer these options during the 1989-90 huntingseason, pending results of the call-count survey and receipt of additionalinformation and recommendations. <T3>Additional information.</T3> The Texas proposal for experimental white-wingedand white-tipped dove seasons will also affect mourning doves. 24. <T3>White-winged and white-tipped doves. </T3>(No change). Arizona, California,Nevada, New Mexico, and Texas may select hunting seasons between September1 and December 31, 1989, and daily bag limits as stipulated below. <T3>Arizona </T3>may select a hunting season of not more than 30 consecutivedays running concurrently with the mourning dove season (see mourning doveframeworks_WMU above). The daily bag limit may not exceed 10 mourning andwhite-winged doves in the aggregate, no more than 6 of which may be white-wingeddoves, and a possession limit twice the daily bag limit after opening day.<T3>Nevada, </T3>in the counties of Clark and Nye, and in the <T3>California </T3>counties of Imperial, Riverside, and San Bernardino,the daily bag and possession limits of mourning and white-winged dovesmay not exceed 10 and 20, respectively, singly or in the aggregate, andthe season length must conform to the mourning dove season (either a 60-daysplit season or a 30-day consecutive season as stipulated under mourningdove frameworks_WMU above). <T3>New Mexico </T3>may select a hunting season with daily bag and possessionlimits not to exceed 12 and 24 (or 15 and 30 if the 60-day option for mourningdoves is selected) white-winged and mourning doves, respectively, singlyor in the aggregate of the 2 species. Dates, limits, and hours are to conformwith those for mourning doves. <T3>Texas </T3>may select a hunting season of not more than 4 days forthe special white-winged dove area of the South Zone. The daily limit maynot exceed 10 white-winged, mourning, and white-tipped doves in the aggregate,including no more than 2 mourning doves and 2 white-tipped doves; and thepossession limit may not exceed 20 white-winged, mourning, and white-tippeddoves in the aggregate including no more than 4 mourning doves and 4 white-tippeddoves in possession. In addition, Texas may also select a hunting season of not more than 70(or 60 under the alternative) days to be held between September 1, 1989(September 20, 1989, in South Zone), and Janaury 25, 1990, and coincidingwith the mourning dove season. The daily bag limit may not exceed 12 white-winged,mourning, and white-tipped doves (or 15 under the alternative) in the aggregate,of which not more than 2 may be white-winged and not more than 2 of whichmay be white-tipped doves. The possession limit may not exceed 24 white-winged,mourning, and white-tipped doves (or 30 under the alternative) in the aggregate,of which not more than 4 may be white-winged doves and not more than 4of which may be white-tipped doves. <T3>Florida </T3>may select a white-winged dove season of not more than70 (or 60 under the alternative) days to be held between September 1, 1989,and January 15, 1990, and coinciding with the mourning dove season. Thedaily bag limit of both species in the aggregate may not exceed 12 (or15 under the alternative), of which not more than 4 may be whitewings.The possession limit of both species in the aggregate may not exceed 24(or 30 under the alternative) of which not more than 8 may be whitewings.<T3>Additional information. </T3>In a letter to the Service dated January24, 1989, the Texas Parks and Wildlife Department requested an experimentalseason that would permit an aggregate daily bag limit of 12 white-winged,mourning, and white-tipped doves to include no more than 2 white-tippeddoves during the Special 4-day white-winged dove season in Texas. Thisproposal would liberalize the aggregate bag limit from 10 to 12 and allowup to 12 mourning doves (whereas the current limit restricts the numberof mourning doves to 2). The Service requests the proposal be modifiedto include details of how the proposed experiment would be conducted andevaluated, and that the proposal be reviewed by Central Flyway Council.25. <T3>Migratory bird hunting seasons in Alaska. </T3>(Change.) Proposed Frameworks for Selecting Open Season Dates for Hunting MigratoryBirds in Alaska, 1989-90 <T3>Outside Dates: </T3>Between September 1, 1989, and January 26, 1990,Alaska may select seasons on waterfowl, snipe, and sandhill cranes, subjectto the following limitations: <T3>Shooting Hours: </T3>Sunrise to sunset daily. <T3>Hunting Seasons</T3>: <T3>Ducks, geese, and brant_</T3>Not more than 107 consecutive days forducks, geese and brant in each of the following: North Zone (State GameManagement Units 11-13 and 17-26); Gulf Coast Zone (State Game ManagementUnits 5-7, 9, 14-16, and 10_Unimak Island only); Southeast Zone (StateGame Management Units 1-4); Pribilof and Aleutian Islands Zone (State GameManagement Unit 10_except Unimak Island); Kodiak Zone (State Game ManagementUnit 8). The season may be split without penalty in the Kodiak Zone. Exceptions:The season is closed on Canada geese from Unimak Pass westward in the AleutianIsland chain. Throughout the State there is no open hunting season forAleutian Canada geese, cackling Canada geese and emperor geese. <T3>Snipe and sandhill cranes_</T3>An open season concurrent with the duckseason. <T3>Daily Bag and Possession Limits: </T3><T3>Ducks</T3>_Except as noted, a basic daily bag limit of not more than5 and a possession limit of 15 ducks. Daily bag and possession limits inthe North Zone are 8 and 24, and in the Gulf Coast Zone they are 6 and18, respectively. These basic limits may not include more than 2 pintailsdaily and 6 in possession. There is no open season on canvasbacks. In additionto the basic limit, there is a daily bag limit of 15 and a possession limitof 30 scoter, eider, oldsquaw, harlequin, and American and red-breastedmergansers, singly or in the aggregate of these species. <T3>Geese_</T3>A maximum basic daily bag limit of 6 and a possession limitof 12, of which not more than 4 daily and 8 in possession may be Greaterwhite-fronted (white-fronted) or Canada geese, singly or in the aggregateof these species. Throughout the State there is no open hunting seasonfor Aleutian and Cackling Canada geese and emperor geese. <T3>Brant</T3>_A maximum daily bag limit of 2 and a possession limit of4. <T3>Common snipe_</T3>A maximum daily bag limit of 8 and a possession limitof 16. <T3>Sandhill cranes_</T3>A daily bag limit of 3 and a possession limitof 6.<T3>Tundra swan_</T3>In Management Unit 22 an experimental permit seasonfor tundra swans may be continued. 26. <T3>Migratory game birds in Puerto Rico and in the Virgin Islands.</T3>(No change.)  Proposed Frameworks for Selecting Open Season Dates for Hunting MigratoryBirds in Puerto Rico, 1989-90  <T3>Shooting hours:</T3> Between sunrise and sunset daily for ducks; andbetween one-half hour before sunrise to sunset for doves and pigeons. <ITAG tagnum="84">Ducks, Coots, Moorhens, Gallinules, and Snipe   </ITAG><T3>Outside Dates:</T3> Between November 5, 1989, and February 28, 1990,Puerto Rico may select hunting seasons as follows:  <T3>Hunting Seasons:</T3> Not more than 55 days may be selected for huntingducks, common moorhens (common gallinules), and common snipe. The seasonmay be split into 2 segments.  Daily Bag and Possession Limits:  <T3>Ducks_</T3>Not to exceed 4 daily and 8 in possession, except that theseason is closed on the ruddy duck (<T3>Oxyura jamaicensis</T3>); the White-cheeked pintail (<T3>Anas bahamensis</T3>); West Indian whistling (tree) duck (<T3>Dendrocygna arborea</T3>); fulvous whistling (tree) duck (<T3>Dendrocygna bicolor</T3>), and the masked duck (<T3>Oxyura dominica</T3>), which are protected by the Commonwealth of PuertoRico.  <T3>Coots</T3>_There is no open season on coots, i.e., common coots (<T3>Fulica americana</T3>) and Caribbean coots (<T3>Fulica carabaea</T3>).  <T3>Common Moorhens_</T3>Not to exceed 6 daily and 12 in possession, exceptthat the season is closed on purple gallinules (<T3>Porphyrula martinica</T3>).  <T3>Common snipe_</T3>Not to exceed 6 daily and 12 in possession.  <T3>Closed Areas:</T3> No open season for ducks, moorhens and gallinules,and snipe is prescribed in the Municipality of Culebra and on DesecheoIsland.  <ITAG tagnum="84">Doves and Pigeons  </ITAG><T3>Outside Dates:</T3> Puerto Rico may select hunting seasons betweenSeptember 1, 1989, and January 15, 1990, as follows:  <T3>Hunting Seasons:</T3> Not more than 60 days for Zenaida, mourning,and white-winged doves, and scaly-naped pigeons.  <T3>Daily Bag and Possession Limits:</T3> Not to exceed 10 doves of thespecies named herein, singly or in the aggregate, and not to exceed 5 scaly-napedpigeons.  <T3>Closed Areas:</T3> No open season for doves and pigeons is prescribedin the following areas:  <T3>Municipality of Culebra and Desecheo Island_</T3>closed under Commonwealthregulations.  <T3>Mona Island_</T3>closed to protect the reduced population of white-crownedpigeon (<T3>Columba leucocephala</T3>), known locally as ``Paloma cabeciblanca.'' <T3>El Verde Closure Area_</T3>consisting of those areas of the municipalitiesof Rio Grande and Loiza delineated as follows: (1) all lands between Routes956 on the west and 186 on the east, from Route 3 on the north to the junctureof Routes 956 and 186 (Km 13.2) in the south; (2) all lands between Routes186 and 966 from the juncture of 186 and 966 on the north, to the CaribbeanNational Forest Boundary on the south; (3) all lands lying west of Route186 for one (1) kilometer from the juncture of Routes 186 and 956 southto Km 6 on Route 186; (4) all lands within Km 14 and Km 6 on the west andthe Caribbean National Forest Boundary on the east; and (5) all lands withinthe Caribbean National Forest Boundary whether private or public. The purposeof this closure is to afford protection to the Puerto Rico parrot (<T3>Amazona vittata</T3>) presently listed as an endangered species underthe Endangered Species Act of 1973.  <T3>Cidra Municipality and Adjacent Closure Areas</T3> consisting of allof Cidra Municipality and portions of Aguas Buenas, Caguas, Cayey, andComerio Municipalities as encompassed within the following boundary: beginningon Highway 172 as it leaves the Municipality of Cidra on the west edge,north to Highway 156, east on Highway 156 to Highway 1, south to Highway1 on Highway 765, south on Highway 765 to Highway 763, south on Highway763 to the Rio Guavate, west along Rio Guavate to Highway 1, southweston Highway 1 to Highway 14, west on Highway 14 to Highway 729, north onHighway 729 to Cidra Municipality, and westerly, northerly, and easterlyalong the Cidra Municipality boundary to the point of beginning. The purposeof this closure is to protect the Plain (Puerto Rican plain) pigeon (<T3>Columba inornata wetmorei</T3>), locally known as ``Paloma Sabanera,''which is present in the above locale in small numbers and is presentlylisted as an endangered species under the Endangered Species Act of 1973.Proposed Framework for Selecting Open Season Dates for Hunting MigratoryBirds in the Virgin Islands, 1989-90<T3>Shooting Hours: </T3>Between sunrise and sunset daily for ducks; andbetween one-half hour before sunrise to sunset daily for doves and pigeons.<ITAG tagnum="84">Ducks</ITAG><T3>Outside Dates: </T3>Between December 1, 1989, and January 31, 1990,the Virgin Islands may select a duck hunting season as follows:<T3>Hunting Seasons: </T3>Not more than 55 consecutive days may be selectedfor hunting ducks.<T3>Daily Bag and Possession Limits: </T3>Not to exceed 4 daily and 8 inpossession, except that the season is closed on the ruddy duck (<T3>Oxyura jamaicensis</T3>); White-cheeked pintail (<T3>Anas bahamensis</T3>); West Indian whistling (tree) duck (<T3>Dendrocygna arborea</T3>); fulvous whistling (tree) duck (<T3>Dendrocygna bicolor</T3>), and the masked duck (<T3>Oxyura dominica</T3>).<ITAG tagnum="84">Doves and Pigeons</ITAG><T3>Outside Dates: </T3>The Virgin Islands may select hunting seasons betweenSeptember 1, 1989, and January 15, 1990, as follows:<T3>Hunting Seasons: </T3>Not more than 60 days for Zenaida doves and scaly-napedpigeons throughout the Virgin Islands.<T3>Daily Bag and Possession Limits: </T3>Not to exceed 10 Zenaida dovesand 5 scaly-naped pigeons.<T3>Closed Seasons</T3>: No open season is prescribed for common ground-dovesor quail doves, or other pigeons in the Virgin Islands.Local Names for Certain Birds.Zenaida dove <T3>(Zenaida aurita)_</T3>mountain dove.Bridled quail dove <T3>(Geotrygon mystacea)_</T3>Barbary dove, partridge (protected).Common Ground-dove <T3>(Columbina passerina)_</T3>stone dove, tobacco dove, rola, tortolita(protected).Scaly-naped pigeon <T3>(Columba squamosa)_</T3>red-necked pigeon, scaled pigeon.27. <T3>Migratory game bird seasons for falconers.</T3> (Change.)Proposed Special Falconry Frameworks<T3>Extended Seasons:</T3> Falconry is a permitted means of taking migratorygame birds in any State meeting Federal falconry standards in 50 CFR 21.29(k).These States may select an extended season for taking migratory game birdsin accordance with the following:<T3>Framework Dates:</T3> Seasons must fall between September 1, 1989,and March 10, 1990.<T3>Daily Bag and Possession Limits:</T3> Falconry daily bag and possessionlimits for all permitted migratory game birds shall not exceed 3 and 6birds, respectively, singly or in the aggregate, during both regular huntingseasons and extended falconry seasons in all States including those thatdo not select an extended falconry season. The more liberal frameworksestablished in 1988 are continued. This change in bag limits is intendedto simplify the falconry regulations.<T3>Regulations Publication:</T3> Each State selecting the special seasonmust inform the Service of the season dates and publish regulations forthe State.<T3>Regular Seasons:</T3> General hunting regulations, including seasonsand hours, apply to falconry in each State listed in 50 CFR 21.29(k) whichdoes not select an extended falconry season. Daily bag and possession limitsfor all permitted migratory birds shall not exceed 3 and 6, respectively,singly or in the aggregate, during regular hunting seasons in all States,including those that do not select an extended falconry season.<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note</T4>: Total season length for all hunting methods combined maynot exceed 107 days for any species (or groups of species) in a geographicalarea.</ITAG>28. <T3>Hawaii mourning doves.</T3> (No change.) The mourning dove is the onlymigratory game bird occurring in Hawaii in numbers to permit hunting. Itis proposed that mourning doves may be taken in Hawaii in accordance withregulations set by the State of Hawaii as has been done in the past andsubject to the applicable provisions of Part 20 of Title 50 CFR. Such aseason must be within the constraints of applicable migratory bird treatiesand annual regulatory frameworks. These constraints provide that the seasonmust be within the period of September 1, 1989, and January 15, 1990, thelength may not exceed 60 (or 70 under the alternative) days; and the dailybag and possession limits may not exceed 15 and 30 (or 12 and 24 underthe alternative) doves, respectively. Other applicable Federal regulationsrelating to migratory game birds shall also apply.29. <T3>Migratory Bird Hunting on Indian Reservations.</T3> In the September3, 1985, <T4>Federal Register</T4> (50 FR 35762) the Service implemented guidelinesfor migratory bird hunting regulations on Federal Indian reservations andceded lands, and has annually established special hunting regulations forcertain tribes since the 1985-86 hunting seasons. The Service intends toemploy the guidelines and establish special migratory game bird huntingregulations for interested Indian tribes in 1989-90. In the February 27,1989, <T4>Federal Register</T4> (54 FR 8221), the Service published a noticerequesting proposals from Indian tribes that wish to establish special1989-90 migratory game bird hunting regulations be submitted no later thanJune 5, 1989. In a later <T4>Federal Register</T4> document the Service will publish for publicreview the pertinent details of proposals received from tribes.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: March 10, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Becky Norton Dunlop,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary for Fish and Wildlife and Parks.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4310-55-M001</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-7138 Filed 3-24-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4310-55-C</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>