<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89404-0040 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.4-04-89.f2.A1039</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 90238-9038]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Financial Assistance for Research and Development Projects to Strengthenand Develop the U.S. Fishing Industry</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>National Marine Fisheries Service (NMFS), NOAA, Commerce.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of availability of financial assistance.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>For FY 89, Saltonstall-Kennedy (S-K) funds are availableto assist persons in carrying out research and development projects whichaddress aspects of U.S. fisheries involving the U.S. fishing industry (commercialor recreational) including, but not limited to, harvesting, processing,and associated infrastructures. NMFS issues this notice describing theconditions under which applications will be accepted and how NMFS willdetermine which applications it will fund.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>Applications must be received by June 5, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>Applications should be sent to the applicable regionalor Washington Office of the National Marine Fisheries Service (for addresses,see Section III. E.2.).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Phyllis S. Bentz, S-K ProgramManager, National Marine Fisheries Service, 1335 East-West Highway, SilverSpring, Maryland 20910, Telephone: (301) 427-2358.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Introduction</ITAG>A. BackgroundThe Saltonstall-Kennedy (S-K) Act (15 U.S.C. 713c-2-713c-3) makes availableto the Secretary of Commerce (Secretary) up to 30 percent of the grossreceipts collected under the customs laws from duties on fishery products.The Secretary must use a portion of these funds each year to make availablegrants to assist persons in carrying out research and development projectswhich address aspects of U.S. fisheries, including, but not limited to,havesting, processing, and associated infrastructures. U.S. fisheries \1\<NOTE/> include any fishery that is or may be engaged in by U.S.citizens or nationals or citizens of the Northern Mariana Islands. Thephrase ``fishing industry'' includes both the commercial and recreationalsections of U.S. fisheries.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ For purposes of this notice, a fishery is defined as oneor more stocks of fish, including tuna, and shellfish which are identifiedas a unit based on geographic, scientific, technical, recreational andeconomic characteristics, and any and all phases of fishing for such stocks.Examples of a fishery are Alaskan groundfish, Pacific whiting, New Englandwhiting, Gulf of Mexico groundfish, etc.B. FundingThere is no guarantee that sufficient funds will be available to make awardsfor all approved projects. For FY 89 about $4.4 million may be used tofund new fisheries research and development projects, subject to availability.<ITAG tagnum="84">II. FY 89 Funding Priorities</ITAG>Consistent with authorizing legislation, NOAA will emphasize the use ofcurrent and future S-K funds appropriated by Congress for industry grantsin the following manner. Priority areas and associated research and developmentactivities that will be designated for funding will be those that are beyondthe scope of any single entity within the fishing industry to undertakewithout Government assistance because of one or more of the following:(1) There is a high degree of risk in achieving positive results; (2) thepotential benefits are too widely dispersed; and (3) the timeframe forresolution of the problem or issue is long or unknown. While multi-yearapproaches to address priority research areas are encouraged, the fundingof short term applications is not precluded.Fisheries research and development project applications should relate toone or more of the priority areas in the Regional and National sections.Primary consideration for funding will be given to applications addressingthe specific priorities. However, NMFS will also consider applicationsthat address other significant industry problems or opportunities (noteexceptions which follow).Except for the Western Pacific, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands,funding will not be provided for projects primarily involving the followingactivities: (1) Infrastructure planning and construction; (2) port andharbor development; (3) research evaluating the ability or extent to whichfish are attracted to fish aggregating devices (FADs); and (4) extensionactivities such as newsletters.Rather than the S-K program, programs administered by NMFS authorized bythe Fish and Seagood Promotion Act of 1986 (FSPA) will be the mechanismto conduct promotional and consumer education activities related to fishand seafood. The National Fish and Seafood Promotional Council, establishedin December 1987, will conduct generic seafood promotion. This Councilis authorized to conduct both domestic and export marketing. The species-specificcouncils, authorized by the FSPA, will market specific species or groupsof species. However, for species or products which are not widely availablecommercially, S-K funds may be used for end-use research, i.e., non-proprietaryproduct concept testing, technical development, and consumer acceptanceevaluation where these activities are a logical component of a comprehensiveresearch or development project.NMFS has identified funding priorities in consultation with a wide crosssection of the U.S. commercial and recreational fishing industry, States,and Fishery Management Councils. The priorities are identified on a regionalbasis. Some priorities were found to relate to several, or all regionsand are listed as national priorities.Priorities for FY 89 funding are listed below, along with a summary ofactivities funded in FY 88. Applications addressing the priorities mustbuild upon or take into account any past and current work in the area.Lists of ongoing and past studies, and more detail where necessary, areavailable from the applicable regional or Washington office (for addresses,see section III. E.2.).A. Northeast RegionProjects funded in FY 88 focused on developing and demonstrating fishinggear which conserves juveniles and non-target species; improving the qualityof mackerel and hake by extra cold storage; developing canned mackerel,mackerel surimi and meat analogues and by-products using minced mackereland hake; developing the sea robin fishery; developing standards and testsfor chemical contamination in fish and shellfish; local fishing vesselsafety training programs; and developing a program to enhance survivalof hook/tag and release fish caught by recreational fishermen.For FY 89, projects are solicited which will complement these activitiesor address other developmental impediments. These priorities apply to allfisheries of the Northeast. Priority for funding will be given to projectsthat:1. Develop or demonstrate gear and/or techniques and innovative approachesto resolving conflicts between users of different gear types. Projectsshould contribute to the conservation and management of fish stocks byreducing by-catch of juveniles or non-target species. Projects may includesocio-economic analyses of costs associated with changing over to new gear.2. Develop new or improved harvesting or processing technology or strategieswhich increase efficiency, production or competitiveness, targeting non-traditionalspecies. 3. Address problems associated with the quality and wholesomeness of seafoodto promote public confidence in seafood. 4. Conduct a comprehensive review of all methodologies and applicabilitiesof risk analysis for fisheries products being used by Federal, State authorities,agencies and universities. Develop a consensus and prepare a demonstrationproject. 5. Conduct basic research for domestication and mass culture of regionalliving fresh-water and marine resources in the areas of genetics, physiology,environmental requirements and impact, animal/plant husbandry, nutrition,disease control, and industrial engineering. B. Southeast RegionProjects funded in FY 88 focused on market potential for eel products;limited entry possibilities for Florida spiny lobster; environmental effectson the Georgia blue crab; development of seafood product quality code;a national shellfish pollution indicator study; studies of seafood processingaids; a survey of shrimp cast netters in Georgia; development of strategiesto enhance charter and headboat fishing in Puerto Rico; evaluation of incidentalfinfish catch by shrimp nets; evaluation of crawfish processing and packaging;development of a fisheries allocation model; analysis of waterfront landuse trends; artificial reef management and user conflict resolution strategies;analysis of the potential for megalops shrimp in the Gulf of Mexico; inventoryof king mackerel size and distribution in south Florida; education of fishermenin seafood processing and marketing; analysis of a microprocessor graderfor oyster meat; analysis of baitfish resources along the Florida coast;impact of trawl by-catch on carnivores in the Gulf of Mexico; food scienceproblems associated with Rangia clams; and experimentation with turtleexcluder device (TED) designs to minimize shrimp losses. Applications should address one or more of the following priorities andmust (a) utilize and build upon relevant research in related fields, and(b) include appropriate economic evaluation of resulting technology inactual application and/or potential capital or labor dislocations resultingfrom implementation of results. Projects proposed as a continuation ofexisting or prior S-K or MARFIN projects should be clearly described withregard to sequential and programmatic relationships. Projects designed to address the following objectives will receive priorityconsideration. 1. Develop or demonstrate gear or harvesting methodology that contributesto the conservation and management of fish stocks by reducing by-catchof juvenile, non-target species, or marine mammals and endangered species.2. Address problems associated with the quality and wholesomeness of seafood,including risk assessment and techniques for promoting public confidencein seafood, including the refinement or implementation of results fromprior research in molluscan shellfish sanitation. 3. Encourage the orderly development of fisheries through innovative approachesto the resolution of user conflicts. Projects dealing with conflict resolutionin the mackerel and reeffish fisheries would be particularly valuable.4. Identify and evaluate the impact of changing fishery regulations onexisting businesses at the producer, processor and distributor levels.Impacts related to rapidly changing regulatory regimes will receive highestpriority. 5. Identify the relationship between habitat and stock abundance or tracethe relationship between habitat degradation and stock abundance over time.6. Expand the information base of specific fisheries where the inadequacyof stock information is the primary limitation to managing and allocatingstocks between commercial and recreational fisheries. The following exampleshave been specifically identified: (a) Develop and test a program for collectingswordfish sex ratios and age/size-frequencies for the longline fisheries;(b) expand tagging programs to determine rates of movement and mixing ofboth king and Spanish mackerel stocks; and (c) determine the recreationalcatch of spiny lobsters in Florida.7. Conduct basic research for domestication and mass culture of regionalliving fresh-water and marine resources in the areas of genetics, physiology,environmental requirements and impact, animal/plant husbandry, nutrition,disease control, and industrial engineering. C. Southwest RegionThe Southwest Region is comprised of two distinct geographic areas_theU.S. Pacific Islands and three mainland states (California, Nevada, andArizona). The island fisheries differ significantly in many instances fromthe mainland fisheries. Accordingly, a list of proposed funding prioritiesfor each of these geographic areas has been established. <ITAG tagnum="81">1. Pacific Islands</ITAG>Projects funded in FY 88 provided for development of infrastructure inGuam, regional standardization of a catch data system, detection of fishpoisons in the Federated States of Micronesia (FSM), time-depth studiesof a longline fishery for sashimi quality tuna, development of a one-stepimmunoassay for detection of ciguatoxin, longlining studies for sashimigrade yellowfin tuna around Kosrae, evaluation of fish aggregation devicesin Palau, improvement of a VHF safety/communication system in AmericanSamoa, creation of a model fish export business in Pohnpei, and developmentof the sea cucumber fishery in the FSM. In the Pacific Islands, priority consideration will be given in FY 89 toprojects which contribute to the fishery development goals of Hawaii, Guam,American Samoa, the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, the FederatedStates of Micronesia, Republic of the Marshall Islands, and Republic ofPalau. High priority will be given to proposals with regional benefits.All applications should be consistent with the cultural and social valuesof Pacific island communities. Applications which address problems in the following areas will be givenpriority for funding in FY 89.a. Develop a long-range fishery development plan for Guam, American Samoa,Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands, Republic of the MarshallIslands, Federated States of Micronesia and the Republic of Palau. Specificand prioritized fishery development goals and action plans for each islandarea should be developed. b. Evaluate and demonstrate the feasibility of handling, holding, and transportinglive fish to high value markets. c. Conduct feasibility studies for the design, engineering and constructionof needed fishing vessel support services and facilities. Applicationsshall clearly demonstrate a need for and benefits of such projects to localfishermen. d. Evaluate the socio-economic impacts and benefits of the foreign-ownedand operated tuna long-line fishery based in Guam and the potential ofthe local fishing industry of Guam to paticipate in this fishery. e. Applications related to FADs will be considered, particularly applicationsthat test an array of FAD designs and mooring configurations. Applicationsmust build upon and take into account any current or past work in thisarea. f. Develop for Pacific island nations a protocol relating to the transferand introduction of non-native or exotic species intended for maricultureor other purposes (giant clams, pearl oysters, etc.). The protocol shalltake into consideration the potential effects of introducing exotic pathogens,the effects of competition and predation on the native fauna, and economicconsequences on existing fisheries. The protocol should strive to reduceuncertainty over the effects of introducing exotic or non-native speciesand stocks. g. Conduct basic research for domestication and mass culture of regionalliving fresh-water and marine resources in the areas of genetics, physiology,environmental requirements and impacts, animal/plant husbandry, nutrition,disease control, and industrial engineering. h. Develop and produce educational materials to reach a broad marine recreationalfishing and public audience with the objective of promoting conservationawareness of fishery resources. This should include, but not be limitedto, marine mammal interactions, wise use of fishery resources, and handlingand release techniques. <ITAG tagnum="81">2. Mainland (California, Nevada, and Arizona)</ITAG>In FY 88, MMFS funded projects to translate a fishing vessel safety manualinto Vietnamese, perform a groundfish mesh-size study, conduct a Proposition65 compliance program, conduct a pilot harvesting and marketing projectfor squawfish, explore alternatives for gillnetting for white croaker,investigate habitat value and productivity at a Southern California reef,and perform a south Pacific albacore tagging project. In 1989, general emphasis will be given to research and development activitieswhich will support the continued growth and/or maintenance of the region'sindustry. Priority will be given to proposals that: a. Test applications of new technologies or methodologies (such as electrophoresis,and novel tagging and marking techniques) to provide a basis for more accurateand rapid determination of harvests of different runs of salmon in oceanfisheries and allow full harvest of strong runs wthout overfishing weakerruns. b. Develop or demonstrate gear and/or techniques which contribute to theconservation and management of fish stocks by reducing by-catch of juvenilesor non-target species. This may include socio-economic anaylsis of costsassociated with changing over to new gear. c. Develop and evaluate fishery gear, and handling and processing techniquesthat will improve efficiency of existing fisheries and/or assist in thedevelopment of new or underutilized fishery resources (e.g., Pacific mackerel,sardines, shortbelly rockfish, and hagfish). d. Design and evaluate alternative management strategies for the West Coastgroundfish fishery that allow fisheries to continue throughout the yearwith low risk of long-term overfishing. Strategies should require lessintensive data collection and reporting activities than the current trimesterreview system. e. Evaluate the feasibility of using seine-caught tuna in alternative marketsand undertake feasibility study and evaluation of needed vessel modifications,if any, to take advantage of alternative tuna markets. f. Conduct basis research for domestication and mass culture of regionalliving fresh-water and marine resources in the areas of genetics, physiology,environmental requirements and impacts, animal/plant husbandry, nutrition,disease control, and industrial engineering. g. Develop and produce educational materials to reach a broad marine recreationalfishing and public audience with the objective of promoting conservationawareness of fishery resources. This should include, but not be limitedto, marine mammal interactions, wise use of fishery resources, and handlingand release techniques. D. Northwest Region The Northwest fishing industry requires a research and development programwhich focuses on fully utilizing groundfish found in the exclusive economiczone (EEZ) off Oregon, Washington and Alaska. A significant part of theRegion's industry is heavily dependent on the resources found off Alaska,and therefore projects of high quality which support this segment of theindustry will also be considered. 1. West Coast Groundfish (Oregon, Washington and Alaska). NMFS funded projectsin FY 88 that will: Continue development of an automated system for thedetection of parasites and pin bones in fish fillets; assess the feasibilityof a fishing gear design and test facility; conduct a study of mortalityof hook-and-line caught salmon in the marine recreational fisheries; investigatejoint venture opportunities outside the U.S. EEZ; develop fish feed fromgroundfish waste; and develop refined video recordings of experimentaltrawl nets tested for by-catch of Tanner crab. The FY 89 priorities outlinedbelow will focus on research and development activities which will supportthe continued growth of the Region's industry. Groundfish species in needof further development include pollock, whiting, shortbelly rockfish, andassorted flatfish found in the EEZ. a. Develop new or improved processing and harvesting technologies or strategieswhich increase efficiency, productivity, and competitiveness of the Region'sindustry and reduce by-catch of prohibited and incidental species. b. Design a public data base and methods of analysis to monitor world-wideprices, distribution, and availability of groundfish products for the purposeof assisting in the formulation of fisheries management, trade, and businessstrategies. c. Research and analyze alternative limited access strategies which willdeter overcapitalization of the groundfish fleet. d. Develop and evaluate waste utilization technologies for both shoresideand at-sea operations which process fish waste into commercial products.2. The following FY 89 priorities pertain to all Northwest Region fisheries:a. Conduct basic research for domestication and mass culture of regionalliving marine resources in the areas of genetics, physiology, environmentalrequirements and impacts, animal/plant husbandry, nutrition, disease control,and industrial engineering. b. Encourage the orderly development of commercial and recreational fisheriesthrough innovative approaches to the resolution of user conflicts. E. Alaska Region 1. Alaska Groundfish. The research and development program in Alaska hasfocused on the domestic utilization of the groundfish resources in theEEZ off Alaska. Technology development and application have been stressedto support U.S. industry efforts in becoming a competitive and dominantforce in the utilization of these EEZ resources. In FY 88, funded projectsaddressed development inpediments in the areas of marine safety, flatfishutilization, groundfish quality enhancement, by-product utilization, internationaltrade in West Coast groundfish, shellfish by-catch mortality rates, andcommercial fishing/marine mammal interactions. Groundfish of the EEZ continue to be the priority species for developmentresearch in FY 89. Applications which address the following areas willbe given priority for funding in FY 89. a. Continued development and analysis of technology to reduce and/or eliminatenegative interactions between commercial fisheries and marine mammal. b. By-catch utilization and/or avoidance is an area of significant importanceto the domestic fishing industry. Requirements in this area include: (1) Devleopment of new or application of existing technology for the avoidanceof taking unwanted or prohibited species. (2) Development of handling and processing technology for improved utilizationof by-catch.(3) Economic analysis of the consequences of by-catch management alternatives.(4) Development and testing of an on-board domestic vessel observer programin the EEZ. c. Development of production cost models for the groundfish complex ofthe Bering Sea and Gulf of Alaska. d. Research and analysis to trawl mesh size impact on catch and size compositionof Alaska pollock stocks. e. Conduct fundamental research needed to support the domestication andmass culture of regional living freshwater and marine resources in theareas of genetics, physiology, environmental requirements and impacts,animal/plant husbandry, nutrition, disease control, and industrial engineering.F. National In FY 88, NMFS funded national projects which address issues crosscuttinga number of fisheries and regions. Specifically, NMFS funded projects whichinvestigate the recycling and reuse of marine plastics; support a nationalsymposium addressing shellfish depuration technology and regulations; describethe movement of fresh and frozen seafood products from domestic harvestingthrough processing, identifying critical control points as a part of acontinuing program to establish a comprehensive seafood surveillance systemfor the U.S. industry; coordinate vessel safety and insurance programs;evaluate <T3>Listeria monocytogenes </T3>inhibitors in smoked fish products; developmarine plastics educational programs on the East, Gulf and West Coasts;analyze fishing tackle export barriers; and develop a rapid sensitive assayfor dinoflagellate toxins in seafood. In FY 89, consideration will be given to applications which:1. Design a survey of selected chemical contaminants (heavy metals, organics)in major commercial and recreational species and imported products at adesign level sufficient to identify the level of public health risks associatedwith pollutants found in the edible tissue. 2. Design and conduct a national consumption survey of fish and shellfishharvested commercially and recreationally. Consumption data will be usedin combination with contaminant data in future development of human healthrisk assessment models associated with seafood consumption. 3. Prepare a computerized data base of artificial reef programs and projectsin the United States. 4. Review and characterize existing non-market valuation studies of estuarineand marine wetlands. Determine which results best reflect total value,including nutrient and contaminant recycling, habitat, food web, and aesthetics.<ITAG tagnum="84">III. How to Apply</ITAG>A. Eligible Applicants. Applications for grants or cooperative agreements for fisheries developmentprojects may be made, in accordance with the procedures set forth in thisnotice, by:1. Any individual who is a citizen or national of the United States; 2. Any individual who is a citizen of the Northern Mariana Islands (NMI),being an individual who qualifies as such under section 8 of the Scheduleon Transitional Matters attached to the Constitution of the NMI;3. Any corporation, partnership, association, or other entity, nonprofitor otherwise, if such entity is a citizen of the United States within themeaning of section 2 of the Shipping Act, 1916 as amended (46 U.S.C. 802).\2\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ To qualify as a citizen of the United States within themeaning of this statute, citizens or nationals of the United States orcitizens of the NMI must own not less than 75 percent of the interest inthe entity or, in the case of a non-profit entity, exercise control ofthe entity that is determined by the Secretary to be equivalent to suchownership; and in the case of a corporation, the president or other chiefexecutive officer and the chairman of the board of directors must be citizensof the United States, no more of its board of directors than a minorityof the number necessary to constitute a quorum may be non-citizens; andthe corporation itself must be organized under the laws of the United States,or of a State, including the District of Columbia, Commonwealth of PuertoRico, American Samoa, the Virgin Islands of the United States, Guam, theNMI or any other Commonwealth, territory, or possession of the United States.Seventy-five percent of the interest in a corporation shall not be deemedto be owned by citizens or nationals of the United States or citizens ofthe NMI, if: (i) The title of 75 percent of its stock is not vested insuch citizens or nationals of the United States or citizens of the NMIfree from any trust or fiduciary obligations in favor of any person nota citizen or national of the United States or citizen of the NMI; (ii)75 percent of the voting power in such corporation is not vested in citizensor nationals of the United States or citizens of the NMI; (iii) throughany contract or understanding it is arranged that more than 25 percentof the voting power in such corporation may be exercised, directly or indirectly,in behalf of any person who is not a citizen or national of the UnitedStates or a citizen of the NMI; or (iv) by any means whatsoever, controlof any interest in the corporation is conferred upon or permitted to beexercised by any person who is not a citizen or national of the UnitedStates. No individual or organization that is in arrears on any outstanding debtto the U.S. Department of Commerce will be considered for funding. Successfulapplicants for S-K funding, at the discretion of the NOPAA Grants Officer,may be rquired to have their financial management system certified by anindependent public accountant as being in compliance with Federal standardsspecified in the applicable Office of Management and Budget (OMB) Circularsprior to execution of the award. Any first time applicant for Federal grantfunds may be subject to a preaward accounting survey by the Departmentof Commerce prior to execution of the award. NMFS encourages women andminority individuals and groups to submit applications. NOAA employeesincluding full, part-time, and intermittent personnel, (or their immediatefamilies) and NOAA offices or centers are not eligible to submit an applicationunder this solicitation, or aid in the preparation of an application, exceptto provide necessary information or guidance about fisheries research anddevelopment and the priorities and procedures included in this solicitation.B. Amount and Duration of FundingFor FY 89, NMFS may have an estimated $4.4 million available to fund newfishery research and development projects. Grants or cooperative agreementswill be awarded for a period of one to three years.To qualify as a multi-year award, a project must, in addition to the criteriaelaborated under ``Administrative Requirements'' and other applicable sectionsof this notice, meet the following criteria: (1) The technology to be developedmust require more than a single year to research, develop and demonstrate;(2) the products or services to be developed require more than a singleyear to research, design and demonstrate and/or market; (3) single yearfunding would otherwise result in <T3>significant</T3> discontinuity in project implementation; (4) projectsmust indicate complete objectives, tasks, or products for the end of eachfunding cycle. The burden of proof for meeting these criteria rests withthe applicant. No multi-year projects will be funded beyond three consecutiveyears. Once approved, multi-year projects will not compete for fundingin subsequent years. For multi-year projects, funding beyond the firstyear will be contingent on the availability of new fiscal year programfunds and the extent to which project objectives were met during the prioryear.Publication of this announcement does not obligate NMFS to award any specificgrant or to obligate any part or the entire amount of funds available.Funding decisions for successful applications generally will be made bySeptember 30, 1989.C. Cost-Sharing RequirementsNMFS must provide at least 50 percent, as provided by statute, but willprovide no more than 80 percent of total project costs. The non-Federalshare may include funds received from private sources or from State orlocal governments or the value of in-kind contributions. Federal fundsmay not be used to meet the non-Federal share of matching funds exceptas provided by Federal statute. In-kind contributions are noncash contributionsprovided by the applicant or non-Federal third parties. In-kind contributionsmay be in the form of, but are not limited to, personal services renderedin carrying out functions related to the project, and permission to usereal or personal property owned by others (for which consideration is notrequired) in carrying out the project.The percentage of the total project costs provided from non-Federal sourcesmay range from 20 to 50 percent of the costs of the project. The S-K Act,as amended, requires the Government to provide at least 50 percent of totalproject costs. The 20 percent minimum non-Federal cost share has been establishedby NOAA as a matter of policy. The percentage of cost share will be a factorin the selection of projects to be funded. Successful applicants will bebound by the percentage of cost share reflected in the grant awards. Exemptionfrom cost-sharing requirements may be granted in unusual circumstancesto applicants who demonstrate in their applications the financial inabilityto meet cost-sharing requirements, and to government institutions in AmericanSamoa, Guam, the Northern Mariana Islands, the Republic of Palau, Republicof the Marshall Islands, the Federated States of Micronesia, Puerto Ricoand the U.S. Virgin Islands. In the case of American Samoa, Guam, the U.S.Virgin Islands, and the Northern Mariana Islands, under the provisionsof 48 U.S.C. 1469a.(d), any requirement for local matching funds under$200,000 (including in-kind contributions) shall be waived. The total projectcosts will be determined as described below.The total costs of a project consist of all costs incurred in the performanceof project tasks, including the value of the in-kind contributions, toaccomplish the objectives of the project during the period the projectis conducted. A project begins on the effective date of a grant, cooperativeagreement, or contract award between the applicant and an authorized representativeof the United States Government and ends on the date specified in the award.Accordingly, the time expended and costs incurred in either the developmentof a project or the financial assistance application, or in any subsequentdiscussions or negotiations prior to award, are neither reimbursable norrecognizable as part of the recipient's cost share.The appropriateness of all cost-sharing proposals, including the valuationof in-kind contributions, will be determined on the basis of guidance providedin OMB Circulars. In general, the value of in-kind services or propertyused to fulfill the cost-sharing requirements will be the fair market valueof the services or property. Thus, the value is equivalent to the costsof obtaining such services or property if they had not been donated. Appropriatedocumentation must exist to support in-kind services or property used tofulfill cost-sharing requirements.D. FormatApplications for project funding must be complete. They must identify theprincipal participants and include copies of any agreements between theparticipants and the applicant describing the specific tasks to be performed.Applications must identify the specific priorities to which they are responding.If an application is not in response to a priority, it should be so stated.Applicants should not assume prior knowledge on the part of NMFS as tothe relative merits of the project described in the application. Applicationsmust be clearly and completely submitted in the following format:1. Cover Sheet: An applicant must use OMB Standard Form 424 as the coversheet for each project within an application. Applicants may obtain copiesof the form from the NMFS Regional Offices, NMFS Washington Office or Departmentof Commerce National Capital Administrative Support Center; addresses arelisted under the ``Application Submission and Deadline'' section whichfollows.2. Project Summary: Each project within the application must contain asummary of not more than one page which provides the following information:a. Project title.b. Project status: (new or continuing).c. Project duration: (proposed beginning and ending dates).d. Name, address, and telephone number of applicant.e. Principal Investigator(s).f. Specific priority(ies) to which project responds.g. Project objective.h. Summary of work to be performed. For continuing projects the applicantwill briefly describe progress to date in addition to work proposed withthe additional funds.i. Total Federal funds requested (initial and total amount and percentageof total project costs).j. Project costs to be provided from non-Federal Government sources (initialand total amount and percentage of total project costs).k. Total project costs.3. Project Description: Each project within the application must be completelyand accurately described. Each project description may be up to 15 pagesin length. NMFS will make all portions of the project description availableto the public and members of the fishing industry for review and comment;therefore, NMFS will not guarantee the confidentiality of any informationsubmitted as part of any project, nor will NMFS accept for considerationany project requesting confidentiality of any part of the project. Eachproject must be described as follows: a. Identification of Problem(s): For new projects, identify and completelydescribe the problem(s) the project addresses. In this description, include:(1) The fisheries involved, (2) the specific problem(s) that the fishingindustry has encountered, (3) the sectors of the fishing industry thatare affected, (4) the specific priorities to which the project responds,and (5) how the problem(s) prevent the fishing industry from developinga fishery or using existing fishery resources. If the application is forthe continuation of an existing S-K funded project, describe progresssto date and explain why continued funding is necessary. b. Project Goals and Objectives: State what the proposed project will accomplishand describe how this will eliminate or reduce the problem(s) describedabove. For multi-year projects, describe the ultimate objective of theproject and how the individual tasks contribute to reaching the objective.Describe the time frame in which tasks would be conducted. c. Need for Government Financial Assistance: Explain why members of thefishing industry cannot fund all the proposed work. List all other sourcesof funding which are or have been sought for the project. d. Participation by Persons or Groups Other than the Applicant: Describe(1) the level of participation by NMFS, Sea Grant, or other Governmentand non-Government entities, particularly members of the fishing industry,required in the project(s); and (2) the nature of such participation. Inaddition, list names and addresses of the members of the fishing industryconsulted during the preparation of the project description. e. Federal, State, and Local Government Activities: List any existing Federal,State, or local Government programs or activities, including State CoastalZone Management Plans, this project would affect and describe the relationshipbetween the project and these plans or activities. List names and addressesof persons providing this information. f. Project Outline: This section requires the applicant to prepare a generalnarrative fully describing the work to be performed which will achievethe previously articulated goals and objectives. A chart which outlinesmajor goals, supporting work activities, timeframe, and individuals responsiblefor various work activities must be included. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">The narrative should include information which responds to the followingquestions. (1) How will the project be structured? (2) What major products, (e.g., research, services, or reports) will resultand what are their specific nature? (3) What supporting activities (be as specific as possible) will be undertakento produce major products? (4) Who will be responsible for carrying out the various activities? (Highlightwork which will be subcontracted and provisions for competitive subcontracting).(5) What methodology will be used to evalaute final products or services,and how will it be integrated into the project? </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">The milestone chart should graphically illustrate: (1) Steps to accomplish the major products, research, services and/or activities;(2) Supporitng activities and associated timelines; and (3) The indivdual(s) responsible for the various activities. Because thisinformation is critical to understanding and reviewing the application,NMFS encourages applicants to provide as much detail as possible. Applicationslacking sufficient detail may be eliminated from further consideration.g. Project Management: Describe how the project will be organized and managed.List all persons directly employed by the applicant who will be involvedin the project, their qualifications, experience, and level of involvementin the project. If any portion of the project will be conducted throughsubcontracts, applicants must follow procurement guidance in 15 CFR Part24, ``Grants and Cooperative Agreements to State and Local Governments,''and OMB Circular A-110 for Institutions of Higher Education, Hospitals,and other Non-profit Organizations. If a subcontractor is chosen priorto application submission, the process used must be documented. h. Project Impacts: Describe the impact of the project in terms of anticipatedincreased landings, production, sales, improvement in product quality orsafety, or other measurable factors. Describe how the results of the projectwill be made available to the fishing industry. i. Evaluation of Project Impacts: The procedures for evaluating the relativesuccess or failure of a project in achieving its goals should be clearlydelineated within each application. It is the responsibility of applicantsto identify the best methodology for evaluating project effectiveness.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">Evaluation procedures in each application should at a minimum containthe following: (1) Specifc methods should be defined to evaluate the accomplishments ofthe project in terms of its original goals and objectives. (2) The benefits of the project should be clearly defined. Depending onthe nature of the benefits, the evaluation methodology should be able toaccurately assess the benefits. For example, if statistical proceduresare to be used, their specific application and use in the project evaluationshould be described.(3) Where benefits might be termed ``intangible,'' methods should be definedto measure results. For example, in the case of safety programs, will follow-upsurveys be conducted to correlate potential reductions in accident or insurancerates?j. Project costs: The applicants must submit cost estimates showing totalproject costs as well as the Federal and non-Federal shares. No cost sharingcan come from another Federal source except as provided by Federal statute.Applicant's matching costs are to be divided into cash and in-kind contributions.A separate budget must be submitted for each project within an application.For multi-year projects, funds will be provided as specified tasks arecompleted. Therefore, an applicant submitting a multi-year project mustsubmit two budgets_one covering total project costs (including individualoutyear costs) and one covering the initial funding request for the project.The initial funding request should cover funds required during the first12-month period. To support its budge the applicant must describe brieflythe basis for estimating the value of the matching funds derived from in-kindcontributions. Estimates of direct costs must be specified in the categorieslisted below. The budget may also include an amount for indirect costsif the applicant has an established indirect cost rate with the FederalGovernment. Estimated indirect costs may be included pending approval ofa negotiated Federal indirect cost rate. The Grants Officer listed in SectionE of this notice will assist prospective applicants in obtaining a negotiatedFederal indirect cost rate, if appropriate.(1) Personnel.(a) Salaries (by position title) of recipient employees and amount forthe project. Also, identify percent of person's time spent on the project.(b) Fringe Benefits (amount only). This entry should be the proportionatecost of fringe benefits paid for amount of time spent on the project. Forexample, if an employee spends 20 percent of his/her time on the project,20 percent of his/her fringe benefits should be charged to the project.(2) Consultants. Identify specific tasks and work to be performed by consultants.(3) Contracts. Identify all work to be completed by contract. If a commitmenthas been made prior to application for funding to contract with a particularvendor, explain how the vendor was selected, type of contract, deliverablesexpected, timeframe, and cost. All contracts must meet the requirementsestablished in OMB Circulars.(4) Travel and Per Diem. Identify number of trips to be taken, purpose,and number of people to travel. Itemize estimated costs to include approximatecost of transportation, per diem, and miscellaneous expenses. Registrationfees should be included.(5) Equipment and Furniture. Identify items of equipment/furniture purchasesor rental costs with the intended use.(6) Supplies. Identify specific supplies necessary for the accomplishmentof the project.(7) Indirect Costs. This entry should be based on the applicant's establishedindirect cost rate with the Federal Government. Estimates may be includedpending approval of a negotiated Federal indirect cost rate.(8) Other Costs. Identify any specific costs that are only applicable tothe project.4. Project Consolidation: Applicants may submit two or more projects underone application but must identify estimated project costs and budgets separatelyfor each individual project. As a result, the amount of administrativefunds provided will be based on the actual number of projects funded.5. Supporting Documentation: This section should include any required documentsand any additional information necessary or useful to the description ofthe project. The amount of information given in this section will dependon the type of project proposed. The applicant should present any informationwhich would emphasize the value of the project in terms of the significanceof the problems addressed. Without such information, the merits of theproject may not be fully understood, or the value of the project of fisheriesdevelopment may be underestimated. The absence of adequate supporting documentationmay cause reviewers to question assertions made in describing the projectand may result in a lower ranking of the project. Reviewers will not necessarilyexamine all material provided as supporting documentation except wheresufficient detail is lacking in the project description to properly evaluatethe project. Therefore, information presented in this section should beclearly referenced in the project description, where appropriate.E. Application Submission and Deadline1. Deadline. NMFS will accept applications for funding under this programbetween April 4, 1989, and June 5, 1989. An application will be acceptedif the application is received by any of the offices listed below on orbefore June 5, 1989.2. Submission of Applications to NMFS Reviewing Offices: Applicants mustsubmit one signed original and two (2) copies of the complete application.Applications are not to be bound in any manner.a. Applications relating to a specific fishery or a particular region shouldbe submitted to the appropriate NMFS Regional Office as specified below:Northeast Region (Maine, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, Connecticut, Vermont,New Hampshire, New York, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Delaware, Maryland,District of Columbia, Virginia, West Virginia, Ohio, Indiana, Illinois,Wisconsin, Michigan, Minnesota):<ITAG tagnum="15">Regional Director, National Marine Fisheries Service, One BlackburnDrive, Gloucester, MA 01930, Telephone: (508) 281-9267;</ITAG>Southeast Region (North Carolina, South Carolina, Georgia, Florida, Alabama,Mississippi, Louisiana, Texas, New Mexico, Oklahoma, Arkansas, Tennessee,Kentucky, Missouri, Kansas, Nebraska, Iowa, Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands):<ITAG tagnum="15">Regional Director, National Marine Fisheries Service, Duval Bldg.,9450 Koger Blvd., St. Petersburg, FL 33702, Telephone: (813) 893-3142.</ITAG>Southwest Region (California, Hawaii, Nevada, Arizona, American Samoa,Guam, Trust Territory of Pacific Islands, Northern Mariana Islands):<ITAG tagnum="15">Regional Director, National Marine Fisheries Service, 300 South FerryStreet, Room 2005, Terminal Island, CA 90731, Telephone: (213) 548-2575.</ITAG>Northwest Region (Washington, Oregon, Idaho, Montana, Wyoming, Utah, Colorado,North Dakota, South Dakota):<ITAG tagnum="15">Regional Director, National Marine Fisheries Service, Bin C15700,7600 Sand Point Way, NE., Seattle, WA 98115, Telephone: (206) 527-6150.</ITAG>Alaska Region (Alaska):<ITAG tagnum="15">Regional Director, National Marine Fisheries Service, P.O. Box 1668,709 West Ninth Street, Juneau, AK 99802, Telephone: (907) 586-7221.</ITAG>b. Applications addressing national priorities should be sent to:<ITAG tagnum="15">Director, Office of Trade and Industry Services, National Marine FisheriesService, 1335 East West Highway, Room 6204, Silver Spring, MD 20910, Telephone:(301) 427-2358.</ITAG>c. Questions of an administrative nature should be referred to the NOAAGrants Office listed below.<ITAG tagnum="15">National Capital Administrative Support Center, (DC33) NBOC1 Room106, 11420 Rockville Pike, Rockville, MD 20852, Telephone: (301) 443-8574.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Review Process and Criteria</ITAG>A. Evaluation and Ranking of Proposed ProjectsFor applications meeting the requirements of this solicitation, NMFS willdetermine which office should evaluate the proposed work. This will normallybe the office where the application is filed.1. Consultation with Interested Parties: NMFS will evaluate the project(s)contained in the application in consultation with representatives fromother Federal Government agencies with programs affecting the U.S. fishingindustry, members of the fishing industry, and other fisheries interests,as necessary. The regional and Washington Offices of NMFS will make projectdescriptions available in the following manner:a. Public review and comment. Regional applications may be inspected atthe office to which they are submitted. All applications will be availablefor inspection at the NMFS Office of Trade and Industry Services, 1335East-West Highway, Room 6204, Silver Spring, Maryland from June 12, 1989to June 26, 1989. Written comments will be accepted at a regional or theWashington Office until June 26, 1989.b. Consultation with members of the fishing industry. NMFS shall, at itsdiscretion, request comments from members of the fishing industry who haveknowledge in the subject matter of a project or who would be affected bya project.c. Consultation with Government agencies. Applications will be reviewedin consultation with NMFS Offices, NOAA Grants/Contracts Offices and, asappropriate, Department of Commerce and other Federal agencies. The RegionalFishery Management Councils will be asked to review applications whichcould impact a managed fishery, the by-catch of a managed fishery, or afishery management issue.2. Technical Evaluation: NMFS, in consultation with appropriate privateand public sector authorities, will conduct a technical evaluation of eachproject. If an application contains two or more projects, NMFS will evaluatethe projects separately. All comments submitted to NMFS will be taken intoconsideration in the technical evaluation of projects. NMFS will give projectspoint scores based on the following evaluation criteria:a. Problem Description and Conceptual Approach for Resolution. Both theapplicant's comprehension of the problem(s) and the overall concept proposedto resolve the problem(s) will be evaluated. (20 points).b. Soundness of Project Design/Technical Approach. Evaluated will be whetheror not the applicant provided sufficient information to technically evaluatethe project and, if so, the strengths and/or weaknesses of the technicaldesign proposed for problem resolution. (25 points).c. Project Management and Experience and Qualifications of Personnel. Evaluatedwill be the organization and management of the project, the project's personnelin terms of related experience, qualifications, and extent of cooperationwith the fishing industry and government throughout the various phasesof the project. (15 points).d. Project Monitoring and Evaluation. Evaluated will be the effectivenessof the applicant's proposed methods to track project progress and evaluatethe final accomplishments of the project in terms of its original goalsand objectives and contribution to fisheries development. (20 points).e. Project Costs. Evaluated will be the justification and allocation ofthe budget in terms of the work to be performed. Taken into account willbe unreasonably high or low project costs, as well as S-K funds requestedwhich should more appropriately be provided by the applicant. (20 points).3. Formal Industry Review: After the technical evaluation, each reviewingoffice will solicit comments from the fishing industry, consumer representatives,and others, as appropriate, to rank the projects filed with the office.The rankings may be obtained through independent reviews or involve formalmeetings of industry representatives.Considered in the industry rankings, along with the technical evaluation,will be the significance of the problem addressed in the project. The industryreviewers will rank each project in terms of importance or need for fundingand provide recommendations on the level of funding NMFS should award toeach project and the merits and benefits of funding each project.B. Funding AwardsAfter projects have been evaluated, the reviewing NOAA Fisheries officeswill develop recommendations for project funding. They will submit therecommendations to the Assistant Administrator for Fisheries, NMFS, whowill determine the number of projects to be funded based on the recommendationsprovided, consistency of projects with the identified fisheries objectives,and the amount of funds available for the program.The exact amount of funds awarded to a project will be determined in pre-awardnegotiations between the applicant and NOAA/NMFS program and grants managementrepresentatives. The Department of Commerce (DOC) will review all recommendedprojects and funding before final authority is given to proceed on theproject. The funding instrument will be determined by NOAA Grants Officers.Although in unique circumstances pre-award costs may be approved, projectsshould not be initiated in expectation of Federal funding until a noticeof award document is received. Any costs incurred prior to issuance ofthe award document are at the applicant's own risk.<ITAG tagnum="84">V. Administrative Requirements</ITAG>A. Obligations of the Applicant.An Applicant must:1. Meet all application requirements and provide all information necessaryfor the evaluation of the project.2. Be available, upon request, in person or by designated representative,to respond to questions during the review and evaluation of the project(s).3. If a project is awarded, manage the day-to-day operations of the project,be responsible for the performance of all activities for which funds aregranted, and be responsible for the satisfaction of all administrativeand managerial conditions imposed by the award.4. If a project is awarded, keep records sufficient to document any costsincurred under the award, and allow access to records for audit and examinationby the Secretary, the Comptroller General of the United States, or theirauthorized representatives.5. If a project is awarded, submit quarterly project status reports onthe use of funds and progress of the project to NMFS within 30 days afterthe end of each calendar quarter. These reports will be submitted to theindividual specified as the Program Officer in the funding agreement. Thecontent of these reports will include, at a minimum, a summary of progressand expenditures to date, including:a. Description of tasks scheduled and accomplished;b. Description of actual and scheduled expenditures;c. Explanation of any differences between actual and scheduled work orexpenditures; andd. Any proposed changes in plans or redirection of resources or activitiesand the reason therefor.6. If a project is awarded, submit an original and two copies of a finalreport within 90 days after completion of each project to the NMFS ProgramOfficer. The final report must describe the project and include an evaluationof the work performed and the results and benefits in sufficient detailto enable NMFS to assess the success of the completed project. The contentof the evaluation should include, at a minimum:a. Description of the original project goals and objectives, and the contextin which the project was to benefit the fishing industry. This descriptionshould address the following questions:(1) What were the original project goals and objectives?(2) To what extent were goals measurable or quantifiable?(3) Were modifications made to project goals and objectives and, if so,what was the cause for the modifications?(4) Were the goals and objectives attained? How? If not, why?b. Description of the specific accomplishments (research results, products,or services) of the project and the relationship of these to the project'sgoals and objectives.(1) List the specific research results, products, or services producedby the project.(2) Describe the value of the products or services by themselves or inconcert with other activities.c. Description of how the project benefitted the fishing industry. Thisdescription should address the following questions:(1) To what extent did and/or will the public have access to the productsor services produced by the project?(2) To what extent did or will the fishing industry and associated infrastructure(universities, financial institutions, etc.) use the project's productsor services to satisfy a need or lessen business or other risks?(3) What are the specific economic or other benefits the fishing industryreceived as a result of its or others' use of the research results, products,or services of the project?(4) Nature of benefits:(a) To what extent are benefits measurable vs. intangible?(b) Are benefits one-time or continuing?(c) Are the benefits the result of a ``negative'' finding?7. If a project is funded by grant or cooperative agreement, an applicantmust comply with applicable Department of Commerce regulations, OMB Circularsand Treasury Circulars. Applicants are also subject to the provisions of15 CFR Part 26, ``Governmentwide Debarment and Suspension (Nonprocurement)and Governmentwide Requirements for Drug-Free Workplace (Grants).'' Copiesare available from the NOAA Grants Offices listed above.8. In order for NMFS to assist the grantee in disseminating information,the grantee is requested to submit three copies of all publications (inaddition to the Final Report in 6. above) printed with grant funds to theOffice of Trade and Industry Services, NMFS, 1335 East-West Highway, SilverSpring, MD 20910.9. Any State agency submitting an application for funding is required tocomplete item 22 on Standard Form 424 regarding clearance by the StatePoint of Contact (SPOC) established as a result of Executive Order 12372.B. Obligations of the National Marine Fisheries ServiceNMFS will: 1. Provide all forms and explanatory information necessary forthe proper submission of applications for fisheries development and utilizationprojects. 2. Provide advice, through the NMFS Office servicing the applicant's area,to inform applicants of NMFS fisheries development policies and goals.Interested applicants are encouraged to contact the NMFS Washington orRegional Offices for clarification or explanation of any information appearingin this notice. 3. Monitor all projects after award to ascertain their effectiveness inachieving their objectives. Actual accomplishments of a project will becompared with stated objectives. 4. Maintain a mailing list for the annual S-K solicitations. Upon request,interested persons will be placed on the mailing list to receive the solicitationat the time it is published in the<T4> Federal Register</T4>.C. Responsibility of the Grants OfficerThe Grants Officer is responsible for the administration processing andfor all business and financial aspects of NOAA Federal assistance awards.Questions from the recipient relating to these aspects will be referrdto the Grants Officer. The official grant file will be maintained by theGrants Officer who will ensure that OMB, DOC, and NOAA policies are met.D. Legal Requirements The applicant will be required to satisfy the requirements of applicableFederal, State and local laws.<ITAG tagnum="84">VI. Classification</ITAG>The Under Secretary for Oceans and Atmosphere, NOAA, determined that thisnotice is not a major action requiring a regulatory impact analysis underExecutive Order 12291 because it is not likely to result in (1) an annualeffect on the economy of $100 million or more; (2) a major increase incosts or prices for consumers, individual industries, Federal, State, orlocal government agencies, or geographic regions; or (3) significant adverseeffects on competition, employment, investment, productivity, innovation,or on the ability of United States-based enterprises to compete with foreign-basedenterprises in domestic or exports markets. Prior notice and an opportunityfor public comment are not required by the Administrative Procedure Actor any other law for this notice concerning grants, benefits and contracts.Therefore, a regulatory flexibility analysis is not required for purposesof the Regulatory Flexibility Act. This action is categorically excluded from the requirements to preparean environmental assessment by NOAA Directive 02-10.This notice does not contain policies with federalism implications sufficientto warrant preparation of a federalism assessment under Executive Order12612.This notice contains a collection of information requirement subject tothe Paperwork Reduction Act. The collection of this information has beenapproved by the Office of Management and Budget, OMB Control Number 0648-0135.This notice of availability of financial assistance for fisheries researchand development projects will also appear in the<T3> Commerce Business Daily</T3>.<ITAG tagnum="20">(Federal Domestic Assistance Catalog No. 11.427 Fisheries Developmentand Utilization Research and Demonstration Grants and Cooperative Agreements)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: March 29, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">James W. Brennan,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Administrator for Fisheries.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-7873 Filed 4-3-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3510-22-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>