<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89526-0012 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.5-26-89.f2.A1011</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 101 / Friday, May 26, 1989 / Rulesand Regulations<ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Federal Aviation Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">14 CFR Parts 121 and 135</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 25590; Amdt. Nos. 121-196 and 135-25]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Smoking Aboard Aircraft; Summary and Disposition of Comments</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), DOT.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Disposition of comments. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This document summarizes and responds to comments receivedby the FAA concerning the Smoking Aboard Aircraft Final Rule. Due to acongressional mandate, the rule went into effect on April 23, 1988. Becauseof the early effective date, the FAA did not have sufficient time to issuea notice of proposed rulemaking and receive comments from the public. Therefore,post-effective date comments were invited from the public. The commentperiod closed on May 31, 1988; however, this document addresses commentsreceived through December 31, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>Effective Date of Final Rule: April 23, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>The Smoking Aboard Aircraft Final Rule docket may beexamined at the Federal Aviation Administration, Office of the Chief Counsel,Rules Docket, Room 915-G, 800 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC 20591.The Rules Docket is open weekdays, except Federal holidays, between 8:30a.m. and 5:00 p.m.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Gary E. Davis, Project DevelopmentBranch (AFS-240), Air Transportation Division, Office of Flight Standards,Federal Aviation Administration, 800 Independence Avenue SW., Washington,DC 20591, Telephone (202) 267-8096.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Background</ITAG>In 1984 Congress directed the Secretary of Transportation to commissionan independent study by the National Academy of Sciences (NAS) on the cabinair quality in airliners. NAS formed the Committee on Airliner Cabin AirQuality (Committee), and the study was published in August 1986. The Committeepresented 21 recommendations, the most controversial of which was to bansmoking on all commercial domestic flights.In December 1987, Congress enacted an amendment to section 404 of the FederalAviation Act of 1958 (Act). The amendment (section 404(d)(1)(A)) (smokingban or ban) banned smoking in the passenger cabin or lavatory aboard domesticflights scheduled for 2 hours or less. Congress required that the ban gointo effect on April 23, 1988, and last for a period of 2 years.Congress also added section 404(d)(2) to the Act which provides for a civilpenalty of up to $2,000 for any passenger who tampers with, disables, ordestroys a smoke detector in the lavatory of an aircraft. The civil penaltyprovision took effect immediately and has no expiration date. Congressdirected the Secretary of Transportation (Secretary) to issue the implementingregulations. The Secretary has delegated this responsibility to the FAA(Amendment 1-223, 53 FR 10250, March 30, 1988).The FAA issued the Smoking Aboard Aircraft Final Rule on April 11, 1988and published it in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on April 13, 1988 (52 FR 12358). Because Congressrequired that the smoking ban go into effect on April 23, 1988, the FAArule became effective on the same date. Post-effective date comments wereinvited from the public.The Department of Transportation (DOT) compiled the public comments inresponse to both the NAS Committee on Airliner Cabin Air Quality recommendationsand the FAA rule. With respect to the former_from the date of publicationof the Committee's recommendations through December 31, 1988_DOT's ConsumerAffairs Office received 3,181 unsolicited letters concerning the Committee'srecommendation to ban smoking aboard aircraft, of which 2,871 supportedthe NAS recommendation. The FAA has been advised by the Office of the Secretaryof Transportation that one of the letters supporting the Committee's recommendationto ban smoking aboard aircraft was signed by more than 6,100 people. Theremaining 310 letters received opposed the Committee's recommendation toban smoking and smoking regulations in general.With respect to the FAA rule_from the date of publication of the rule throughDecember 31, 1988_DOT's Consumer Affairs Office received 6,068 lettersand postcards. Seventy-seven comments were in favor of the ban; the balance,most of which were form letters and postcards, opposed the smoking ban.The letters and cards received by DOT since June 8, 1988, are availablefor review in the Rules Docket.<ITAG tagnum="84">Discussion of the Comments </ITAG>Comments on the final rule were invited to be submitted between April 23,1988, and May 31, 1988. The FAA has reviewed all of the comments receivedup to December 31, 1988. The comments and the FAA's disposition of thecomments are discussed below.The FAA received 122 comments; 79 supporting the rule, 36 opposing therule, and 7 neutral. Ninety-three comments received were from private citizens.Twenty-one comments were received from medical and health organizations.The remaining 8 comments received were from airline industry and unionorganizations, a consumer action group, one air carrier, and a representativeof the tobacco industry.The private citizen commenters opposed to the rule recommended that theFAA repeal the ban. Because the smoking ban was congressionally mandated,only Congress can repeal the smoking ban.The private citizen commenters supporting the rule and the comments receivedfrom the medical and health organizations recommended that the FAA extendthe smoking ban to include flights longer than 2 hours and to extend theban beyond the April 1990 expiration date.At this time, scientific evidence has not sufficiently established thatthere is a significant health risk to nonsmoking passengers and crewmembers,while on board an aircraft, when other passengers are smoking and the existingsmoking regulations are enforced. DOT is conducting a study to identifythe type and level of contaminants created by smoking aboard aircraft andthe health risks such contaminants may pose to nonsmoking passengers. Withthe information provided from the DOT study, and upon consideration ofreports and studies from other governmental agencies and scientific andmedical groups, options for mitigating the exposure to smoking contaminantsaboard aircraft will be evaluated. Further rulemaking at this time is premature.The scope and duration of the present smoking ban regulations promulgatedby the FAA were intended solely to implement the congressional mandateto ban smoking aboard aircraft. Therefore, recommendations to extend thesmoking ban in duration or to expand the scope of the ban to flights longerthan 2 hours are beyond the scope of this rulemaking. Recommendations forchanges to the congressional mandate that bans smoking should be directedto the Congress. Legislation was introduced in the last Congress and atleast one bill has been introduced already in the 101st Congress to permanentlyprohibit smoking on all domestic airline flights.The remaining 8 comments are discussed below. These commenters addressedthe FAA's decision to apply the smoking ban to each flight segment of 2hours or less during a multistop flight, use of the North American Editionof the Official Airline Guide (OAG) to determine which flights will becovered by the smoking ban, realistic scheduling, compliance and enforcementissues, tampering with smoke detectors, and the requirement to keep thepassenger information signs lit during flights of 2 hours or less.<ITAG tagnum="84">Flights Covered by the Smoking Ban</ITAG>Flight SegmentsOne commenter stated that the FAA's determination to apply the smokingban to each flight segment of 2 hours or less during a multistop flightignores what the commenter believes is the intent of Congress to strikea balance between the needs of smokers and nonsmokers aboard aircraft.By applying the smoking ban to each flight segment of 2 hours or less,a passenger who is on board an aircraft that makes several stops beforearriving at its final destination will be prevented from smoking for theentire length of the trip if each flight segment of the trip is 2 hoursor less. The commenter recommended, for the purpose of applying the smokingban, that a multistop flight be considered one flight, rather than consideringeach flight segment of a multistop flight as a separate flight.Congress made no apparent distinction between flights of 2 hours or lessand flights that are segments of multiple-flight itineraries (flight segments).Such flight segments are listed individually in schedules as nonstop flightsand, for many passengers, a nonstop flight segment is an entire flight.The FAA determined that Congress intended to provide passengers on nonstopflights of 2 hours or less a smoke-free flight, even if that flight maycontinue after landing to another destination.Use of the Official Airline Guide Another commenter stated that the FAA's determination to apply the smokingban to each flight of 2 hours or less listed in the OAG is too narrow.The commenter recommends that the smoking ban apply to all flights of 2hours or less, including charter flights which are not listed in the OAG.The commenter raised two concerns: (1) many flights, although not scheduled,are 2 hours or less and passengers aboard such flights should benefit fromthe smoking ban; and (2) air carriers may stop publishing their flightsin the OAG and thereby avoid compliance with the smoking ban.Charter flights are not scheduled flights. Because the congressional mandaterequires that the smoking ban be applied to scheduled flights, nonscheduledflights of 2 hours or less are unaffected. Therefore, applying the banto charter flights is beyond the scope of this rulemaking.While, hypothetically, an air carrier might remove a flight listing fromthe OAG to avoid complying with the smoking ban, the FAA concluded, asnoted in the preamble to the rule, that competitive and marketing pressureswould discourage this action. The FAA invited comments on its conclusion(52 FR 12359; April 13, 1988). No comment or complaint has been receivedregarding the removal of a flight listed in the OAG.One commenter suggested that the air carriers be allowed to use sourcesother than the OAG to determine scheduled flight times. The computer reservationsystem was recommended as one alternative to the OAG. The FAA determinedthat passengers, air carriers, and FAA inspectors should use the same resourceto determine which flights are subject to the smoking ban. Thus, a comprehensiveand accessible list of scheduled flights must be available. The OAG issuch a list. It contains the operations of all major air carriers offeringscheduled flights. Any such flights that are not listed in the OAG wouldalmost certainly be utilizing aircraft with less than 30 seats where smokingis totally banned already. (14 CFR 252.5) In addition, the flight informationin the OAG is readily available to passengers who want to determine whethersmoking will be prohibited on a particular flight. Thus, because of itsaccessibility and widespread use and acceptance, the FAA continues to believethat the OAG is the best means for determining which scheduled flightsare covered by the smoking ban.Realistic SchedulingCongress required that the smoking ban apply to flights scheduled for 2hours or less, notwithstanding the actual duration of the flight. One commenterstated that many flights scheduled for 2 hours or less take longer andthat passengers on such flights will be required to refrain from smokingfor a longer period of time than intended by Congress. To prevent the banfrom applying to scheduled flights that are likely to exceed 2 hours, thecommenter suggested that the FAA require the airlines to adjust their schedules,as reported in the OAG, by incorporating an average delay factor that wouldensure accurate listings.This comment should be addressed as a scheduling issue which is more appropriatelywithin the regulatory jurisdiction of the Office of the Secretary of Transportation(OST). OST rules already regulate ``unrealistic scheduling,'' which isdefined as a prohibited unfair or deceptive practice (14 CFR 399.81(a)).Persons with evidence of unrealistic scheduling by a particular air carriershould provide it to OST. OST rules also require air carriers to reporttheir on-time performance to OST and to include an on-time performancecode for each flight in their computerized reservation systems (14 CFR234.4). Thus, a regulatory deterrent to unrealistic scheduling is alreadyin place.Compliance and EnforcementThe preamble to the final rule states that the FAA expects air carriersto enforce the prohibition on smoking (52 FR 12360; April 13, 1988). Onecommenter requested that the FAA clarify the statement made in the preambleconcerning this duty of the air carrier.The FAA expects air carriers to make reasonable efforts to assist in theenforcement of the rule implementing the smoking ban. There is no indicationthat air carriers are not making such efforts or that air carriers do notunderstand how to do so.Two commenters suggested that the FAA amend the rule to include provisionsthat the air carriers take such steps as are necessary to obtain a positiveidentification of the violator including, if necessary, the notificationof police authorities at the airport who can meet the passenger and requestidentification. One of these commenters also suggested that the regulationsrequire air carriers to report violations to the FAA within 48 hours ofbeing informed that the violation occurred and that the FAA notify thealleged violator within 7 days of notification from the air carrier. Thecommenter is concerned that many violations may go unreported if such provisionsare not included in the regulations.The FAA expects smoking ban enforcement to be similar to enforcement ofany other Federal Aviation Regulation (FAR). If a passenger violates thesmoking ban, the air carrier should submit the appropriate informationto the local FAA Flight Standards District Office (FSDO) so that the FAAcan investigate the violation. The FAA does not believe that enforcementof the smoking ban requires the presence of a local enforcement officeror FAA representative at the gate to immediately initiate enforcement actions.However, if a passenger who is violating the smoking ban interferes witha crewmember while the crewmember is performing his or her duties, a pilotin command may request the presence of a law enforcement officer at thegate.Limiting the time period for a person to report a violation may actuallydecrease the number of violations reported to the FAA. Air carriers wouldnot report violations if they could not submit the information within the48-hour time limitation. The FAA prefers to have as many violations reportedas possible despite the amount of time the air carrier needs to submitthe information. Similarly, after an air carrier reports a violation, FAApersonnel must determine whether the violation can be pursued. To makethis determination, FAA personnel must obtain the crewmembers' statements.Obtaining these statements often requires more than 7 days; however, itis not until these steps are taken, that the alleged violator is notified.Therefore, the FAA has determined that time limitations on the air carrierswould decrease the number of violations reported and, a requirement thatthe FAA notify an alleged violator within 7 days would not provide theFAA with sufficient time to open an investigation.Tampering and Disabling Smoke DetectorsSeveral comments addressed the rule's provisions governing smoke detectorsin aircraft lavatories. One commenter suggested that, as of January 1,1989, the statement that tampering with smoke detectors is prohibited shouldbe eliminated from the pre-flight briefing because, on January 1, 1989,andSection; 121.317(e) of the FAR will require a placard in all aircraftlavatories stating this same information. Although the placards will belegible to most passengers using the lavatory, there may be some passengerswho cannot or may not see or read the sign. In the interest of safety andbecause a violation may subject a passenger to a civil penalty of up to$2,000, the FAA has determined that an audible, as well as a visual warningis appropriate. By including the statement in the briefing, all passengerswill receive notice of the potential penalty for tampering with smoke detectors.Considering the possibility that the 2-hour smoking ban might increasesurreptitious smoking aboard aircraft, the FAA sought comments on the needfor tamper-resistant smoke detectors (52 FR 12359; April 13, 1988). Severalcommenters stated that passengers who insist on smoking can easily disablethe smoke detectors. Some commenters suggested that the FAA require ``tamper-resistant''smoke detectors and others suggested ``tamper-proof'' detectors. The commentersrecommended a variety of approaches, such as: installing the smoke detectorsbehind the ceiling panel, development of a technical standard order whichwould require that an audible and/or visual signal be provided to the flightor cabin crewmembers when tampering occurs, and requirements that smokedetectors be upgraded so that they are as sensitive as the existing technologywill permit. In addition to soliciting comments, the FAA contacted localFAA inspectors to determine whether passengers are tampering with smokedetectors. The information received from our requests for comments andfrom the local FAA maintenance inspectors indicates that there has beensome tampering with smoke detectors.During a House Appropriations Committee hearing on February 24, 1988, RepresentativeRichard Durbin recommended that the FAA require air carriers to installplacards stating ``Federal law provides for a penalty of up to $2,000 fortampering with the smoke detector installed in this lavatory'' in everylavatory equipped with a smoke detector. The recommendation was accepted,and the rule requires that these placards be installed before January 1,1989. The FAA believes that these placards will help deter passengers fromtampering with the smoke detectors. In addition, the FAA will issue anAction Notice to all Principal Maintenance Inspectors requiring the inspectorsto conduct a survey and to report the results of the survey to the FlightStandards division within 30 days. The action notice will help obtain theinformation necessary to determine whether or not further rulemaking isnecessary and if so, what action should be taken to prevent tampering withsmoke detectors.Passenger Information SignsIn addition to the passenger briefings, the FAA chose to inform passengersof the no smoking requirement on flights of 2 hours or less by keepingthe passenger information signs lit during the flight. This method waschosen for the following reasons: (1) all airplanes used in operationsunder Part 121 of the FAR and all airplanes with more than 19 passengerseats used in operations under Part 135 of the FAR must be equipped withthese signs; (2) such signs have always been used to inform passengerswhen smoking is not allowed; and (3) passengers are accustomed to suchsigns. However, in the preamble to the final rule, the FAA solicited commentson whether the use of these signs is the best means of notification andwhether any alternative means would be better (52 FR 12359; April 13, 1988).The FAA received one comment on this issue.The commenter stated that the passenger information signs were not designedfor continuous operation. The commenter recommended that the rule allowair carriers to choose between keeping the passenger information signslit or posting ``no smoking'' signs in designated areas of the passengercabin.The FAA finds that the alternative presented by the commenter would notbe an effective way to carry out the ban. Passenger information signs arepositioned so that every passenger can see a sign while seated. A passenger'sfield of vision is limited while seated in an aircraft and posted signsmay not always be visible. Therefore, posted no smoking signs might notprovide sufficient notice of the smoking ban to all passengers. Furthermore,it is important that the air carriers notify passengers of the smokingban in a consistent manner. Uniformity of notification will reduce confusionconcerning whether the ban applies to a particular flight.Continuous use of the passenger information signs will not deterioratethe signs. Although the air carrier may need to replace the light bulbsused in the signs more frequently, this should not cause a substantialinconvenience. The bulbs used in the passenger information signs have auseful life of approximately 7,000 hours. In addition, the signs are installedwith two bulbs so that the signs dim somewhat before both bulbs burn out.This gives the air carrier sufficient time to change the bulbs before thesign is inoperable. Because no effective alternative to the passenger informationsigns has been presented, and because use of the passenger informationsigns create no appreciable additional burden on the air carrier, the FAAwill continue to require that the passenger information signs be used toinform passengers that a flight is a nonsmoking flight.<ITAG tagnum="21">Issued in Washington, DC, on May 18, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Daniel C. Beaudette,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Director, Flight Standards Service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-12626 Filed 5-25-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-13-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>