<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR891006-0030 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.10-06-89.f2.A1029</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 193 / Friday, October 6, 1989/ Proposed Rules<ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Coast Guard</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">33 CFR Parts 154, 155, 156</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">46 CFR Parts 32, 35, 39</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[CGD 88-102]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="91">RIN 2115-AC65</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Marine Vapor Control Systems</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Coast Guard, DOT.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of proposed rulemaking.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Coast Guard proposes to adopt new regulations forthe safe design, installation, and operation of marine vapor control systems.Some states, in an attempt to meet the national ambient air quality standardfor ozone set by the EPA under the Clean Air Act, have issued requirementsfor the control of volatile organic compound (VOC) emissions from tankvessels which carry oil and chemicals in bulk. Vapor emission control isalso being considered as a means of reducing occupational exposure to toxicchemicals such as benzene. Unsafe vapor control system design or operationcould result in fires and explosions, tank ruptures and oil spills. Thisrulemaking will not require the installation or use of vapor control systems.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>Comments must be received on or before November 20, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>Comments should be mailed to the Executive Secretary,Marine Safety Council (G-LRA-2/3600) (CGD 88-102), U.S. Coast Guard, 2100Second St. SW., Washington, DC 20593-0001, (202) 267-1477. Comments mayalso be delivered to and will be available for inspection and copying atthe Marine Safety Council, room 3600, U.S. Coast Guard, 2100 Second Street,SW., Washington, DC, between 8:00 a.m. and 3:00 p.m., Monday through Friday,except Federal holidays.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Lieutenant Commander Robert H.Fitch, Office of Marine Safety, Security and Environmental Protection (G-MTH-1),room 1214, (202) 267-1217, between 7:00 a.m. and 3:30 p.m., Monday throughFriday, except Federal holidays.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>The public is invited to participatein this proposed rulemaking by submitting written views, data or arguments.Comments should include the name and address of the person making them,identify this notice (CGD 88-102) and the specific section of the proposalto which each comment applies, and give the reason for each comment. Ifan acknowledgement is desired, a stamped self-addressed post card or envelopeshould be enclosed.The rules as proposed may be changed in light of the comments received.All comments received before the expiration of the comment period willbe considered before final action is taken on this proposal.No public hearing is planned. However, one may be held at a time and placeto be set in a subsequent notice in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> if written requests for a public hearing arereceived and it is determined that the opportunity to make oral presentationswill be beneficial to the rulemaking process.<ITAG tagnum="84">Drafting Information</ITAG>The principal persons involved in drafting this proposal are: LieutenantCommander Robert H. Fitch, Project Manager, and Lieutenant Commander DonM. Wrye, Project Counsel, Office of Chief Counsel.<ITAG tagnum="84">Background</ITAG>During loading or ballasting of bulk liquid cargo tanks, the liquid introducedinto a tank displaces vapors within the tank, which in typical operationstoday are released to the atmosphere. The displaced vapors of certain cargoescontain VOC's which are a precursor to the formation of ozone, a majorair pollutant in some areas. Several states, acting pursuant to their authorityunder the Clean Air Act of 1970, are considering requirements for the controlof VOC emissions from the loading and ballasting of tankships and tankbarges. Three states currently have regulations which will require thecontrol of marine VOC emissions in the future.Marine occupational exposure offers another reason for using vapor controlsystems. In a separate regulatory project (CGD 88-040), the Coast Guardis developing regulations requiring lower occupational exposure limitsfor benzene. In anticipation of these requirements, vessel and facilityoperators are considering the use of marine vapor control systems for thepurpose of reducing occupational exposure to benzene and other hazardouschemicals.In a typical vapor control system, vapors emitted from a tank vessel beingloaded or ballasted are collected and piped ashore where they are destroyedthrough a process such as incineration, recovered through a process suchas refrigeration/condensation, or returned to the shore tank being emptied(vapor balancing). When vapors are collected for purposes of reducing occupationalexposure, and air pollution is not a factor, facility operators may chooseto pipe the vapors to a remote location and disperse them to the atmosphere.The use of marine vapor control systems introduces potentially significantnew hazards to the loading and ballasting operations of tank vessels. TheCoast Guard can best address these hazards through the development of safetyregulations for tank vessels and facilities using vapor control systems.This rulemaking will not require the installation or use of vapor controlsystems.The primary hazards associated with the use of vapor control equipmentare: cargo tank over- or underpressurization; overfill and spillage; andfire, explosion, and detonation. The severity and likelihood of accidentswhich might result from the use of vapor control systems warrant CoastGuard measures to minimize the risk of such accidents. It is, for example,possible for a vapor control system pipeline interconnecting a tank ona tank vessel with a shoreside vapor processing system to be filled witha flammable vapor. An ignition of this vapor could initiate a detonationwave which would propagate along the pipeline in either direction at thespeed of sound and would generate pressure exceeding 600 pounds per squareinch. Such an ignition could originate in shoreside vapor processing unitssuch as incinerators or flares which are likely to be the most commonlyused vapor processing systems. In 1983, such a flare initiated casualtyoccurred in a marine vapor control system. As a result, two barges weretotally destroyed and considerable damage was done to the facility. Reviewof the casualty indicates that additional safety features, routine inspectionsand better training of personel would have contributed to minimizing thelikelihood of this casualty. Present regulations do not address vapor control in the comprehensive mannerconsidered necessary for safe operation of vapor control systems. Thereare currently no safety regulations applicable to facility vapor controlsystem installations. In the case of tank vessels, while there are existingregulations for piping and electrical equipment which are applicable tovapor control equipment on vessels, the regulations are at this time inadequatein addressing all of the hazards associated with vapor control. Becauseof the complexities of vapor control systems, proper training of both shipand facility personnel is also considered essential to the safe operationof vapor control systems. At this time there are no Coast Guard requirementsdealing with the training and qualifications of personnel operating vaporcontrol systems.Recognizing the hazards associated with vapor control systems, the CoastGuard began to review proposed shoreside systems used in handling limitednumbers of vessels in dedicated trade. While effective when vapor controlsystem use was limited to a small number of dedicated trades, the caseby case reviews fell short of providing a comprehensive safety check andproviding the standardization considered necessary for widespread applicationof vapor control. Case by case review was also an inefficient means ofconveying to Coast Guard field units and to industry the level of safetywhich must be provided. The use of vapor control systems is expected to increase dramatically asstates require their use to help achieve Clean Air Act standards for airquality and as industry increases its use of vapor control systems to meetnew or proposed limits for occupational exposure to benzene and other carcinogenicchemicals carried in bulk. Given the anticipated increased use of vaporcontrol systems, the Coast Guard can best ensure safety through regulations.Because there was little historical experience to provide background datafor vapor control systems and serious concerns existed over potential safetyhazards introduced in implementing vapor control requirements, in 1986the Coast Guard funded a National Research Council (NRC), Commission onEngineering and Technical Systems, Marine Board study to assess the technical,safety and economic aspects of vapor control systems. The NRC study wasreleased in January, 1988 and concluded that control and recovery of hydrocarbonvapors from tankships and tank barges was feasible with available technologyprovided that national safety standards for vapor emission controls weredeveloped and implemented.In response to the NRC recommendation, the Chemical Transportation AdvisoryCommittee (CTAC) Subcommittee on Vapor Control was formed to develop standardsfor the design and operation of vapor control systems. The Subcommitteeheld its first meeting in August 1987. Six Subcommittee and ten workinggroup meetings were held to develop the standards. All meetings were opento the public and announced in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. CTAC presented the recommendations to the CoastGuard in February 1989.The Coast Guard funded a failure modes and effects analysis and a worstcase scenario analysis on several hypothetical vapor control systems whichincluded the safety provisions contained in draft recommendations preparedby CTAC. On basis of the analysis, the Coast Guard proposed changes tothe CTAC draft recommendations. CTAC reviewed the Coast Guard recommendationsand incorporated some of those recommendations in their final recommendations.The American Petroleum Institute (API) has funded a quantitative risk analysis(referred to as the API risk analysis) based upon the final CTAC recommendations.Some changes resulting from the API risk analysis have been incorporatedin these proposed rules. Both the Coast Guard and the API studies are includedin this rulemaking docket and are available for examination.The CTAC recommendations were used as the basis for these proposed regulations.The recommendations were reorganized and revised as appropriate to conformwith language required for regulations, and some recommendations were notincluded because they were outside the scope of this rulemaking. Specifictechnical deviations from the CTAC recommendations are discussed in theDiscussion section that follows:The objective of this regulatory proposal is to provide standards for thesafe design and operation of vapor control systems and provide qualificationrequirements for personnel operating vapor control systems. The requirementswould be applicable to vessels and facilities that use vapor control systems.This rulemaking will not require the installation or use of vapor controlsystems. The requirement to use a vapor control system will stem from astate requirement to control vessel emissions, or alternatively, as partof a vessel or facility operator's program for complying with personnelexposure requirements for hazardous chemicals.<ITAG tagnum="84">Discussion of the Proposed Regulation</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">33 CFR Part 154 </ITAG>The Coast Guard has another regulatory project (CGD 86-034) which wouldchange part 154 to apply existing requirements for bulk oil transfer facilitiesto facilities which transfer bulk liquid hazardous materials. A Noticeof Proposed Rulemaking of this project was published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on June 13, 1988 at 53 FR 22118, and a SupplementalNotice of Proposed Rulemaking was published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on June 9, 1989 at 54 FR 24718. Some of the changesin that rulemaking are necessary to make this part applicable to facilitiesusing vapor control. Changes to andSection;andSection;154.100, 154,105, and154.106 included in that proposal are repeated in these proposed rulesfor the convenience of the reader. If CGD 86-034 becomes a final rule beforethis rulemaking, the proposed changes for those sections will be deletedfrom this rulemaking except for some additional incorporation by referencestandards in andSection;154.106.Section 154.100 ApplicabilityThis section would amend the applicability of this part to include facilitieswhich transfer bulk liquid hazardous materials.Section 154.105 DefinitionsThis section would redefine ``facility'' to include facilities which transferhazardous materials to or from a vessel.Section 154.106 Incorporation by ReferenceThis section would list the materials which are incorporated by referenceinto this part.Section 154.310 Operations Manual: ContentsThis section would require operating procedures and a line diagram of afacility's vapor control system to be included in the facility's operationsmanual.Section 154.740 RecordsThis section would require a facility to keep records of repairs to thevapor control system and all automatic shutdowns of the vapor control system.This was not part of the CTAC recommendations. However, the Coast Guard'sposition is that this is needed to indicate to the Coast Guard recurringproblems which may require design changes.<ITAG tagnum="84">33 CFR 154, Subpart E</ITAG>A new subpart E would be added to part 154 entitled ``Vapor Control Systems''which would include requirements for the safe design and operation of vaporcontrol systems at facilities. The following sections would be includedin the new subpart:Section 154.800 ApplicabilityThis section would describe the applicability of this subpart. The ruleswould be applicable to any facility which recovers flammable or combustiblevapors from tank vessels. Recovery of vapors from liquefied flammable gasesis exempted. The CTAC recommendations listed applicability only for vaporsfrom crude oil, benzene, and gasoline cargoes. The Coast Guard anticipatesthat vapor control systems must be utilized in controlling emissions froma wider range of cargoes. The requirements developed by CTAC can applyequally to all cargoes listed in Table 30.25-1 of 46 CFR part 30 and tohydrocarbon compounds (i.e., only made up of hydrogen and carbon) listedin 46 CFR Table 151.01-10(b) or Table 1 of 46 CFR part 153. Cargoes listedin 46 CFR Table 151.01-10(b) or Table 1 of 46 CFR part 153, which are nothydrocarbons liquids, are given special consideration in andSection; 154.803of this subpart.Section 154.802 DefinitionsThis section would give definitions of terms which are used in this subpart.Several terms were added to those provided by CTAC in order to define termswhich may not otherwise be clear to people likely to use these rules. ``Recognizedindustry standards'' which was included in the CTAC recommendations, isnot included in these proposed rules because the subject is dealt within the section on ``Incorporation by Reference''. ``Sources of ignition'',which was included in the CTAC recommendations, is not included in theseproposed rules because its primary usage in the CTAC recommendations isnot contained in these proposed rules.Section 154.803 Other Hazardous MaterialsThis section would require a facility which collects vapors of cargoeslisted in 46 CFR Table 151.01-10(b) or Table 1 of 46 CFR part 153, whichare not hydrocarbons liquids, to meet the requirements in this subpartand any additional requirements which the Commandant (G-MTH) may prescribe.These cargoes may have unusual flammability characteristics or other particularhazards which are not adequately addressed by this subpart and must receivespecial consideration.Section 154.804 Review of System Designs and Initial InspectionThis section describes the proposed process for review of a facility'svapor control system design. It includes provisions for review by a thirdparty acceptable to the Coast Guard. All new and existing facility vaporcontrol systems would be reviewed and certified by an entity acceptableto the Coast Guard, including these facility vapor control systems whichwere previously approved by the Coast Guard. Owners or operators of a facilitywith a previously approved vapor control system would have six months tomake their submittal, twelve months to make modifications after notificationby the certifying entity, and not more than two years total to come intocompliance with the regulations. The CTAC recommendations called for previouslyapproved existing systems to be accepted by the Coast Guard without formalreview, however, the Coast Guard is proposing that formal review. Whenthe Coast Guard previously reviewed the systems, the potential hazardswere not fully understood, and they were not reviewed to the same standardsof safety which would be required by these regulations.This section would also require a qualitative failure analysis as partof the review process. It would require the analysis to show that the vaporcontrol system has two means of protection to prevent an ignition in thefacility's system from propagating to the vessel and to prevent an ignitionon the vessel from propagating into the facility's system, and these meansof protection must operate automatically, independent of human intervention.The CTAC recommendations called for three means of protection to preventan ignition from propagating to the vessel, however, the first means ofprotection was intended to be good design which eliminates sources of ignition.The Coast Guard's position is that this good design means of protectionis addressed throughout these proposed rules, would be difficult to demonstratein a failure analysis, and therefore is not needed. Although not includedin the CTAC recommendations, the Coast Guard is proposing to include inthe definition of ``means of protection'' that these means of protectionmust operate without intervention, because an operator is not likely tobe able to act with sufficient speed to prevent propagation of an ignition.This section would authorize the certifying entity to conduct the initialinspection and testing of the installation to verify that the system conformsto the plans and specifications, and meets the requirements of this subpart.After the certifying entity certifies that the installation meets the requirmentsof this subpart, the Captain of the Port will endorse the facility's Letterof Adequacy that the facility is acceptable to collect vapors.The CTAC recommendations did not address procedures relating to alterationsto a vapor control system. The Coast Guard's position is that alterationsinvolving any component required by this subpart must be approved and inspectedby an approval entity. Therefore, this provision is included. Section 154.806 Application for Acceptance as a Certifying EntityThis section would give the process and required qualifications for obtainingCoast Guard acceptance as a certifying entity. The CTAC recommendationsprovided for a professional engineer to perform the review. The Coast Guard'sposition is that persons other than professional engineers may be qualifiedto perform the review, and that additional criteria should be met to demonstrateacceptable qualifications. The Coast Guard wants certifying entities tobe available when the final rules become effective. Entities may submittheir applications based on these proposed rules, and the Coast Guard willbegin to grant acceptances when the final rules are published. If thereare no acceptable entities when the final rules become effective, the Commandant(G-MTH) will consider conducting the review and analysis required by andSection;154.804 of this subpart on an interim basis and Coast Guard field unitswill conduct the initial inspection. Section 154.808 Vapor Control System, GeneralThis section would give some general requirements for a facility's vaporcontrol system. The proposed requirements would include provisions forelimination of potential sources of ignition, for vapor collection systemcomponents to meet ANSI Standard B31.3 with a design working pressure ofat least 150 psig, for a means to drain and collect any liquid condensatein the vapor line, and for a liquid knockout vessel to protect the vaporcompressor from liquid carryover. Based upon the results of the API riskanalysis, this section would also require a high level alarm and overfillshutdown for the knockout vessel to prevent liquid carryover.Section 154.810 Vapor Line Connections This section would give requirements for the facility vapor connection,shutoff valves at the facility vapor connection, and vapor hoses and loadingarms. A requirement for the automatic shutoff valve to close in five seconds,and to be located upstream of any vapor assist device and the point whereinerting, diluting, or enriching gas is introduced into the system, hasbeen included. The Coast Guard is proposing to require an isolation valvecapable of manual operation in addition to the automatic shutoff valvecalled for in the CTAC recommendations. The Coast Guard's position is thatthe facility needs to be able to isolate its vapor collection system fromthe vessel manually, in case of failure of the automatic shutoff valve.The requirements for vapor hoses and vapor loading arms would be expandedfrom the CTAC recommendations. The proposed rules would require that thehoses and loading arms have a maximum allowable working pressure of atleast 25 psi pressure and 2.0 psi vacuum, require annual testing of hoses,and require specific types of connections. The rules would also requirethe last 1.5 meters of vapor piping or vapor loading arm to be painteda bright orange color (international orange), and all of the vapor hoseto be that color in lieu of only the last two feet as specified in theCTAC recommendations. Although CTAC wanted a standard color to be usedto distinguish vapor connections, it could not agree on a color. The CoastGuard is proposing to require orange because it is easily recognizableand will not conflict with existing piping color code systems.Both the Coast Guard hazards analysis and the API risk analysis recognizedthe hazard involved in misconnecting a loading hose to the vessel vaporconnection and recommended steps to prevent it from occuring. The CoastGuard's position is that this can best be handled by requiring some meansof physically preventing misconnection. The Coast Guard proposes to requirea lug with a corresponding hole on each flange to prevent misconnection.Suggestions of other physical means to prevent misconnection are solicited.Section 154.812 Vessel Liquid Overfill ProtectionThis section would give requirements for facilities to prevent the overfillof tank barges. These requirements are needed because of the potentiallyincreased hazards resulting from the closed loading of tank vessels associatedwith vapor control. The requirements would be applicable to facilitiesloading tank barges which use the overfill protection measures proposedin 46 CFR 39.20-9(b). It would give requirements for an overfill controlpanel located on the facility, which would receive a high level signalfrom sensors on the tank barge. Although the CTAC recommendations did notspecify an automatic shutdown of cargo loading, the Coast Guard's positionis that this should be required. The need for this automatic shutdown isindicated by the Coast Guard's hazards analysis and API's risk analysis.The Coast Guard is also proposing that the loading should automaticallyshut down when signal circuit continuity is lost.Section 154.814 Vessel Vapor Overpressure and Vacuum ProtectionThis section would give requirements to prevent a facility from over-orunderpressurizing a tank vessel. The requirements would include maximumand minimum pressures at the facility vapor connection, and high and lowpressure alarms and shutdowns. The CTAC recommendations specified a maximumpressure of 0.2 psig for inland tank barges and 0.3 psig for ocean tankbarges. The Coast Guard's position is that the 0.1 psig pressure differencedoes not add any benefit, and therefore is proposing to require that themaximum pressure be 0.3 psig for all non-inerted vessels. The Coast Guardis proposing that the facility's vapor collection system have a capacityat least equal to 1.25 times the facility's maximum loading rate in orderto reduce the possibility of overpressurizing a vessel. The 1.25 factoris used to account for vapor generation during loading.This section would also include provisions for high/low pressure alarmsand high/low pressure shutdowns of the vapor collection system and cargoloading when the high/low pressure levels are exceeded by a specific pressure.The CTAC recommendations did not include maximum/minimum settings for thealarms and shutdowns. The Coast Guard has decided that these maximum/minimumsettings should be specified in order to ensure standard performance criteria.The Coast Guard's hazards analysis recommended that the pressure sensingdevices used to activate high pressure alarms and shutdowns be locatedin the vapor collection line as close to the tank vessel as possible, thatis, upstream of the facility's first valve, so this provision has beenincluded. The API risk analysis recommended that a liquid vacuum breakerto relieve excessive vacuum should be located in the vapor collection lineif a device is used to assist drawing the vapors, so this has been included.Provisions are also included which would require the liquid vacuum breakerto be tested for capacity in accordance with API Standard 2000. The CoastGuard is proposing that a means of determining whether the maximum allowableloading rate is exceeded for a vessel must be provided.Section 154.820 Fire, Explosion and Detonation ProtectionThis section would give requirements to prevent a fire, explosion, or detonationin a facility's vapor control system. The CTAC recommendations requiredthree means of protection against flame propagation from any source ofignition in the vapor control system to the tank vessel, and two meansof protection against flame propagation from the tank vessel to the facility.The Coast Guard's position is that this approach is too confusing, notsufficiently specific, and may result in some systems not having an adequatelevel of safety. This section would be more specific than the CTAC recommendations,yet still retain flexibility to allow operators to design any type of systemwhich would provide for an adequate level of safety.This section would require a two-way detonation arrester at the facilityvapor connection. The CTAC recommendations identified this device as oneof the means of protection. An ASTM specification for the testing of detonationarresters is under development, and is expected to be published prior tothe publishing of these requirements as a final rule. In these proposedrules, the number of this specification is left blank and will providein the final rule. A draft of this specification is included as AppendixA. Detonation arresters have not yet been tested to the requirements ofthis specification. The Coast Guard expects that due to the expense ofthe test, no company will want to perform the test until the standard isadopted. It is anticipated that some commercially available detonationarresters can meet the draft ASTM standard. API has expressed its intentionto conduct tests after the standard is adopted.This section would also require a means of maintaining the concentrationof the vapor mixture outside the flammable range. The operator would havethe option of using either air dilution, enrichment, or inerting. The proposedregulation would provide the acceptable range of hydrocarbon concentrationor oxygen concentration based upon a percentage of either the upper orlower flammable limit. An alarm would be required when the mixture deviatesfrom the acceptable concentration range and an automatic shutdown of thevapor collection system would be required when the concentration deviateseven further from the acceptable range. The CTAC recommendations wouldrequire an inerting system to alarm when the oxygen content exceeded 7.0percent and to shut down vapor transfer at 8.0 percent. Coast Guard regulationsand requirements of the International Convention for the Safety of Lifeat Sea of 1974, as amended (SOLAS 74/83), require that the oxygen contentin cargo tanks of certain oil tankers be maintained at 8.0 percent by volumeor less. The Coast Guard's position is that this concentration providesan acceptable margin of safety for ships and that it will be equally appropriatefor vapor control purposes. Therefore, these proposed regulations requirean oxygen concentration of 8.0 percent for the alarm set point and 9.0percent for the shutdown set point.This proposed section goes into more detail on the means of analyzing thevapor stream than was recommended by CTAC, such as including provisionsfor the injection of a test span gas. The API risk analysis indicated thatthere was a danger of the cargo tanks being overpressurized by a blockagein the vapor collection line, or of the cargo tanks being overpressurizedby the diluting, enriching or inerting gas system. Therefore, a provisionwas added to require a pressure relieving device in the facility vaporcollection line. The CTAC recommendations recognized an explosion suppression system asan acceptable fire protection measure. The Coast Guard has reservationson the effectiveness of an explosion suppression system for this application,and questions whether the design criteria for such a system have been adequatelydefined. Tests to demonstrate its effectiveness are now being planned.If these tests demonstrate the effectiveness of an explosion suppressionsystem, design criteria will also be developed, and the Coast Guard willmodify the final rule to allow the use of an explosion suppression systemas a fire protection measure. This proposed section requires a flame arrester at all outlets to the atmosphereof the vapor control system and at any incinerator or flare. Each flamearrester must meet an ASTM standard which is under development and is expectedto be published prior to the publishing of these requirements as a finalrule. In these proposed rules, the number of this specification is leftblank and will be provided in the final rule. A draft of this specificationis included as Appendix B. The CTAC recommendations did not address all of the ignition hazards introducedby an incinerator or flare used to destroy the vapors or by a compressoror blower used to assist the movement of the vapors. This section wouldprovide additional requirements to address these hazards. If inerted vapors are handled by the vapor collection system, there maybe a build-up of pyrophoric iron sulphide deposits in the system. If airis introduced into the system, there is a danger of heating by the pyrophoriciron sulphide. This section proposes a requirement for a facility to haveprovisions to reduce the risk of heating from pyrophoric iron sulfide depositsif the vapor control system handles inerted vapors.Section 154.840 Personnel Since few systems are currently installed, the Coast Guard is proposingthat training be specifically tailored to a particular facility's installedvapor control system. The guidelines for a training program were developedby CTAC and are included as Appendix D. For personnel who have not previouslyreceived vapor control system training, the proposed rules would requirea 40 hour course, with at least 8 hours of hands-on training in normaland emergency operating procedures. For personnel who have completed thistraining at another facility or similar training for vessel personnel,the training could be reduced to 24 hours, including 8 hours of hands-ontraining in normal and emergency operating procedures. Comments are specificallyrequested on the duration of the training and whether individual trainingcourses should be approved by the Coast Guard.Section 154.850 Operational Requirements This section would detail operational requirements for a facility usinga vapor control system. It would include limitations on the loading rateand verification that all necessary valves in the vapor control systemare open. In addition to the CTAC recommendations, the Coast Guard is proposingthat a facility shall only receive vapors from a vessel approved for vaporcontrol, that all alarms and sensing devices must be tested not more than24 hours prior to each loading operation, that both oxygen or hydrocarbonanalyzers must be operable at the start of each loading operation, andthat the cargo loading must be terminated whenever the vapor control systemis shut down. The CTAC recommendations did not address the size or the length of vaporhose which can be used. The proposed regulations assume that pressure dropsthrough hoses will be minimal. The Coast Guard's position is that, in orderfor this to be a reasonable assumption, the length of vapor hose shouldbe limited to 30 meters and the inside diameter to no less than that ofthe vessel's vapor collection system piping. Longer hose lengths may beused if provisions are made to account for the resistance of the additionalvapor hose. The Coast Guard hazard analysis and the API risk analysis brought out severalother potential hazards which were not addressed in the CTAC recommendations.The following provisions to address these additional hazards were addedto this proposed rulemaking: The initial loading rate to each cargo tankshould be limited in order to reduce the possibility of generating staticelectricity; and vapors from an inerted vessel must be at a higher pressurethan on the facility side of the isolation valve before the valve is opened,in order to prevent the possibility that non-inerted air will enter thevessel's vapor collection line and cause heating of pyrophoric iron sulphidedeposits.The CTAC recommendations did not address line clearing of the cargo loadingline. The Coast Guard's position is that line clearing risks overpressurizingcargo tanks when a vessel is closed loading. Therefore, line clearing wouldbe prohibited. A damaged flame arrester at a flare contributed to a casualty with a vaporcontrol system. The flame arrester had been damaged by a previous flare-back.Therefore, a provision is included to inspect the flame arrester priorto continuing transfer operations if a flame is detected on the flame arresteror if it is suspected that a flare-back has occurred. <ITAG tagnum="84">33 CFR Part 155 </ITAG>Section 155.750 Contents of Oil Transfer Procedures This section would require operating procedures and a line diagram of thevessel's vapor collection system to be included in the vessel's oil transferprocedures. <ITAG tagnum="84">33 CFR Part 156 </ITAG>Section 156.120 Requirements for Oil Transfer This section would require that certain operational conditions of the vaporcontrol system be verified prior to conducting a transfer operation. Section 156.170 Equipment Tests and Inspections This section would require certain tests and inspections to be performedon a facility's or vessel's vapor control system. The CTAC recommendationsdid not include provisions for periodic testing and inspection other thantests prior to each transfer operation. The Coast Guard's position is thatmost components of the vapor control system which are not tested priorto each transfer operation should be tested annually. Although periodicinspection of detonation arresters is necessary, the Coast Guard does nothave sufficient information to determine how often inspection should berequired. Clogging of detonation and flame arresters varies with differentcargoes. The Coast Guard proposes to require annual inspection of detonationand flame arresters, and requests information regarding the frequency ofinspection considered necessary based on operational experience. The CoastGuard also proposes to require weekly calibration of hydrocarbon and oxygenanalyzers. <ITAG tagnum="84">46 CFR Part 32 </ITAG>Section 32.53-85 Instruction Manual_T/ALL This section would require a vessel's inert gas instruction manual to beamended to include procedures relating to vapor control operations. <ITAG tagnum="84">46 CFR Part 35 </ITAG>Section 35.35-20 Inspection Prior to Transfer of Cargo_TB/ALL This section would require certain operational conditions of a tank vessel'svapor control system to be verified prior to conducting an oil transferoperation. Section 35.35-30 ``Declaration of Inspection'' for Tankships_T/ALL This section would require checks to a vessel's vapor control system priorto transfer to be added to the vessel's Declaration of Inspection as anappendix. <ITAG tagnum="84">46 CFR Part 39 </ITAG>A new part 39 entitled ``Vapor Control Systems'' would be added which wouldinclude requirements for the safe design and operation of vapor controlsystems on tank vessels. The CTAC recommendations had separate requirementsfor tankships and tank barges. Because of the extent of overlap, the CoastGuard is proposing that these requirements should be combined, with differingrequirements pointed out. The following sections would be included in thenew part: Section 39.10-1 Applicability_TB/ALL This section would describe the applicability of this part. This part wouldbe applicable to any tankship or tank barge which recovers hydrocarbonvapors. Because state requirements to control vapor emissions may requireforeign vessels in U.S. ports to control vapor emissions, these safetyregulations would apply to foreign vessels collecting vapor emissions.Recovery of vapors from liquefied flammable gases is exempted. The CTACrecommendations listed applicability only for vapors from crude oil, benzene,and gasoline cargoes. The Coast Guard anticipates that vapor control systemsmay be utilized in controlling emissions from a wider range of cargoes.The requirements developed by CTAC can apply equally to all cargoes listedin Table 30.25-1 of 46 CFR part 30 and to hydrocarbon compounds (i.e.,only made up of hydrogen and carbon) listed in 46 CFR Table 151.01-10(b)or Table 1 of 46 CFR part 153. Cargoes listed in 46 CFR Table 151.01-10(b)or Table 1 of 46 CFR part 153, which are not hydrocarbon liquids, are givenspecial consideration in andSection;39.10-7 of this part. Section 39.10-3 Definitions_TB/ALL This section would give definitions of terms which are used in this partwhich may not otherwise be clear to people likely to use these rules. TheCTAC recommendations did not include a definition section for tankshipsor tank barges. Section 39.10-5 Incorporation by Reference_TB/ALL This section would list the materials which are incorporated by referenceinto this part. Section 39.10-7 Other Hazardous Materials_TB/ALL This section would require a facility which collects vapors of cargoeslisted in 46 CFR Table 151.01-10(b) or Table 1 of 46 CFR part 153, whichare not hydrocarbon liquids, to meet the requirements in this subpart andany additional requirements which the Commandant (G-MTH) may prescribe.These cargoes may have unusual flammability characteristics or other particularhazards which are not adequately addressed by this subpart and must receivespecial consideration. Section 39.10-9 Vessel Vapor Processing Unit_TB/ALL Since a tank vessel with a vapor processing unit on board has hazards similarto a facility with a vapor control system, this section would require sucha vessel to be reviewed to verify that the vessel provides an equivalentlevel of safety as required for a facility in proposed 33 CFR 154, subpartE. Although this requirement was not part of the CTAC recommendations,CTAC addressed this type of vessel assuming that it would meet the requirementsfor a facility. Therefore, this is consistent with the assumption and intentof the CTAC recommendations. Section 39.10-11 Personnel_TB/ALL Since few systems are currently installed, the Coast Guard is proposingthat training be specifically tailored to a vapor control system installedon a particular vessel or class of vessels. The guidelines for a trainingprogram were developed by CTAC and are included as Appendix D. For personnelwho have not previously received vapor control system training, the proposedrules would require a 40-hour course, with at least 8 hours of hands-ontraining in normal and emergency operating procedures. For personnel whohave completed this training on another vessel or similar training forfacility personnel, the training could be reduced to 24 hours, including8 hours of hands-on training in normal and emergency operating procedures.Comments are specifically requested on the duration of the training andwhether individual training courses should be approved by the Coast Guard.Section 39.10-13 Submission of Vapor Control System Designs_TB/ALL This section would specify the procedures for submitting vessel vapor controlplans to the Coast Guard's Marine Safety Center (MSC) for review. The installationon a foreign flag vessel would be certified by the classification societywhich classes the vessel. All new and existing vessel vapor control systemswould have to be reviewed and approved by the MSC. Owners or operatorsof a vessel with a previously approved vapor control system would havesix months to make their submittal, twelve months to make modificationsafter notification by the Coast Guard, and not more than two years totalto come into compliance with the regulations. The CTAC recommendationswere that previously approved existing systems should not need furtherreview. However, the Coast Guard's position is that further review is necessary.When the Coast Guard previously reviewed the systems the potential hazardswere not fully understood, and they were not reviewed to the same standardsof safety which would be required by these regulations. Section 39.20-1. Vapor Collection System_TB/ALL This section would give some general requirements for a tank vessel's vaporcollection system. It would give requirements for the vessel vapor connectionline and for vapor hoses. The CTAC recommendations did not require thevapor piping to be permanently installed. The Coast Guard is proposingthat vapor piping should be permanently installed. However, the Coast Guardrecognizes that there may be instances when the use of vapor hoses wouldbe acceptable. Therefore, the proposed regulations allow for exceptions.The CTAC recommendations called for the vessel vapor connection to be inthe vicinity of the loading manifold. The Coast Guard agrees that sucha location is desirable. However, the recommendation provided by CTAC isvague and would do little to enhance safety. The API is presently developinga standard for manifold arrangements which will provide a more definitivedescription than the CTAC recommendation. When this standard is received,the Coast Guard may propose adopting it as a requirement. Comments arespecifically requested on the need for specifying the location of the vaporconnection and what this location should be. The requirements for vapor hoses and vapor loading arms would be expandedfrom the CTAC recommendations. The proposed regulations would require thatthe hoses have a maximum allowable working pressure of at least 25 psig,be capable of withstanding a vacuum of 2.0 psi, and require specific typesof connections. They would also require the last 1.5 meters of the vessel'svapor piping to be painted a bright orange color (international orange),and all of the vapor hose to be that color in lieu of only the last twofeet as specified in the CTAC recommendations. As previously discussed,orange is proposed because it is easily recognizable and will not conflictwith existing piping color code systems. Both the Coast Guard hazards analysis and the API risk analysis recognizedthe hazard involved in misconnecting a loading hose to the vessel vaporconnection and recommended steps to prevent it from occurring. The CoastGuard's position is that this can best be handled by requiring some meansof physically preventing misconnection. The Coast Guard proposes to requirea lug with a corresponding hole on each flange to prevent misconnection.Suggestions of other physical means to prevent misconnection are solicited.Section 39.20-3 Cargo Gauging System_TB/ALL This section would require a closed gauging system on a tank vessel whichrecovers hydrocarbon vapors in order to determine liquid level in the cargotank, and gives the requirements for such a system. The CTAC recommendationsfor tank barges called for the gauging system to be permanently installed,while this was not included for tankships. The Coast Guard's position isthat the gauging system should be permanently installed on all vessels.This section would also require a secondary gauging system for the toppingoff range for tank barges which recover hydrocarbon vapors, because theywill not normally have the high level and overflow alarms that tankshipshave. The CTAC recommendations did not specify the range for this secondarygauging system. The Coast Guard's position is that at least the cargo levelin the top 1.5 meters of the tank should be indicated by this system. However,where a tank barge does have the same high level and overflow alarms thatare required for tankships, the proposed regulations exempt them from thesecondary gauging system requirements. Although not included in the CTACrecommendations, the Coast Guard is proposing that an exemption under thesecircumstances would be appropriate. Section 39.20-7 Tankship Liquid Overfill Protection_T/ALLThis section would require a high level alarm and a tank overflow alarmon tankships which recover hydrocarbon vapors, and give the requirementsfor these alarms. The CTAC recommendations called for the high level alarmto be set at no less than 95 percent of the tank capacity and the overflowalarm to be set at no higher than 98.5 percent of tank capacity. The CoastGuard's position is that it is not appropriate to specify a lower limitfor the high level alarm, but that tanks should not normally be filledover 97 percent capacity. Therefore, the proposed regulations require thatthe high level alarm set point be not higher than 97 percent capacity.The Coast Guard has decided that the set point for the overflow alarm shouldbe given as a performance standard. Therefore, the proposed regulationsrequire that the alarm should be set to go off at a level where the operatorhas sufficient time to shut down cargo loading before the cargo tank overflows.The requirements are intended to be similar to the requirements for highlevel and overflow alarms in 46 CFR part 153. Section 39.20-9 Tank Barge Liquid Overfill Protection_B/ALL This section would give the overfill protection requirements for tank bargeswhich recover hydrocarbon vapors. The Coast Guard is proposing four differentalternatives: dual high level alarms meeting andSection; 39.20-7, an overflowcontrol system which has sensors on the tank barge and electrical connectionto an overflow control panel on shore, an acceptable spill valve, or anapproved rupture disk. The CTAC recommendations called for a spill valveto limit the back pressure in the tank from reaching the design pressureof the tank. The Coast Guard's position is that it would create less confusionto specify a maximum back pressure of 3.0 psig for tankships and 2.0 psigfor tank barges. An ASTM specification for spill valves is under development,and is expected to be published prior to the publishing of these requirementsas a final rule. In these proposed rules, the number of this specificationis left blank and will be provided in the final rule. A draft of this specificationis included as appendix C. The use of rupture disks introduces some additional concerns which arenot present when spill valves are used. Spill valves resist passage offlame into a cargo tank in the case of a fire on deck. Rupture disk arrangementsmay not, since, when the disk ruptures, it leaves an open path into thetank. Alternatively, if a valve is provided to close off the rupture diskdischarge, the valve may be left closed when the tank is loaded. Theseproposed rules require approval from the Commandant for rupture disk arrangementsaddressing these added concerns. The Coast Guard has already approved onesuch arrangement. Section 39.20-11 Vapor Overpressure and Vacuum Protection_TB/ALL This section would give requirements to prevent over- or underpressurizinga cargo tank on a vessel which recovers hydrocarbon vapors. The Coast Guardis proposing to require pressure relief devices with an adequate capacityto vent vapors at a rate at least 1.25 times the maximum loading rate withoutexceeding 3.0 psig for tankships or 2.0 psig for tank barges, and witha relief pressure of not less than 1.5 psig. Vacuum relief devices wouldbe required which have an adequate capacity to vent air into the tank ata rate at least 1.25 times the maximum loading rate without exceeding 1.0psi vacuum, and with a relief pressure of not less than 0.5 psi vacuum.The 1.25 factor is used to account for vapor generation during loading.The CTAC recommendations did not specify the maximum back pressure or vacuumwhich can be reached in the tank. Also, the CTAC recommendations did notspecify the minimum pressure or vacuum setting of the relief devices. TheCoast Guard is proposing minimum relief settings and maximum tank pressureand vacuum to enhance standardization of systems and, thereby, improvesafety. This section would require that a relief device installed after the effectivedate of these regulations have means to check that the device is operatingfreely. The CTAC recommendations for tank barges called for a delay inthe implementation of this requirement until January 1, 1991. The CoastGuard's position is that this delay is unwarranted because the featureis currently available from most manufacturers of relief devices.Although not part of the CTAC recommendations, the Coast Guard is proposingthat the capacity of relief devices must be demonstrated through testingin accordance with API Standard 2000. Section 39.20-13 High and Low Vapor Pressure Protection for Tankships_T/ALLThis would require sensors and alarms on tankships which recover hydrocarbonvapors to warn against over- or underpressurizing the tankship. The CTAGrecommendations did not specify the number of pressure sensors or the locationof the pressure sensors. The Coast Guard's position is that short of havinga pressure sensor at each tank, a vessel should have two pressure sensorslocated at the forwardmost and aftermost tanks which are connected to thevapor collection system. If only one pressure sensor is provided, the operatorof a vessel will not know the highest or lowest pressure reading on thevessel, particularly when multiple tanks forward and aft of the vesselvapor connection are being loaded. Provisions are included for arrangementswhich do not have tanks connected to the vapor collection system whichare both forward and aft of the vessel vapor connection. Although not specifiedin the CTAC recommendations, the Coast Guard is proposing that the highpressure alarm be activated when the pressure reaches 50 percent of thelowest pressure relief device setting, and that the low pressure alarmbe activated when the pressure falls to four inches water gauge (0.144psig) for inerted tankships, or 0.5 psi vacuum for other tankships. Section 39.30-1 Operational Requirements_TB/ALL This section would detail operational requirements for a tank vessel usinga vapor control system. Although not part of the CTAC recommendations,the Coast Guard is proposing that a tank vessel may only transfer vaporsto a facility or vessel which is approved to receive the vapors. This section would include limitations on the loading rate based upon theventing capacity of the pressure relief devices or the capacity of thevapor collection system, in both cases assuming that vapors are ventedat 1.25 times the loading rate. The 1.25 factor is used to account forvapor generation during loading. The CTAC recommendations for tankshipsand tank barges differ in their approach to ensuring that the maximum allowablepressure in a cargo tank is not exceeded due to excessive loading rates.The tankship recommendations require the size of the vapor collection linesto be sufficient to prevent the back pressure in the tank from exceedingthe tank's maximum operating pressure. The tank barge recommendations requirethe loading rate to be limited so that the pressure does not exceed anypressure relief device setting or the venting capacity of the pressurerelief devices. The Coast Guard's position is that this would be best handledas an operational requirement, and that 50 percent of any pressure reliefdevice setting should be specified as the maximum back pressure in orderto provide a greater margin of safety. The Coast Guard is also proposingthat the maximum pressure in the tank when venting vapors at 1.25 timesthe maximum loading rate be 3.0 psig for tankships and 2.0 psig tank barges.If the capacity of the tank vessel's vapor collection system is the limitingfactor, the maximum loading rate will vary with the pressure at the facility'svapor connection. Information on the maximum loading rate would be providedas part of the vessel's oil transfer procedures required under proposed33 CFR 155.750(d). The information may be provided as a table or graphgiving the maximum allowable loading rate versus the pressure at the vessel'svapor connection. This section would limit cargo tank filling to a capacity of 97 percentor the set point level for the high level alarm, whichever is lower. TheCTAC recommendations called for a maximum filling limit of 98%. The CoastGuard's position is that filling a tank higher than 97% carries too higha risk that the person in charge will not be able to shut down loadingin time and that the loading should not be continued after the high levelalarm goes off. The 97% filling limit is consistent with the requirementin 46 CFR 153.409 for the setting of the high level alarm. Vessels withspecial circumstances would be able to request permission from the Commandantto fill higher than 97%. This section would require certain operational conditions to be met inorder to open gauge for cargo sampling or custody transfer. The InternationalSafety Guide for Oil Tankers and Terminals recommends waiting at least30 minutes after loading a tank before gauging or sampling the tank withmetallic equipment, to allow static electricity accumulations to dissipate.This requirement is included in this section. This section would limit the initial loading rate to each cargo tank toone meter per second linear velocity until the cargo level in the tankreaches one meter in height. This requirement is consistent with standardindustry guidelines. The purpose is to minimize the risk of a vapor ignitiondue to static electricity. The CTAC recommendations for tank barges includeda similar requirement, but they did not specify at what height of cargothe reduced loading rate could be increased. The CTAG recommendations fortankships did not include this requirement. This section would also require the inert gas generator to be isolatedfrom the vapor collection system while the vapors are being collected,and the pressure indicator required by andSection; 39.20-13 of this partto be continuously monitored during the loading operation. In addition to the CTAC recommendations, the Coast Guard is proposing requirementsthat an inerted tank vessel must be tested for oxygen content, and thateach high level and overflow alarm must be tested prior to each loadingoperation. The CTAC recommendations did not address the size or the length of vaporhose which can be used. The proposed regulations assume that pressure dropsthrough hoses will be minimal. The Coast Guard's position is that, in orderfor this to be a reasonable assumption, the length of vapor hose shouldbe limited to 30 meters and the inside diameter to no less than that ofa vessel's vapor collection system piping. Longer hose lengths may be usedif provisions are made to account for the resistance of the additionalvapor hose. Section 39.40-1 General Requirements for Vapor Balancing_TB/ALL The CTAC recommendations did not include provisions for lightering. A lighteringworking group developed draft standards for lightering, but they have notyet been approved by CTAC. The provisions of subpart 39.40 of this proposedrulemaking are drawn from that working group's draft standards. This sectionwould require tank vessels which control vapor emissions while lighteringto meet all requirements in this part for a vessel with a vapor controlsystem. It also requires special approval from the Commandant in orderto use a method other than vapor balancing to control the vapors in a lighteringoperation. Section 39.40-3 Design and Equipment for Vapor Balancing_TB/ALL This section would give the design and equipment requirements for tankvessels which engage in vapor balancing during lightering operations. Itwould require a detonation arrester on at least one of the vessels. Theworking group recommended that a flame arrester could be used at this location.The Coast Guard's position is that a flame arrester would be inadequatebecause detonations are possible at this location. This section would alsorequire that in order to have a device to assist the transfer or recoveryof vapors, special approval must be received from the Commandant. Thiswas not a part of the lightering working group's draft standards, becausethe working group assumed that no such device was necessary. The CoastGuard's position is that the Commandant's approval is necessary becausevessels engaged in lightering normally would not have the same fire protectionprovisions as would be available at a facility. This section would require a pressure indicator and high pressure alarmon the service vessel. This was not part of the lightering working group'sdraft standards. The Coast Guard's position is that this is necessary becausethe vessel will not have the overpressure protection it would have at afacility. This would only be a factor on tank barges, because andSection;39.20-13 of this chapter would require the indicator and alarm for tankships.Although not a part of the lightering working group's draft standards,the Coast Guard is proposing that, where the service vessel in a lighteringoperation is a tank barge which has an overflow control system in accordancewith andSection; 39.30-9(b) of this chapter, the vessel to be lightered musthave an overflow control panel which meets 33 CFR 154.812. When the service vessel or both vessels are inerted vessels, this sectionwould require an oxygen sensor and alarm, normally located on the vesselto be lightered, which would alarm when the oxygen content in the vaporcollection line exceeds 8 percent. It would also require provisions tobe made to inert the vapor transfer hose between the vessels prior to thetransfer of vapors. Although not part of the lightering working group'sdraft standards, it would require means to add span gas in order to testthe oxygen sensors. Section 39.40-5 Operational Requirements for Vapor Balancing_TB/ALL This section would detail the operational requirements for tank vesselswhich engage in vapor balancing during lightering operations. It wouldrequire each cargo tank being loaded to be connected by the vapor collectionsystem to a cargo tank which is being discharged. This was not part ofthe lightering working group's draft standards. The Coast Guard's positionis that this is necessary because vessels which do not use a common ventline for the vapor collection system, or have a means of isolating individualtanks from the vapor collection system, could transfer vapors to a tankwhich is not being discharged and overpressurize the tank. It would alsorequire that the pressure indicator be continuously monitored during thetransfer operation. Although not a part of the lightering working group'sdraft standards, it would require that one of the vessel's provide an insulatingflange at its vapor connection. This is similar to the requirement in 33CFR 154.810(g) for a facility to provide an insulating flange. If both vessels are inerted, this section would require all tanks on theservice vessel to be tested for oxygen content prior to cargo transferand to be continuously monitored during the transfer. It would requirethat the vessel to be lightered control the cargo transfer rate to ensurethat the maximum allowable loading rate is not exceeded. Although not partof the lightering working group's draft standards, the Coast Guard is proposingthat tank washing and cargo tank ballasting be prohibited during the loadingoperation. If only the service vessel is inerted, this section would require the sameoperational requirements to be met as when both vessels are inerted. Itwould also require that the vapor collection system isolation valve onthe service vessel not be opened until the pressure in the vapor collectionsystem on the service vessel exceeds the pressure in the vapor collectionsystem on the vessel to be lightered. This section would require that, when neither vessel is inerted, the vesselto be lightered control the cargo transfer rate so that the maximum allowableloading rate is not exceeded. This section would prohibit vapor balancing when only the vessel to belightered is inerted. This requirement is consistent with the lighteringworking group draft standards, and was developed to prevent non-inertedvapors from entering an inerted tank. <ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory Evaluation </ITAG>The proposed regulations are considered to be non-major under ExecutiveOrder 12291 and significant under Department of Transportation (DOT) regulatorypolicies and procedures (DOT Instruction 2100.5). A draft evaluation hasbeen prepared and placed in the public docket. It may be inspected or copiedat the Marine Safety Council, Room 3600, at the address listed above under``ADDRESSES.'' (Copies may also be obtained by contacting that office at(202) 267-1477. The proposed rules, if adopted, would benefit industry by providing standardsfor the safe design and operation of vapor control systems. The rules wouldresult in fewer vessels and facilities being damaged from fires and explosions,fewer vessels being damaged from overfilling and over- or underpressurization,fewer injuries/deaths from fires and explosions, and less oil spilled fromoverfilling or overpressurizing of tanks while loading with a vapor controlsystem in use. The proposed rules, if adopted, would also benefit the Federal and stategovernments. The standards promulgated would facilitate review and inspectionof vapor control systems by the Coast Guard. State governments would notneed to become involved in developing safety requirements when they imposevapor control requirements, and there will not be differing safety requirementsbetween states. Because the proposed rules would not require the installation of vaporcontrol systems, the entire cost of installing vapor control systems shouldnot be attributed to this rulemaking. The only costs which are properlyattributable to this rulemaking are those which would be increased to meetstandards in these rules which exceed normal industry practice. Since theserules have been developed in close cooperation with industry, the differencesshould be minimal. Estimated costs of installing vapor control systemswere provided in the NRC Marine Board study. The study estimated that thecost to modify a typical 35,000 deadweight ton product tanker for vaporcontrol would be $831,250. It estimated that the cost to modify a typicalinland river barge for vapor control would be about $167,750. It also estimatedthat the cost to modify a typical product terminal for vapor control whichserves ships and barges would be about $7,502,160. Small entities would be affected by this rulemaking only if the state orlocal governments require the use of vapor control systems. These costsshould be attributed to the state or local government rulemaking. Therefore,the Coast Guard certifies that, if adopted, the proposed regulations willnot have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of smallentities. Differing state requirements to control hydrocarbon emissions could adverselyimpact competition between states. Since this rulemaking addresses safetyrequirements for vapor control systems, it will ease the impact on competitionbetween states by providing for nationwide safety requirements. It is possiblethat some owners of foreign tank vessels will not install vapor controlsystems on their vessels and withdraw them from U.S. trade, however, itis not expected that the overall pattern of oil importation will be significantlyaffected. In addition, the Coast Guard is working with the InternationalMaritime Organization (IMO) to develop international safety requirementsfor the design and operation of vapor control systems. <ITAG tagnum="84">Environmental Impact </ITAG>This rulemaking has been thoroughly reviewed by the Coast Guard and ithas been determined to be categorically excluded from further environmentaldocumentation in accordance with section 2.b.2.c andamp; 1 of CommandantInstruction (COMDTINST) M16475.1B. The environmental impact associatedwith vapor control systems is the direct result of state or local actionrequiring the use of such systems. A Categorical Exclusion Determinationstatement has been prepared and is included as part of the rulemaking docket.<ITAG tagnum="84">Paperwork Reduction Act </ITAG>This rule contains information collection requirements in 33 CFR 154.310,154.804, 154.806, 154.814, 155.750, 156.120, and 156.170 and 46 CFR 32.53-85,32.35-30, 39.10-13, and 39.20-11. These have been submitted to the Officeof Management and Budget (OMB) for approval under the provisions of thePaperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3501 <T3>et seq.</T3>). Persons desiring to comment on these information collectionrequirements should submit their comments to: Office of Regulatory Policy,Office of Management and Budget, 726 Jackson Place, NW., Washington, DC20503, Attn: Desk Officer, U.S. Coast Guard. Persons submitting commentsto OMB are also requested to submit a copy of their comments to the CoastGuard as indicated under ``ADDRESSES.'' <ITAG tagnum="84">Federalism </ITAG>Based on the information currently available, the Coast Guard is unableto determine whether the proposed rule would have sufficient federalismimplications to warrant the preparation of a Federalism Assessment. TheCoast Guard's position at this time is that once a state requires vaporcontrol, the discretion available to the state to modify the requirements,as they pertain to shoreside facilities, may be limited. For example, allflexible hoses used in vapor control systems and the last 1.5 meters (4.9feet) of fixed piping leading to the facility vapor connection flange mustbe color coded bright orange (international orange). The vapor connectionflanges are also of unique design to prevent cross-connection with otherpiping systems. These requirements, and others like them, could not bemodified. Some standardization of equipment and procedures is necessarysince affected vessels move from port to port in the national marketplaceand excessive modification of the requirements would be burdensome andpotentially unsafe. The Coast Guard specifically seeks public comment onthe federalism implications of this proposal. <ITAG tagnum="84">Appendices</ITAG>Three draft ASTM specifications have been referenced in this rulemakingdocument. The draft specifications address: (1) The testing of detonationflame arresters, (2) the testing of flame arresters, and (3) specificationsfor spill valves. Since the information in the draft specifications maybe helpful to the public in commenting on the proposed regulations, andsince this rulemaking has a relatively short comment period, the draftspecifications have been reproduced, respectively, as appendices A, B,and C.CTAC developed recommended guidelines for vessel and facility personnel.The Coast Guard would use these guidelines in developing criteria for approvalof industry training courses, if it is determined that courses should requireCoast Guard approval. The CTAC guidelines have been reproduced as appendixD.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects</ITAG>33 CFR Part 154Incorporation by reference, Oil pollution, Reporting and recordkeepingrequirements, Vapor control.33 CFR Part 155Oil pollution, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements.33 CFR Part 156Hazardous materials transportation, Oil pollution, Reporting and recordkeepingrequirements, Water pollution control.46 CFR Part 32Cargo vessels, Fire prevention, Marine safety, Navigation (water), Occupationalsafety and health, Seamen.46 CFR Part 35Cargo vessels, Fire prevention, Marine safety, Navigation (water), Occupationalsafety and health, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements, Seamen.46 CFR Part 39Cargo vessels, Hazardous materials transportation, Incorporation by reference,Marine safety, Occupational safety and health, Vapor control.For the reasons set out in the preamble, the Coast Guard proposes to amendtitle 33, chapter I, subchapter O, parts 154, 155, and 156, and title 46,chapter I, parts 32 and 35, and add new part 39 as set forth below.<ITAG tagnum="52">TITLE 33_[AMENDED]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 154_[AMENDED]</ITAG>1. The authority citation for part 154 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>33 U.S.C. 1231; 49 CFR 1.46.</ITAG>2. Section 154.100 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 154.100</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Applicability.</ITAG>This part applies to each facility or marina that transfers, in bulk, toor from any vessel with a capacity of 250 barrels or more, oil or any material,other than liquefied gases, determined to be hazardous under 46 CFR 153.40(a), (b), (c) or (e) except that andSection;154.735 applies to each facilityor marina that_(a) Transfers in bulk any quantity of these producing; or(b) Has storage tanks containing these products, mixtures that includethese products, or their residues.<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note: </T4>A storage tank that is not gas free and safe for entry isconsidered to have residues of these products or mixtures of these products.</ITAG>3. Section 154.105 is amended by revising the definition for the word ``facility''to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 154.105</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><T3>``Facility'' </T3>means any structure on or in the navigable watersof the United States or any land structure or shore area immediately adjacentto such waters, used or capable of being used to transfer oil or hazardousmaterials to or from a vessel.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>4. Section 154.106 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 154.106 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Incorporation by reference.</ITAG>(a) Certain materials are incorporated by reference into this part withthe approval of the Director of the Federal Register in accordance with5 U.S.C. 552(a). To enforce any edition other than the one listed in paragraph(b) of this section, notice of change must be published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>and the material made available to the public.All approved material is on file at the Office of the Federal Register,1100 L Street, NW., Washington, DC, and at the U.S. Coast Guard, MarineTechnical and Hazardous Materials Division (G-MTH), 2100 Second Street,SW., Washington, DC, 20593-0001, and is available from the sources indicatedin paragraph (b) of this section.(b) The material approved for incorporation by reference in this part,and the section affected are: <ITAG tagnum="110"><C>2,L0,tp0,p0,8/9,g1,t1,i1,s350,xs40</C> <H1> </H1><H1> </H1>American Petroleum Institute (API), 2101 L Street NW., Washington, DC 20037:<ITAG tagnum="3">API Standard 2000, Venting Atmospheric and Low-Pressure Storage Tanks(Nonrefrigerated and Refrigerated), January 1982</ITAG><D>154.814</D><ITAG tagnum="3">API Recommended Practice 550, Manual on Installation of Refinery Instrumentsand Control Systems, Part II_Process Stream Analyzers, Section 5_OxygenAnalyzers, Fourth Edition, August 1983</ITAG><D>154.820</D>American Society of Mechanical Engineers (ASME), United Engineering Center,345 E. 47 Street, New York, NY 10017:<ITAG tagnum="3">ANSI B16.5_Steel Pipe Flanges and Flanged Fittings, 1981</ITAG><D>154.500;</D><P>154.810</P><ITAG tagnum="3">ANSI B16.24_Brass or Bronze Pipe Flanges, 1979</ITAG><D>154.500;</D><P>154.810</P><ITAG tagnum="3">ANSI B31.3_Chemical Plant and Petroleum Refinery Piping, 1987</ITAG><D>154.510;</D><P>154.808</P>American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), 1916 Race Street, Philadelphia,PA 19103:<ITAG tagnum="3">ASTM </ITAG><T2>XXXXX</T2>_Standard Specification for Tank Vent Flame Arresters<D>154.820</D><ITAG tagnum="3">ASTM</ITAG><T2>XXXXX</T2>_Standard Specification for Detonation Flame Arresters<D>154.820</D>National Fire Protection Association (NFPA), Batterymarch Park, Quincy,MA 02269:<ITAG tagnum="3">NFPA 70_National Electrical Code, 1987</ITAG><D>154.735;</D><P>154.820</P><ITAG tagnum="3">NFPA 85A_Standard for Prevention of Furnace Explosions in Fuel Oil-and Natural Gas-Fired Single Burner Boiler-Furnaces, 1987</ITAG><D>154.820</D><ITAG tagnum="1">Oil Companies International Marine Forum (OCIMF), 6th Floor, PortlandHouse, Stag Place, London SWIE 5BH: International Safety Guide for OilTankers and Terminals, Third Edition, 1988<D>154.735</D></ITAG></ITAG>5. Section 154.310 is amended by redesignating existing paragraphs (b)and (c) as (c) and (d), respectively, and adding new paragraph (b) to readas follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 154.310</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Operations manual: Contents.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(b) If a facility collects vapors emitted from vessel cargo tanks for recovery,destruction, or dispersion, the operations manual must contain a descriptionof the vapor collection system at the facility which includes:(1) A line diagram of the facility's vapor control system piping, includingthe location of each valve, control device, pressure/vacuum relieving device,pressure indicator, flame arrester, and detonation arrester; and(2) A description of, and procedures for operating, the vapor control systemincluding the:(i) Vapor line connection;(ii) Startup and shutdorn procedures;(iii) Steady state operating procedures;(iv) Provisions for dealing with pyrophoric sulfide (for facilities whichhandle inerted vapors);(v) Alarms and shutdowns; and(vi) Pre-transfer equipment inspection requirements.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>6. Section 154.740 is amended by deleting the word ``and'' at the end ofparagraph (e) and adding new paragraphs (g), (h), and (i) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 154.740</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Records.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(g) A record of all repairs to any component, which is required by subpartE of this part, of the facility's vapor control system is to be kept for3 years;(h) A record of all automatic shutdowns of the facility's vapor controlsystem is to be kept for 3 years; and(i) Plans, calculations, and specifications of the facility's vapor controlsystem certified under andSection; 154.804 of this part.7. A new subpart E is added to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart E_Vapor Control Systems</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">154.800 Applicability.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">154.802 Definitions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">154.803 Other hazardous materials.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">154.804 Review of system designs and initial inspection.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">154.806 Application for acceptance as a certifying entity.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">154.808 Vapor control system, general.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">154.810 Vapor line connections.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">154.812 Vessel liquid overfill protection.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">154.814 Vessel vapor overpressure and vacuum protection.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">154.820 Fire, explosion and detonation protection.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">154.840 Personnel.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">154.850 Operational requirements.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart E_Vapor Control Systems</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 154.800</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Applicability.</ITAG>(a) This subpart applies to the following:(1) Each facility which collects vapors of flammable or combustible liquidsemitted from a tank vessel's cargo tanks for recovery, destruction, ordispersion, or other vapor control process.(2) A vessel that is not a tank vessel but which has a vapor processingunit located on board for recovery, destruction, or dispersion of vaporof flammable or combustible liquids from a tank vessel.(b) This subpart does not apply to the collection of vapors of liquefiedflammable gases as defined in 46 CFR 30.10-39.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 154.802</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions.</ITAG>As used in this subpart:<T3>``Existing vapor control system'' </T3>means a vapor control systemwhich was approved by the Coast Guard prior to October 6, 1989.<T3>``Facility vapor connection'' </T3>means the point in the facility'svapor collection system where it interconnects with the vessel's vaporcollection system.<T3>``Inerted'' </T3>means the oxygen content of the vapor space in a tankvessel's cargo tank is reduced to 8 percent by volume or less in accordancewith the inert gas requirements of 46 CFR 32.53 or 46 CFR 153.500 or otherinerting arrangements acceptable to the Commandant (G-MTH).<T3>``Liquid knockout vessel'' </T3>means a device to separate liquid outof the vapor stream.<T3>``Maximum allowable loading rate'' </T3>means the maximum volumetricrate at which a vessel may receive cargo or ballast. The criteria for determiningthis rate is given in 46 CFR 39.30-1(b).<T3>``Means of protection'' </T3>means a system or device which will preventignition from occurring or prevent flame propagation without human intervention.<T3>``New vapor control system'' </T3>means a vapor control system whichis not an existing vapor control system.<T3>``Vapor balancing'' </T3>means the transfer of vapors displaced byincoming cargo from the tanks of the vessel receiving cargo into the tanksof the vessel or facility delivering cargo.<T3>``Vapor collection system'' </T3>means an arrangement of piping andhoses used to collect vapors emitted from a vessel's cargo tanks and transportthe vapors to a vapor processing unit.<T3>``Vapor control system'' </T3>means an arrangement of piping and equipmentused to control hydrocarbon vapor emissions collected from a vessel. Itincludes the vapor collection system and the vapor processing unit.<T3>``Vapor dispersion system'' </T3>means a vapor control system whichreleases vapors to the atmosphere through a venting system not locatedon the vessel which is collecting the vapors.<T3>``Vapor processing unit'' </T3>means the components of the vapor controlsystem that recovers, destroys, or disperses vapors collected from thevessel.<T3>``Vessel vapor connection'' </T3>means the point in the vessel's fixedvapor collection system where it connects with the facility's vapor collectionsystem or another vessel's vapor collection system (for lightering operations).<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 154.803</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Other hazardous materials.</ITAG>A facility which collects vapors of flammable or combustible cargoes listedin 46 CFR Table 151.01-10(b) or Table 1 of 46 CFR part 153, which are nothydrocarbon liquids, must meet the requirements of this subpart and anyadditional requirements that the Commandant (G-MTH) may prescribe.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 154.804</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Review of system designs and initial inspection.</ITAG>(a) New vapor control system installation must be certified by an entityaccepted under andSection; 154.806 of this subpart as meeting the requirementsof this subpart.(b) Plans, calculations, and specifications for existing vapor controlsystem installations must be submitted to an entity accepted under andSection;154.806 of this subpart within [insert date six (6) months after the effectivedate of these regulations]. Any modifications required to bring the installationinto compliance shall be completed within twelve (12) months after receiptof notification by the approval entity of modifications to be required,but not later than [insert date twenty-four (24) months after the effectivedate of these regulations]. After completion of modifications and testsand inspections under paragraph (d) of this section, the installation mustbe certified by the certifying entity as meeting the requirements of thissubpart. The certification and a copy of the plans, calculations, and specificationson which the system is based shall be maintained at the facility.(c) Plans and information submitted to the certifying entity must includea qualitative failure analysis to demonstrate that the system's fire, explosionand detonation components provide the following:(1) Two independent means of protection to prevent an ignition occurringanywhere in the facility's vapor control system from propagating to thetank vessel; and(2) Two independent means of protection to prevent an ignition on the tankvessel from propagating into the facility's vapor control system.(d) The certifying entity shall conduct all initial inspections and teststo demonstrate that the facility:(1) Conforms to approved plans and specifications;(2) Meets the requirements of this subpart; and(3) Operates properly.(e) Upon receipt of the certification required by paragraphs (a) and (b)of this section, the Captain of the Port shall endorse the letter of adequacyrequired by andSection; 154.325 that the facility is acceptable for collectingvapors of flammable or combustible liquid. (f) Any alteration involving any component required by this subpart mustbe reviewed by a certifying entity accepted under andSection; 154.806 ofthis subpart. The certifying entity must conduct the tests and inspectionin accordance with paragraph (d) of this section before certifying thatthe alteration meets the requirements of this subpart. A copy of the certificationshall be submitted to the Captain of the Port.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 154.806</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Application for acceptance as a certifying entity.</ITAG>(a) Any entity seeking acceptance to certify facility vapor control systemsshall apply in writing to the Commandant (G-MTH). Each application mustbe signed and certified to be correct by the applicant or, if the applicantis an organization, by an authorized officer or official representativeof the organization, and must include a letter of intent from a facilityowner or operator to use the services of the entity to approve a vaporcontrol system installation. Any false statement or representation, orthe knowing and willful concealment of a material fact may subject theapplicant to prosecution under the provisions of 18 U.S.C. 1001, and denialor termination of acceptance.(b) The applicant must possess the following minimum qualifications, andbe able to demonstrate these qualifications to the satisfaction of theCommandant (G-MTH):(1) The ability to review and evaluate design drawings, and qualitativefailure analyses;(2) A knowledge of the applicable regulations of this subpart, includingthe standards incorporated by reference in these regulations;(3) The ability to conduct or monitor and evaluate test procedures andresults;(4) The ability to perform inspections and tests of bulk liquid cargo handlingsystems;(5) Is not controlled by the owners or operators of the vessels or thefacilities engaged in controlling vapor emission; and(6) Is not dependent upon Coast Guard acceptance under this section toremain in business.(c) Each application for acceptance must contain the following:(1) The name and address of the applicant, including subsidiaries and divisionsif applicable;(2) A statement that the applicant is not controlled by the owners or operatorsof vessels or facilities engaged in controlling vapor emissions, or a fulldisclosure of any ownership or controlling interest held by such ownersor operators;(3) A description of the experience and qualifications of the person(s)who would be reviewing or testing the system;(4) A statement that the person(s) who would be reviewing or testing thesystems is/are familiar with the regulations in this subpart; and(5) A statement that the Coast Guard may verify the information submittedin the application and may examine the person(s) who would be reviewingor testing the systems to determine their qualifications.(d) The acceptance of an entity may be terminated by the Commandant ifthe entity fails to properly review or test systems in accordance withthis subpart.<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note: </T4>A list of entities accepted to approve vapor control systeminstallations is available from the Commandant (G-MTH).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 154.808</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Vapor control system, general.</ITAG>(a) The vapor control system design and installation must eliminate potentialsources of ignition to the maximum practical extent. Each remaining ignitionsource which is not eliminated must be specifically addressed in the protectionsystem design and operational requirements.(b) The vapor collection system piping, valves, flanges, and fittings mustbe in accordance with ANSI Standard B31.3 and designed for a maximum allowableworking pressure of at least 150 psig. This maximum allowable working pressuredoes not apply to the vapor processing unit equipment, loading arms, vaporhoses, compressors, blowers and liquid knockout vessels.(c) A means must be provided to drain and collect any liquid condensatewhich may carry over from the vessel from each low point in the line.(d) A liquid knockout vessel must be provided for compressor units to protectthe compressor from liquid carryover, unless the manufacturer certifiesthat the compressor can safely handle flammable and combustible liquids.Any required liquid knockout vessel must have the following:(1) Means to indicate the level of liquid in the device;(2) Provisions to cause the automatic vapor shutoff valve required by andSection;154.810(b) of this subpart to automatically close prior to liquid carryoverfrom the device to the compressor; and (3) An audible and visible high level alarm which is activated at a liquidlevel lower than the level which will activate the automatic shutoff valverequired by andSection; 154.810(b) of this subpart.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 154.810</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Vapor line connections.</ITAG>(a) An isolation valve capable of manual operation must be provided atthe facility vapor connection. The valve must have an indicator to showclearly whether the valve is in the open or closed position.(b) In addition to the isolation valve required by paragraph (a) of thissection, an automatically operated vapor shutoff valve must be installedwhich meets the following:(1) The valve must close within five (5) seconds of detection of a shutdowncondition by a component required by andSection;andSection; 154.808(d)(2),154.814(f), 154.814(g), 154.820(c)(3), 154.820(d)(4), 154.820(e)(3), 154.820(f)(5),or 154.820(k) of this subpart;(2) An audible and visible alarm must warn the person in charge when asignal to shut down is received; and (3) The valve must be located upstream of any device used to assist drawingvapors from the vessel, any liquid knockout vessel, and the point whereinerting, enriching, or diluting gas is introduced into the vapor collectionline.(c) Vapor connection flanges and the last 1.5 meters (4.9 feet) of vaporpiping from the facility vapor connection must be painted bright orange(international orange) and clearly marked with the words ``VAPOR PIPING''in black letters 2\1/2\ inches high.(d) Each facility vapor connection flange, vapor hose flange, vapor loadingarm flange, and vapor line adapter flange must meet the following:(1) Each flange must have a 0.5 inch diameter lug, which is at least 1.0inch long, permanently attached to the flange;(2) Each flange must have a 0.625 inch diameter hole in the flange locateddirectly opposite the lug;(3) The lug and hole must be located midway between bolt holes in linewith the bolt hole pattern;(4) The lug must be on the left hand side of the installed flange whenlooking at the open end of the flange; and(5) Fixed flanges must be arranged such that the lug and hole line up horizontally.(e) Each hose used for transferring vapors must:(1) Have a design burst pressure of at least 100 psig;(2) Have a maximum allowable working pressure of at least 25 psig;(3) Be capable of withstanding at least 2.0 psi vacuum without collapsingor constricting;(4) Have flanges that meet ANSI Standard B16.5 or B16.24;(5) Be electrically continuous with a maximum resistance of one millionohms (1 Mohm);(6) Where two or more hoses are connected in series, have a maximum resistancebetween points of bonding to the vessel of 1 Mohm.(7) Have an exterior coating which is bright orange (international orange)in color; and(8) Be stenciled with the words ``VAPOR HOSE'' in black letters 2\1/2\inches high.(f) Fixed vapor loading arms must:(1) Meet the requirements of andSection; 154.810(e)(1) through (5) of thispart;(2) Have the last 1.5 meters (4.9 feet) of the arm painted bright orange(international orange); and(3) Be clearly marked with the words ``VAPOR RETURN LINE'' in black letters2\1/2\ inches high.(g) An electrical insulating flange must be provided at the facility vaporconnection.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 154.812</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Vessel liquid overfill protection.</ITAG>Each facility which serves a tank barge fitted with overfill protectionin accordance with 46 CFR 39.20.-9(b) must:(a) Have an overfill control panel installed on the dock capable of receivinga shutdown signal from an intrinsically safe system aboard the tank barge;(b) Have cargo pumps and cargo shutdown valves which automatically shutdown upon receiving a shutdown signal from the tank barge without causingpiping design pressure limits to be exceeded and without causing the bargetanks to become 100 percent liquid full;(c) Have an alarm on the overfill protection control panel which;(1) Is activated by the shutdown signal from the tank barge or by a highlevel signal set at a liquid level below the shutdown level, and(2) Is visible and audible to vessel as well as facility personnel;(d) Have means to electrically and mechanically test alarm and shutdownsystems prior to each loading operation; and (e) Have the shutdown system activate upon loss of continuity of the tankbarge's overflow control system circuitry.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 154.814</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Vessel vapor overpressure and vacuum protection.</ITAG>(a) A facility's vapor collection system must have the capacity for collectingvapors at a rate not less than 1.25 times the facility's maximum designliquid loading rate.(b) A facility's vapor collection system must be capable of maintainingthe pressure at the facility vapor connection between 0.3 psi vacuum and0.3 psig for a non-inerted tank vessel and between 0.2 psig and 1.0 psigfor an inerted tank vessel. The specified pressures must be maintainedat any loading rate less than or equal to the facility's maximum designloading rate.(c) A pressure sensing device must be provided which actuates an alarmwhen the pressure at the facility vapor connection exceeds either the maximumpressure given in paragraph (b) of this section or a lower pressure agreedupon at the pre-transfer conference required by andSection; 156.120(w) ofthis chapter.(d) A pressure sensing device must be provided which actuates an alarmwhen the pressure at the facility vapor connection falls below either theminimum pressure given in paragraph (b) of this section or a higher levelagreed upon at the pre-transfer conference.(e) The pressure alarms required by paragraphs (c) and (d) of this sectionmust be audible and visible at the facility at the place where cargo loadingis controlled and from any point in the cargo deck area of the vessel asdefined in 46 CFR 39.10-3.(f) A pressure sensing device must be provided which causes automatic shutdownof the cargo transfer and closure of the automatic vapor shutoff valverequired by andSection; 154.810(b) of this subpart when the pressure exceedsthe maximun level given in paragraph (b) of this section by 0.25 psi. Thesensing device must be independent of the device used to activate the alarmsreferred to in paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section.(g) A pressure sensing device must be provided which causes automatic shutdownof the cargo transfer and closure of the automatic vapor shutoff valverequired by andSection; 154.810(b) of this subpart when the pressure fallsbelow the minimum level given in paragraph (b) of this section by 0.25psi. The sensing device must be independent of the device used to activatethe alarms referred to in paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section.(h) The pressure sensing devices required by paragraphs (c), (d) (f), and(g) of this section must be located in the vapor collection line such thatthere are no valves between the facility vapor connection and the sensingdevices.(i) A pressure indicating device must be provided at the location wherethe cargo transfer and vapor control system are controlled which indicatesthe vapor pressure in the vapor collection line.(j) If a device is installed to assist drawing vapors from the vessel (e.g.compressor or blower), a liquid vacuum breaker must be installed in thevapor collection line between the device and the facility vapor connection,which meets the following:(1) The capacity of the liquid vacuum breaker must not be less than thecapacity of the vapor assist device;(2) The liquid vacuum breaker must relieve at a pressure such that thepressure in the vapor collection system at the facility vapor connectiondoes not exceed 1.0 psi vacuum when the liquid vacuum breaker is ventingat the capacity of the vapor assist device; and(3) Each liquid vacuum breaker must be tested for venting capacity in accordancewith paragraph 1.5.1.3 of API Standard 2000.(k) A pressure relieving device must be installed which meets the following:(1) The relieving capacity of the device must not be less than the greaterof 1.25 times the facility's maximum design liquid loading rate or themaximum capacity of any inerting, enriching, or diluting gas source;(2) The device must relieve at a pressure such that the pressure in thevapor collection system at the facility vapor connection when the deviceis venting at 1.25 times the facility's maximum loading rate or the capacityof the gas source, whichever is greater, does not exceed 2.0 psig.(3) Each device must be tested for venting capacity in accordance withparagraph 1.5.1.3 of API Standard 2000; and(4) The device must be located upstream of the detonation arrester requiredby andSection; 154.820(a) of this subpart and the location where inerting,enriching, or diluting gas is introduced into the vapor collection line.(1) Means must be provided to determine that the cargo loading rate doesnot exceed the maximum allowable loading rate given in the vessel's oiltransfer procedures in accordance with andSection; 155.750(e) of this chapter.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 154.820</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Fire, explosion and detonation protection.</ITAG>(a) Each facility vapor connection must be fitted with a detonation arresterwhich:(1) Meets ASTM <T2>XXX</T2>;(2) Is capable of arresting a detonation from either side of the device;and(3) Is installed within 6.0 meters (19.7 feet) of the facility vapor connection.(b) Except as provided for in paragraph (g) of this section, the vaporcontrol system must be fitted with a system which maintains the concentrationof the vapor mixture outside the flammable range by one or a combinationof the following methods:(1) <T3>Air dilution:</T3> A system which meets paragraphs (c) and (f) of thissection and supplies additional air to the vapor stream in sufficient quantitiesto insure that the hydrocarbon concentration of the vapor in the vaporcontrol system is maintained below 30 percent by volume of the lower flammablelimit;(2) <T3>Enrichment: </T3>A system which meets paragraphs (d) and (f) of thissection and supplies a compatible hydrocarbon gas to the vapor stream insufficient quantities to insure that the hydrocarbon concentration of thevapor in the vapor control system is maintained above 170 percent by volumeof the upper flammable limit; or(3) <T3>Inerting: </T3>A system which meets paragraphs (e) and (f) of thissection and supplies an inerting gas to the vapor stream in sufficientquantities to insure that the oxygen concentration of the vapor in thevapor control system is maintained below 8.0 percent by volume.(c) An air dilution system must meet the following requirements:(1) Have at least two sets of independent hydrocarbon analyzers with independentsensor taps;(2) An alarm must be activated when the flammable vapor concentration exceeds30 percent of the lower flammable limit; and(3) The automatic vapor shutoff valve required by andSection; 154.810(b)of this subpart must automatically close when the flammable vapor concentrationexceeds 50 percent of the lwer flammable limit.(d) An enrichment system must meet the following requirements:(1) Have at least two sets of independent hydrocarbon analyzers with independentsensor taps;(2) In lieu of the hydrocarbon analyzers, two independent oxygen analyzerswith independent sensor taps may be provided if the upper flammable limitfor the enriching gas does not vary by more than 5 percent by volume;(3) An alarm must be activated when the flammable vapor concentration fallsbelow 170 percent of the upper flammable limit;(4) The automatic vapor shutoff valve required by andSection; 154.810(b)of this subpart must automatically close when the flammable vapor concentrationfalls below 150 percent of the upper flammable limit; and (5) If oxygen sensors are utilized, the alarm and shutdown set points mustbe calculated for an equivalent upper flammable limit based upon the enrichinggas.An inerting system must meet the following:(1) The system must have at least two sets of independent oxygen analyzerswith independent sensor taps;(2) An alarm must be activated when the oxygen concentration exceeds 8.0percent by volume;(3) The automatic vapor shutoff valve required by andSection; 154.810(b)of this subpart must automatically close when the oxygen concentrationexceeds 9.0 percent by volume; and(4) When a combustion device is used to produce the inerting gas, the flowof gas from the vapor collection system into the inert gas line must beprevented by a hydraulic seal and a non-return valve.(f) An air dilution, enrichment, or inerting system, installed to meetthe requirements of paragraph (b) of this section, must meet the following:(1) The appropriate gas must be injected into the vapor control systemat a point within 6.0 meters (19.7 feet) of the facility vapor connection;(2) The design must provide for complete mixing of the gases within 20pipe diameters of the injection point;(3) Analyzers must have response times of no more than 30 seconds;(4) Analyzers must sample the vapor concentration at a point where thevapor mixture is homogeneous, at least 20 but no more than 50 pipe diametersdownstream from the point of gas injection;(5) Analyzers must be designed such that the more severe concentrationreading must be used to activate the required alarms and shutdowns;(6) If a mixing device is installed between the injection point and thesampling point, the analyzers may be installed closer than 20 pipe diametersfrom the injection point, but must be after the point where a homogeneousmix of the vapor is achieved;(7) Analyzers must be in accordance with API Recommended Practice 550;(8) Oxygen analyzers of the zirconia electrochemical or thermomagnetictype must not be used;(9) At least one connection for injecting zero gas and a span gas of knownconcentration into the system must be provided for testing and calibrationof the analyzers;(10) Systems must have the capability to dilute, enrich, or inert the shorevapor collection line prior to receiving vapors from a vessel;(11) An indicator must be provided which indicates the oxygen or hydrocarbon(as appropriate) content and is located where the cargo transfer and vaporcontrol systems are controlled; and(12) For enrichment and inerting systems, the vapor collection piping mustbe operated at a positive gauge pressure after the injection point unlessa means acceptable to Commandant (G-MTH) is provided which ensures thatair is not drawn into the system.(g) If a terminal serves only vessels whose cargo tanks are inerted, thefollowing is applicable:(1) An additional supply of inerting gas is not required, except for theprovision to be capable of inerting the vapor line prior to the transferin accordance with paragraph (f)(10) of this section;(2) Paragraph (e) of this section must be met; and(3) The analyzers required by paragraph (e) of this section must samplethe vapor concentration within 3 meters (9.8 feet) of the facility vaporconnection.(h) Any alarm condition specified in this part must activate an audibleand visible alarm which can be seen and heard where the cargo transferand vapor control system are controlled, and from anywhere the operatormay be reasonably expected to be located.(i) If a vapor control system interconnects with more than one vapor collectionsystem, it must meet the following:(1) Only one of the methods of controlling the vapor mixture (air dilution,enrichment, or inerting) required by paragraph (b) of this section maybe used at any one time;(2) Each branch must be fitted with a detonation arrester that meets paragraph(a) of this section at the points of intersection; and(3) Any branch shut down after loading ceases for that branch must be isolatednear the junction point with other branches by double block and bleed valves,double shutoff valves, or a blind acceptable to the Commandant (G-MTH).(j) The vapor control system must be separated or insulated from externalheat sources to limit vapor control system piping surface temperature to177 anddegrees;C (350 anddegrees;F) during normal operation.(k) An incinerator or flare in the vapor control system must:(1) Have two automatic quick acting stop valves installed in the vaporcollection line upstream of the incinerator or flare which automaticallyclose whenever the incinerator or flare shuts down or has a flameout condition;(2) Be designed such that actuation of the automatic quick acting stopvalves must also cause the automatic vapor shutoff valve required by andSection;154.810(b) of this subpart to close and cargo transfer to stop;(3) Have a flame arrester that meets ASTM <T2>XXX</T2> installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions;(4) Have a liquid seal flame arrester installed;(5) Have a means of detecting a flame on the flame arrester which is closestto the incinerator or flare which will actuate the automatic quick actingstop valves, actuate the automatic vapor shutoff valve, and cause cargotransfer to stop; and(6) Not be located within 30 meters (98.4 feet) of any tank vessel mooredat the facility.(l) An incinerator in the vapor control system must be designed in accordancewith NFPA 85A.(m) If a reciprocating or screw-type compressor is used to assist movementof vapors in the vapor collection system, it must be provided with indicatorsand audible and visible alarms to warn against the following conditions:(1) Excessive discharge gas temperatures at each compressor chamber orcylinder;(2) Excessive cooling water temperature;(3) Excessive vibration;(4) Low lube oil level;(5) Low lube oil pressure; and(6) Excessive shaft bearing temperatures.(n) If a centrifugal compressor or fan is used to assist movement of vaporsin the vapor collection system, it must meet the following:(1) Construction of the blades and/or housing must meet one of the following:(i) Blades or housing of nonmetallic construction;(ii) Blades and housing of nonferrous material;(iii) Blades and housing of corrosion resistant steel;(iv) Ferrous blades and housing with one-half inch or more design tip clearance;or(v) Blades of aluminum or magnesium alloy and a ferrous housing with anonferrous insert ring at the periphery of the impeller;(2) Any combination of an aluminum alloy or a magnesium alloy componentand a ferrous component is prohibited, regardless of the material thatis used as the fixed or rotating component; and(3) All metal parts must be electrically bonded and grounded.(o) If the facility handles inerted vapors, provisions must be made tocontrol heating from pyrophoric iron sulphide deposits in the vapor collectionline.(p) All outlets of the vapor control system to atmosphere must have a flamearresting device located at the outlet. The device must meet ASTM <T2>XXX</T2> and be installed in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions.(q) All electrical equipment used in the vapor control system must complywith NFPA 70.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;154.840</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Personnel.</ITAG>(a) The person in charge of the transfer operation utilizing a vapor controlsystem must have completed a training program covering the particular systeminstalled at the facility. For persons who have not previously receivedtraining under this section, there must be at least 40 hours of trainingwith a minimum of 8 hours of drills or demonstrations, using the installedvapor control system, covering normal operations and emergency procedures.For persons who have previously received training under this section ortraining for vessel personnel under 46 CFR 39.10-11, there must be at least24 hours of training with a minimum of 8 hours of drills or demonstration,using the installed vapor control system, covering normal operations andemergency procedures.(b) The training course must cover the following subjects:(1) Purpose of a vapor control system;(2) Coast Guard regulations in this subpart;(3) Principles of vapor control systems;(4) Hazards of vapor control systems;(5) Components of a vapor control system;(6) Operating procedures:(i) Testing and inspection requirements,(ii) Pre-transfer procedures,(iii) Connection sequence,(iv) Start-up procedures, and(v) Normal operations; and(7) Emergency procedures.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;154.850</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Operational requirements.</ITAG>(a) A facility shall receive vapors only from a vessel which has its certificateof inspection or certificate of compliance endorsed in accordance with46 CFR 39.10-13(e).(b) Whenever a condition results in a shutdown of the vapor control system,the person in charge shall immediately terminate cargo loading.(c) Loading rate must not exceed the maximum allowable loading rate forthe vessel.(d) Loading rate must not exceed the facility's maximum design loadingrate.(e) The person in charge shall test all alarms, automatic shutdowns, andsensing devices required by andSection;154.820 (c), (d), and (e) of thissubpart not more than 24 hours prior to each loading operation.(f) If one of the oxygen or hydrocarbon analyzers required by andSection;154.820of this subpart becomes inoperable during a loading operation, the operationmay continue provided the remaining analyzer remains operational; however,no further loading operations may be started until the inoperable analyzeris replaced or repaired.(g) The person in charge shall verify that all necessary valves in thevapor line between the vessel's tanks and the shore system are open priorto starting of the loading.(h) The initial loading rate to each cargo tank shall be limited to onemeter per second (3.28 feet per second) linear velocity until cargo levelhas exceeded one meter (3.28 feet) in height.(i) The person in charge shall verify that normal vapor flow has been establishedonce vapors are generated from loading.(j) When vapors are being received from an inerted vessel, prior to openingthe isolation valve the person in charge shall verify that the vessel sideof the isolation valve is at a higher pressure than the shore side.(k) No more than 30 meters (98.4 feet) of vapor hose may be used unlessprovisions are made to reduce the maximum allowable loading rate to accountfor the resistance of the additional vapor hose.(l) The inside diameter of all vapor hoses connected to a tank vessel mustnot be less than the inside diameter of the vessel's vapor collection systempiping.(m) Line clearing of a cargo loading line is prohibited while transferringcargo to a vessel.(n) If a flare in the vapor control system is suspected of having a flare-back,or a flame is detected on the flame arrester by the detection means requiredby andSection;154.820(k)(5) of this subpart, the transfer operation shallnot be continued until the flame arrester has been inspected internallyand found to be in satisfactory condition.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 155_[AMENDED]</ITAG>8. The authority citation for part 155 is revised to read as follows andall other authority citations in the part are removed:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>33 U.S.C. 1321 (j)(1)(C), 1902(c) and 1903(b), E.O.11735, 49 CFR 1.46.</ITAG>9. Section 155.750 is amended by adding paragraph (d) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;155.750</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Contents of oil transfer procedures.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(d) If a vessel is fitted with a vapor control system, the oil transferprocedures must contain a description of the vapor collection system onthe vessel which includes:(1) A line diagram of the vessel's vapor collection system piping, includingthe location of each valve, control device, pressure/vacuum relieving device,pressure indicator, and device to prevent the passage of flame;(2) The location of spill valves and rupture disks if fitted;(3) The maximum allowable loading rates as described in 46 CFR 39.30-1(b);(4) A description of, and procedures for operating, the vapor collectionsystem including the:(i) Vapor line connection;(ii) Closed gauging system;(iii) High level alarm system;(iv) Independent automatic shutdown system; and(v) Pre-transfer equipment inspection requirements; and(5) The relief settings of all spill valves, rupture disks, and pressure/vacuumrelieving devices.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 156_[AMENDED]</ITAG>10. The authority citation for part 156 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>33 U.S.C. 1321 (j)(1) (C) and (D); 46 U.S.C. 3715;E.O. 11735, 3 CFR, 1971-1975 COMP., p. 793; 49 CFR 1.46.</ITAG>11. Section 156.120 is amended by adding paragraph (aa) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;156.120</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Requirements for oil transfer.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(aa) A transfer operation which includes collection of the vapors emittedfrom the vessel's cargo tanks for recovery, destruction, or dispersionthrough a venting system not located on the vessel must have the followingverified by the person in charge:(1) Each part of the vapor collection system is aligned to allow the flowof vapor to shore;(2) Vapor recovery hoses or loading arms are connected to the vessel'svapor collection connection;(3) The electrical insulating flange required by andSection;154.810(g) ofthis chapter or 46 CFR 39.40-5(c) is installed at the vapor connection;(4) Maximum loading rate for the transfer is identified;(5) Maximum and minimum operating pressures at the vessel/shore connectionare identified;(6) If installed, the overflow control system on a tank barge is properlyconnected to the facility and operating;(7) All alarms and automatic shutdowns required by andSection;154.820 (c),(d) and (e) of this chapter and 46 CFR 39.20-7, 39.20-9, and 39.40-3(d)have been tested not more than 24 hours prior to the start of the transferoperation and are operating properly;(8) Each vapor recovery hose has no unrepaired loose covers, kinks, bulges,soft spots, or any other defect which would permit the discharge of vaporsthrough the hose material, and no external gouges, cuts, or slashes thatpenetrate the first layer of hose reinforcement.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">12. Section 156.170 is amended by adding new paragraph (g) to readas follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;156.170</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Equipment tests and inspections.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(g) If a facility or vessel collects vapors emitted from vessel cargo tanksfor recovery, destruction, or dispersion, no person may use any equipmentin this paragraph for vapor control operations unless the vessel or facilityoperator, as appropriate, tests and inspects the equipment as follows:(1) Each vapor hose, loading arm, pressure or vacuum relief device, andpressure gauge is tested and inspected in accordance with paragraphs (b),(c), and (f) of this section;(2) Each remote operating or indicating equipment is tested for properoperation in accordance with paragraph (f) of this section; and(3) Each detonation arrester required by andSection;154.820(a) of this chapteror 46 CFR 39.40-3(a), and each flame arrester required by andSection;154.820(j) and (o) of this chapter, is inspected internally at least annually,or more frequently if operational shows frequent clogging or rapid deterioration.(4) Each hydrocarbon and oxygen analyzer required by andSection;154.820 (c),(d) and (e) of this chapter and 46 CFR 39.40-3(d), is calibrated weekly.<ITAG tagnum="72">TITLE 46_[AMENDED]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 32_[AMENDED]</ITAG>13. The authority citation for part 32 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>46 U.S.C. 3306, 3703; E.O. 12234, 45 FR 58801, 3 CFR,1980 Comp., p. 277; 49 CFR 1.46.</ITAG>14. Section 32.53-85 is amended by designating the existing text as paragraph(a) and adding paragraph (b) to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 32.53-85 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Instruction manual_T/ALL. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(b) If the tankship is fitted with a vapor control system to which part39 of this subchapter is applicable, the instruction manual must includeprocedures relating to vapor control operations. <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 35_[AMENDED] </ITAG>15. The authority citation for part 35 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>33 U.S.C. 1321(j); 46 U.S.C. 3706, 3703, 6101; 49 U.S.C.App. 1804; E.O. 11735, 38 FR 21243, 3 CFR 1971-1975 Comp., p. 793; E.O.12234, 45 FR 58801, 3 CFR, 1980 Comp., p. 277; 49 CFR 1.46.</ITAG>16. Section 35.35-20 is amended by adding paragraph (m) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;35.35-20 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Inspection prior to transfer of cargo_TB/ALL.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(m) When the transfer operation includes collection of the vapors emittedfrom the vessel's cargo tanks for recovery, destruction, or dispersionthrough a system other than the vessel's approved venting system: (1) Each part of the vapor collection system is aligned to allow the flowof vapor to shore or, if lightering, to the other vessel; (2) Vapor recovery hoses or loading arms are connected to the vessel'svapor collection connection; (3) An electrical insulating flange is installed as required by 33 CFR154.810(g) or andSection; 39.40-5(c) of this subchapter as appropriate; (4) Maximum loading rate for the tranfer is identified; (5) Maximum and minimum operating pressures at the vessel/shore connectionare identified; (6) An overflow control system on a tank barge is properly connected tothe facility and operating; (7) All alarms required by andSection;andSection; 39.20-7, 39.20-9 and 39.40-3(d)of this subchapter have been tested not more than 24 hours prior to thestart of the transfer operation and are operating properly; and (8) Each vapor recovery hose has no unrepaired loose covers, kinks, bulges,soft spots, or any other defect which would permit the discharge of vaporsthrough the hose material, and no gouges, cuts, or slashes that penetratethe first layer of hose reinforcement.17. Section 35.35-30 is amended by adding paragraph (c) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 35.35-30 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">``Declaration of Inspection'' for tankships_T/ALL. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(c) In addition to the requirements in paragraph (b) of this section, ifthe transfer operation includes collection of the vapors emitted from thevessel's cargo tanks for recovery, destruction, or dispersion through avapor control system not located on the vessel, the Declaration of Inspectionmust include the following as an appendix: (1) Is each part of the vapor collection system aligned to allow the flowof vapor to shore or, if lightering, to the other vessel? (2) Are the vapor recovery hoses or loading arms connected to the vessel'svapor collection connection? (3) Is an electrical insulating flange installed as required by 33 CFR154.810(g) or andSection; 39.40-5(c) of this subchapter as appropriate; (4) Has the maximum loading rate for the transfer been identified? (5) Have the maximum and minimum operating pressures at the vessel/shoreconnection been identified? (6) Is the overflow control system on a tank barge properly connected andoperating? (7) Have all alarms required by andSection;andSection; 39.20-7, 39.20-9 and39.40-3(d) of this subchapter been tested not more than 24 hours priorto the start of the transfer operation and found to be operating properly?(8) Is each vapor recovery hose free of unrepaired loose covers, kinks,bulges, soft spots, or any other defect which would permit the dischargeof vapors through the hose material, and gouges, cuts, or slashes thatpenetrate the first layer of hose reinforcement?18. A new part 39 is added to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 39_VAPOR CONTROL SYSTEMS</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart 39.10_General </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">39.10-1 Applicability_TB/ALL. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">39.10-3 Definitions_TB/ALL. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">39.10-5 Incorporation by reference_TB/ALL.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">39.10-7 Other hazardous materials_TB/ALL.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">39.10-9 Vessel vapor processing unit_TB/ALL.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">39.10-11 Personnel_TB/ALL.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">39.10-13 Submission of vapor control system designs_TB/ALL.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart 39.20_Design and Equipment</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">39.20-1 Vapor collection system_TB/ALL.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">39.20-3 Cargo gauging system_TB/ALL.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">39.20-7 Tankship liquid overfill protection_TB/ALL.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">39.20-9 Tank barge liquid overfill protection_B/ALL.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">39.20-11 Vapor overpressure and vaccum protection_TB/ALL.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">39.20-13 High and low vapor pressure protection for tankships_T/ALL.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart 39.30_Operations</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">39.30-1 Operational requirements_TB/ALL.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart 39.40_Lightering Operations With Vapor Balancing </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">39.40-1 General requirements for vapor balancing_TB/ALL. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">39.40-3 Design and equipment for vapor balancing_TB/ALL. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">39.40-5 Operational requirements for vapor balancing_TB/ALL. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>33 U.S.C. 1231; 46 U.S.C. 3306, 3703; E.O. 12234, 45FR 58801, 3 CFR, 1980 Comp., p. 277; 49 CFR 1.46. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart 39.10_General </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 39.10-1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Applicability_TB/ALL. </ITAG>(a) This part applies to all U.S. flag tank vessels, and foreign flag tankvessels operating in the navigable waters of the United States, when collectingvapors of a flammable or combustible liquid emitted from a vessel's cargotanks for recovery, destruction, or dispersion through a venting systemnot located on the vessel, or other vapor control process. (b) This part does not apply to the collection of vapors of liquefied flammablegases as defined in andSection; 30.10-39 of this subchapter. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 39.10-3 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions_TB/ALL. </ITAG>As used in this part: <T3>``Cargo deck area'' </T3>means that part of the weather deck that isdirectly over the cargo tanks. <T3>``Existing vapor collection system'' </T3>means a vapor collectionsystem approved by the Coast Guard prior to [insert effective date of theserules]. <T3>``Facility vapor connection'' </T3>means the point in a facility'svapor collection system where it connects with a vessel's collection system.<T3>``Independent'' </T3>as applied to two systems means that one systemwill operate with a failure of any part of the other system except powersources and electrical feeder panels. The electrical wiring for severalindependent systems may be carried in a single conduit or tray (for specialrequirements applicable to intrinsically safe systems, see andSection; 111.105-15of this chapter). <T3>``Inerted'' </T3>means the oxygen content of the vapor space in a cargotank is reduced to 8 percent by volume or less in accordance with the inertgas requirements of andSection; 32.53 or andSection; 153.500 of this chapter,or other inerting arrangements acceptable to the Commandant (G-MTH). <T3>``Lightering'' </T3>or <T3>``lightering operation'' </T3>means the transfer of a flammable orcombustible liquid from one vessel to another, except when that liquidis intended only for use as fuel or lubricant aboard the receiving vessel.<T3>``Marine Safety Center'' </T3>means Commanding Officer, U.S. CoastGuard Marine Safety Center, 400 Seventh Street, SW., Washington, DC 20590.<T3>``Maximum allowable loading rate'' </T3>means the maximum volumetricrate at which a vessel may receive cargo or ballast. The criteria for determiningthis rate is given in andSection; 39.30-1(b) of this chapter. <T3>``New vapor collection system'' </T3>means a vapor collection systemwhich is not an existing vapor collection system. <T3>``Service vessel'' </T3>means a vessel which receives a flammable orcombustible cargo from another vessel in a lightering operation. <T3>``Vapor balancing'' </T3>means the transfer of vapors displaced fromthe tanks of the service vessel by incoming cargo into the tanks of thevessel to be lightered or the facility delivering cargo via a vapor collectionsystem. <T3>``Vapor collection system'' </T3>means an arrangement of piping andhoses used to collect vapors emitted from a vessel's cargo tanks and totransport the vapors to a vapor processing unit. <T3>``Vapor control system'' </T3>means an arrangement of piping and equipmentused to control vapor emissions collected from a vessel. It includes thevapor collection system and vapor processing unit. <T3>``Vapor dispersion system'' </T3>means a type of vapor control systemwhich releases vapors to the atmosphere through a venting system not locatedon the vessel. <T3>``Vapor processing unit'' </T3>means the components of a vapor controlsystem that processes, destroys, or disperses vapors collected from a vessel.<T3>``Vessel to be lightered'' </T3>means a vessel which transfers a flammableor combustible liquid to another vessel in a lightering operation. <T3>``Vessel vapor connection'' </T3>means the point in a vessel's vaporcollection system where it connects with a facility's vapor collectionsystem or, for lightering operations, to another vessel's vapor collectionsystem. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 39.1.-5 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Incorporation by reference_TB/ALL. </ITAG>(a) Certain materials are incorporated by reference into this part withthe approval of the Director of the <T4>Federal Register </T4>in accordance with 5 U.S.C. 552(a). To enforceany edition other than the one listed in paragraph (b) of this section,notice of change must be published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>and the material made available to the public.All approved material is on file at the Office of the Federal Register,100 L Street, NW., Washington, DC, and at the U.S. Coast Guard, MarineTechnical and Hazardous Materials Division (G-MTH), 2100 Second Street,SW., Washington, DC, 20593-0001, and is available from the sources indicatedin paragraph (b) of this section. (b) The material approved for incorporation by reference in this part,and the sections affected are:  <ITAG tagnum="110"><C>2,L0,tp0,p0,8/9,g1,t1,s10,8</C> <H1> </H1><H1> </H1><T3>American Petroleum Institute (API),</T3> 2101 L Street, NW., Washington,DC 20037:<ITAG tagnum="2">API Standard 2000_Venting Atmospheric and Low-Pressure Storage Tanks(Nonrefrigerated and Refrigerated), January 1982<D>39.20-11</D></ITAG><T3>American Society of Mechanical Engineers, </T3>United Engineering Center,345 E. 47 Street, New York, NY 10017:<ITAG tagnum="2">ANSI B16.5_Steel Pipe Flanges and Flanged Fittings, 1981<D>39.20-1</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">ANSI B16.24_Brass or Bronze Pipe Flanges, 1979<D>39.20-1</D></ITAG><T3>American Society for Testing and Materials (ASTM), </T3>1916 Race Street,Philadelphia, PA 19103:<ITAG tagnum="2">ASTM<T2>XXX</T2>_Standard Specification for Spill Valves for Use in MarineTank Liquid Overpressure Protection Applications <D>39.20-9</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">ASTM<T2>XX</T2>_Standard Specification for Detonation Flame Arresters<D>39.40-3</D></ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 39.10-7</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Other hazardous material_TB/ALL.</ITAG>A tank vessel which collects vapors of flammable or combustible cargoeslisted in Table 151.01-10(b) or Table 1 of part 153 of this chapter, whichare not hydrocarbon liquids, must meet the requirements of this part andany additional requirements that the Commandant (G-MTH) may prescribe.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 39.10-9</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Vessel vapor processing unit_TB/ALL.</ITAG>Each vessel which has a vapor processing unit located on board must submitplans, calculations, and specifications to the Marine Safety Center andmeet the intent of 33 CFR 154, subpart E.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 39.10-11</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Personnel_TB/ALL.</ITAG>(a) The person in change of the transfer operation utilizing a vapor collectionsystem must have completed a training program covering the particular systeminstalled on the vessel. For persons who have not previously received trainingunder this section, there must be at least 40 hours of training with aminimum of 8 hours of drills or demonstrations, using the installed vaporcontrol system, covering normal operations and emergency procedures. Forpersons who have previously received training under this section or trainingfor facility personnel under 33 CFR 154.840, there must be at least 24hours of training with a minimum of 8 hours of drills or demonstration,using the installed vapor collections system, covering normal operationsand emergency procedures.(b) The training course must cover the following subjects:(1) Purpose of a vapor control system;(2) Coast Guard regulations in this part;(3) Principles of vapor control systems;(4) Hazards of vapor control systems;(5) Components of a vapor control system;(6) Operating procedures:(i) Testing and inspection requirements, (ii) Pre-transfer procedures,(iii) Connection sequence,(iv) Start-up procedures, and (v) Normal operations; and (7) Emergency procedures.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 39.10-13</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Submission of vapor control system designs_TB/ALL.</ITAG>(a) Plans, calculations, and specifications for each new vapor collectionsystem must be submitted in accordance with andSection; 31.10-5(a) of thissubchapter.(b) Except as provided for in paragraph (c) of this section, existing vaporcollection system installations must have plans, calculations, and specificationssubmitted in accordance with andSection; 31.10-5(a) of this subchapter byApril 6, 1990. In addition, modifications required to bring the installationinto compliance must be completed within twelve (12) months after receiptof notification by the Coast Guard of modifications to be required, butnot later than October 7, 1991.(c) A tank vessel with an existing vapor collection system which will operatethe system at a facility other than the facility for which it was originallyapproved to operate will be treated as a vessel with a new vapor collectionsystem and must meet paragraph (a) of this section. The vapor collectionsystem may not be operated at a facility other than the facility for whichit was approved until approval to do so has been obtained.(d) The owners/operators of a foreign flag vessel may submit certificationby the classification society which classes the vessel that the vesselmeets the requirements of this part as an alternative to meeting the requirementsin paragraph (a) of this section.(e) Upon satisfactorily completion of plan review and inspection of thevapor collection system or receipt of the certification provided for inparagraph (d) of this section, the Officer in Charge, Marine Inspection,shall endorse the Certificate of Inspection for U.S. flag vessels, or theCertificate of Compliance for foreign flag vessels, that the vessel isacceptable for collecting vapors of flammable or combustible liquids.<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart 39.20_Design and Equipment</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;39.20-1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Vapor collection system_TB/ALL.</ITAG>(a) Each vapor collection system must meet the following requirements:(1) Piping must be permanently installed, except as allowed by the Commandant(G-MTH);(2) A means must be provided to drain and collect condensate from eachlow point in the vapor collection system; (3) Vapor collection piping must be electrically bonded to the hull andmust be electrically continuous; and (4) An inerted tankship must have a stop valve installed in the cargo deckarea to isolate the inert gas supply from the vapor collection system.(b) A vapor collection system must not interfere with the proper operationof any cargo tank pressure relief device.(c) An isolation valve capable of manual operation must be provided atthe vessel vapor connection. The valve must have an indicator to show clearlywhether the valve is in the open or closed position.(d) The last 1.5 meters (4.9 feet) of the vessel's vapor piping beforethe vessel vapor connection must be painted bright orange (internationalorange) and clearly marked with the words ``VAPOR PIPING'' in black letters2\1/2\ inches high.(e) Each vessel vapor connection flange, vapor hose flange, and vapor lineadapter flange must meet the following:(1) Each flange must have a 0.5 inch diameter lug, which is at least 1.0inch long, permanently attached to the flange;(2) Each flange must have a 0.625 inch diameter hole in the flange locateddirectly opposite the lug;(3) The lug and hole must be located midway between bolt holes in linewith the bolt hole circle;(4) The lug must be on the left hand side of the installed flange whenlooking at the open end of the flange; and (5) On the vessel vapor connection, the lug and hole must line up horizontally.(f) Each hose used for transferring vapors must:(1) Have a design burst pressure of at least 100 psig;(2) Have a maximum allowable working pressure of at least 25 psig;(3) Be capable of withstanding at least 2.0 psi vacuum without collapsingor constricting;(4) Have flanges that meet ANSI Standard B16.5 or B16.24;(5) Be electrically continuous with a maximum resistance of one millionohms (1 Mohm);(6) Where two or more hoses are connected in series, have a maximum resistancebetween points of bonding to the vessel of 1 Mohm.(7) Have an exterior coating which is colored bright orange (internationalorange); and (8) Be stenciled with the words ``VAPOR HOSE'' in black letters 2\1/2\inches high.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;39.20-3 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Cargo gauging system_TB/ALL</ITAG>(a) Each cargo tank of a tank vessel which is connected to a vapor collectionsystem must be equipped with a permanently installed cargo gauging systemwhich:(1) Allows determination of the liquid level in the tank without openingthe tank to the atmosphere (closed gauging system);(2) Allows the operator to determine the liquid level in the tank for thefull range of liquid levels in the tank;(3) Indicates the liquid level in the tank at the cargo tank and, if thecargo loading is controlled at some point other than at the cargo tank,at the point where the cargo loading is controlled; and (4) For a tank barge, has the maximum liquid level permitted under andSection;39.30-1(c)of this part at even keel conditions conspicuously and permanently markedon the cargo gauging system at each tank.(b) Except when a tank barge complies with andSection;39.20-9(a) of thispart, each cargo tank of a barge must have a device giving a visual indicationof the liquid level in the cargo tank within 1.5 meters (4.9 feet) of thetank top. The indication must be visible from all points in the cargo deckarea.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;39.20-7 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Tankship liquid overfill protection_T/ALL.</ITAG>(a) Each cargo tank of a tankship must be equipped with a high level alarmand a tank overflow alarm.(b) The high level alarm and tank overflow alarm must:(1) Be independent of one-another;(2) Alarm in the event of loss of power to the alarm sytem or failure ofelectrical circuitry to the tank level sensor;(3) Be able to be checked at the tank for proper operation prior to eachloading;(4) Have audible and visible alarm indications that can be seen and heardwhere cargo tansfer is controlled and in the cargo deck area; and (5) For components of alarms located within cargo tanks, use only non-conductivematerial or conductive material bonded to the tank structure.(c) The high level alarm must:(1) Alarm before the tank overflow alarm, but no higher than 97 percentof tank capacity; and (2) Be identified with the legend ``HIGH LEVEL ALARM'' in lettering asspecified for the warning sign in andSection;153.955 of this chapter.(d) The tank overflow alarm must:(1) Be independent of the cargo gauging system;(2) At the maximum allowable loading rate, alarm early enough to allowthe person in charge to;(i) Stop the loading operation before the cargo tank overflows, and(ii) Avoid surge pressures that exceed the cargo piping's maximum workingpressure; and (3) Be identified with the legend ``TANK OVERFLOW ALARM'' in letteringas specified for the warning sign in andSection;153.955 of this chapter.(e) If spill valves are fitted, they must meet andSection;39.20-9(c) of thispart. (f) Rupture disk installations must meet andSection;39.20-9(d) of this part.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;39.20-9 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Tank barge liquid overfill protection_B/ALL </ITAG>Each cargo tank of a tank barge must have one of the following liquid overfillprotection arrangements: (a) A system meeting the requirements of andSection;39.20-7 of this part;(b) An overflow control system which: (1) Is independent of the cargo gauging system required by andSection;39.20-3(a)of this part, (2) Actuates a system onshore, or on the vessel to be lightered if a lighteringoperation, which automatically stops the flow of cargo to the tank bargebefore the tank becomes 100 percent liquid full; and (3) Is able to be checked at the tank for proper operation prior to eachloading; (c) A spill valve which meets the following requirements: (1) Relieves at a pressure higher than the pressure reached in the tankwhich the pressure relief device operates at the maximum anticipated loadingrate, assuming a vapor rate of 1.25 times the liquid loading rate; (2) Limits the maximum pressure at the cargo tank top during liquid overfillat the maximum anticipated loading rate to not more than 3.0 psig for tankshipsor 2.0 psig for tank barges; (3) Is in accordance with ASTM Specification <T2>XXX</T2>; and (4) If the vessel is in ocean or coastwise service, has provisions to preventopening of the spill valve due to sloshing loads; or (d) A rupture disk arrangement which meets paragraphs (c) (1), (2) and(4) of this section and is approved by the Commandant (G-MTH). <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;39.20-11 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Vapor overpressure and vacuum protection_TB/ALL. </ITAG>(a) Each cargo tank must be protected by a pressure relief device whichmeets the following: (1) Is capable of discharging saturated cargo vapors at 1.25 times themaximum anticipated loading rate such that the pressure in the cargo tankvapor space does not exceed 3.0 psig for tankships or 2.0 psig for tankbages, or if a spill valve is fitted, the pressure at which the spill valvewill relieve; and (2) Must not relieve at a pressure in the cargo tank vapor space of lessthan 1.5 psig. (b) Each cargo tank must be protected by a vacuum relief device which meetsthe following: (1) Prevents a vacuum in the cargo tank vapor space, whether generatedby withdrawal of cargo or vapor at maximum rates, that exceeds 1.0 psivacuum; and (2) Relieves at not less than 0.5 psi below atmospheric pressure (0.5 psivacuum) in the cargo tank vapor space. (c) Each pressure/vacuum relief device must:(1) Be tested for venting capacity in accordance with paragraph 1.5.1.3of API Standard 2000; and(2) Have mechanical means to check that it is operating freely if installedafter [insert effective date of these rules].<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 39.20-13</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">High and low vapor pressure protection for tankships_T/ALL</ITAG>Each tankship vapor collection system must be fitted with a pressure sensingdevice which:(a) Has a pressure indicator located where the cargo loading is controlled;and(b) Has a high pressure and low pressure alarm that:(1) Is audible and visible where cargo transfer is controlled and in thecargo deck area;(2) Alarms at a high pressure of not more than 50 percent of the lowestpressure relief device setting in the vapor collection system;(3) Alarms at a low pressure of not less than four inches water gauge (0.144psig) for inerted tankships, or 0.5 psi vacuum for non-inerted tankships;(4) If cargo tanks connected to the vapor collection system are locatedonly forward of the vessel vapor connection, senses the pressure in thevapor collection line at the forwardmost cargo tank connected to the vaporcollection system;(5) If cargo tanks connected to the vapor collection system are locatedonly aft of the vessel vapor connection, senses the pressure in the vaporcollection line at the aftermost cargo tank connected to the vapor collectionsystem;(6) If cargo tanks connected to the vapor collection system are locatedforward and aft of the vessel vapor connection, senses the pressure inthe vapor collection line at the forwardmost and the aftermost cargo tanksconnected to the vapor collection system; and(7) If only one cargo tank is connected to the vapor collection system,senses the pressure in the vapor collection line at the cargo tank.<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart 39.30_Operations</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 39.30-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Operational requirements_TB/ALL</ITAG>(a) Vapors from a tank vessel may not be transferred to:(1) A facility which does not have its letter of adequacy endorsed as meetingthe requirements of 33 CFR 154, subpart E; or(2) In the case of lightering operations, a vessel which does not haveits certificate of inspection endorsed as meeting the requirements of subpart39.40 of this part.(b) The rate of cargo transfer must not exceed the maximum allowable loadingrate specified in the oil transfer procedures required by 33 CFR 155.720.This rate is the lesser of the following:(1) The rate at which the pressure relief devices in the vapor collectionsystem or on any tank connected to the system are capable of venting vaporsto atmosphere at 1.25 times the loading rate such that no cargo tank pressureexceeds 3.0 psig for tankships or 2.0 psig for tank barges, or if a spillvalve or rupture disk is fitted, the pressure at which the spill valveor rupture disk will relieve; or(2) The rate based on calculation at which, for a given pressure at thevessel vapor connection, the pressure in any cargo tank connected to thevapor collection system is no more than 50 percent of any pressure reliefdevice setting on any tank connected to the system, assuming a vapor flowrate of 1.25 times the loading rate.<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note: </T4>The maximum allowable loading rate will normally be givenas a table or graph in the vessel's oil transfer procedures showing themaximum allowable loading rate versus the pressure at the vessel's vaporconnection.</ITAG>(c) Unless exempted by the Commandant (G-MTH), a cargo tank must not befilled higher than the lesser of:(1) 97 percent of the cargo tank volume; or(2) The level at which the high level alarm complying with andSection; 39.20-7of this part is set.(d) A cargo tank must not be opened to the atmosphere during cargo loadingoperations except as provided in paragraph (e) of this section.(e) A cargo tank may be opened to the atmosphere for gauging or samplingwhile the tank vessel is connected to a vapor control system if the followingconditions are met:(1) The tank is not being filled;(2) Except if the tank is inerted, any pressure in the cargo tank vaporspace is first reduced to atmospheric pressure by the vapor control system;(3) The cargo is not required to be closed or restricted gauged by Table151.05 or Table 1 in part 153 of this chapter; and(4) All metallic equipment used in sampling or gauging is electricallybonded to the vessel before it is put into the tank, remains bonded tothe vessel until it is removed from the tank, and a period of 30 minuteshas elapsed since loading of the tank was completed.(f) The initial loading rate to each cargo tank must not exceed one meterper second (3.28 feet per second) average linear velocity through the cargofill line until the cargo level in the tank exceeds one meter (3.28 feet)in height.(g) If the emitted vapors are collected by a facility which requires thevapors from the vessel to be inerted in accordance with 33 CFR 154.820(g),the master shall ensure by measurement before loading or ballasting beginsthat the oxygen content in the vapor space of each cargo tank connectedto the vapor collection system does not exceed 8 percent by volume. Theoxygen content of each tank must be measured at a point one meter (3.28feet) below the tanktop and in the center of the ullage space. Where tankshave partial bulkheads, the oxygen content of each area of that tank formedby each partial bulkhead must be measured at a point one meter (3.28 feet)below the tanktop and in the center of the area.(h) If the vessel is equipped with an inert gas system, the stop valverequired by andSection; 39.20-1(a)(4) of this part must remain closed duringvapor control operations.(i) Each high level alarm and tank overflow alarm on all cargo tanks beingloaded must be tested at the tank for proper operation prior to each loadingoperation.(j) The pressure indicator required by andSection; 39.20-13(a) of this partmust be continuously monitored during the loading operation. (k) No more than 30 meters (98.4 feet) of vapor hose may be used unlessprovisions are made to reduce the maximum allowable loading rate to accountfor the resistance of the additional vapor hose.(l) The inside diameter of all vapor hoses must not be less than the insidediameter of the vessel's vapor collection system piping.<ITAG tagnum="56">Subpart 39.40_Lightering Operations with Vapor Balancing</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 39.40-1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">General requirements for vapor balancing_TB/ALL.</ITAG>(a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, each vessel whichengages in a lightering operation while collecting flammable or combustiblevapors emitted from a cargo tank for retention on the vessel to be lighteredmust be fitted with vapor balancing equipment that meets the requirementsof this subpart in addition to the requirements of subparts 39.10, 39.20,and 39.30 of this part.(b) An arrangement to control vapor emissions during lightering operationswhich does not use vapor balancing must receive specific approval fromthe Commandant (G-MTH).<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 39.40-3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Design and equipment for vapor balancing_TB/ALL.</ITAG>(a) A detonation arrester must be installed in the vapor collection systemwhich:(1) Meets ASTM <T2>XXX</T2>;(2) Is capable of arresting a detonation from either side of the device;and(3) Is installed not more than 1.0 meter (3.28 feet) from the vessel vaporconnection on at least one of the vessels involved in the lightering.(b) A vapor collection system must not use a device to assist the transferor recovery of vapors (e.g. a compressor or blower) without specific approvalby the Commandant (G-MTH).(c) If a tank barge which is the service vessel has a means of liquid overfillprotection in accordance with andSection; 39.20-9(b) of this part, the vesselto be lightered must have a power supply and overflow control panel whichmeets the requirements of 33 CFR 154.812.(d) If the service vessel or both vessels involved in a lightering operationare inerted tank vessels, the following requirements must be met:(1) An oxygen sensor and an oxygen alarm must be provided which meets thefollowing:(i) Are located at the vessel vapor connection on the vessel to be lightered,unless the Commandant (G-MTH) has approved alternative arrangements withthe oxygen sensor and oxygen alarm on the service vessel;(ii) Produce an audible and visible signal when the oxygen content in thevapor collection system exceeds 8 percent by volume;(iii) Have a connection for injecting a span gas of known concentrationfor testing and calibration of the oxygen sensor; and(iv) Have an indicator located where the cargo transfer is controlled whichindicates the oxygen content.(2) The vessel to be lightered must have a means to inert the vapor transferhose between vessels prior to admitting any vapors into its vapor collectionsystem.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;39.40-5 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Operational requirements for vapor balancing_TB/ALL. </ITAG>(a) During lightering operations, each cargo tank being loaded must beconnected by the vapor collection system to a cargo tank which is beingdischarged. (b) During lightering operations, the pressure indicator required by andSection;39.40-3(c)of this part on the service vessel must be continuously monitored. (c) During lightering operations, an electrical insulating flange mustbe provided at the vessel vapor connection on either the vessel to be lighteredor the service vessel. (d) If both vessels involved in a lightering operation are inerted tankships,the following requirements must be met. (1) All tanks on the service vessel which are connected to the vapor collectionsystem must be tested prior to cargo transfer to ensure that the oxygencontent in the vapor space is not more than 8 percent by volume. The oxygencontent of each tank must be measured at a point one meter (3.28 feet)below the tanktop and in the center of the ullage space. Where tanks havepartial bulkheads, the oxygen content of each area of that tank formedby each partial bulkhead must be measured at a point one meter (3.28 feet)below the tanktop and in the center of the area; (2) The oxygen sensor must be tested for proper operation prior to thestart of each transfer operation. The oxygen content of vapors being transferredmust be continuously monitored during the transfer operation. Transferof cargo must be terminated if the oxygen content exceeds 8 percent byvolume and must not be restarted until the oxygen content is reduced to8 percent by volume or less. (3) The rate of cargo transfer must be controlled from the vessel to belightered, and must not exceed the maximum allowable loading rate for eithervessel. (4) Tank washing on a vessel to be lightered shall not be conducted onany tank connected to the vapor collection system unless the isolationvalve required by andSection;39.20-1 of this part is closed. (5) Cargo tanks must not be ballasted during cargo transfer operations.(e) If only the service vessel in a lightering operation is an inertedtankship: (1) All requirements in paragraph (d) of this section must be met; and(2) The service vessel isolation valve required by andSection;39.20-1(c)of this part must not be opened until the pressure in the vapor collectionsystem on the service vessel exceeds the pressure in the vapor collectionsystem on the vessel to be lightered. (f) When neither vessel is an inerted tankship in a lightering operation,the rate of cargo transfer must be controlled from the vessel to be lightered,and must not exceed the maximum allowable loading rate for either vessel.(g) Vapor balancing must not be utilized when only the vessel to be lighteredis an inerted tankship.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: July 21, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">J.D. Sipes, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Chief, Office of Marine Safety, Security and Environmental Protection.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note: </T4>The following Appendices will not appear in the Code ofFederal Regulations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Appendix A_Standard Specification for Detonation Flame Arresters</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1. <T3>Scope</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">1.1 This standard provides the minimum requirements for design, construction,performance and testing of detonation flame arresters. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">2. <T3>Intent</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">2.1 This standard is intended for detonation flame arresters protectingsystems containing vapors of flammable or combustible liquids where vaportemperatures do not exceed 60 </ITAG>anddegrees;C. For all tests, the testmedia defined in 14.1.1 can be used except where detonation flame arrestersprotect systems handling vapors with a maximum experimental safe gap (MESG)below 0.9 millimeters. Detonation flame arresters protecting such systemsmust be tested with appropriate media (the same vapor or a media havinga MESG no greater than the vapor). Various gases and their respective MESGare listed in attachment 1 to Appendix A.<ITAG tagnum="24">2.2 The tests in this standard are intended to qualify detonationflame arresters for all in-line applications independent of piping configurationprovided the operating pressure is equal to or less than the maximum operatingpressure limit specified in the manufacturer's certification and the diameterof the piping system in which the detonation arrester is to be installedis equal to or less than the piping diameter used in the testing.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note: </T4>Detonation flame arresters meeting this standard as TypeI devices, which are certified to be effective below 0 anddegrees;C and whichcan sustain three stable detonations without being damaged or permanentlydeformed, also comply with the minimum requirements of the InternationalMaritime Organization, Maritime Safety Committee Circular No. 373 (MSC/Circ.373/Rev. 1).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3. <T3>Applicable Documents</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">3.1 ASTM Standards \1\</ITAG><NOTE/>: A395 Ferritic Ductile Iron Pressure-Retaining Castings ForUse at Elevated Temperatures; F722 Welded Joints for Shipboard Piping Systems;F1155 Standard Practice for Selection and Application of Piping SystemMaterials.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ Available for the American Society for Testing and Materials,1916 Race St., Philadelphia, PA 19103.<ITAG tagnum="24">3.2 ANSI Standards \2\: B16.5 Pipe Flanges and Flanged Fittings.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">3.3 Other Documents </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">3.3.1 ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code \2\</ITAG><NOTE/>: Section VIII, Division 1, Pressure Vessels; Section IX,Welding and Brazing Qualifications.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ Available from the American Society of Mechanical Engineers,345 E. 47th St., New York, NY 10017<ITAG tagnum="24">3.3.2 International Maritime Organization, Maritime Safety Committee\3\</ITAG><NOTE/> MSC/Circ. 373/Rev. 1_Revised Standards for the Design, Testingand Locating of Devices to Prevent the Passage of Flame into Cargo Tanksin Tankers.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\ Available from the International Maritime Organization,4 Albert Embankment, London SE1 7SR, England.<ITAG tagnum="24">3.3.3 International Electrotechnical Commission \4\</ITAG><NOTE/> Publication 79-1_Electrical Apparatus for Explosive Gas Atmospheres.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\4\ Available from the International Electrotechnical Commission,1 rue de Varembe, Geneva, Switzerland.<ITAG tagnum="26">4. <T3>Terminology</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4.1 </ITAG>DP/P<T2>o</T2>_The dimensionless ratio, for any deflagration and detonationtest of 14.3, of the maximum pressure increase (the maximum pressure minusthe initial pressure), as measured in the piping system on the side ofthe arrester where ignition begins by the device described in paragraph14.3.3, to the initial absolute pressure in the piping system. The initialpressure should be greater than or equal to the maximum operating pressurespecified in paragraph 11.1.7.<ITAG tagnum="24">4.2 Deflagration_A combustion wave that propagates subsonically (asmeasured at the pressure and temperature of the flame front) by the transferof heat and active chemical species to the unburned gas ahead of the flamefront.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4.3 Detonation_A reaction in a combustion wave propagating at sonicor supersonic (as measured at the pressure and temperature of the flamefront) velocity. A detonation is stable when it has a velocity equal tothe speed of sound in the burnt gas or may be unstable (overdriven) witha higher velocity and pressure.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4.4 Detonation flame arrester_A device which prevents the transmissionof a detonation and a deflagration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4.5 Flame speed_The speed at which a flame propagates along a pipeor other system.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4.6 Flame Passage_The transmission of a flame through a device. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4.7 Gasoline Vapors_A non-leaded petroleum distillate consisting essentiallyof aliphatic hydrocarbon compounds with a boiling range approximating 65</ITAG>anddegrees;C/75 anddegrees;C.<ITAG tagnum="26">5. Classification </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">5.1 The two types of detonation flame arresters covered in this specificationare classified as follows: </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">5.1.1 Type I_Detonation flame arresters acceptable for applicationswhere stationary flames may rest on the device. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">5.1.2 Type II_Detonation flame arresters acceptable for applicationswhere stationary flames are unlikely to rest on the device, and furthermethods are provided to prevent flame passage when a stationary flame occurs.One example of ``further methods'' is a temperature monitor and an automaticshutoff valve. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">6. Ordering Information </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.1 Orders for detonation flame arresters under this specificationshall include the following information as applicable: </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.1.1 Type (I or II). </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.1.2 Nominal pipe size. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.1.3 Each gas or vapor in the system and the corresponding MESG.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.1.4 Inspection and tests other than specified by this standard.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.1.5 Anticipated ambient air temperature range. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.1.6 Purchaser's inspection requirements (see section 10.1). </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.1.7 Description of installation. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.1.8 Materials of construction (see section 7). </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.1.9 Maximum flow rate and the maximum design pressure drop for thatmaximum flow rate. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.1.10 Maximum operating pressure.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">7. Materials </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.1 The detonation flame arrester housing, and other parts or boltingused for pressure retention, shall be constructed of materials listed inASTM F1155, or section VIII, Division 1 of the ASME Boiler and PressureVessel Code. Cast and malleable iron shall not be used; however, ductilecast iron in accordance with ASTM A395 may be used. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.1.1 Arresters, elements, gaskets, and seals must be made of materialsresistant to attack by seawater and the liquids and vapors contained inthe system being protected (see section 6.1.3). </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.2 Nonmetallic materials, other than gaskets and seals, shall notbe used in the construction of pressure retaining components of the detonationflame arrester. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.2.1 Nonmetallic gaskets and seals shall be non-combustible and suitablefor the service intended. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.3 Bolting materials, other than that of section 7.1, shall be atleast equal to those listed in Table 1 of ANSI B16.5. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.4 The possibility of galvanic corrosion shall be considered in theselection of materials. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.5 All other parts shall be constructed of materials suitable forthe service intended. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">8. Other Requirements </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.1 Detonation flame arrester housings shall be gas tight to preventthe escape of vapors. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.2 Detonation flame arrester elements shall fit in the housing ina manner that will insure tightness of metal-to-metal contacts in sucha way that flame cannot pass between the element and the housing. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.2.1 The net free area through detonation flame arrester elementsshall be at least 1.5 times the cross-sectional area of the arrester inlet.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.3 Housings, elements, and seal gasket materials shall be capableof withstanding the maximum and minimum pressures and temperatures to whichthe device may be exposed under both normal and the specified fire testconditions in section 14, and shall be capable of withstanding the hydrostaticpressure test of section 9.2.3. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.4 Threaded or flanged pipe connections shall comply with the applicableB16 standards in ASTM F1155. Welded joints shall comply with ASTM F722.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.5 All flat joints of the housing shall be machined true and shallprovide for a joint having adequate metal-to-metal contact. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.6 Where welded construction is used for pressure retaining components,welded joint design details, welding and non-destructive testing shallbe in accordance with section VIII, Division 1, of the ASME Code and ASTMF722. Welders and weld procedures shall be qualified in accordance withsection IX of the ASME Code. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.7 The design of detonation flame arresters shall allow for easeof inspection and removal of internal elements for replacement, cleaningor repair without removal of the entire device from the system. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.8 Detonation flame arresters shall allow for efficient drainageof condensate without impairing their efficiency to prevent the passageof flame. The housing may be fitted with one or more drain plugs for thispurpose.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.9 All fastenings shall be protected against loosening. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.10 Detonation flame arresters shall be designed and constructedto minimize the effect of fouling under normal operating conditions. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.11 Detonation flame arresters shall be capable of operating overthe full range of ambient air temperatures anticipated. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.12 Detonation flame arresters shall be of first class workmanshipand free from imperfections which may affect their intended purpose. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.13 Detonation flame arresters shall be tested in accordance withsection 9. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">9. Tests </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.1 Tests shall be conducted by an independent laboratory capableof performing the tests. The manufacturer, in choosing a laboratory, acceptsthat it is a qualified independent laboratory by determining that it has(or has access to) the apparatus, facilities, personnel, and calibratedinstruments that are necessary to test detonation flame arresters in accordancewith this standard. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.1.1 A test report shall be prepared by the laboratory which shallinclude: </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.1.1.1 Detailed drawings of the detonation flame arrester and itscomponents (including a parts list identifying the materials of construction).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.1.1.2 Types of tests conducted and results obtained. This shallinclude the maximum temperature reached and the length of testing timein section 14.2 in the case of Type II detonation flame arresters. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.1.1.3 Description of approved attachments (reference 9.2.6). </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.1.1.4 Types of gases of vapors for which the detonation flame arresteris approved. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.1.1.5 Drawings of the test rig. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.1.1.6 Record of all markings found on the tested detonation flamearrester. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.1.1.7 A report number. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.2 One of each model Type I and Type II detonation flame arrestershall be tested. Where approval of more than one size of a detonation flamearrester model is desired, only the largest and smallest sizes need betested provided it is demonstrated by calculation and/or other testingthat intermediate size devices have equal or greater strength to withstandthe force of a detonation and have equivalent detonation arresting characteristics.A change of design, material, or construction which may affect the corrosionresistance, or ability to resist endurance burning, deflagrations or detonationsshall be considered a change of model for the purpose of this paragraph.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.2.1 The detonation flame arrester shall have the same dimensions,configuration, and most unfavorable clearances expected in production units.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.2.2 A corrosion test shall be conducted. In this test, a completedetonation flame arrester, including a section of pipe similar to thatto which it will be fitted, shall be exposed to a 20% sodium chloride solutionspray at a temperature of 25 anddegrees;C for a period of 240 hours, andallowed to dry for 48 hours. Following this exposure, all movable partsshall operate properly and there shall be no corrosion deposits which cannotbe washed off. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.2.3 The detonation flame arrester shall be subjected to a hydrostaticpressure test of at least 350 psig for ten minutes without rupturing, leaking,or showing permanent distortion. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.2.4 Flow characteristics as declared by the manufacturer, shallbe demonstrated by appropriate tests. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.2.5 Detonation flame arresters shall be tested for endurance burnand deflagration/detonation in accordance with the test procedures in section14. Type I detonation flame arresters shall show no flame passage whensubjected to both tests. Type II detonation flame arresters shall showno evidence of flame passage during the detonation/deflagration tests insection 14.3. Type II detonation flame arresters shall be tested for enduranceburn in accordance with section 14.2. From the endurance burn test of aType II detonation flame arresters, the maximum temperature reached andthe test duration shall be recorded and provided as part of the laboratorytest report. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.2.6 Where a detonation flame arrester is provided with cowls, weatherhoods and deflectors, etc., it shall be tested in each configuration inwhich it is provided. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.2.7 Detonation flame arresters which are provided with a heatingarrangement designed to maintain the surface temperature of the deviceabove 85 anddegrees;C shall pass the required tests at the maximum heatedoperating temperature. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.2.8 Each finished detonation arrester shall be pneumatically testedat 10 psig to ensure there are no defects or leakage. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">10. Inspection </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">10.1 The manufacturer shall afford the purchaser's inspector all reasonablefacilities necessary to assure that the device is being furnished in accordancewith this standard. All examinations and inspections shall be made at theplace of manufacture, unless otherwise agreed upon.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">10.2 Each finished detonation arrester shall be visually and dimensionallychecked to ensure that the device corresponds to this standard, is certifiedin accordance with section 11 and is marked in accordance with section12. Special attention shall be given to the checking of welds and the properfit-ups of joints (see sections 8.5 and 8.6).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">11. <T3>Certification</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">11.1 Manufacturer's certification that a detonation flame arrestermeets this standard shall be provided in an instruction manual. The manualshall include as applicable:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">11.1.1 Installation instructions and a description of all configurationstested (reference paragraph 9.2.6). Installation instructions to includethe device's limitations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">11.1.2 Operating instructions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">11.1.3 Maintenance requirements.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">11.1.3.1 Instructions on how to determine when arrester cleaning isrequired and the method of cleaning.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">11.1.4 Copy of test report (see section 9.1.1).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">11.1.5 Flow test data, maximum temperature and time tested (Type II).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">11.1.6 The ambient air temperature range over which the device willeffectively prevent the passage of flame.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note: </T4>Other factors such as condensation and freezing of vaporsshould be evaluated at the time of equipment specification.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">11.1.7 The maximum operating pressure for which the device is suitable.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">12. <T3>Marking</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">12.1 Each detonation flame arrester shall be permanently marked indicating:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">12.1.1 Manufacturer's name or trademark.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">12.1.2 Style, type, model or other manufacturer's designation forthe detonation flame arrester.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">12.1.3 Size of the inlet and outlet.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">12.1.4 Type of device (Type I or II).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">12.1.5 Direction of flow through the detonation flame arrester.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">12.1.6 Test laboratory and report number.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">12.1.7 Lowest MESG of gases that the detonation flame arrester issuitable for.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">12.1.8 ASTM designation of this standard.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">12.1.9 Ambient air operating temperature range.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">12.1.10 Maximum operating pressure.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13. <T3>Quality Assurance</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">13.1 Detonation flame arresters shall be designed, manufactured andtested in a manner that ensures they meet the characteristics of the unittested in accordance with this standard.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">13.2 The detonation flame arrester manufacturer shall maintain thequality of the arresters that are designed, tested and marked in accordancewith this standard. At no time shall a detonation flame arrester be soldwith this standard designation that does not meet the requirements herein.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">14. <T3>Test Procedures for Detonation Arresters</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">14.1 </ITAG><T3>Media/Air Mixtures</T3><ITAG tagnum="24">14.1.1 For vapors from flammable or combustible liquids with a MESGgreater than or equal to 0.9 mm, technical grade hexane or gasoline vaporsshall be used for all tests in this section except technical grade propanemay be used for the deflagration/detonation tests in section 14.3 For vaporswith a MESG less than 0.9 mm, the specific vapor (or alternatively, a mediawith a MESG less than or equal to the MESG of the vapor) must be used asthe test medium in all section 14 tests.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">14.1.2 Hexane, propane, gasoline and other test vapors shall be mixedwith air to form the most easily ignitable mixture.\5\</ITAG><NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\5\ See IEC Publication 79-1.<ITAG tagnum="24">14.2 </ITAG><T3>Endurance Burn Test Procedure</T3><ITAG tagnum="24">14.2.1 An endurance burning test shall be carried out as follows:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">14.2.1.1 The test rig shall consist of an apparatus producing an explosivemixture, a small tank with a diaphragm, a prototype of the detonation flamearrester and a firing source in close proximity to the test device (seeFigure 1). The detonation flame arrester shall be installed so that themixture emission is vertically upwards, or installed in the position forwhich it is designed and which will cause the most severe heating of thedevice under the prescribed endurance burn conditions. In this positionthe mixture shall be ignited.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">14.2.1.2 Endurance burn test shall start by using the most easilyignitable test vapor/air mixture with the aid of a pilot flame or a sparkigniter at the outlet. The flammable mixture may be reignited as necessaryin the course of the endurance burn. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">14.2.1.3 Temperature measurement will be performed on the surfaceof the arrester element half way between the center and its edge. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">14.2.1.4 By varying the proportions of the flammable mixture and theflow rate, the detonation flame arrester shall be heated by a stable flameon the surface of the arrester until the highest obtainable temperatureis reached on the ignited side or until the temperature on the side whichwas not ignited (protected side) rises 100 </ITAG>anddegrees;C. <ITAG tagnum="24">14.2.1.5 The flammable mixture proportions will then be varied againuntil the conditions which result in the highest temperature on the protectedside are achieved. This temperature shall be maintained for a period often minutes, after which the flow shall be stopped and the conditions observed.The highest attainable temperature is considered to have been reached whenany subsequent rise of temperature does not exceed 0.5 </ITAG>anddegrees;Cper minute over a ten minute period. <ITAG tagnum="24">14.2.1.6 If difficulty arises in establishing the highest attainabletemperature on the protected side, the following criteria shall apply.When the increase in temperature on the protected side occurs so slowlythat its temperature does not rise 100 </ITAG>anddegrees;C, the conditionswhich produced the highest temperature on the ignited side of the arresterwill be maintained for two hours. For the condition in which the temperatureon the protected side continues to rise at a rate in excess of 0.5 anddegrees;Cper minute for a 10 minute period, endurance burning shall be continued,using the most severe conditions of flammable mixtures and flow rate, fora period of two hours. In either of these cases, at the end of the twohour period, the flow shall be stopped and the conditions observed. Thetwo hour interval shall be measured commencing with the setting of theconditions which produced the most severe conditions of mixture and flowrate. For Type I detonation flame arresters, flame passage shall not occurduring this test. For Type II detonation flame arresters, the maximum temperatureobtained, and the time elapsed from the time when the most severe conditionsare set to when flame passage occurs, shall be recorded. However, for TypeII detonation flame arresters the test may be terminated 15 minutes aftersetting the most severe conditions on the protected side. <ITAG tagnum="24">14.3 </ITAG><T3>Deflagration/Detonation Test Procedure </T3><ITAG tagnum="24">14.3.1 A detonation flame arrester shall be installed at one end ofa pipe of the same diameter as the inlet of the detonation flame arrester(see Figure 2). The length and configuration of the test pipe shall developa stable detonation \6\</ITAG><NOTE/> at the device and shall be capable, by change in its lengthor configuration, of developing deflagrations and unstable (overdriven)detonations as measured on the side of the pipe where ignition occurs (run-upside). For deflagration testing, two test piping arrangements shall beused on the outlet side of the detonation flame arrester (the side whichis not ignited). In both of the following end arrangements, the outletside pipe diameter shall be equal to that on the run-up side. In one arrangement,the outlet side pipe shall be at least 10 pipe diameters long with a plasticbag over the free end. (Alternate end of pipe closures are also acceptableprovided they easily give way during the course of the test, and the closureallows the required gas concentration to be maintained throughout the testpiping arrangement.) In the other arrangement the outlet side pipe shallbe fitted with a restriction located 0.6 meter from the outlet side arresterflange. The size of the restriction for each nominal size detonation flamearrester shall be as follows:<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\6\ Some data are available for the estimation of flame speedsin horizontal pipes without detonation flame arresters. Some data indicatethat the presence of small obstacles, fittings or bends in the test pipecan accelerate the flame speeds appreciably.<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>2,L2,i1,s50,r50</C> <H1>Nominal pipe diameter </H1><H1>Restriction diameter</H1><ITAG tagnum="1">3andmin172;andmin172; <D>\1/2\</D>andmin172;andmin172;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">4andmin172;andmin172; <D>\1/2\</D>andmin172;andmin172;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">6andmin172;andmin172; <D>1</D>andmin172;andmin172;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">8andmin172;andmin172; <D>1\1/2\</D>andmin172;andmin172;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">10andmin172;andmin172; <D>1\1/2\</D>andmin172;andmin172;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">12andmin172;andmin172; <D>2</D>andmin172;andmin172;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">18andmin172;andmin172; <D>2</D>andmin172;andmin172;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">24andmin172;andmin172; <D>2</D>andmin172;andmin172;</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24"> The entire pipe shall be filled with the most easily ignitable vapor/airmixture to a pressure corresponding to or greater than the upper limitof the device's maximum operating pressure (see 11.1.7). The concentrationof the mixture should be verified by appropriate testing of the gas compositionin the plastic bag. The vapor/air mixture shall then be ignited. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">14.3.2 Flame speeds shall be measured by optical devices capable ofproviding accuracy of +/^ 5%. These devices shall be situated no more than11.75 inches apart with one device no more than 4 inches from the end ofthe test pipe to which the detonation flame arrester is attached. In addition,each outlet arrangement described in paragraph 14.3.1 shall be fitted withan optical device located no more than 6 inches from the detonation flamearrester outlet.\7\</ITAG><NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\7\ Other pressure and/or flame speed measuring techniquesmay be used if effective.<ITAG tagnum="24">14.3.3 Explosion pressures within the pipe shall be measured by ahigh frequency transducer situated in the test pipe no more than 4 inchesfrom the run-up side of the housing of the detonation flame arrester. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">14.3.4 Using the first end arrangement (10 pipe diameter outlet) describedin paragraph 14.3.1, a series of tests shall be conducted to determinethe test pipe length and configuration that results in the maximum unstable(overdriven) detonation having the maximum measured flame speed at thedetonation flame arrester. (These tests may also be carried out using asingle length of pipe with igniters spaced at varying distances from thearrester.) The flame speeds, explosion pressures and test pipe configurationsshall be recorded for each of these tests. The piping configuration thatresulted in the highest recorded unstable (overdriven) detonation flamespeed shall be used, and the device shall be subjected to at least fouradditional unstable (overdriven) detonations. In the course of testing,the device shall also demonstrate its ability to withstand five stabledetonations, five deflagrations (as determined by flame speed) where </ITAG>DP/P<T2>o</T2> was less than 1 and five deflagrations (as determined by flamespeed) where DP/P<T2>o</T2> was greater than 1 but less than 10. Deflagration tests usingthe restricted outlet arrangement described in paragraph 14.3.1 shall thenbe conducted. In these tests the device shall demonstrate its ability tostop five deflagrations (as determined by flame speed) generated by thesame configurations which resulted in DP/P<T2>o</T2> being less than 1 during the deflagration tests which were conductedwithout the restricted end arrangements, and five deflagrations (as determinedby flame speed) generated by the same configurations which resulted inDP/P<T2>o</T2> being greater than 1 but less than 10 during the deflagrationtests which were conducted without the restricted end arrangements. Noevidence of flame passage shall occur during these tests. The flame speedsand explosion pressures for each of these tests shall be recorded. <ITAG tagnum="24">14.3.5 A device that successfully passes the tests of 14.3.4 shallbe considered to be directional (suitable for arresting a detonation advancingonly from the direction as tested) except; </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">14.3.5.1 A device may be tested according to 14.3.4 for detonationsapproaching from either direction, or </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">14.3.5.2 The design of the device is symmetrical where each end maybe considered to be identical when approached by a detonation from eitherdirection.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-14-M002</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="42">Insert illustration(s) 2 255A-2 256</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-14-C</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Attachment 1 to Appendix A</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="110"><C>3,L2,i1,s50,4.4,4.4</C> <H1>Inflammable gas or vapour</H1><H1>Experimental maximum safe gap</H1><H2>mm</H2><H2>in.</H2><ITAG tagnum="1">Methane<D>1.170</D><D>0.046</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Blast furnace gas<D>1.193</D><D>0.047</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Propane<D>0.965</D><D>0.038</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Butane<D>1.066</D><D>0.042</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Pentane<D>1.016</D><D>0.040</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Hexane<D>0.965</D><D>0.038</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Heptane<D>0.965</D><D>0.038</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iso-octane<D>1.040</D><D>0.041</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Decane<D>1.016</D><D>0.040</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Benzene<D>0.99</D><D>0.039</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Xylene<D>1.066</D><D>0.042</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cyclohexane<D>0.94</D><D>0.037</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Acetone<D>1.016</D><D>0.040</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ethylene<D>0.71</D><D>0.028</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Methyl-ethyl-ketone<D>1.016</D><D>0.040</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Carbon monoxide<D>0.915</D><D>0.036</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Methyl-acetate<D>0.990</D><D>0.039</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ethyl-acetate<D>1.04</D><D>0.041</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Propyl-acetate<D>1.04</D><D>0.041</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Butyl-acetate<D>1.016</D><D>0.040</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Amyl-acetate<D>0.99</D><D>0.039</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Methyl alcohol<D>0.915</D><D>0.036</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ethyl alcohol<D>1.016</D><D>0.040</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iso-butyl-alcohol<D>0.965</D><D>0.038</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Butyl-alcohol (Normal)<D>0.94</D><D>0.037</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Amyl-alcohol<D>0.99</D><D>0.039</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ethyl-ether<D>0.864</D><D>0.034</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Coal gas (H<T2>2</T2> 57%)<D>0.482</D><D>0.019</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Acetylene<D>andless;0.025</D><D>andless;0.001</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Carbon disulphide<D>0.203</D><D>0.008</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Hydrogen<D>0.102</D><D>0.004</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Blue water gas (H<T2>2</T2> 53% CO 47%)<D>0.203</D><D>0.008</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ethyl nitrate<D>andless;0.025</D><D>andless;0.001</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ammonia<D>3.33</D><D>0.133</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ethylene oxide<D>\1\.65</D><D>\1\ 0.026</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ethyl nitrite<D>0.922</D><D>0.038</D><F>\1\ Approx.</F></ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Appendix B_Standard Specification for Tank Vent Flame Arresters </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1. <T3>Scope </T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">1.1 This standard provides the minimum requirements for design, construction,performance and testing of tank vent flame arresters. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">2. <T3>Intent </T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">2.1 This standard is intended for flame arresters protecting systemscontaining vapors of flammable or combustible liquids where vapor temperaturesdo not exceed 60anddegrees;C. The text media defined in 14.1.1 can be usedexcept where arresters protect systems handling vapors with a maximum experimentalsafe gap (MESG) below 0.9 millimeters. Flame arresters protecting suchsystems must be tested with appropriate media (the same vapor or a mediahaving a MESG no greater than the vapor). Various gases and their respectiveMESG are listed in Attachment 1 to Appendix B.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24"> </ITAG><T4>Note: </T4>Flame arresters meeting this standard also comply with theminimum requirements of the International Maritime Organization. MaritimeSafety Committee Circular No. 373 (MSC/Circ. 373/Rev.1). <ITAG tagnum="26">3. <T3>Applicable Documents </T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">3.1 ASTM Standards \1\</ITAG><NOTE/> <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\Available from the American Society for Testing and Materials,1916 Race St., Philadelphia, PA 19103 <ITAG tagnum="24">F722 Welded Joints for Shipboard Piping Systems </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">F1155 Standard Practice for Selection and Application of Piping SystemMaterials </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">3.2 ANSI Standards \2\</ITAG><NOTE/> <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\Available from the American Society of Mechanical Engineers,345 E. 47th St., New York, NY 10017. <ITAG tagnum="24">B16.5 Pipe Flanges and Flanged Fittings. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">3.3 Other Documents </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">3.3.1 ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code \2\ </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Section VIII, Division 1, Pressure Vessels </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Section IX, Welding and Brazing Qualifications. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">3.3.2 International Maritime Organization, Maritime Safety Committee\3\</ITAG><NOTE/> <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\Available from the International Maritime Organization,4 Albert Embankment, London SE1 7SR, England. <ITAG tagnum="24">MSC/Circ. 373/Rev. 1_Revised Standards for the Design, Testing andLocating of Devices to Prevent the Passage of Flame into Cargo Tanks inTankers. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3.3.3 International Electrotechnical Commission (\4\<NOTE/>) </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\4\Available from the International Electrotechnical Commission,1 rue de Varembe, Geneva, Switzerland <ITAG tagnum="24">Publication 79-1_Electrical Apparatus for Explosive Gas Atmospheres.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">4. <T3>Terminology </T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4.1 Flame arrester_A device to prevent the passage of flame in accordancewith a specified performance standard. Its flame arresting element is basedon the principle of quenching. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4.2 Flame speed_The speed at which a flame propagates along a pipeor other system. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4.3 Flame passage_The transmission of a flame through a flame arrester.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4.4 Gasoline Vapors_A non-leaded petroleum distillate consisting essentiallyof aliphatic hydrocarbon compounds with a boiling range approximately 65anddegrees;C/75anddegrees;C.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">5. <T3>Classification </T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">5.1 The two types of flame arresters covered in this specificationare classified as follows: </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">5.1.1 Type I_Flame arresters acceptable for end-of-line applications</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">5.1.2 Type II_Flame arresters acceptable for in-line applications.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">6. <T3>Ordering Information </T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.1 Orders for flame arresters under this specification shall includethe following information as applicable: </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.1.1 Type (I or II). </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.1.2 Nominal pipe size. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.1.3 Each gas or vapor in the tank being protected by the flame arrester,and the corresponding MESG. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.1.4 Inspection and tests other than specified by this standard.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.1.5 Anticipated ambient air temperature range.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.1.6 Purchaser's inspection requirements (see section 10.1).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.1.7 Description of installation (distance and configuration of pipebetween the arrester, and the atmosphere or potential ignition source)(see section 9.2.4.2).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.1.8 Materials of construction (see section 7).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.1.9 Maximum flow rate and the design pressure drop for that maximumflow rate.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">7. <T3>Materials</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.1 The flame arrester housing, and other parts or bolting used forpressure retention, shall be constructed of materials listed in ASTM F1155,or section VIII, Division 1 of the ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.1.1 Arresters, elements, gaskets, and seals must be of materialsresistant to attack by seawater and the liquids and vapors contained inthe tank being protected (see section 6.1.3).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.2 Nonmetallic materials, other than gaskets and seals, shall notbe used in the construction of pressure retaining components of the flamearrester.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.2.1 Nonmetallic gaskets and seals shall be non-combustible and suitablefor the service intended.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.3 Bolting materials, other than that of section 7.1, shall be atleast equal to those listed in Table 1 of ANSI B16.5.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.4 The possibility of galvanic corrosion shall be considered in theselection of materials.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.5 All other parts shall be constructed of materials suitable forthe service intended.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">8. <T3>Other Requirements</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.1 Flame arrester housings shall be gas tight to prevent the escapeof vapors.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.2 Flame arrester elements shall fit in the housing in a manner thatwill insure tightness of metal-to-metal contacts in such a way that flamecannot pass between the elements and the housing.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.2.1 The net free area through flame arrester elements shall be atleast 1.5 times the cross-sectional area of the arrester inlet.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.3 Housings and elements shall be of substantial construction anddesigned for the mechanical and other loads intended during service. Inaddition, they shall be capable of withstanding the maximum and minimumpressures and temperatures to which the device may be exposed under bothnormal and the specified fire test conditions in section 14.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.4 Threaded or flanged pipe connections shall comply with the applicableB16 standards in ASTM F1155. Welded joints shall comply with ASTM F722.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.5 All flat joints of the housing shall be machined true and shallprovide for a joint having adequate metal-to-metal contact.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.6 Where welded construction is used for pressure retaining components,welded joint design details, welding and non-destructive testing shallbe in accordance with section VIII, Division 1, of the ASME Code and ASTMF722. Welders and weld procedures shall be qualified in accordance withsection IX of the ASME Code.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.7 The design of flame arresters shall allow for ease of inspectionand removal of internal elements for replacement, cleaning or repair withoutremoval of the entire device from the system.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.8 Flame arresters shall allow for efficient drainage of condensatewithout impairing their efficiency to prevent the passage of flame.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.8.1 Where the design does not permit complete drainage of condensatethrough its connection to the tank, the housing shall be fitted with aplugged drain opening on the side of the atmospheric outlet of not lessthan \1/2\ inch nominal pipe size (NPS \1/2\).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.9 All fastenings shall be protected against loosening.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.10 Flame arresters shall be designed and constructed to minimizethe effect of fouling under normal operating conditions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.11 Flame arresters shall be capable of operating over the full rangeof ambient air temperatures anticipated.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.12 End-of-line flame arresters shall be so constructed as to directthe efflux vertifically upward.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.13 Flame arresters shall be of first class workmanship and freefrom imperfections which may affect their intended purpose.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.14 Tank vent flame arresters shall show no flame passage when subjectedto the tests in 9.2.4.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">9. <T3>Prototype Tests</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.1 Tests shall be conducted by an independent laboratory capableof performing the tests. The manufacturer, in choosing a laboratory acceptsthat it is a qualified independent laboratory by determining that it has(or has access to) the apparatus, facilities, personnel, and calibratedinstruments that are necessary to test flame arresters in accordance withthis standard.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.1.1 A test report shall be prepared by the laboratory which shallinclude:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.1.1.1 Detailed drawings of the flame arrester and its components(including a parts list identifying the materials of construction).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.1.1.2 Types of tests conducted and results obtained.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.1.1.3 Specific advice on approved attachments (see section 9.2.4.1).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.1.1.4 Types of gases or vapors for which the flame arrester is approved(see section 6.1.3).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.1.1.5 Drawings of the test rig.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.1.1.6 Record of all markings found on the tested flame arrester.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.1.1.7 A report number.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.2 One of each model Type I and Type II flame arrester shall be tested.Where approval of more than one size of a flame arrester model is desired,the largest and smallest sizes shall be tested. A change of design, material,or construction which may affect the corrosion resistance, endurance burn,or flashback capabilities of the flame arrester shall be considered a changeof model for the purpose of this paragraph.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.2.1 The flame arrester shall have the same dimensions, configuration,and the most unfavorable clearances expected in production units.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.2.2 A corrosion test shall be conducted. In this test, a completearrester, including a section of pipe similar to that to which it willbe fitted, shall be exposed to a 20% sodium chloride solution spray ata temperature of 25 degrees C for a period of 240 hours, and allowed todry for 48 hours. Following this exposure, all movable parts shall operateproperly and there shall be no corrosion deposits which cannot be washedoff.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.2.3 Performance characteristics as declared by the manufacturer,such as flow rates under both positive and negative pressure, operatingsensitivity, flow resistance, and velocity, shall be demonstrated by appropriatetests.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.2.4 Tank vent flame arresters shall be tested for endurance burnand flashback in accordance with the test procedures in section 14. Thefollowing constraints apply:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.2.4.1 Where a Type I flame arrester is provided with cowls, weatherhoods and deflectors, etc., it shall be tested in each configuration inwhich it is provided.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.2.4.2 Type II arresters shall be specifically tested with the inclusionof all pipes, tees, bends, cowls, weather hoods, etc., which may be fittedbetween the arrester and the atmosphere.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.2.5 Devices which are provided with a heating arrangement shallpass the required tests at the heated temperature.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.2.6 After all tests are completed, the device shall be disassembledand examined, and no part of the device shall be damaged or show permanentdeformation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">10. <T3>Inspection</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">10.1 The manufacturer shall afford the purchaser's inspector all reasonablefacilities necessary to assure that the material is being furnished inaccordance with this standard. All examinations and inspections shall bemade at the place of manufacture, unless otherwise agreed upon.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">10.2 Each finished flame arrester shall be visually and dimensionallychecked to ensure that the device corresponds to this standard, is certifiedin accordance with section 11 and is marked in accordance with section12. Special attention shall be given to checking the proper fit-up of joints(see sections 8.5 and 8.6)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">11. <T3>Certification</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">11.1 Manufacturer's certification that a flame arrester has been constructedin accordance with this standard shall be provided in an instruction manual.The manual shall include as applicable:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">11.1.1 Installation instructions and a description of all configurationstested (reference paragraph 9.2.4.1 and 9.2.4.2). Installation instructionsto include manufacturer's recommended limitations based on all configurationstested.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">11.1.2 Operating instructions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">11.1.3 Maintenance requirements.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">11.1.3.1 Instructions on how to determine when flame arrester cleaningis required and the method of cleaning.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">11.1.4 Copy of test report (see section 9.1.1).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">11.1.5 Flow test data, including flow rates under both positive andnegative pressures, operating sensitivity, flow resistance, and velocity.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">11.1.6 The ambient air temperature range over which the device willeffectively prevent the passage of flame.</ITAG><T4>Note:</T4> Other factors such as condensation and freezing of vaporsshould be evaluated at the time of equipment specification.<ITAG tagnum="26">12. <T3>Marking</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">12.1 Each flame arrester shall be permanently marked indicating:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">12.1.1 Manufacturer's name or trademark.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">12.1.2 Style, type, model or other manufacturer's designation forthe flame arrester.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">12.1.3 Size of the inlet and outlet.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">12.1.4 Type of device (Type I or II).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">12.1.5 Direction of flow through the flame arrester.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">12.1.6 Test laboratory and report number.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">12.1.7 Lowest MESG of gases for which the flame arrester is suitablefor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">12.1.8 Ambient air operating temperature range.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">12.1.9 ASTM designation of this standard.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13. <T3>Quality Assurance</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">13.1 Flame arresters shall be designed, manufactured and tested ina manner that ensures they meet the characteristics of the unit testedin accordance with this standard.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">13.2 The flame arrester manufacturer shall maintain the quality ofthe flame arresters that are designed, tested and marked in accordancewith this standard. At no time shall a flame arrester be sold with thisstandard designation that does not meet the requirements herein.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">14. <T3>Test Procedures for Flame Arresters</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">14.1 </ITAG><T3>Media/Air Mixtures</T3><ITAG tagnum="24">14.1.1 For vapors from flammable or combustible liquids with a MESGgreater than or equal to 0.9 mm, technical grade hexane or gasoline vaporsshall be used for all tests in this section except technical grade propanemay be used for the flashback test in section 14.2. For vapors with a MESGless than 0.9 mm, the specific vapor (or alternatively, a media with aMESG less than or equal to the MESG of the vapor) must be used as the testmedium in all section 14 tests.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">14.1.2 Hexane, propane, gasoline and chemical vapors shall be mixedwith air to form the most easily ignitable mixture.\5\</ITAG><NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\5\ See IEC Publication 79-1<ITAG tagnum="26">14.2 <T3>Flashback Test</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">14.2.1 A flashback test shall be carried out as follows:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">14.2.1.1 The test rig shall consist of an apparatus producing an explosivemixture, a small tank with a diaphragm, a prototype of the flame arrester,a plastic bag \6\</ITAG><NOTE/> and a firing source in three positions (see Figure 1).\7\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\6\ The dimensions of the plastic bag are dependent on thoseof the flame arrester. The plastic bag may have a circumference of 2 m,a length of 2.5 m and a wall thickness of .05 m.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\7\ In order to avoid remnants of the plastic bag from fallingback on to the flame arrester being tested after ignition of the fuel/airmixture, it may be useful to mount a coarse wire frame across the flamearrester within the plastic bag. The frame should be constructed so asnot to interfere with the test result.<ITAG tagnum="24">14.2.1.2 The tank, flame arrester assembly and the plastic bag envelopingthe prototype flame arrester shall be filled so that this volume containsthe most easily ignitable vapor/air mixture.\8\</ITAG><NOTE/> The concentration of the mixture should be verified by appropriatetesting of the gas composition in the plastic bag. Three ignition sourcesshall be installed along the axis of the bag, one close to the flame arrester,another as far away as possible therefrom, and the third at the midpointbetween these two. These three sources shall be fired in succession, oneduring each of the three tests. Flame passage shall not occur during thistest.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\8\ See IEC Publication 79-1<ITAG tagnum="24">14.2.1.3 If flame passage occurs, the tank diaphragm will burst andthis will be audible and visible to the operator by the emission of a flame.Flame, heat and pressure sensors may be used as an alternative to a burstingdiaphragm.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">14.3 <T3>Endurance Burn Test</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">14.3.1 An endurance burning test shall be carried out as follows:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">14.3.1.1 The test rig as referred to in 14.2 may be used, withoutthe plastic bag. The flame arrester shall be so installed that the mixtureemission is vertical. In this position the mixture shall be ignited.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">14.3.1.2 Endurance burning shall be achieved by using the most easilyignitable test vapor/air mixture with the aid of a pilot flame or a sparkigniter at the outlet. By varying the proportions of the flammable mixtureand the flow rate, the arrester shall be heated until the highest obtainabletemperature on the cargo tank side of the arrester is reached. The highestattainable temperature may be considered to have been reached when therate of rise of temperature does not exceed 0.5 anddegrees;C per minute overa ten minute period. This temperature shall be maintained for a periodof ten minutes, after which the flow shall be stopped and the conditionsobserved. If difficulty arises in establishing the highest attainable temperature,the following criteria shall apply. When the temperature appears to beapproaching the maximum temperature, using the most severe conditions offlammable mixtures and flow rate, but increases at a rate in excess of0.5 anddegrees;C per minute over a ten minute period, endurance burning shallbe continued for a period of two hours after which the flow shall be stoppedand the conditions observed. Flame passage shall not occur during thistest.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-14-M001</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="42">Insert illustration(s) 2-267</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-14-C</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Attachment 1 to Appendix B</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="110"><C>3,L2,i1,s50,4.4,4.4</C> <H1>Inflammable gas or vapour</H1><H1>Experimental maximum safe gap</H1><H2>mm</H2><H2>in.</H2><ITAG tagnum="1">Methane<D>1.170</D><D>0.046</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Blast furnace gas<D>1.193</D><D>0.047</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Propane<D>0.965</D><D>0.038</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Butane<D>1.066</D><D>0.042</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Pentane<D>1.016</D><D>0.040</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Hexane<D>0.965</D><D>0.038</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">heptane<D>0.965</D><D>0.038</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iso-octane<D>1.040</D><D>0.041</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Decane<D>1.016</D><D>0.040</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Benzene<D>0.99</D><D>0.039</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Xylene<D>1.066</D><D>0.042</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Cyclohexane<D>0.94</D><D>0.037</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Acetone<D>1.016</D><D>0.040</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ethylene<D>0.71</D><D>0.028</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Methyl-ethyl-ketone<D>1.016</D><D>0.040</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Carbon monoxide<D>0.915</D><D>0.036</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Methyl-acetate<D>0.990</D><D>0.039</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ethyl-acetate<D>1.04</D><D>0.041</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Propyl-acetate<D>1.04</D><D>0.041</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Butyl-acetate<D>1.016</D><D>0.040</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Amyl-acetate<D>0.99</D><D>0.039</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Methyl alcohol<D>0.915</D><D>0.036</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ethyl alcohol<D>1.016</D><D>0.040</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Iso-butyl-alcohol<D>0.965</D><D>0.038</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Butyl-alcohol (Normal)<D>0.94</D><D>0.037</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Amyl-alcohol<D>0.99</D><D>0.039</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ethyl-ether<D>0.864</D><D>0.034</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Coal gas (H<T2>2</T2> 57%)<D>0.482</D><D>0.019</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Acetylene<D>andless;0.025</D><D>andless;0.001</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Carbon disulphide<D>0.203</D><D>0.008</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Hydrogen<D>0.102</D><D>0.004</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Blue water gas (H<T2>2</T2> 53% CO 47%)<D>0.203</D><D>0.008</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ethyl nitrate<D>andless;0.025</D><D>andless;0.001</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ammonia<D>3.33</D><D>0.133</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ethylene oxide<D>\1\.65</D><D>\1\0.026</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Ethyl nitrite<D>0.922</D><D>0.038</D><F>\1\ Approx.</F></ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Appendix C_Standard Specification for Spill Valves for Use in MarineTank Liquid Overpressure Protection Applications</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1. <T3>Scope</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">1.1 This standard provides the minimum requirements for design, construction,performance and testing of devices to prevent marine tank liquid overpressurization(hereafter called spill valves).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">1.2 The spill valves provided to this standard will satisfy Regulation1I-2/59.1.6 of the 1981 and 1983 Amendments to the International Conventionfor the Safety of Life at Sea, 1974 (SOLAS) which states: ``Provision shallbe made to guard against liquid rising in the venting system to a heightwhich would exceed the design head of the cargo tank. This shall be accomplishedby high level alarms or overflow control systems or other equivalent means,together with gauging devices and cargo tank filling procedures.''</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">1.3 The spill valves are not intended for the venting of vapors orthe relief of vapor overpressurization or underpressurization of marinetanks.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">2. <T3>Applicable Documents</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">2.1  ANSI Standards (1)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">B2.1 Pipe Threads</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">B16.1 Cast Iron Pipe Flanges and Flanged Fittings.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">B16.3 Malleable Iron Threaded Fittings.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">B16.4 Cast Iron Threaded Fittings.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">B16.5 Steel Pipe Flanges and Flanged Fittings.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">B16.11 Forged Steel Fittings, Socket-Welding andamp; Threaded.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">B16.15 Cast Bronze Threaded Fittings.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">B16.24 Bronze Pipe Flanges and Flanged Fittings.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">B31.1 Power Piping.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">B117 Standard Method of Salt Spray (Fog) Testing.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">2.2 Other Documents</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">ASME Boiler and Pressure Vessel Code \1\</ITAG><NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ Available from the American Society of Mechanical Engineers,345 E. 47th St., New York, NY 10017.<ITAG tagnum="24">Section VIII, Division 1, Pressure Vessels.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">Section IX, Welding and Brazing Qualifications.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3. <T3>Terminology</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">3.1 Spill Valve_An independent device that automatically preventsliquid overpressurization of a tank by relieving liquid at a predeterminedpressure set higher than the pressure reached in the tank when the tankvapor relieving device operates at its maximum design venting rate (basedon a volumetric vapor volume 1.25 times the maximum design loading rate).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">4. <T3>Ordering Information</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4.1 Orders for spill valves under this specification shall includethe following information as applicable:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4.1.1 Nominal pipe size and end connections.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4.1.2 Product(s) in tank being protected by the spill valve.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4.1.3 Inspection and tests other than specified by this standard.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4.1.4 Required relieving pressure at maximum tank loading flow rate.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4.1.5 Set (opening) pressure.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4.1.6 Maximum tank design loading flow rate.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4.1.7 Inlet pressure drop resulting from the maximum tank design loadingflow rate.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4.1.8 Back pressure of the spill valve discharge lines resulting frommaximum tank design loading flow rate.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4.1.9 Purchaser's inspection requirements (see section 9.1).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4.1.10 Installation inclinations in excess of 2\1/2\ degrees (seesection 6.6).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4.1.11 Purchaser's specifications for preventing the valve from leakingdue to cargo sloshing.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4.1.12 Additional requirements or testing as contracted by the manufacturerand purchasers.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">5. <T3>Materials</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">5.1 All parts shall be constructed of materials suitable for the serviceintended. Table I of 46 CFR 153 specifies materials that may not be usedin components that contact liquid or vapor of each hazardous liquid cargo.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">5.2 Housing of spill valves, and all other parts and/or bolting usedfor pressure retention, shall be constructed of materials having a solidusmelting point of greater that 1700 anddegrees;F and be listed in ANSI-B31.1,Power Piping, or Section VIII Division 1 of the ASME Boiler and PressureVessel Code, except as noted in section 5.5.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">5.3 Materials in contact with the liquid or the liquid's vapor shallbe suitable for the service and resistant to attack by the liquid carriedin the tank being protected (see section 4.1.2).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">5.4 Corrosion resistant materials shall be used for the following:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">5.4.1 Housings, discs, spindles and seats of valves.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">5.4.2 Springs that actuate discs of valves. Springs plated with corrosionresistant material are not acceptable.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">5.5 Nonmetallic materials shall not be permitted except for gaskets,seals, bushings in way of moving parts, and valve diaphragms.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">5.6 Bolting materials shall be at least equal to those listed in Table1 of ANSI B16.5. Bolts, screws, and fasteners in contact with interiorliquid shall be compatible with the liquid (see section 4.1.2).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">6. <T3>Other Requirements</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.1 Pressure retaining housings shall be designed to withstand a hydrostaticpressure of at least 125 pounds per square inch without rupturing or showingpermanent distortion.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.2 Housing shall have suitable pipe connections for the removal,maintenance, and testing of the spill valve.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.2.1 Pipe and connections shall be in accordance with one of thestandards listed in paragraph 2.1 or as agreed by the manufacturer anduser (see 4.1.12).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.3 The design of spill valves shall allow for ease of inspectionand removal of internal elements for replacement, cleaning or repair withoutremoval of the spill valve.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.4 All flat joints of the housing shall be machined true and shallprovide for a joint having adequate metal-to-metal contact.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.5 Where welded construction is used, welded joint design details,welding and non-destructive testing shall be in accordance with SectionVIII, Division 1, of the ASME Code. Welders and weld procedures shall bequalified in accordance with section IX of the ASME Code.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.6 The spill valve shall be fully operable at static inclinationsup to 2\1/2\ degrees unless otherwise specified by the ordering informationof section 4.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.7 Spill valves shall allow for efficient drainage of moisture withoutimpairing their proper operation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.7.1 Where the design does not permit complete drainage of condensatethrough its connection to the tank, the housing shall be fitted with aplugged drain opening on the side of the atmospheric outlet of not lessthan nominal pipe size \1/2\ (12mm).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.8 Housing, elements, and seal gasket materials shall be capableof withstanding the highest pressure and temperature to which the spillvalve may be exposed under normal conditons.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.9 Spill valves shall be vapor tight at pressures below the ratedliquid relieving pressure.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.10 Fastenings essential to the operation of the spill valve shallbe protected against loosening.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.11 Spill valves shall be designed and constructed to minimize theeffect of fouling under normal conditions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.12 The spill valve shall not be provided with a means of positiveclosure. In installations where cargo sloshing is expected, the spill valveinstallation must be designed to preclude premature opening of the valvedue to cargo sloshing. Also, spill valves shall be designed so that theycomply with applicable Loadline and Subdivision requirements.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.13 Spill valves shall be capable of operating in freezing conditions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.14 Each of the free areas through the valve seat and through thevalve discharge at maximum lift shall not be less than the cross-sectionalarea of the valve inlet connection.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.15 Means shall be provided to check that any valve opens freelyand does not remain in the open position.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.16 Valves discs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.16.1 Valve discs shall be guided by a ribbed cage or other suitablemeans to prevent binding and insure proper seating. Where valve stems areguided by bushings suitably designed to prevent binding and to insure properseating, the valves need not be fitted with ribbed cages.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.16.2 Valve discs shall close tight against the valve seat by metalto metal contact; however, resilient seating seals may be provided if thedesign is such that the disc closes tight against the seat in case theseals are destroyed or in case they carry away.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.16.3 Valve discs may be solid or hollow. The pressure at which thevalve discs open fully at maximum flow rating shall not exceed 120 percentof the set (opening) pressure.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.17 Valves may be actuated by nonmetallic diaphragms.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.17.1 Nonmetallic diaphragms are not allowed where failure resultsin unrestricted flow of flammable or toxic tank vapors to the atmosphereor in an increase in the pressure at which the valve normally releases.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.18 Relief pressure adjusting mechanisms shall be permanently securedby lockwire, locknuts or other suitable means.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.18.1 Hollow portions of the valve used to vary the relieving pressureby adding or removing weight shall be watertight.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6.1.19 Spill valves shall not permit entrance of water when exposedto boarding seas.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">7. <T3>Tests</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.1 </ITAG><T3>Prototype Tests</T3><ITAG tagnum="24">7.1.1 A prototype of the largest and smallest spill valve of eachdesign, based on valve inlet connection size, shall be tested as specifiedbelow in 7.1.5 through 7.1.10.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.1.2 The spill valve shall have the dimensions of and most unfavorableclearances expected in production units.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.1.3 Tests shall be conducted by a laboratory capable or performingthe tests.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.1.4 A test report shall be prepared by the laboratory which shallinclude:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.1.4.1 Detailed drawings of the spill valve.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.1.4.2 Types of tests conducted and results obtained.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.1.4.3 Specific advice on approved attachments.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.1.4.4 Types of liquid for which the spill valve is approved.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.1.4.5 Drawings of the test rig.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.1.4.6 The pressures at which the spill valve opens and closes andthe efflux flow rate at various inlet pressures.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.1.4.7 Record of all markings found on the prototype spill valve.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.1.4.8 A traceable report number.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.1.5 </ITAG><T3>Corrosion Test:</T3> A corrosion test shall be conducted in accordancewith ANSI B117. The valve shall be subjected to the test for a period of240 hours and allowed to dry for 48 hours. There shall be no corrosiondeposits which cannot be washed off.<ITAG tagnum="24">7.1.6 </ITAG><T3>Hydrostatic Test: </T3>A hydrostatic pressure test shall be conductedto show compliance with section 6.1 The test shall be made with water orother liquid having a maximum viscosity of 40 SSU at 125 anddegrees;F (52anddegrees;C) with a maximum pressure test temperature of 125 anddegrees;F(52 anddegrees;C). Minimum duration of test shall be one minute.<ITAG tagnum="24">7.1.7 </ITAG><T3>Performance Tests: </T3>Performance characteristics, including flowrates under various positive pressures, operating sensitivity, flow resistanceand velocity, shall be demonstrated by appropriate tests with a representativefluid.<ITAG tagnum="24">7.1.8 </ITAG><T3>Freeze Test: </T3>Simulate water sloshing on deck by spraying a prototypespill valve completely with water from all sides and below using a fullypressurized fire hose. Allow 3 minutes to drain off. Immediately immerseit in a freeze chamber prechilled to 20anddegrees;F. Hold in chamber fortwo hours at this temperature. Immediately test the valve as in 7.1.7 todetermine opening pressure while frozen. The unit passes the test if itopens within 10% of its previously measured set (opening) pressure.<ITAG tagnum="24">7.1.9 </ITAG><T3>Vapor Tightness Test: </T3>Compliance with 6.9 shall be demonstratedby testing the spill valve with compressed air at 90% of the spill valveset (opening) pressure. The test apparatus shall have a total volume ofair (in cubic feet) equal to 5 X D, where D is the seat diameter of thespill valve, in inches (test volume may vary by plus or minus 10%). Thevalve design shall be deemed satisfactory if the air leakage rate is suchthat the pressure drop is not more than 2% in two hours.<ITAG tagnum="24">7.1.10 </ITAG><T3>Seaworthiness Test: </T3>In a simulated installation, immerse the spillvalve in 2.0 feet of water. Spray it for 10 minutes with a 2\1/2\ inchfire hose with a fully open \7/8\ inch diameter nozzle at a pitot pressureof 80 psig measured at the open nozzle. Spray all parts of the valve, bothimmersed and non-immersed, from all angles. The hose nozzle shall not belocated further than 10 feet from the spill valve during the course ofthis test. The valve design is sufficient if leakage through the housingand/or past the disk is no more than 1 ounce.<ITAG tagnum="24">7.2 </ITAG><T3>Production Tests</T3><ITAG tagnum="24">7.2.1 Each finished spill valve is to be tested by a hydrostatic testconducted at 1\1/2\ times the rate relieving pressure of the spill valve,with the closure device secured. The test shall be made with water or otherliquid having a maximum viscosity of 40 SSU at 125 anddegrees;F (52 anddegrees;C)with a maximum pressure test temperature of 125 anddegrees;F (52 anddegrees;C).Minimum duration of test shall be 1 minute. The purpose of this test isto detect leaks and structural imperfections. No visible leakage is permitted.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7.2.2 Before being shipped, each unit shall be tested as necessaryto verify it will function at its set (opening) pressure and that the discmoves freely and fully.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">8. <T3>Workmanship, Finish, and Appearance</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.1 Spill valves shall be of first class workmanship and free fromimperfections which may affect their intended purpose.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8.2 Each finished spill valve shall be visually and dimensionallychecked to ensure that the spill valve corresponds to this standard, iscertified in accordance with Section 10 and is marked in accordance withSection 11.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">9. <T3>Inspection</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">9.1 The manufacturer shall afford the purchaser's inspector all reasonablefacilities necessary to satisfy him that the material is being furnishedin accordance with this standard. Inspection by the purchaser shall notinterfere unnecessarily with the manufacturer's operations. All examinationsand inspections shall be made at the place of manufacture, unless otherwiseagreed upon.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">10. <T3>Certification</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">10.1 Manufacturer's certification that a spill valve has been constructedin accordance with this standard shall be provided in an instruction manual.The manual shall include:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">10.1.1 Installation instructions, including size of the inlet andoutlet, approved location for installation, and maximum or minimum lengthof pipe if any between the spill valve and the atmosphere.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">10.1.2 Operating instructions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">10.1.3 Maintenance requirements.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">10.1.3.1 Instructions on how to determine when spill valve cleaningis required and the method of cleaning.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">10.1.4 Copy of prototype test report (see section 7.1).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">10.1.5 Product(s) which the valve is designed for and/or restrictedto.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">11. <T3>Marking</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">11.1 Each spill valve shall be permanently marked indicating:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">11.1.1 Manufacturer's name or trademark.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">11.1.2 Style, type, model or other manufacturer's designation forthe spill valve.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">11.1.3 Direction of flow through the spill valve.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">11.1.4 Maximum rated flow.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">11.1.5 ASTM designation of this standard.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">11.1.6 Relief pressure setting at full flow rating.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">11.1.7 Set (opening) pressure.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">11.1.8 Indication of proper orientation of valve, if critical.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">12. <T3>Quality Assurance</T3></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">12.1 Spill valves shall be designed, manufactured and tested in amanner that ensures they meet the characteristics of the prototype testedin accordance with this standard.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">12.2 The spill valve manufacturer shall maintain the quality of thespill valves that are designed, tested and marked in accordance with thisstandard. At no time shall a spill valve be sold with this standard designationthat does not meet the requirements herein.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="74">Appendix D</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73">Waterfront Facility Vapor Control Training Guidelines</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">A. Purpose</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">1. Air Pollution</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">a. State/Federal Requirements</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">2. Toxicity</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">a. OSHA/USCG Standards</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">B. Coast Guard Regulations</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">C. Vapor Collection and Processing System</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">1. Explanation of the System</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">2. Waterfront Facility Systems</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">3. Waterfront Facility Interface</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">D. Hazards</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">1. Explosion/Detonation/Fire</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">2. Over/Under Pressurization</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">3. Improper Shutdown</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4. Misconnection of Liquid and Vapor Lines</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">5. Liquid/Condensation in Vapor Lines</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">6. Static Electricity Discharge</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">7. Auto-ignition</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">8. Pyrophoric Iron Sulfide Deposits</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">E. Active Components</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">1. Processing Unit</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">2. Compressor/Blower (If Installed)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">3. Inerting/Dilution/Enrichment System and Analyzers</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4. Vapor Pressure Gauges and Alarms</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">5. Automatic Shutdown (If Installed)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">F. Passive Components</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">1. Explosion Suppression System</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">2. Detonation Arrestor</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">3. P/V Valves</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4. Piping</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">G. Operating Procedures</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">1. Testing and Inspection Requirements</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">2. Additional Pre-transfer Conference Topics</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">a. Maximum Cargo Transfer Rates</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">b. Vapor Recovery Pressures</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">c. Emergency Shutdown</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">3. Hose Connection Sequence</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4. Start-up</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">a. Proper Valve Alignment</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">b. Check Operating Pressure During Initial Start-up</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">c. Check That Vapor Processing Unit is Operating</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">d. Check That Inerting/Dilution/Enrichment System is Operating</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">5. Normal Operations</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">a. Check Operating Pressures</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">b. Check Processing Unit Operation</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">c. Check Inerting/Dilution/Enrichment System Operation</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">H. Emergency Procedures</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">1. Explosion/Detonation/Fire</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">2. Over/Under Pressure</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">3. Spill </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4. Ship/Barge Emergencies</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73">Marine Vessel Vapor Control Training Guidelines</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">A. Purpose</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">1. Air Pollution</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">a. State/Federal Requirements</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">2. Toxicity</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">a. OSHA/USCG Standards</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">B. Coast Guard Regulations</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">C. System Principles</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">1. Positive Pressure/Vacuum</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">2. Waterfront Facility Systems</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">3. Waterfront Facility Interface</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">D. Hazards</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">1. Explosion/Fire</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">2. Over/Under Pressure</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">3. Overfill</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4. Misconnection of Liquid and Vapor Lines</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">5. Liquid/Condensation in Vapor Lines</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">E. Active Components</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">1. Liquid Level Indicators</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">2. High Level Alarm(s)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">3. Vapor Collection Manifold</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4. Vapor Pressure Gauges</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">F. Passive Components</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">1. Detonation Arrestor</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">2. P/V Valves</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">3. Piping</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4. Overfill/Overpressurization Protection</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">a. Spill Valves</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">b. Rupture Disks</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">G. Operating Procedures</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">1. Testing and Inspection Requirements</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">2. Additional Pre-transfer Conference Topics</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">a. Maximum Cargo Transfer Rates</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">b. Vapor Recovery Pressures</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">c. Emergency Shutdown</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">3. Hose Connection Sequence</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4. Start-up</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">a. Proper Cargo and Vapor System Alignment</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">b. Confirm Operating Pressure During Initial Start-up</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">5. Normal Operations</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">a. Monitor Vapor Pressure</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">b. Monitor Cargo Level</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">H. Emergency Procedures</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">1. Explosion/Fire</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">2. Over/Under Pressurization</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">3. Overfill </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">4. Activation of Spill Valve/Rupture Disk</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">5. Waterfront Facility Emergencies</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-23431 Filed 10-5-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-14-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>