<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89315-0121 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.3-15-89.f2.A1120</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Application No. D-7521 et al.]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Proposed Exemptions; Union Bank, et al.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of proposed exemptions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This document contains notices of pendency before theDepartment of Labor (the Department) of proposed exemptions from certainof the prohibited transaction restrictions of the Employee Retirement IncomeSecurity Act of 1974 (the Act) and/or the Internal Revenue Code of 1954(the Code).<ITAG tagnum="84">Written Comments and Hearings Requests</ITAG>All interested persons are invited to submit written comments or requestsfor a hearing on the pending exemptions, unless otherwise stated in theNotice of Pendency, within 45 days from the date of publication of this<T4>Federal Register</T4> Notice. Comments and requests for a hearing shouldstate the reasons for the writer's interest in the pending exemption.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>All written comments and requests for a hearing (at leastthree copies) should be sent to the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration,Office of Regulations and Interpretations, Room N-5671, U.S. Departmentof Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20210. Attention:Application No. stated in each Notice of Pendency. The applications forexemption and the comments received will be available for public inspectionin the Public Documents Room of Pension and Welfare Benefit Programs, U.S.Department of Labor, Room N-5507, 200 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington,DC 20210.<ITAG tagnum="84">Notice of Interested Persons</ITAG>Notice of the proposed exemptions will be provided to all interested personsin the manner agreed upon by the applicant and the Department within 15days of the date of publication in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. Such notice shall include a copy of the noticependency of the exemption as published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> and shall inform interested persons at theirright to comment and to request a hearing (where appropriate).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>The proposed exemptions were requestedin applications filed pursuant to section 408(a) of the Act and/or section4975(c)(2) of the Code, and in accordance with procedures set forth inERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). Effective December31, 1978, section 102 of Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1978 (43 FR 47713,October 17, 1978) transferred the authority of the Secretary of the Treasuryto issue exemptions of the type requested to the Secretary of Labor. Therefore,these notices of pendency are issued solely by the Department.The applications contain representations with regard to the proposed exemptionswhich are summarized below. Interested persons are referred to the applicationson file with the Department for a complete statement of the facts and representations.<ITAG tagnum="84">Union Bank (the Bank) Located in Los Angeles, California</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">[Application No. D-7521]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a) of the Act and the sanctions resulting from the applicationof section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1) (A) through(D) of the Code shall not apply to: (1) The proposed use of assets fromcertain multi-employer pension plans (the Plans), for which the Bank servesas a directed trustee, directed corporate trustee, directed corporate co-trustee,or custodian, for permanent mortgage loans to persons (the Borrowers),who will use the loan proceeds to pay off construction loans originatedby the Bank; and (2) the execution and consummation of tri-party buy-sellagreements for such mortgage loans by the Bank with the Borrowers and thePlans, and the subsequent assignment of mortgage notes by the Bank to thePlans pursuant to such agreements, provided that:A. Each permanent mortgage loan is expressly approved by a fiduciary independentof the Bank who has authority to manage or control those Plan assets beinginvested;B. The terms of each such transaction are no less favorable to the Planthan the terms generally available in an arm's-length transaction betweenunrelated parties; andC. No investment management, advisory, underwriting or sales commissionor similar compensation is paid to the Bank by the Plan with regard tosuch transaction.Temporary Nature of ExemptionThis exemption, if granted, will be effective only for those loans whichare originated within five years of the date on which the Final Grant ofthis proposed exemption is published in the <T4>Federal Register.</T4>Summary of Facts and Representations  1. The Bank serves as a directed trustee, directed corporate trustee, directedcorporate co-trustee, or custodian of the Plans. The Plans are 19 multiemployerconstruction trade Taft-Hartley pension funds with assets of approximately$2.5 billion. The Bank's services to the Plans consist of holding, receiving,handling and disbursing funds as instructed by an independent plan fiduciary.The Bank represents that it has no discretionary authority with respectto the management of assets of the Plans and does not render investmentadvice with regard to the permanent loans made by the Plans.\1\<NOTE/> The Bank states that the only fiduciary relationship it haswith the Plans is that of a directed trustee, directed corporate trustee,directed corporate co-trustee, or custodian for such Plans.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ To the extent that, in the ordinary course of business,the Bank or any of its affiliates provides ``investment advice'' to anemployee benefit plan within the meaning of regulation 29 CFR 2510.3-21(c)(1)(ii)(B)and recommends an investment of the plan's assets in a permanent loan wherethe proceeds will be used to pay off a construction loan originated bythe Bank, the presence of an unrelated second fiduciary acting on the Bank'srecommendations on behalf of the plan would not be sufficient ot insulatethe Bank from fiduciary liability under section 406(b) of the Act. (SeeAdvisory Opinions 84-03A and 84-04A, issued by the Department on January4, 1984). The Department is unable, as a general matter, to conclude thatfiducary self-dealing of this type (if present) is in the interest or protectiveof a plan and its participants and beneficiaries. Thus, the Departmenthas limited the exemptive relief for the proposed use of the proceeds ofthe Plans' permanent loans to section 406(a) violations only.  2. In the ordinary course of its commercial lending activities, the Bankmakes construction loans to the Borrowers, who develop real property forprojects such as office buildings, shopping centers, apartment houses,condominium developments, etc. The Bank states that it is one of the leadingbanks in California in making construction loans and that the borrowersare some of the leading developers in California. The Borrowers, withoutthe assistance of the Bank, normally obtain a commitment for a permanentloan to pay off the Bank's construction loan when the particular projectis completed. However, the Bank states that the Plans are precluded frommaking such permanent loans, as investment for their real estate portfolios,when the Bank is the construction lender for the project. Thus, the Plansmust either forego these real estate investment opportunities or removethe Bank as a trustee, corporate trustee, corporate co-trustee, or custodian. 3. The Bank requests an exemption to permit the use of assets of the Plansfor permanent loans to the Borrowers, who will use the loan proceeds topay off the construction loans originated by the Bank. The Plans do notpropose to originate any construction loans or to participate in any constructionloans originated by the Bank. The Bank states that none of the Borrowerswill be parties in interest with respect to the Plans. The Bank also statesthat no contributing employers of the Plans will participate as contractorsor subcontractors on any of the projects which are being financed by thePlans' permanent loans.\2\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ The Department notes that where the construction on theproperty which secures a mortgage loan made by the Plan was conducted bya contributing employer, and a principal of such employer exercises fiduciaryauthority in approving the Plan's investment in the mortgage, a prohibitedtransaction may occur which would not be covered by this exemption.  4. The Bank represents that no loan origination fees will be paid by theBorrowers to the Bank for permanent financing. The Borrower will obtaincommitments for permanent financing either through direct contacts withthe Plans or through mortgage bankers. The Banks states that it occasionallyacts as a broker, for a fee, in order to find a permanent lender for aproject. However, the Bank represents that it has never acted as such abroker for any employee benefit plan for which it acts as a fiduciary andthat, in the proposed transaction, the Borrowers will not authorize theBank to act as an agent for the Borrower to obtain permanent financingfor any project.  All of the permanent loans to the Borrowers will be originated by the Plans.Therefore, all loan origination fees will be paid to the Plans. In addition,the Bank states that the Plans will not be required to pay and advisory,investment management, or loan commitment fee to the Bank, although suchloans will be treated as assets for the normal directed trustee or custodialadministration fees which will be assessed by the Bank. However, the Plansmay request the Bank to service the permanent loans, for which the Bankwill receive a servicing fee.\3\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\ The Bank states that all servicing arrangements for thePlans' permanent loan portfolios would comply with section 408(b)(2) ofthe Act and the regulations thereunder.  5. The Bank represents that in some instances, the Plans and the Borrowersmay want the construction loan and the permanent loan to be documentedin the same package. In such instances, the parties will enter into a buy/sellarrangement. Such buy/sell arrangements will involve a written tri-partyagreement between the Borrower, the Bank (as construction lender), andthe Plan (as permanent lender). There will be no tri-party agreements withmortgage bankers. The tri-party agreement will set forth the terms andconditions of both the construction loan and the permanent loans. Whenthe Plan makes a commitment to provide a permanent loan for a project uponcompletion of its construction, pursuant to a buy-sell arrangement, thetri-party agreement will commit the Borrower to us the proceeds of thepermanent loan to repay the Bank's construction loan.  In all cases, the Bank as construction lender will have a lien interestin the property which is the subject of the Plans permanent loan commitment.In the absence of a buy-sell arrangement, the Bank states that when itsconstruction loan is paid off with the proceeds of the Plan's permanentloan, the Bank will convey its lien interest in the property to the Borrower,who will simultaneously convey the lien interest to the Plan. However,in a buy/sell arrangement, the Bank will ``sell'' or assign the existinglien, including the mortgage note and supporting documents, to the Plan.The Bank states that in no case will it advance funds to the Borrower underthe permanent loan.6. The Bank represents that it will not be involved in the decision bythe Plans to invest in any permanent loan on a real estate project. Inall cases, independent Plan fiduciaries and investment advisers will reviewthe proposed transactions and will examine the interest rates, financialstatements, projected returns, appraisals and other factors relating tothe investment before advising the Plan to make a permanent loan. The Bankwill be subject to the investment directions of the investment managersand advisers for the Plans. With respect to the construction loans originated by the Bank, the Bankstates that it may require the Borrowers to furnish certain information,such as a list of all material dealers, laborers and subcontractors withwhom agreements have been made by either the general contractor or theBorrower regarding the construction for a particular project. The Bankrequests such information in order to evaluate the credit worthiness ofthe transactions. However, the Bank states that because it is not involvedin the process by which the Plans decide whether to provide permanent financingfor particular projects, it will not be aware of any non-economic factorsthat may be considered by the Plans' fiduciaries in making the investments,such as a requirement that construction on a particular project be performedby contractors and subcontractors who employ only union construction labor.\4\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\4\ The Department notes that section 404(a)(1) of the Actrequires, among other things, that a fiduciary of a plan must act prudently,solely in the interest of the plan's participants and beneficiaries, andfor the exclusive purpose of providing benefits to participants and beneficiarieswhen making investment decisions on behalf of a plan. In order to act prudentlyin making investment decisions, the trustees must consider, among otherfactors, the availability, risks and potential return of alternative investmentsfor the plan. Investing plan assets in loans meeting these criteria wouldnot satisfy section 404(a)(1) if such loans would provide the plan withless return, in comparison to risk, than comparable investments availableto the plan or if such loans would involve a greater risk to the securityof plan assets than other investments offering a similar return. <ITAG tagnum="28">Thus, in deciding whether and to what extent to invest in mortgageloans, the trustees must consider only factors relating to the interestsof the plan participants and beneficiaries in their retirement incomes.A decision to make a loan may not be influenced by a desire to stimulatebusiness in a particular geographic area or to encourage the use of unionlabor unless the investment, when judged solely on the basis of its economicvalue, would be equal to or superior to alternative investments availableto the plan. </ITAG>7. The Bank states that investments by the Plans in real estate projectsas permanent lenders are common in the current real estate financing market.The Bank also asserts that the proposed exemption is appropriate for thetransactions described herein because of the absence of potential for abuseby the Bank and because a denial would unduly restrict the Plan's choicesof potential Borrowers to those who have not secured a construction loanfrom the Bank, which is merely a directed trustee, directed corporate trustee,directed corporate co-trustee, or custodian for the Plans. The Bank representsthat there will be no scheme or arrangement, other than an arm's-lengthtri-party agreement, between the Borrowers, the Bank, and the Plans regardingthe proposed construction and permanent loan financing.  8. In summary, the Bank represents that the proposed transactions willsatsify the statutory criteria of section 408(c) of the Act because: (a)the Bank will have no discretionary authority regarding the managementor disposition of the assets of the Plans and will not be an investmentadviser for the Plans with respect to the proposed loans; (b) the fiduciariesof the Plans, who are independent of the Bank, will make all investmentdecisions for the Plans, including all decisions relating to the proposedpermanent loans; (c) the terms of the permanent mortgage loans will beno less favorable to the Plan than the terms generally available in arm's-lengthtransactions between unrelated parties; (d) no investment management fee,advisory fee, underwriting fee, sales commission, or other similar compensationwill be paid to the Bank by the Plans with respect to such transactions;(e) the Bank will play no role in securing permanent loans from the Plansfor the Borrowers; and (f) no permanent loans will be made to persons whoare parties in interest with respect to the Plans. <T3>For Further Information Contact: </T3>Mr. E.F. Williams of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8883. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="84">American Express Company Located in New York, New York</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">[Application Nos. D-7662 and D-7832]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, American Express Companyand its affiliates, including IDS Financial and Shearson Lehman Hutton,Inc. (collectively, American Express), except for E.F. Hutton andamp; Company,Inc., (Hutton), shall not be precluded from functioning as a ``qualifiedprofessional asset manager'' pursuant to Prohibited Transaction Exemption84-14 (PTE 84-14, 49 FR 9494, March 13, 1984) solely because of AmericanExpress's failure to satisfy Section I(g) of PTE 84-14 as a result of itsaffiliation with Hutton.<T3>Effective Date:</T3> If granted, this exemption will be effective asof the date on which American Express became an affiliate of Hutton.Summary of Facts and Representations1. Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. (Shearson), which is incorporated in Delaware,is a wholly-owned subsidiary of Shearson Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc.(Shearson Holdings), which in turn is a majority-owned subsidiary of AmericanExpress Company. Both Shearson Holdings and American Express are publicly-ownedcompanies whose stock is traded on the New York Stock Exchange. AmericanExpress and its subsidiaries form a diversified financial and travel servicescompany.On January 13, 1988, over 90 percent of the stock of E.F. Hutton GroupInc. (Hutton Group), the parent company of Hutton, was tendered to SLBPAcquisition Corp. (SLBP), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Shearson Holdings,pursuant to an Agreement and Plan of Merger (Merger Agreement) dated December2, 1987, as amended on December 28, 1987, entered into among Shearson Holdings,SLBP, and the Hutton Group. On January 21, 1988, as permitted by the termsof the Merger Agreement, SLBP assigned its right to purchase those sharesso accepted to Shearson, and Shearson purchased the shares. As a resultof the acquisition of the Hutton Group stock, Shearson controls the HuttonGroup and indirectly controls Hutton.2. On May 2, 1985, Hutton entered a plea of guilty (the Guilty Plea) toan Information filed in the United States District Court for the MiddleDistrict of Pennsylvania. The Information charged that Hutton had violatedthe federal mail and wire fraud statutes in connection with its handlingof certain checking accounts it maintained for the deposit of its own fundsduring the period from July 1, 1980 to February 28, 1982. As a result ofthe Guilty Plea, Hutton agreed to pay, and has paid, a criminal fine of$2,000,000 plus $750,000 to defray the costs of the government investigation.Hutton further agreed to establish, and has established, a restitutionprogram for the benefit of commercial banks that may have been damagedby its actions. None of the acts alleged in the Information, however, involvedfunds or securities owned by any investment advisory or brokerage clientsof Hutton or any employee benefit plan for which Hutton or any affiliateis a party in interest.3. On May 16, 1988, Hutton entered a plea of guilty (the Providence Plea)in the United States District Court for the District of Rhode Island ontwo counts of violating the Bank Secrecy Act and one count of conspiracyto violate that Act. Hutton agreed to pay, and has paid, an aggregate fineof $1,010,000 as a result of the Providence Plea. The Information filedby the government in connection with the Providence Plea alleges that theconduct of the two brokers, formerly employed at Hutton-Providence, wasin violation of the Bank Secrecy Act. The Bank Secrecy Act requires thefiling of a Currency Transaction Report, under certain circumstances, ifmore than $10,000 in cash is deposited with a financial institution. Thebrokers' unlawful conduct occurred primarily in the period from 1982 to1983, and no such conduct transpired later than October 1984_more thanthree years before Shearson acquired its majority interest in Hutton.4. The applicant represents that although none of the unlawful conductthat occurred at Hutton-Providence involved Hutton's investment managementactivities or any ERISA plans, Hutton's Guilty Pleas preclude Hutton andits affiliates from serving as a ``qualified professional asset manager''(QPAM) pursuant to sections I(g) and V(d) of PTE 84-14. Section I(g) ofPTE 84-14 precludes a person who otherwise qualifies as a QPAM from servingas a QPAM if such person or an affiliate thereof has within the 10 yearsimmediately preceding the transaction been either convicted or releasedfrom imprisonment as a result of certain criminal activity. For purposesof section I(g) of PTE 84-14, an ``affiliate'' of a person is defined inrelevant part as ``any person directly or indirectly, through one or moreintermediaries, controlling, controlled by, or under common control withthe person * * *'' (PTE 84-14, section V(d)). As such, under this definitionAmerican Express, Shearson Holdings and all of their majority-owned subsidiarieswould be considered affiliates of Hutton as a result of Shearson's acquisitionof a controlling interest in the Hutton Group.5. Neither American Express nor its wholly-owned direct or indirect subsidiarieswere affiliates of Hutton at the time the events underlying the Huttonconvictions occurred. They are not now controlled by Hutton or by the individualsinvolved in the transactions which led to the Hutton convictions. Therehas been no suggestion that the events leading to the Hutton convictionshave extended into the period since Hutton became affiliated with AmericanExpress. None of those persons responsible for the transactions leadingto the Hutton convictions is now employed by American Express or its subsidiaries.6. The applicant asserts that failure to grant the requested exemptionwill prohibit such plans for which American Express or its subsidiariesact as investment manager from engaging in transactions with parties ininterest that would otherwise be permitted under PTE 84-14 and will causeplans to forego attractive investment opportunities. The applicant andits subsidiaries typically engage in real estate transactions which maybe structured in a variety of different ways, including participating mortgages,joint ventures or other partnership interests, or outright fee ownership.In all of these contexts, there is a significant risk that the party withwhich the plan is dealing will be a party in interest. Given the size ofthe plans which the applicant and its subsidiaries represent, the largenumber of service providers (particularly financial institutions) whichsuch plans engage and the breadth of the ERISA definition of ``party ininterest'', it is not uncommon for a proposed transaction in the privatereal estate market to involve a party in interest.Thus, the prohibition against serving as a QPAM would deprive the applicantand its subsidiaries of the ability to render investment advisory servicesto many ERISA clients that must rely on the QPAM Exemption to avoid inadvertentprohibited transactions. In the absence of the relief requested, the applicantand its subsidiaries could be forced to curtail their future operationsas they relate to ERISA clients. In this regard, prior to Shearson's acquisitionof Hutton, several of the applicant's subsidiaries were charting theircourse of future business activities in the expectation that they wouldbe able to avail themselves of the QPAM Exemption.7. Accordingly, the applicant proposes that for the purposes of sectionV(d) of PTE 84-14 Hutton not be considered an affiliate of American Expressin order that American Express and its subsidiaries may continue to availthemselves of the provisions of PTE 84-14, nothwithstanding the acquisitionof Hutton by Shearson and the resultant failure to comply with sectionI(g) of PTE 84-14.8. The applicant represents that the following safegaurds will be presentto assure that the flexibility which PTE 84-14 provides will be utilizedby American Express in a manner protective of and beneficial to both ERISAplans and their participants:(a) PTE 84-14 includes numerous other conditions all of which would continueto apply and to assure that the best interests of ERISA plans are served;(b) Many of American Express's ERISA plan clients are large plans, andhence have access to the resources and sophistication needed to properlymonitor American Express's performance as investment manager;(c) All of the Hutton criminal activity in question occurred prior to itsacquisition by Shearson. Shearson is fully cooperating with all ongoinggovernment investigations, and Shearson is actively working to installvarious safeguards and procedures designed to protect against such violationsin the future; and (d) As investment advisers registered under the Investment Advisers Actof 1940 (the Advisers Act), several of the subsidiaries of American Expressare subject to the jurisdiction of the Securities and Exchange Commission(SEC) and to the substantive requirements of the Advisers Act. Such subsidiariesmust make annual filings with the SEC and is subject to unannounced auditsby the SEC to assure compliance with the requirements of the Advisers Act.9. In addition, the applicant represents that Hutton and Shearson havetaken a number of steps to ensure that conduct such as that leading tothe Guilty Plea and the Providence Plea will not recur. In connection withthe Guilty Plea, Hutton acted to recompense its depository banks for anyharm that may have been caused by the illegal acts. Hutton offered to makefull restitution (including interest to date of payment) to any bank withwhich it maintained a deposit relationship during the period July 1, 1980to December 31, 1982 for any net uncompensated interest losses incurredby the bank as a result of Hutton's having drawn on uncollected funds withoutprior written agreement. Hutton's offer to reimburse its banks includedunreimbursed service fees, unreimbursed charges in respect of uses of uncollectedfunds, and interest on the foregoing amounts.The applicant represents that Hutton also initiated changes in its organizationalstructure and management practices as follows:(a) Nearly all of Hutton's financial operations were realigned and subjectedto centralized control.(b) Hutton also installed a computerized Branch Information ProcessingSystem to expedite and improve communications between its New York headquartersand its more than 400 branches, which allows Hutton's headquarters in NewYork to monitor drawdown activity at the branch and regional levels.(c) Hutton also held instructional meetings for its employees in 18 citiesfrom coast to coast with respect to the nature of the activities that werefound unlawful and/or now are enjoined, and explained the revised internalcontrols and auditing procedures that Hutton was putting in place withrespect to its cash concentration system.10. Subsequent to the Guilty Plea, Hutton Group retained the HonorableGriffin Bell, former Attorney General of the United States and a one timeJudge of the United States Court of Appeals for the Fifth Circuit, to conductan independent inquiry into the cash management practices to which Huttonpleaded guilty.Judge Bell found that ultimate management responsibility for the practicesin question rested with Thomas P. Lynch, then Executive Vice Presidentand Chief Financial Officer of Hutton, and with Thomas P. Morley, thenSenior Vice President and Money Mobilizer of Hutton. Judge Bell determinedthat the practices were developed and carried out by middle managementemployees who generally believed they were operating within the law, andthat Messrs. Lynch and Morley, though not bearing any criminal responsibilityfor the practices, should have detected and/or prevented them. Followingthe release of the Bell Report, both Mr. Lynch and Mr. Morley relinquishedtheir positions.The Bell Report also recommended substantial monetary and other sanctionsagainst other Hutton employees. All of the culpable Hutton employees involvedin the activities which led to the Guilty Plea resigned or were dismissedprior to Shearson's acquisition of Hutton Group. In addition, Judge Bellrecommended a number of procedural and structural reforms designed to ensurethat the practices in question did not recur.These changes included:(a) Restructuring the financing, financial control, operations and generalcounsel functions;(b) Establishing a separate audit committee to specifically review Hutton'sactivities and supplement the existing audit committee of Hutton Group,with full access to the chief executive officer and the board of directors;and(c) Working in conjunction with the Ethics Resource Center in Washington,DC, to develop a corporate code of ethics, supplemented by educationaland monitoring programs.11. In late December 1987, following the announcement of Shearson's acquisitionof Hutton, Shearson retained outside counsel to conduct an internal investigationand provide legal advice concerning compliance by Hutton, prior to itsacquisition by Shearson, with the reporting requirements of the Bank SecrecyAct.The investigation revealed certain unreported currency transactions atHutton branch offices, prior to Shearson's acquisition of Hutton. A majorityof potential non-reporting occurred in two New York retail offices, withisolated instances of possible non-reporting found in seven additionalHutton branch offices in the New York metropolitan area. No such instanceswere found in the offices reviewed outside the New York area. The personspotentially involved in the possible violations were exclusively branchoffice personnel. Outside counsel is in the process of evaluating the possibleinvolvement of any individuals in these branches and will provide Shearsonwith a report as to such involvement. Shearson has advised the United StatesAttorney for the Southern District of New York of Shearson's internal investigationand is cooperating with the United States Attorney in his inquiry.12. The applicant states that in connection with Shearson's request foran exemption from the Securities and Exchange Commission from the provisionsof section 9(a) of the Investment Company Act of 1940,\5\<NOTE/> Shearson at its expense has agreed to retain independentauditors:<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\5\ Section 9(a) of the Investment Company Act of 1940 states,in part, that it shall be unlawful for a person to serve as or act in thecapacity of employee, officer, director, member of an advisory board, investmentadvisor, or depositor of any registered investment company, or principalunderwriter for any registered open-end company, registered unit investmenttrust, or registered face amount certificate company if such person, oran affiliate of such person, has engaged in certain criminal activity [asspecified in section 9(a)(1)].(a) To confirm that the Shearson currency reporting procedures are in place,and that the computer software program used in connection with the proceduresis operational, with respect to each former Hutton branch office;(b) To review the procedures (i) to determine whether the procedures arereasonably designed to ensure compliance with the currency transactionreporting provisions of the Bank Secrecy Act, (ii) to detect non-compliancewith the procedures, and (iii) to make recommendations, if appropriate,for changes in the procedures and staffing necessary reasonably to ensurecompliance with applicable law relating to currency transaction reporting;and(c) To report to Shearson the results of its review.Upon completion of the auditor's review, Shearson will submit the reportand recommendations, if any, to the Commission, together with a reportby Shearson setting forth the action it has taken or proposes to take concerningthe implementation of the recommendations.13. The applicant states that as of February 8, 1988, as part of the consolidationof the Hutton branch offices into the Shearson branch office system, eachHutton branch had been made subject to the same internal procedures forprocessing currency transactions as those to which Shearson is subject.Shearson's procedures with respect to currency transaction reporting wereadopted as a means of avoiding the type of situation that occurred at Hutton-Providence.The procedures prohibit the deposit or payment in currency at any Shearsonor Hutton branch office. The procedures also mandate that any Shearsonor Hutton employee who is asked by a customer to deposit currency in anyaccount, inform the customer that Shearson and Hutton will only accepta non-cash instrument and will not accept cash. The procedures furtherprotect against the kind of irregularities that occurred at Hutton-Providenceby requiring Shearson and Hutton employees to notify immediately not onlytheir branch manager, but also Shearson's Compliance Department, if anycustomer, during a limited period of time, deposits a series of cashier'schecks, traveler's checks, money orders or checks in bearer form <T3>(i.e., </T3>checks made payable to cash or endorsed in blank) thatare each under $10,000 but collectively exceed $10,000.The applicant also notes that as an additional safeguard against irregularitiesin currency transaction reporting, the procedures expressly forbid Shearsonand Hutton brokers and all other Shearson and Hutton employees from engagingin any of the following activities:(a) Taking possession of currency for a customer;(b) Escorting a customer to a financial institution to convert currencyto an acceptable means of payment; and/or(c) Advising a customer as to how to ``structure'' his transaction witha financial institution in order to avoid the financial institution's reportingrequirements under the Currency Transaction Reporting Act. Shearson and Hutton employees are also informed that failure to complywith these procedures will subject the offender to internal disciplinaryaction and possibly to civil and criminal liability for violating Federallaw.14. In summary, the applicant represents that this proposed exemption satisfiesthe criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because, among other things:(a) American Express and its subsidiaries are operated independently ofHutton; (b) none of American Express's officers is an officer or employeeof Hutton; (c) Hutton's criminal activity in every case took place beforeits acquisition by Shearson; (d) both Hutton and Shearson have undertakensubstantial reforms and put in place procedures designed to prevent anyrecurrence of the criminal activity; (e) the other provisions of PTE 84-14taken together with Shearson's independent audit procedures establishedpursuant to its exemption request under section 9(a) of the InvestmentCompany Act of 1940, are sufficient to assure that the best interests ofthe ERISA plans and their participants are served; and (f) American Expressand its subsidiaries will be able to take advantage of a broader varietyof attractive investment opportunities on behalf of the participants andbeneficiaries of its clients' plans.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Joseph L. Roberts III of theDepartment, telephone (202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="84">General Information</ITAG>The attention of interested persons is directed to the following:(1) The fact that a transaction is the subject of an exemption under section408(a) of the Act and/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code does not relievea fiduciary or other party in interest or disqualified person from certainother provisions of the Act and/or the Code, including any prohibited transactionprovisions to which the exemption does not apply and the general fiduciaryresponsibility provisions of section 404 of the Act, which among otherthings require a fiduciary to discharge his duties respecting the plansolely in the interest of the participants and beneficiaries of the planand in a prudent fashion in accordance with section 404(a)(1)(B) of theAct; nor does it affect the requirement of section 401(a) of the Code thatthe plan must operate for the exclusive benefit of the employees of theemployer maintaining the plan and their beneficiaries;(2) Before an exemption may be granted under section 408(a) of the Actand/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code, the Department must find that theexemption is administratively feasible, in the interests of the plan andof its participants and beneficiaries and protective of the rights of participantsand beneficiaries of the plan; and(3) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be supplemental to, and notin derogation of, any other provisions of the Act and/or the Code, includingstatutory or administrative exemptions and transitional rules. Furthermore,the fact that a transaction is subject to an administrative or statutoryexemption is not dispositive of whether the transaction is in fact a prohibitedtransaction.(4) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be subject to the expresscondition that the material facts and representations contained in eachapplication are true and complete, and that each application accuratelydescribes all material terms of the transaction which is the subject ofthe exemption.<ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, this 10th day of March 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Robert J. Doyle,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director of Regulations and Interpretations, Pension and Welfare BenefitsAdministration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-6008 Filed 3-14-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4510-29-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>