<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR891017-0061 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.10-17-89.f2.A1060</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[A-583-806]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Final Determination of Sales at Less Than Fair Value: Certain SmallBusiness Telephone Systems and Subassemblies Thereof From Taiwan</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Import Administration, International Trade Administration,Commerce.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>We determine that certain small business telephone systemsand subassemblies thereof (SBTS) from Taiwan are being, or are likely tobe, sold in the United States at less than fair value. We have notifiedthe U.S. International Trade Commission (ITC) of our determination andhave directed the U.S. Customs Service to continue to suspend liquidationof all entries of SBTS from Taiwan, except those of Sun Moon Star as describedin the ``Continuation of Suspension of Liquidation'' section of this notice.The ITC will determine within 45 days of the publication of this noticewhether these imports materially injure, or threaten material injury to,the U.S. industry.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>October 17, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION: </T2>Contact Louis Apple or Kathy Boyce, Officeof Antidumping Investigations, Import Administration, International TradeAdministration, U.S. Department of Commerce, 14th Street and ConstitutionAvenue, NW., Washington, DC 20230; telephone: (202) 377-1769 or (202) 377-4198,respectively.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Final Determination</ITAG>We determine that SBTS from Taiwan are being, or are likely to be, soldin the United States at less than fair value, as provided in section 735(a)of the Tariff Act of 1930, as amended (19 U.S.C. 1673d(a)) (the Act). Theestimated weighted-average dumping margins are shown in the ``Continuationof Suspension of Liquidation'' section of this notice.<ITAG tagnum="84">Case History</ITAG>On July 26, 1989, the Department issued an affirmative preliminary determination(54 FR 31987). Since that time the following events have occurred:Verification of the questionnaire response of Sun Moon Star (SMS) was conductedin Taiwan during August 7-18, 1989.Interested parties submitted comments for the record in their case briefsdated September 11, 1989 and in their rebuttal briefs dated September 15,1989. A public hearing was held on September 20, 1989.<ITAG tagnum="84">Period of Investigation</ITAG>The period of investigation (POI) is July 1, 1988, through December 31,1988.<ITAG tagnum="84">Scope of Investigation</ITAG>The United States has developed a system of tariff classification basedon the international harmonized system of Customs nomenclature. On January1, 1989, the United States fully converted to the Harmonized Tariff Schedule(HTS), as provided for in section 1201 <T3>et seq. </T3>of the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988.All merchandise entered, or withdrawn from warehouse, for consumption onor after this date is now classified solely according to the appropriateHTS item number(s). The HTS item numbers are provided for convenience andU.S. Customs Service purposes. The written description remains dispositive.The products covered by this investigation are certain small business telephonesystems and subassemblies thereof, currently classifiable under HarmonizedTariff Schedule item numbers 8517.30.2000, 8517.30.2500, 8517.30.3000,8517.10.0020, 8517.10.0040, 8517.10.0050, 8517.10.0070, 8517.10.0080, 8517.90.1000,8517.90.1500, 8517.90.3000, 8518.30.1000, 8504.40.0004, 8504.40.0008, 8504.40.0010,8517.81.0010, 8517.81.0020, 8517.90.4000, and 8504.40.0015. Prior to January1, 1989, such merchandise was classifiable under items 684.5710, 684.5720,684.5730, 684.5805, 684.5810, 684.5815, 684.5825, 684.5830, 682.6051, and682.6053 of the Tariff Schedules of the United States Annotated (TSUSA).Certain small business telephone systems and subassemblies thereof aretelephone systems, whether complete or incomplete, assembled or unassembled,with intercom or internal calling capability and total non-blocking portcapacities of between 2 and 256 ports, and discrete subassemblies designedfor use in such systems. A subassembly is ``designed'' for use in a smallbusiness telephone system if it functions to its full capability only whenoperated as part of a small business telephone system. These subassembliesare defined as follows:(1) Telephone sets and consoles, consisting of proprietary, corded telephonesets or consoles. A console has the ability to perform certain functionsincluding: Answer all lines in the system; monitor the status of otherphone sets; and transfer calls. The term ``telephone sets and consoles''is defined to include any combination of two or more of the following items,when imported or shipped in the same container, with or without additionalapparatus: housing; hand set; cord (line or hand set); power supply; telephoneset circuit cards; console circuit cards.(2) Control and switching equipment, whether denominated as a key serviceunit, control unit, or cabinet/switch. ``Control and switching equipment''is defined to include the units described in the preceding sentence whichconsist of one or more circuit cards or modules (including backplane circuitcards) and one or more of the following items, when imported or shippedin the same container as the circuit cards or modules, with or withoutadditional apparatus: connectors to accept circuit cards or modules orbuilding wiring.(3) Circuit cards and modules, including power supplies. These may be incorporatedinto control and switching equipment or telephone sets and consoles, orthey may be imported or shipped separately. A power supply converts ordivides input power of not more than 2400 watts into output power of notmore than 1800 watts supplying DC power of approximately 5 volts, 24 volts,and 48 volts, as well as 90 volt AC ringing capability.The following merchandise has been excluded from this investigation: (1)Nonproprietary industry-standard (``tip/ring'') telephone sets and othersubassemblies that are not specifically designed for use in a covered system,even though a system may be adapted to use such nonproprietary equipmentto provide some system functions; (2) telephone answering machines or facsimilemachines integrated with telephone sets; and (3) adjunct software usedon external data processing equipment.We note that a number of ambiguities existed in the scope language previouslypublished in the Notice of Initiation with regard to the definition ofsubassemblies. In our preliminary determination, therefore, we clarifiedthe language describing the subassemblies under investigation.The Department continues to receive numerous inquiries regarding the inclusionof dual use subassemblies within the scope of this investigation. As notedin the preliminary determination notice, the Department defines dual usesubassemblies as those subassemblies that function to their full capabilitywhen operated as part of a large business telephone system as well as asmall business telephone system. Because dual use subassemblies by definitionare not subassemblies ``designed'' for use in small business telephonesystems, dual use subassemblies are excluded from the scope of the investigation.<ITAG tagnum="84">Such or Similar Comparisons</ITAG>For all respondent companies, pursuant to section 771(16)(C), we establishedfour categories of ``such or similar'' merchandise consisting of: (a) Controland switching equipment; (b) circuit cards and modules; (c) telephone setsand consoles; and (d) complete small business telephone systems.Product comparisons were made using criteria which are ranked in orderof importance. For control and switching equipment we used the followingcriteria: (1) Port capacity based on minimum operational configuration;(2) type of central microprocessor; and (3) read-only memory (ROM) size.For circuit cards and modules we considered: (1) Functions; and (2) physicalappearance. For telephone sets and consoles we considered: (1) Number ofbuttons (regardless of function) excluding dialpad; and (2) number of individualvisual indicators. For complete telephone systems, we made comparisonson the basis of the similarity of subassemblies, using the criteria describedin the preceding sentences.Where there was no identical product in the home or third country marketwith which to compare a product imported into the United States, the mostsimilar product was compared on the basis of the characteristics describedabove. We made adjustments for differences in the physical characteristicsof the merchandise in accordance with section 773(a)(4)(C) of the Act.Consistent with our normal practice, when adjustments for differences inthe merchandise proved to be substantial, we used constructed value.In order to determine whether there were sufficient sales of SBTS in thehome market to serve as the basis for calculating foreign market value(FMV), we compared the volume of home market sales within each such orsimilar category to the volume of third country sales within each respectivesuch or similar category, in accordance with section 773(a)(1) of the Act.For Sun Moon Star (SMS), we determined that there were sufficient homemarket sales to unrelated customers for three such or similar categories.SMS had no sales of complete small business telephone systems in the UnitedStates during the POI.<ITAG tagnum="84">Fair Value Comparisons</ITAG>To determine whether sales of SBTS from Taiwan to the United States weremade at less than fair value, we compared the United States price to theFMV, as specified in the ``United States Price'' and ``Foreign Market Value''sections of this notice.Since Taiwan Nitsuko declined to provide information essential to our investigation,we used the best information available as required by section 776(c) ofthe Act. As best information available, we took the highest margin containedin the petition for products manufactured by Nitsuko Japan for each suchor similar category and averaged these figures to determine the marginfor Taiwan Nitsuko in this investigation.Taiwan Nitsuko declined to respond to the Department's MNC questionnaire.Because the MNC provision, section 773(d) of the Act, calls for the Departmentto calculate FMV with reference to merchandise produced in facilities outsidethe country of exportation, we attempted to compare the FMV in the petitionfor merchandise produced and sold in Japan with actual United States pricesreported by Taiwan Nitsuko for products produced in Taiwan and sold inthe United States, or Taiwan Nitsuko's U.S. sales prices as provided inthe petition. Since we did not have data on sales of merchandise producedby Taiwan Nitsuko in Taiwan and sold in the United States that was comparableto the merchandise listed in the petition as being produced and sold inJapan and there were no U.S. sales prices for Taiwan Nitsuko reported inthe petition, we used the margins calculated in the petition based on acomparison of the FMV of merchandise produced and sold in Japan and theUnited States price of merchandise produced in Japan and sold in the UnitedStates. Petitioner supplied information indicating that Taiwan Nitsukoand Nitsuko Japan produce the same products for sale in the United Statesand that these products are sold in the U.S. market at the same pricesto the same single customer.For SMS, we compared the United States price to the FMV as described below.<ITAG tagnum="84">United States Price</ITAG>Because virtually all sales by SMS were made directly to unrelated partiesprior to importation into the United States, we based the United Statesprice for these sales on purchase price, in accordance with section 772(b)of the Act. We calculated purchase price based on packed, f.o.b. Taiwanport prices. Gross unit price was based on the contract price plus an exchangerate adjustment. We made a further upward adjustment to gross unit priceto account for early payment on future sales. We made deductions were appropriatefor inland freight and brokerage and handling. We added uncollected dutiespursuant to section 772(d)(1)(B) of the Act and andSection; 353.41(d)(ii)of the Department's regulations published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>on March 28, 1989 (54 FR 12742) (to be codifiedat 19 CFR 353.41).For Taiwan Nitsuko we used information contained in the petition for UnitedStates price as described above.<ITAG tagnum="84">Foreign Market Value</ITAG>In accordance with section 773(a) of the Act, we calculated FMV for SMSbased on home market sales prices or constructed value, as appropriate.We calculated FMV based on the packed, delivered or ex-works prices tounrelated customers in the home market. We made deductions, where appropriate,for inland freight, discounts, and rebates. We deducted the home marketpacking costs from the FMV and added all U.S. packing costs. We made circumstanceof sale adjustments, where appropriate, for differences in credit terms,advertising, and warranties. We made adjustments for indirect selling expensesand inventory carrying costs in the home market to offset commissions paidin the United States in accordance with andSection; 353.56(b) of the Department'sregulations. Where appropriate, we made further adjustments to the home market priceto account for differences in the physical characteristics of the merchandisein accordance with section 353.57 of the Department's regulations. In our preliminary determination, we stated that where the adjustment fordifferences in the physical characteristics of the merchandise being comparedexceeded 20 percent, we would not use home market sales as the basis ofFMV. Instead, FMV would be based on constructed value. As a result of verification in this case, adjustments were made to increasethe costs reported by SMS. The effect of these corrections was to raisethe difference in the physical characteristics of one product above the20 percent threshold stated in our preliminary determination to 23 percent.For purposes of this final determination, we have decided that despitethe size of the adjustment, the home market merchandise may still be reasonablycompared to the U.S. merchandise within the meaning of section 771(16)(C)(iii)of the Act. The product in question, included in the such or similar categoryof control and switching equipment, is an SCPU. The SCPU is sold individuallyin the United States, while it is sold in combination with an internalcircuit card in the home market. Except for this, the home market SCPUis identical to the SCPU sold in the United States. Moreover, the internalcircuit card is significantly less important component by value than theSCPU in the home market transaction. For these reasons, we find the homemarket and U.S. merchandise to be similar within the meaning of 771(16)(C)(iii).As noted above, for Taiwan Nitsuko, we used information contained in thepetition for FMV. <ITAG tagnum="84">Constructed Value</ITAG>We calculated the constructed value in accordance with section 773(e) ofthe Act. For SMS, the following adjustments were made to its submittedcosts. Material cost was adjusted: (1) To eliminate the effect of ``freesamples'' by using the average cost at which the product was transferredfrom Work-In-Process to Finished Goods Inventory: (2) to reflect the differencebetween the purchase order price and the actual price paid for materials;(3) to include import duties (see DOC position to comment 13). The cost of direct labor and factory overhead for each part was determinedby calculating the average per unit fabrication cost at which the partwas transferred from Work-In-Process to Finished Good Inventory. Additionally,direct labor and factory overhead were increased to reflect the effectof the respondant's reclassification of labor insurance from general expensesto the cost of manufacturing. Finally, factory overhead was also adjustedto include product-specific research and development costs (Randamp;D) forthree of the five Randamp;D departments. While these departments performedproduct-specific Randamp;D, the expenses had been classified as general expense.Selling expenses included an absolute amount of indirect and direct sellingexpenses on a per product basis and an amount for interest expenses incurredby SMS. Since SMS is a sales company and because it could not be consolidatedwith Emptel (the related manufacturer), all of SMS's interest expenseswere treated as indirect selling expenses. Interest income of SMS was usedto offset its interest expenses, since the income was earned from short-terminvestments related to the current operations of the company. When imputedinventory and credit expenses were included in selling expenses, the interestexpense reflected on SMS's books was reduced for a portion of the expensesrelated to these activities in order to avoid double counting. For general and administrative expenses incurred by related entities otherthan Emptel, the following adjustments were made: (1) General expensesof the holding company of Vidar-SMS were allocated over the cost of goodssold of Vidar-SMS (parent of Emptel) and the holding company; (2) generalmanagement expenses incurred by SMS for the management of Vidar-SMS andSMS were allocated over the cost of goods sold of the same two companies;(3) general Randamp;D incurred by Vidar-SMS was allocated over the cost ofgoods sold of Vidar-SMS. For general and administrative expenses incurredby Emptel, the following adjustments were made: (1) Randamp;D was adjustedto exclude those expenses incurred for cellular mobile telephones (CMTs)and all product-specific Randamp;D; (2) royalties paid for the productionand sale of CMTs were excluded; (3) loss on physical inventory was reclassifiedfrom non-operating expenses to general expenses. Financial expenses werecomputed using the financial data from Vidar-SMS and the holding company.Interest revenue earned from short-term investments related to the currentoperations of the company was offset against interest expense. Since theprofit on the sales of SBTS in the home market was not provided by therespondent, ``best information available'' was used. The ``best informationavailable'' was the profit earned on Emptel's and SMS's financial statement,after eliminating intercompany sales. <ITAG tagnum="84">Currency Conversion</ITAG>We used the official exchange rates in effect on the dates of sale, inaccordance with section 773(a)(1) of the Act. All currency conversionswere made at the rates certified by the Federal Reserve Bank of New Yorkin accordance with section 353.60 of the Department's regulations. <ITAG tagnum="84">Verification</ITAG>Except where noted, we verified all information used in making our finaldetermination in accordance with section 776(b) of the Act. We used standardverification procedures including examination of relevant accounting recordsand original source documents of the respondent. Our verification resultsare outlined in the public version of the verification report which ison file in the Central Records Unit (Room B-099) of the Main Commerce Building.<ITAG tagnum="84">Interested Party Comments</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="81">Sun Moon Star</ITAG>Comment 1Petitioner asserts the Department should rely on best information availablerather than the information submitted by SMS because of significant deficienciesin SMS's response. SMS disagrees and does not believe best informationavailable should be used.DOC PositionWe disagree with petitioner. Verification of SMS did uncover several minordeficiencies. However, these deficiencies were not of a magnitude thatwarranted rejection of the response and they were subsequently corrected.Comment 2Petitioner asserts that if the Department does not use the best informationavailalbe for all subassemblies of SMS, the Department should compare theU.S. sales of DKTS Plus with home market sales of DKTS Non Plus productsfor the following two reasons. First, petitioner alleges that the DKTSPlus products sold in the home market were sold after the period of investigationand, therefore, the Department should reject SMS's date of sale for homemarket sales of these products. Petitioner argues that the facts indicatethat there was no binding commitment from the dealers to purchase a specifiedquantity of goods in November 1988 because the dealers did not specifya delivery date until after the period of investigation and the obligationto take delivery appears conditional both on the dealers finding purchasersand the Taiwan authorities approving the products for sale in the homemarket. Second, petitioner argues that the Department should disregardthese home market sales because they were sales of trial units and, therefore,were not sales in the ordinary course of trade.SMS disagrees, arguing it would be inappropriate to compare DKTS Plus withDKTS Non Plus products. They contend that the merchandise was sold duringthe period of investigation because price and quantity were establishedwithin the period. They further assert that the two sales were in the ordinarycourse of trade, following normal sales procedures, and in fact were notsales of trial units.DOC PositionWe agree with SMS on both issues. First, when resolving date of sale issues,the Department is guided primarily by the date on which the essential termsof the sale_price and quantity_are established to the extent that the partieshave nothing left to negotiate. In this case, the Department verified thatprice and quantity of the two DKTS Plus home market transactions were setin November 1988, the date of the purchase orders.Contrary to petitioner's assertions, the facts indicate that both partiestreated the November 1988 pruchase orders as binding agreements. Therefore,the date of sale for these transactions is within the period of investigation.Second, the DKTS Plus sales were within the ordinary course of trade. Thesales were pursuant to an established dealer price list and discount schedule.The fact that approval by the Taiwan authorities was not given until afterthe period of investigation (because it took longer than expected to approvethe system) is incidental to, and not dispositive of, this issue.Comment 3Petitioner claims that SMS failed to report significant exporter salesprice (ESP) sales in the period of investigation. SMS disagrees, claimingthat these transactions were actually transfers of goods from the homemarket manufacturer to its United States subsidiary and that they did notconstitute sales.DOC PositionWe agree with SMS. We verified that SMS reported all of its ESP sales duringthe period of investigation and that these intracompany transfers werenot sales.Comment 4Petitioner argues that the Department should reject SMS's proposed adjustmentsfor rebates and monthly discounts. SMS claims that these adjustments wereproperly reported and verified as correct.DOC PositionWe agree with SMS and accept the adjustments SMS for rebates earned butnot yet paid. We verified hat it is SMS's longstanding policy to grantcumulative discounts. We also verified that the amounts were correctlyreported.Comment 5Petitioner argues that the Department should reject SMS's proposed adjustmentsfor commissions and uncollected duties. SMS alleges that the adjustmentsfor commissions and uncollected duties were correctly reported and verified.DOC PositionWe agree with SMS. These adjustments were verified to be correctly reported.Comment 6Petitioner claims that if the Department accepts SMS's proposed adjustmentsfor uncollected duties, only 50% of the amount of the duties should beapplied to U.S. price based on the terms of a confidential clause in theSMS-Bell South contract. SMS disagrees and claims that the adjustment foruncollected duties was reported and fully verified.DOC PositionThe Department has adjusted United States price for the full amount ofduties which were not collected by reason of the exportation of the merchandise.We have done so because, regardless of the terms of the confidential contractclause at issue, inputs for the home market comparison merchandise aresubject to the full amount of duties. Given this fact, it is appropriateto adjust for duties in their entirety per section 772 (d)(1)(B) of theAct.Comment 7SMS asserts that it was correct in not reporting a U.S. transaction arisingfrom a purchase order dated December 18, 1988. SMS contends that the correctdate of sale for this transaction is February 3, 1989, the ``order date''stated on the February 9, 1989 invoice.DOC PositionThe Department agrees with SMS that the merchandise was not sold untilthe purchase order was issued in February 1989, because it was at thistime that both price and quantity were set. Therefore, this sale was outsidethe period of investigation.Comment 8SMS argues that an advance downpayment from BellSouth was correctly reflectedas a discount from invoice prices to BellSouth.DOC PositionWe agree. The downpayment was correctly reported as a deduction from theinvoice price because the downpayment was applied to reduce the pricesof DKTS products purchased in the future.Comment 9SMS claims that the Department should use the list-price allocation methodSMS proposed for the comparisons of home market sales of MCPUs priced andsold with modems and SCPUs priced and sold with conference cards with MCPUs,modems, conference cards, and SCPUs sold separately in the United States.DOC PositionWe are not persuaded that the list-price methodology proposed by SMS yieldsan acceptable measure of FMV. In the instances SMS has cited, there isa single observed price for two components being sold together in the homemarket. Under its methodology, SMS would have the Department ``create''two prices from that one observed price based on relative prices from theirprice list. We believe the better method is to start with the observedprice and perform adjustments for differences in the physical characteristicsof the home market and U.S. merchandise, where appropriate, using the variablemanufacturing costs of the components, in accordance with section 773(a)(4)(C)of the Act and andSection; 353.57 of our regulations.Comment 10SMS claims that the Department failed to make an adjustment to constructedvalue for home-market credit expenses.DOC PositionWe agree. Home-market credit expenses have been deducted from constructedvalue in the final determination.Comment 11Petitioner argues that the Department should not rely on respondent's constructedvalue data because respondent failed to identify all affiliated partiesand thereby disguised related party transactions. The respondent statesthat it did in fact report the existence of other related companies, butacknowledges that it erred in identifying only certain companies as membersof ``Sun Moon Star Group.'' The respondent maintains that it had no intentof misleading the Department, because the other related parties were referredto in various parts of the SMS response and because the complete corporatestructure was clarified at verification.DOC PositionPrior to verification, the Department requested in the original questionnaireand in deficiency letters that the respondent provide details of its corporateorganization. During the cost verification, the Department obtained informationwhich reflected facts concerning related companies that were differentthan those disclosed in the SMS response. SMS and Vidar-SMS are relatedparties. Because of this relationship, certain adjustments were made toconstructed value: (1) Net interest expenses incurred by SMS were consideredto be indirect selling expenses, not manufacturing-related interest aspresented in the response and were allocated over SMS's Cost of Goods Sold;(2) the offset related to the credit expenses and inventory carrying costswere computed on SMS's financial expenses since this company incurred theexpense of credit and inventory carrying costs; and (3) the general managementexpenses of SMS incurred to manage the Vidar-SMS Group and SMS were allocatedover the cost of goods sold of the Vidar-SMS Group and SMS to determinea fair value for these services to Emptel.Comment 12Petitioner contends that the Department correctly rejected the SMS internalprofit and loss statement as an inaccurate protrayal of profit on homemarket sales because the statement failed to include the profits earnedby Emptel, the manufacturer of the products under investigation. Petitionerfurther states that the Department must include the profit earned by bothcompanies, Emptel and SMS, to determine the total profits earned by theSMS Group on the manufacture and sale of SBTS. The respondent claims thatit reported its only ``regularly kept'' statement of profits and lossesfor the products under investigation. The respondent argues that it wouldbe inappropriate to use the profit stated in the financial statement ofEmptel as a measure of profit in the home market because Emptel's profitis earned on export sales as well as on transfers to SMS. The respondentfurther argues that Emptel's profit has no relationship to the home marketsales to unrelated customers.DOC PositionWe agree with the petitioner. The amount of profit Emptel earns on thetransfer of the product to SMS is crucial to the calculation of total profiton the sales in the home market. It is the actual costs incurred by themanufacturer of the product which determines profit on sales to unrelatedbuyers in Taiwan. Thus, the difference between the cost incurred by Emptel,the manufacturer, and the sales price of SMS in the home market to thefirst unrelated customer for the general class or kind of merchandise isthe profit required for the constructed value. As related parties, thetotal profitability of home market sales can be determined only by referenceto the profits earned by each. Because the submitted profit did not reflectprofits earned by Emptel, the Department used the profit earned on Emptel'sand SMS's financial statements after eliminating intercompany sales asBIA.Comment 13Respondent contends that the Department should not add import duties tothe cost of manufacture because it would increase constructed value byan amount far greater than the amount of duties actually paid. This isdue to the multiplier effect of the rates for general and administrativeexpenses and profit because they are expressed as percentages of cost ofmanufacture and cost of production, respectively. Respondent argues thatthe Department should continue to follow the methodology used in the preliminarydetermination and should add the duties separately after profit.DOC PositionIn our preliminary determination we added import duties after general expensesand profit were accounted for in the constructed value as BIA because respondent'streatment of these import duties was not clear. We were not able to resolvethis issue during verification. In particular, respondent's general andadministrative expenses were calculated as a percentage of cost of goodssold inclusive of import duties, based on its financial statements. Asa result, it would be inappropriate to apply this percentage to a costof manufacture exclusive of import duties for purposes of calculating constructedvalue. Therefore, as BIA, import duties have been included in cost of manufacturefor purposes of the final determination.Comment 14Petitioner argues that since the respondent failed to provide the 1988financial statements for the holding company that owns Vidar-SMS the Departmentshould reject the respondent's information and use the best informationavailable. The respondent contends that the holding company had not beenaudited by its independent auditors and, thus, the 1988 financil statementswere not available. The respondent maintains that the holding company hadno employees and its general expenses were negligible.DOC PositionThe Department used the 1987 financial statement of the holding companyas ``best information available'' for the general expenses for that entity,because there were no audited 1988 financial statements.Comment 15The respondent argues that royalty expenses included in general and administrativeexpenses in its response should be deducted from general and administrativeexpenses because they were specifically incurred for a product unrelatedto those products under investigation.DOC PositionThe Department agrees with respondent and has deducted royalty expensesfrom general and administrative expenses that were incurred for the productionof merchandise not under investigation.Comment 16Petitioner maintains that the respondent failed to provide documentationto support its claim that the ``Inventory Loss'' and ``Loss on PhysicalInventory'' accounts were not related to the products under investigation.Furthermore, petitioner argues that the ``Purchase Price Difference'' account,which is the difference between the purchase order price and actual pricepaid for all materials, was also improperly excluded from the submission.The respondent maintains that these expenses were submitted in detail inthe response. However, the three expenses were not included in the company'sconstructed value calculation because they were classified as non-operatingexpenses by the company's auditors. The respondent further argues thatthe ``Provision For Inventory Loss'' expense is merely a loss reserve andnot an actual cost of production.DOC PositionThe Department agrees with the respondent in part. The ``Loss on PhysicalInventory'' expense is an actual cost of production, although not a product-specificone. Therefore, it was included as a general expense and not as part ofthe cost of manufacturing. Since the ``Provision for Inventory Loss'' expenseis a reserve against future losses, this amount was appropriately excludedby the respondent. The ``Purchase Price Difference'' expense was addedto the material costs since this difference represented the actual pricepaid.Comment 17Petitioner argues that the respondent failed to include research and developmentcosts (Randamp;D) incurred by the parent Vidar-SMS in the constructed valuecalculations. The respondent contends that all other Randamp;D incurred byVidar-SMS, other than Emptel's Randamp;D, was incurred by API and Vidar,the other subsidiaries consolidated with Emptel and Vidar-SMS. Furthermore,the Randamp;D incurred by API and Vidar was for different products than thoseunder investigation.DOC PositionThe Department included a portion of the Randamp;D expenses incurred by Vidar-SMSas general Randamp;D in the general and administrative section of the constructedvalue calculation. Those Randamp;D expenses determined to be product-specificwere reclassified from general expenses to cost of manufacturing.Comment 18Petitioner argues that the Department did not err by finding that fabricationcosts are evenly distributed throughout the manufacturing process, andthus manufacturing costs should be computed using equivalent units. Therespondent maintains that the structure of Emptel's assembly line dictatesthat virtually all manual labor expenses are incurred in the first elevenstages of the twenty-eight stage production process, and thus conversioncosts are incurred most heavily in the very first stages of production.Therefore, the respondent claims that the process cost accounting system,by not computing equivalent units and instead using physical units to divideproduction costs, accurately reflects the cost of manufacturing the productsunder investigation. The respondent also maintains that it did not wantto create controversies by using a new cost methodology solely for thesubmission.DOC PositionThe Department agrees with the petitioner. During the plant tour at verificationand through our discussions with Emptel's officials, we noted that fabricationcosts were not incurred only at the beginning of the production processas the respondent's process cost system assumes. This was apparent forfactory overhead expenses, e.g., depreciation, rent, and indirect labor,which were a substantial portion of the overhead. The respondent uses aprocess cost accounting system that does not compute equivalent units inorder to compute average costs per unit. Therefore, the production costsfor a period of time are divided by less or more output than the amountactually produced by these costs. The Department, therefore, computed theequivalent units for the period of investigation for each part in work-in-processand used these equivalent units as the denominator in calculating averagecost per unit.Comment 19Petitioner argues that the Department should not rely on the respondent'scost of production information because it substantially understated thematerial costs for units produced during the period of investigation byincluding free sample units without the fully loaded cost of these unitsbeing included in the process cost calculations. The respondent maintainsthat its cost system is reliable, and argues that if the Department makessubstantial adjustments to the reported costs, the resulting figures willbear little resemblance to the respondent's knowledge of the products'cost structure.DOC PositionWe agree with the petitioner. The Department adjusted the per unit coststo exclude the effect of the ``free samples.'' The Department used theaverage Finished Goods cost of the products which was based on the respondent'sprocess cost accounting system used in the production process.Comment 20The respondent argues that the Department should allocate general expensesof Emptel over its cost of manufacturing rather than the cost of goodssold, although this was not the methodology that the respondent used inits questionnaire response. Also, the respondent argues that general expensesshould not be solely attributed to production because Emptel is also anexporter and investor. Petitioner contends that the respondent's methodologyfor allocating general expenses is improper and that the Department shouldfollow its normal methodology for allocating general and administrativeexpenses to the products.DOC PositionWe agree with petitioner. We allocated general expenses over the respondent'scost of goods sold since the nature of these expenses relate to currentoperations. General expenses are not allocated over the cost of manufacturingsince all the products may not have been sold in the current period oftime, nor may ever be sold. Certain expenses related to the selling operationsof SMS for accounting and general manager staff functions classified asgeneral expenses in the response to the Section D questionnaire were reclassifiedby the Department as indirect selling expenses.Comment 21The respondent argues that selling expenses should be divided by the costof manufacture instead of sales value because it would be improper to usea ratio based on a denominator of sales value and then apply it to thesmaller factor, i.e., cost of manufacturing.DOC PositionWhere selling expenses are allocated, it is the Department's practice toallocate those expenses on the basis of sales. Use of the respondent'sproposed allocation methodology could lead to anomalous results. For example,selling expenses could be allocated to merchandise which was produced duringthe period even though there were no sales of that merchandise.Moreover, SMS misunderstands the application of this amount to the constructedvalue. The allocation of selling expenses described above yields an absoluteamount to be applied to sales of SBTS. This amount, in turn, is allocatedamong units sold to arrive at an absolute, per unit selling expense. Finally,this absolute amount is divided by the cost of manufacture so that theselling expense can be expressed as a percentage of that cost. This isnot the same as applying a sales-based ratio to a smaller denominator asthe comment implies.Comment 22Petitioner claims that the Department should reject the respondent's submissionand use BIA because the respondent did not provide the Department withsufficient information to verify its response, which was replete with deficienciesand inaccuracies. The respondent argues that all costs of production weresubmitted as they are recorded on the company's books. Moreover, the respondentcontends that most of the issues presented by petitioner were disagreementswith methodologies used rather than material deficiencies and omissions.Finally, the respondent maintains that BIA has been used only in casesof very serious deficiencies or lack of cooperation from respondents. Theyargue that there is nothing on the record that indicates that the respondentfailed to provide requested information or made unresponsive, insufficientor untimely submissions.DOC PositionThe Department agrees with the respondent in part. Although there wereareas in which information was not provided or was deemed insufficient,e.g., import duties and profit, the Department was able, with adjustments,to rely on the information submitted in the response for most costs.<ITAG tagnum="81">Taiwan Nitsuko</ITAG>Comment 23Taiwan Nitsuko asserts that petitioner's MNC allegation was based on subassemblyprices that were constructed from dealers' price lists for systems and,therefore, are not relevant to the true prices of Nitsuko Corporation'ssubassemblies. Taiwan Nitsuko requests that the Department rescind itsMNC investigation and rely on the information submitted by Taiwan Nitsuko.Petitioner argues that it submitted actual prices of control units soldin Japan and that it did not extrapolate subassembly prices from systemprices. Petitioner further argues that the information submitted was specificto Nitsuko.DOC PositionWe agree with the petitioner. The petitioner established to our satisfactionthe criteria necessary for the initiation of a MNC investigation. Accordingly,we do not agree to rescind the MNC investigation with regard to TaiwanNitsuko.Comment 24Taiwan Nitsuko asserts that the Department's decision to initiate the MNCinvestigation was improper because the information upon which the decisionwas made was not initially accompanied by the proper certification requiredby the Department's regulations. Petitioner asserts it was sufficient thatits legal counsel certified the submission at a later date.DOC PositionThe Department agrees with the petitioner. The Department's certificationrequirement is relatively new (see section 353.31(i) of the Department'sregulations). Department officials' failure to discover that the petitioner'sallegation was not accompanied by the requisite certification was an oversight.Once respondent's counsel pointed out that the certification was missing,petitioner's counsel immediately provided the requisite certification.The fact that the petitioner's allegation was not initially accompaniedby the requisite certification does not invalidate the allegation. Thecertification of the relevant submission subsequently provided by petitioner'slegal counsel satisfied the Department's regulations.Comment 25Several importers have requested that we exclude certain imported productsfrom the scope of the investigation.DOC Position In many proceedings, the Department can only investigate a limited numberof respondents. Insofar as the products at issue are of a highly technicalnature and were not manufactured by an investigated company, the Departmentdid not investigate whether the particular models imported by the aboveinterested parties should be excluded. For the most part, we did not haveenough information, submitted in a timely fashion, to address these concerns.Therefore, should an order be issued in this case, the above importersmay want to consider seeking a scope letter ruling, as described in 19U.S.C. 1516a(a)(1)(B)(vi). Comment 26 Several interested parties have requested that the best information availablerate of Taiwan Nitsuko not be used in calculating the ``All Others'' rateas it was stated in the preliminary determination. These interested partiesstate that Taiwan manufacturers and American importers are being unfairlytreated because the best information available rate is based on TaiwanNitsuko which is a multinational company not a Taiwan company, and becauseTaiwan Nitsuko's rate is premised upon Japanese market information notreflective of the Taiwan market. These interested parties request thatthe Department disregard Taiwan Nitsuko's rate in calculating the ``AllOthers'' rate because they believe SMS, the only responding company fromTaiwan, more fairly reflects the experience in Taiwan. Petitioner arguesthat Taiwan Nitsuko is a Taiwan company and is the largest exporter tothe U.S. of the products under investigation; therefore, Taiwan Nitsuko'sbest information available rate is the appropriate rate to use in calculatingthe ``All Others'' rate. DOC Position In the preliminary determination, the Department followed its standardpractice of excluding zero and <T3>de minimis </T3>margins from the ``All Others'' rate. As a result,the ``All Others'' rate was based solely on Taiwan Nitsuko's BIA rate.For purposes of this final determination, however, the Department has determinedthat the application of the BIA rate for Taiwan Nitsuko to the ``All Others''rate is inappropriate. The Department does not believe that the BIA ratecalculated for Taiwan Nitsuko is representative of other unnamed Taiwanmanufacturers because, as previously explained, the Department appliedsection 773(d) of the Act (the MNC provision) to calculate Taiwan Nitsuko'sBIA rate. This resulted in comparisons being based only on merchandiseproduced and sold in Japan to that produced in Japan and sold in the UnitedStates. Instead, the Department has determined that it is more appropriate to applythe margin of SMS, the only responding company from Taiwan, as the ``AllOthers'' rate. For SMS, we calculated a dumping margin of 0.00%, whichwill be applied to the ``All Others'' rate for cash deposit purposes. Wenote, however, that the Department has determined that SBTS from Taiwanare being, or are likely to be, sold in the United States at less thanfair value. The only company excluded from this determination is SMS. Therefore,all companies subject to the ``All Others'' rate are covered by the Department'saffirmative determination, but will be subject to a cash deposit of 0.00%.<ITAG tagnum="84">Continuation of Suspension of Liquidation </ITAG>We are directing the U.S. Customs Service to continue to suspend liquidation,under section 733(d) of the Act, of all entries of SBTS from Taiwan, exceptthose of Sun Moon Star, as defined in the ``Scope of Investigation'' sectionof this notice, that are entered, or withdrawn from warehouse, for consumptionon or after the date of publication of this notice in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. The U.S. Customs Service shall continue to requirea cash deposit or posting of a bond equal to the estimated amounts by whichthe foreign market value of the subject merchandise from Taiwan exceedsthe United States price as shown below. This suspension of liquidationwill remain in effect until further notice. The weighted-average dumping margins are as follows: <ITAG tagnum="110"><C>2,L2,tp0,i1,s20,8.2 </C>  <H1>Manufacturer/producer/exporter </H1><H1>Weighted-average margin percentage </H1> <ITAG tagnum="1">Taiwan Nitsuko Co., Ltd <D>129.73 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Sun Moon Star Inc <D>0 </D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">All Others <D>0 </D></ITAG></ITAG> <ITAG tagnum="84">ITC Notification </ITAG>In accordance with section 735(d) of the Act, we have notified the ITCof our determination. In addition, pursuant to section 735(c)(1) of theAct, we are making available to the ITC all nonprivileged and nonproprietaryinformation relating to this investigation. We will allow the ITC accessto all privileged and business proprietary information in our files, providedthe ITC confirms that it will not disclose such information, either publiclyor under administrative protective order, without the written consent ofthe Assistant Secretary for Import Administration. If the ITC determines that material injury, or threat of material injury,does not exist with respect to any of the products under investigation,the proceeding will be terminated and all securities posted as a resultof the suspension of liquidation will be refunded or cancelled as to thoseproducts. However, if the ITC determines that such injury does exist, theDepartment will issue an antidumping duty order directing Customs officialsto assess antidumping duties on SBTS from Taiwan, except those of Sun MoonStar, entered, or withdrawn from warehouse, for consumption, on or afterthe effective date of the suspension of liquidation, equal to the amountby which the foreign market value exceeds the U.S. price. This determination is published pursuant to section 735(d) of the Act (19U.S.C. 1673d(d). <ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: October 10, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Eric I. Garfinkel, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary for Import Administration. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-24503 Filed 10-16-89; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3510-DS-M  </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>