<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR891017-0038 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.10-17-89.f2.A1037</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 199 / Tuesday, October 17, 1989/ Proposed Rules  <ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Federal Aviation Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">14 CFR Part 71 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Airspace Docket No. 89-AWA-12] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="91">RIN 2120-AD07 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Proposed Establishment of the Tampa Terminal Control Area and Revocationof the Tampa International Airport Airport Radar Service Area; FL </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY:</T2> Federal Aviation Administration (FAA), DOT.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION:</T2> Notice of proposed rulemaking. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY:</T2> This notice proposes to establish a Terminal ControlArea (TCA) at the Tampa International Airport, FL. The TCA would consistof airspace from the surface up to 10,000 feet mean sea level (MSL) withina 5-nautical-mile arc based on the Tampa International Airport airportsurveillance radar (ASR) site located on the airport. The TCA extends outwardto 30 nautical miles with altitude restrictions from 8,000 to 10,000 feetMSL. Establishment of this TCA would impose certain operating rules andpilot/equipment requirements, including requirements for an operable two-wayradio, a 4096 transponder with automatic altitude-reporting equipment,an operable very high frequency omnidirectional radio range (VOR) or tacticalair navigational aid (TACAN) receiver, and restrictions on student pilotoperations. This action is intended to increase the capability of the airtraffic control (ATC) system to separate all aircraft in the terminal airspacearound the Tampa International Airport. The objective of this proposalis to substantially increase safety while accommodating the legitimateconcerns of airspace users. Tampa International Airport is currently servedby an Airport Radar Service Area (ARSA) which would be rescinded concurrentwith the establishment of this TCA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE:</T2> Comments must be received on or before December 15, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES:</T2> Send comments on the proposal in triplicate to: FederalAviation Administration, Office of the Chief Counsel, Attention: RulesDocket [AGC-10], Airspace Docket No. 89-AWA-12, 800 Independence Avenue,SW., Washington, DC 20591. The official docket may be examined in the Rules Docket, weekdays, exceptFederal holidays, between 8:30 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. The FAA Rules Docketis located in the Office of the Chief Counsel, Room 916, 800 IndependenceAvenue, SW., Washington, DC. An informal docket may also be examined during normal business hours atthe office of the Regional Air Traffic Division.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2> Lewis W. Still, Airspace Branch(ATO-240), Airspace-Rules and Aeronautical Information Division, Air TrafficOperations Service, Federal Aviation Administration, 800 Independence Avenue,SW., Washington, DC 20591; telephone: (202) 267-9250.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Comments Invited </ITAG>Interested parties are invited to participate in this proposed rulemakingby submitting such written data, views, or arguments as they may desire.Comments that provide the factual basis supporting the views and suggestionspresented are particularly helpful in developing reasoned regulatory decisionson the proposal. Comments are specifically invited on the overall regulatory,aeronautical, economic, environmental, and energy aspects of the proposal.Communications should identify the airspace docket and be submitted intriplicate to the address listed above. Commenters wishing the FAA to acknowledgereceipt of their comments on this notice must submit with those commentsa self-addressed, stamped postcard on which the following statement ismade: ``Comments to Airspace Docket No. 89-AWA-12.'' The postcard willbe date/time stamped and returned to the commenter. All communicationsreceived before the specified closing date for comments will be consideredbefore taking action on the proposed rule. The proposal contained in thisnotice may be changed in the light of comments received. All comments submittedwill be available for examination in the Rules Docket both before and afterthe closing date for comments. A report summarizing each substantive publiccontact with FAA personnel concerned with this rulemaking will be filedin the docket. <ITAG tagnum="84">Availability of NPRM's </ITAG>Any person may obtain a copy of this Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM)by submitting a request to the Federal Aviation Administration, Officeof Public Affairs, Attention: Public Inquiry Center, APA-230, 800 IndependenceAvenue, SW., Washington, DC 20591, or by calling (202) 267-3484. Communicationsmust identify the notice number of this NPRM. Persons interested in beingplaced on a mailing list for future NPRM's should also request a copy ofAdvisory Circular No. 11-2A which describes the application procedure.<ITAG tagnum="84">Related Rulemaking Actions </ITAG>On May 21, 1970, the FAA published FAR Amendment 91-78 (35 FR 7782) whichenabled the establishment of TCA's. On February 3, 1987, the FAA publisheda final rule which established requirements pertaining to the use, installation,inspection, and testing of Air Traffic Control Radar Beacon System (ATCRBS)and Mode S transponders in U.S.-registered civil aircraft (53 FR 3380).The rule adopted continues to require a transponder for operation in eachTCA. The FAA published a final rule on June 21, 1988, which requires Mode Cequipment when operating within 30 nautical miles of any designated TCA-primaryairport from the surface up to 10,000 feet MSL, except for operations bycertain aircraft types specifically excluded (53 FR 23356). On October 14, 1988, the FAA published a final rule which revised the classificationand pilot/equipment requirements for conducting operations in a TCA (53FR 40318). Specifically, the rule: (a) Establishes a single-class TCA;(b) requires the pilot-in-command of a civil aircraft operating withina TCA to hold at least a private pilot certificate, except for a studentpilot who has received certain documented training; and (c) eliminatesthe helicopter exception from the minimum navigational equipment requirement.<ITAG tagnum="84">Background </ITAG>The TCA program was developed to reduce the midair collision potentialin the congested airspace surrounding airports with high density air trafficby providing an area in which all aircraft will be subject to certain operatingrules and equipment requirements. The density of traffic and the type of operations being conducted in theairspace surrounding major terminals increase the probability of midaircollisions. In 1970, an extensive study found that the majority of midaircollisions occurred between a general aviation (GA) aircraft and an aircarrier, military or another GA aircraft. The basic causal factor commonto these conflicts was the mix of uncontrolled aircraft operating undervisual flight rules (VFR) and controlled aircraft operating under instrumentflight rules (IFR). TCA's provide a method to accommodate the increasingnumber of IFR and VFR operations. The regulatory requirements of TCA airspaceafford the greatest protection for the greatest number of people by providingATC with an increased capability to provide aircraft separation service,thereby minimizing the mix of controlled and uncontrolled aircraft. To date, the FAA has established a total of 24 TCA's. The FAA is proposingto take action to modify or implement the application of these proven controltechniques to more airports to provide greater protection of air trafficin the airspace regions most commonly used by passenger-carrying aircraft.On August 22, 1987, the Secretary of Transportation announced nine locationsfor which the FAA would issue Notices proposing the establishment of TCA's.The nine candidates cited qualify for TCA status by meeting the criteriapublished in FAA Handbook 7400.2C, ``Procedures for Handling Airspace Matters.''The criteria for establishing a TCA are based on factors which includethe number of aircraft and people using that airspace, the traffic density,and the type or nature of operations being conducted. Accordingly, guidelineshave been established to identify TCA locations based on two elements_thenumber of enplaned passengers and the number of aircraft operations. <ITAG tagnum="84">Pre-NPRM Public Input </ITAG>Airspace Meetings Three pre-NPRM airspace meetings were held: Tampa, August 23; St. Petersburg,August 24; Sarasota, August 25, 1988. The meetings were held to allow localaviation interests and airspace users an opportunity to present input onthe design of the proposed Tampa TCA. The final recommendations for theproposed TCA were coordinated with members of the Ad Hoc Committee formedby the Florida Department of Transportation.At the pre-NPRM meetings the following recommendations were submitted:A representative of the 56th Tactical Training Wing at MacDill Air ForceBase (AFB) recommendad that the floor of the TCA be established at 1,200feet MSL in the area between the Skyway Bridge and MacDill AFB, and theinner core of the TCA be extended to include the entire airport trafficarea (ATA) at MacDill AFB. Several commenters submitted the following recommendations: 1. The Tampa TCA should be designed with approach and departure corridorsthat consider the operational performance of the aircraft being separated.and with a VFR corridor, east/west, across the city of Tampa. The FAA shouldestablish a north/south corridor over the Lakeland area which will provideVFR pilots the ability to travel through central Florida without penetratingthe TCA boundaries. Also, the FAA should install a VORTAC at Tampa Airportand limit the innermost circle of the TCA to no more than 5 nautical miles.A 5-mile circle would be consistent with the existing Tampa ARSA and wouldeliminate the need to provide special procedures, or a TCA cutout for thePeter O'Knight Airport operations. 2. The Tampa and Orlando TCA's should be effective on the same date andthe charts should be available at least 60 days prior to the effectivedate. Also, the FAA should consider a violations grace period of 6 monthsbefore enforcement action begins. The Central Florida Airspace Planning and Utilization Committee offeredthe following recommendations: The Inner Core of the TCA should be from the surface up to and including8,000 feet MSL. A ceiling of 8,000 feet MSL was recommended because ofknown performances and factors. This altitude is low enough to allow encoder-equippedaircraft to operate VFR over-the-top of the TCA without the need for exceptionalperformance capability, and without the use of supplemental oxygen. The boundary of the inner core should be a 5-nautical-mile radius, excludingDavis Island, and the northern segment of Hillsborough Bay, and shouldbe elongated to the south to include MacDill AFB. The First Step-ring of the TCA should have a floor altitude of 1,200 feetMSL; however, in the vicinity of the Peter O'Knight Airport the altitudeshould be 1,400 feet MSL. This altitude would provide aircraft access tothe St. Petersburg-Clearwater International Airport and the Peter O'KnightAirport. The boundary should be a 10-nautical-mile radius from the center of theTampa International Airport, elongated to include lower Tampa Bay. Thiswould exclude Vandenberg Airport and Albert Whitted Airport. The Outer Boundary of the TCA should have an altitude floor of 4,000 feetMSL on the east and west sides and a 3,000-foot MSL floor for the northernapproach area. The boundaries should include the airspace west of Tampa to the Gulf Coast,north to Florida State Highway 52 to St. Leo, northeast from St. Leo toZephyrhills, then east from Zephyrhills to the Alafia River, then southeastalong the railroad, to Interstate I-75 to State Road 64 Interchange, thensouth along State Road 64 then back to the beginning. Other recommendations to be considered are as follows: 1. The Sarasota ARSA should be incorporated in the Tampa TCA. Air carrier/airtaxi activity enplaned passengers increased to 816,343 by October 1988.The traffic flow at Sarasota, which mixes with the traffic from Tampa andMacDill, supports the inclusion of the Sarasota ARSA into the Tampa TCA.2. User groups requested that geographical landmarks should be used todefine the TCA boundaries. In addition, members of the Tampa Tower staffhave flown along the proposed boundaries and stated that visual landmarkscan be utilized for determining the boundaries. The user groups recommendeda TCA chart be published for Tampa using actual photographs of the geographicallandmarks similar to the prototype chart for the New York TCA developedby the Eastern Region. The written comments on the proposed TCA are as follows: A Sunshine Flying Club member, who is a certified flight instructor anda member of the Albert Whitted Airport Advisory Committee, stated thathe was in support of the Tampa TCA proposal that was submitted by the CentralFlorida Airspace Planning and Utilization Committee. He also believes TCA'sshould automatically consist of the airspace within a 30-nautical-mileradius, up to 10,000 feet MSL. The Central Florida Airspace Planning andUtilization Committee's proposal, however, recommended a TCA area of lessthan 30 nautical miles. The International Aerobatic Club spokesperson requested that provisionsbe made, within the plans for the Tampa TCA, for an area for the performanceof aerobatics. Sites that should be considered are in the areas of Brooksville,FL, Airport, Zephyrhills Airport, Wimauma Airport, and east of Tampa Palmsover land owned by the Southwest Water Management District. The InternationalAerobatic Club also requested assistance from the air traffic control tower(ATCT) at Tampa to locate a suitable site for aerobatics in the Tampa area,not necessarily within the TCA. The FAA has offered three sites for consideration.The Experimental Aircraft Association (EAA), Chapter 175, Brandon, FL,expressed concern over Vandenberg Airport being included in the Tampa TCA.Pilots felt strongly that consideration should be given to the need forarrival and departure aircraft to maneuver in that area without havingto contact Tampa International Airport Control Tower. Although Vandenbergis within the 10-nautical-mile ring, the proposed TCA is designed to keepthis airport out of the surface area. Vandenberg is now within the 1,200to 10,000 feet MSL area, and access is possible without clearance fromATC. The 56th Tactical Training Wing, based at McDill AFB, generally concurredwith the proposed TCA at Tampa. They believe the establishment of a TCAat Tampa will undoubtedly reduce the midair collision potential and greatlyimprove flight safety in the Tampa area. An airport restaurant owner at Lakeland Municipal Airport opposes the TCAat Tampa because pilots have told him they will not have the equipmentto enter the TCA; therefore, the TCA will effectively put him out of business.The FAA has determined that departure and arrival traffic will experienceno problems because Lakeland is not within the TCA; however, the LakelandAirport is in the Mode C Veil which requires aircraft to be equipped withMode C equipment when operating within 30 nautical miles of any designatedTCA primary airport from the surface up to 10,000 feet MSL. The authorityto permit an aircraft to operate without a Mode C transponder is assignedto the facility air traffic manager in areas of no radar coverage. The city of Lakeland, FL, stated that the TCA rule would place a ``squeeze''on many of Lakeland's home and visitor aircraft owners. In addition tothe financial burden, there are real questions as to whether or not therule would improve safety. The Lakeland Air Center wrote that the proposed TCA's at Tampa and Orlando,FL, seriously threaten the economic health of Polk County, the city ofLakeland, and Lakeland Municipal Airport and its business. If implemented.the TCA could cost the city of Lakeland over $12 million annually, andLakeland Air Center several hundred thousand dollars annually. The Sun'N Fun EAA Fly-In, Inc., stated that the proposed TCA design, andthe operating rules as stated in NPRM 87-7, would result in a negativefinancial impact on the tourist industry in the State of Florida and onthe Sun'N Fun Fly-In. The FAA stated to the Sun'N Fun officials that eachaircraft without Mode C equipment will be considered for entry within theMode C Veil during the annual Sun'N Fun Fly-In. The Sun'N Fun EAA Fly-In,Inc., recommended that pilots continue to provide input on the TCA, andthey further recommend letters to the FAA in Washington, DC, asking thatthe Mode C rule be rewritten to encompass the TCA only as depicted on sectionalcharts.The Sun'N Fun Fly-In, Inc., also commented that the use of the Mode C inthe veil area, below the outer layers of the TCA, will place unnecessaryhardship on aircraft owners who fly out of secondary airports. The FAArecognizes that the establishment of a TCA and the effect of the Mode Crule are related; however, the TCA design and the Mode C Veil are separatematters. Aircraft which are not equipped with Mode C may be accommodatedwithin the veil in accordance with national policies and local procedures.The Aviation Task Force and Board of Directors of Greater Brandon, FL.submitted a resolution recommending support of the proposal forwarded bythe Vandenberg Fixed Base Operator and the general aviation pilots to establishthe Tampa TCA. The FAA is of the opinion that it has incorporated the AviationTask Force and Board of Directors' recommendations. Vandenberg Airport, Inc., wrote that Vandenberg is vital to the futuredevelopment along the I-75 corridor. With present expansion plans, increasedhangar space will probably double within the next 10 years. The economicimportance of Vandenberg Airport to East Hillsborough County Area is immeasurablefor long-range corporate and community development. The President of Niles Aviation stated that TCA's, ARSA's and TRSA's area complete waste of valuable airspace. The FAA should develop climb anddescent corridors, and forbid VFR traffic to enter these corridors. Thepresent system distracts pilots and needlessly complicates controller workloadwith flights that do not require tracking. The FAA has determined thatwhile corridors do provide a degree of safety to aircraft arriving anddeparting terminal areas, they do not provide adaquate and/or sufficientairspace required to effectively vector, sequence, and meter the vast numberof aircraft served in major terminal areas today. The use of corridorswould result in a drop in the capacity for most terminal areas becauseof the different performance characteristics of aircraft. <ITAG tagnum="84">The Proposal </ITAG>The FAA is considering an amendment to part 71 of the Federal AviationRegulations (14 CFR part 71) to establish a TCA at Tampa InternationalAirport, FL. In 1987, the total number of annual enplaned passengers atTampa International Airport was 5,002,812 which exceeds the 3.5 millionnecessary for consideration as a TCA candidate. The total number of airportoperations was 522,787 of which 177,999 were air carrier. Consequently,the FAA has determined that establishment of a TCA at Tampa InternationalAirport would be in the interest of flight safety and would result in agreater degree of protection for the greatest number of people during flightin that terminal area. Tampa International Airport is currently servedby an ARSA which would be rescinded concurrent with the establishment ofthis TCA. The proposed location is depicted on the attached chart. Section 91.90 of part 91 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR part91) defines TCA's and prescribes operating rules for aircraft in airspacedesignated as a TCA. The TCA rule provides, in part, that prior to enteringthe TCA, any pilot arriving at any airport within the TCA or flying througha TCA must: (1) Obtain appropriate authorization from ATC; (2) comply withapplicable procedures established by ATC for pilot training operationsat an airport within the TCA; (3) hold at least a private pilot certificate;(4) meet the requirements of andSection; 61.95 of the Federal Aviation Regulationsif the aircraft is operated by a student pilot. Any aircraft arriving atany airport within the TCA or flying through the TCA must: have an operableVOR or TACAN receiver; have an operable two-way radio capable of communicationswith ATC on appropriate frequencies for that TCA; and be equipped withthe applicable operating transponder and automatic altitude reporting equipmentspecified in paragraph (a) of andSection; 91.24 of the Federal Aviation Regulations,except as provided in paragraph (d) of that section. Unless otherwise authorizedby ATC, all large, turbine-engine aircraft operating to or from a primaryairport must be operated above the designated floors of the TCA. The pilotof any aircraft departing from an airport located within the TCA is requiredto receive a clearance from ATC prior to takeoff. All aircraft operating within a TCA are required to comply with all ATCclearances and instructions, and any FAA arrival or departure traffic patternfor the airport of intended operation. However, the TCA rule permits ATCto authorize deviations from any of the operating requirements of the rulewhen safety considerations justify the deviation or more efficient utilizationof the airspace can be attained. Ultralight vehicle operations and parachutejumps in a TCA may only be conducted under the terms of an ATC authorization.Definitions, operating requirements, and specific airspace designationsapplicable to TCA's may be found in andSection;andSection; 71.12, 71.401, and71.403 of part 71 of the Federal Aviation Regulations (14 CFR Part 71);and andSection;andSection; 91.1 and 91.90 of part 91 of the Federal AviationRegulations (14 CFR part 91). The standard configuration of the TCA consists of three concentric circlescentered on the primary airport extending to 10, 20, and 30 nautical milesrespectively. The vertical limits of the TCA are 12,500 feet above MSL,with the floor established at the surface in the inner area and at levelsappropriate to containment of operations in the outer areas. Variationsof these criteria may be authorized contingent upon terrain, adjacent regulatoryairspace, and factors unique to the terminal area. The airspace configurationcontained herein is the result of an extensive staff study conducted bythe local FAA authority after obtaining public input from informal airspacemeetings and coordinating with the FAA regional office. The FAA has determinedthat the following proposed TCA airspace configuration is consistent withTCA objectives and allows consideration of terminal area flight operationsand terrain: 1. That airspace extending upward from the surface up to and including10,000 feet MSL beginning from the St. Petersburg, FL, 090anddegrees; radial,9 nautical miles, then the 5-nautical-mile arc of the Tampa, FL, airportsurveillance radar (ASR) antenna located at lat. 27anddegrees;59andmin16;15&quot;N., long. 82anddegrees;32andmin16;40&quot; W., clockwise to the St. Petersburg,FL, 076anddegrees; radial 13 nautical miles, then southwest along the westside of Interstate Highway I-275 to the St. Petersburg, FL. 090anddegrees;radial, 9 nautical miles. This airspace is required to contain aircraftdeparting from and arriving at the primary airport. 2. That airspace extending upward from 1,200 feet above ground level upto and including 10,000 feet MSL from the shoreline at Anna Maria Island,FL. (St. Petersburg, FL, 184anddegrees; radial, 24 nautical miles) then northalong the shoreline to the St. Petersburg 192anddegrees; radial, 14 nauticalmiles, then northeast to the north of the Skyway Bridge, then north alongthe shoreline to the St. Petersburg 145anddegrees; radial, 5 nautical miles,then a 10-nautical-mile arc of the Tampa ASR antenna, clockwise to Highway301, then southwest along the west side of Interstate Highway I-75 to theSarasota, FL, 10-nautical-mile arc, then southeast along the 10-nautical-milearc to the St. Petersburg 150anddegrees; radial, 29 nautical miles, thenwest along the 30-nautical-mile arc of the Tampa ASR antenna to the shorelineof Anna Maria Island, FL.3. That airspace extending upward from 3,000 feet MSL up to and including10,000 feet MSL from Hudson, FL, east along Highway 52 to San Antonio,FL, then southeast to Zephyrhills, FL, then south on the west side of Highway39, then west along Highway 60 to the St. Petersburg 087anddegrees; radial,27 nautical miles, then southwest along the west side of the railroad toParrish, FL, then southwest to Highway 301, and a 10-nautical-mile arcof Sarasota, FL, to the St. Petersburg 157anddegrees; radial, 22 nauticalmiles, then northeast along the west side of Interstate Highway I-75 toHighway 60, then the 10-nautical-mile arc of the Tampa ASR antenna, thencounterclockwise to the St. Petersburg 145anddegrees; radial, 5 nauticalmiles, then south to follow the shoreline to the north and of the SkywayBridge, then southwest to the St. Petersburg 192anddegrees; radial, 14 nauticalmiles, then north along the shoreline to Hudson, FL. 4. That airspace extending upward from 8,000 feet MSL up to and including10,000 feet MSL from Anna Maria Island, FL, then northwest along the 30-nautical-milearc of the Tampa, FL, ASR antenna, northwest to the St. Petersburg 322anddegrees;radial, 27 nautical miles, then clockwise along the 30-nautical-mile arcof the Tampa ASR antenna to Dade City, FL, then south on the west sideof Highway 301 to Zephyrhills, FL, then northwest to San Antonio, thenwest along Highway 52 to Hudson, FL, then south along the shoreline toAnna Maria Island, FL. 5. That airspace extending upward from 8,000 feet MSL up to and including10,000 feet MSL from Sarasota, FL, 10-nautical-mile arc, then northwestalong the Sarasota 10-nautical-mile arc to the St. Petersburg, FL, 152anddegrees;radial, 24 nautical miles, then northeast to Parrish, FL, then along thewest side of the railroad northeast to Highway 60, then east along Highway60 to Highway 39, then south on the west side of Highway 39, to the St.Petersburg 126anddegrees; radial, 33 nautical miles, then southwest on the30-nautical-mile arc of the Tampa ASR antenna to the Sarasota 10-nautical-milearc. This configuration would provide an area to contain aircraft during climband descent profiles while transitioning between the terminal and en routestructure. The preceding general summary of the proposed TCA airspace configurationidentifies that airspace which is necessary to contain large turbojet aircraftoperations at Tampa International Airport. Air Traffic Control would providecontrol and separation of all flights within the proposed airspace boundaries.Furthermore, ATC authorization is requisite to aircraft operations withinthat airspace. Establishment of this TCA would greatly enhance the safetyof flight within the congested airspace overlying the Tampa metropolitanarea by facilitating the separation of controlled and uncontrolled flightoperations. Section 71.403 of part 71 of the Federal Aviation Regulationswas republished in Handbook 7400.6E dated January 3, 1989. <ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory Evaluation Summary </ITAG>The FAA is required to assess the benefits and costs of each proposed rulemakingaction to assure that the public is not burdened with rules having costswhich outweigh their benefits. This section contains an analysis whichquantifies, to the maximum possible extent, the costs and benefits of establishinga TCA at Tampa, FL. This regulatory evaluation summary should be read inconjunction with the NPRM since it provides additional background information.This proposal is intended to lower the likelihood of midair collisionsby increasing the capability of the ATC system to separate all aircraftin terminal airspace around Tampa International Airport. This action wasprompted by data indicating that a high percentage of near midair collisionsreported to the FAA in terminal areas involve VFR aircraft that are notrequired to be under the control of ATC. Thus, the overall objective ofthis proposal is to substantially increase safety while accommodating thelegitimate concerns of airspace users. Cost-Benefit Analysis <ITAG tagnum="81">a. Costs </ITAG>The FAA estimates the total cost expected to accrue from implementationof the proposed rule to be $311,000 (discounted, 15 years) in 1987 dollars.Approximately $107,000 (discounted) or 34 percent of the total estimatedcosts would be incurred by the FAA primarily for additional equipment.The remaining costs would be incurred by small GA aircraft operators whowould be required under this proposal to equip their aircraft with ModeC transponders sooner than they would have for the ARSA under the previousFAA rule: ``Transponder With Automatic Altitude Reporting Capability Requirement(Mode C)'' (53 FR 23356, June 21, 1988). This rule will be implementedin two phases. Phase I, which began on July 1, 1989, requires a transponderwith Mode C at and above 10,000 feet MSL and in the vicinity (30 nauticalmiles) of TCA-primary airports. There are currently 24 TCA's. Phase II will implement a transponder with Mode C requirement in the airspacein the vicinity (10 nautical miles) of ARSA-primary airports. Phase IIbecomes effective on December 30, 1990, and will affect over 135 ARSA's.Also in Phase II, a transponder with Mode C will be required at other designatedairports for which either a TCA or ARSA has not been adopted. Consequently,most aircraft without Mode C transponders would need ATC authorizationto fly within 30 nautical miles of a TCA-primary airport, within 10 nauticalmiles of an ARSA-primary airport, or within the controlled airspace ofother designated airports that would also require Mode C transponders.Thus, this evaluation, as well as the Mode C rule, assumes that all aircraftwithout Mode C would acquire such equipment rather than circumnavigatethe subject airport. The only aircraft without this equipment would benonelectrical and antique types. Costs to these types of aircraft operatorshave already been accounted for by the Mode C rule. As a result, aircraftoperators impacted by this proposal would only incur the opportunity costof capital by requiring them to acquire, install, and maintain Mode C transpondersone year earlier than they would be required to do so in accordance withPhase II of the Mode C rule. <ITAG tagnum="81">b. Benefits </ITAG>This proposed rule is expected to generate potential benefits primarilyin the form of enhanced safety to the aviation community and the flyingpublic. Such safety, for instance, would take the form of reduced casualtylosses (namely, aviation fatalities and property damage) resulting froma lowered likelihood of midair collisions due to increased air trafficcontrol in airspace to be established by the TCA. In addition, potentialbenefits are expected to accrue in the form of improved operational efficiencyon the part of FAA air traffic controllers. Ordinarily, the potential benefits of this proposal would be the reductionin the probability of midair collisions resulting from converting the existingARSA to a TCA. However, due to the recent Mode C rule (and to some extent,the rule for Traffic Alert and Collision Avoidance (TCAS), 54 FR 940, January10, 1989), the number of potential midair collisions avoided by this proposalis expected to be significantly lower. Nevertheless, this proposal is stillexpected to accrue benefits in terms of enhanced safety, though on a muchsmaller scale. This point can be illustrated with the use of statistical models basedon actual and projected critical near midair collision (NMAC) incidentsin lieu of actual midair collisions. (A critical NMAC is an event involvingtwo aircraft coming within 100 feet of each other; the fact that they donot collide is not due to an action on the part of either pilot but, rather,is due purely to chance.) Since midair collisions involving part 135 aircraftand especially part 121 aircraft are rare, the use of critical NMAC's willserve to illustrate, to some degree, the potential improvements in aviationsafety from implementing this proposal.Simple regression analyses were prepared for this evaluation which focusedon critical NMAC's, aircraft operations in the 23 existing TCA's, and arandom sample of 23 of the existing 79 ARSA's (as of 1986 and 1987). Theresults of these analyses indicated that TCA's have approximately 68 percentfewer critical NMAC's annually, on average, than ARSA's. While there isno demonstrated relationship between NMAC's and actual midair collisions,the lower NMAC rate does indicate a more efficient separation of aircraftin congested airspace. As the result of these findings, if the existing Tampa ARSA were to remainunchanged (and the recent Mode C and TCAS rules were not in effect), theTampa Terminal Area would be expected to experience approximately 1.6 criticalNMAC's annually (or 23 critical NMAC's over the next 15 years). If, however,the ARSA were to become a TCA, this figure would reduce to approximately0.5 critical NMAC's annually (or 7 critical NMAC's over the next 15 years).Thus, over the next 15 years, this proposal could result in the reductionof approximately 16 critical NMAC's. However, it is important to note thatmany, if not most, of these potential critical NMAC's would never materializeas predicted primarily because of the Mode C rule as it is applied to theTampa ARSA and, to some extent, the TCAS rule. According to Phase II of the Mode C rule, all aircraft operating within10 nautical miles (except for flights below the outer 5-mile ``shelf'')of an ARSA-primary airport must be equipped with a Mode C transponder.Phase I of the Mode C rule requires, as of July 1989, aircraft operatingwithin 30 nautical miles of a TCA to be equipped with a Mode C transponder.These requirements are expected to significantly reduce the risk of midaircollisions in ARSA's and TCA's. For this reason, the primary safety benefitof this proposal to create a TCA in 1990 at Tampa is that the safety enhancementsof the Mode C and TCAS requirements will occur earlier than they otherwisewould be expected without this proposal. A second safety benefit wouldbe in terms of the lowered likelihood of midair collisions as a resultof expanding the lateral boundaries of ATC by 20 nautical miles throughreplacing the Tampa ARSA with a TCA. Thus, the safety benefits of the establishment of a new TCA, while positive,would be less than would otherwise accrue in the absence of the Mode Cand TCAS rules. Since this proposal essentially extends the effects ofthe Mode C rule, virtually all of its potential safety benefits are assumedto be part of that rule. Such benefits cannot be estimated separately and,therefore, are considered to be inextricably linked primarily to the ModeC rule. Over a 15-year period, the Mode C rule is expected to generatetotal potential safety benefits of $344 million (discounted, in 1987 dollars).(The Mode C rule benefits estimate of $310 million for 10 years has beenadjusted to a 15-year period for the purpose of comparability with theTCAS rule and other FAA rulemaking actions). It is important to note thatpart of these safety benefits would be attributed to the TCAS rule. Thus,the potential safety benefits of this proposal, and the Mode C and TCASrules, are considered to be inextricably linked. Another potential benefit of the proposed rule would be improved operationalefficiency on the part of FAA air traffic controllers. Under the proposedrule, Mode C transponder requirements would ease controller workload asa result of aircraft being controlled due to a reduction in radio communications.It would also make potential traffic conflicts more readily apparent tothe controller. As the result of improved operational efficiency,  theimpact of controller workload, increased by separation requirements inthe proposed TCA, would be somewhat offset due to the controller's abilityto adjust the volume of VFR traffic in any given portion of the TCA. Improved operational efficiency should generate other types of benefitsin the form of significant reductions in the number of VFR aircraft requestsdenied and in the number of VFR aircraft delayed during busy periods. Asthe result of converting the existing Tampa ARSA to a TCA, improved operationalefficiency would accrue due to the availability of additional air trafficequipment. If the Tampa ARSA were to remain intact, such additional equipmentwould not be required. Therefore, the potential benefits of improved operationalefficiency, which is not considered to be quantifiable in monetary termsin this evaluation, would be attributed to this proposal rather than eitherthe Mode C rule or TCAS rule. <ITAG tagnum="81">c. Comparison of Benefits and Costs </ITAG>The total cost that would accrue from implementation of the proposed ruleis estimated to be $311,000 (discounted, in 1987 dollars). Approximately66 percent of this total cost estimate would fall on those GA aircraftoperators without Mode C transponders in ths form of opportunity costsrequiring them to acquire such avionics equipment, including maintenance,one year sooner than they otherwise would under the status quo. The typicalindividual GA aircraft operator impacted would incur an estimated one-timecost ranging from $86 to $191 (discounted) under the proposed rule. (Asa result of the opportunity cost concept, the derivation of these costestimates is too complex to discuss briefly. Therefore, the reader shouldrefer to the detailed regulatory evaluation, which is contained in thedocket, for a full explanation of the method by which these costs estimateswere made.)The potential benefits of the proposed rule would be the lowered likelihoodof midair collisions from the conversion of the existing ARSA to a TCA.The number of midair collisions avoided and their respective monetary valuescannot be estimated for this proposal independent of the Mode C and TCASrules, but the FAA believes this risk would be substantially reduced. AnFAA analysis prepared for this evaluation, however, has shown that criticalnear midair collisions occur approximately two-thirds less frequently ina TCA than within an ARSA. The FAA believes that even after the aviationcommunity complies with the Mode C and TCAS rules, locations convertingfrom ARSA's to TCA's would continue to experience reduced critical NMAC's.In addition, the proposed rule would generate improved operational efficiencybenefits on the part of FAA air traffic controllers, though they are notconsidered to be quantifiable in monetary terms. Clearly, in view of the cost of compliance relative to the significantreduction in the likelihood of midair collisions as well as improved operationalefficiency in the Tampa Terminal Area, the FAA firmly believes the proposedrule is cost-beneficial. The Regulatory Evaluation that has been placed in the docket contains additionaldetailed information ralated to the costs and benefits that are expectedto accrue from the implementation of this NPRM. <ITAG tagnum="84">Initial Regulatory Flexibility Determination </ITAG>The Regulatory Flexibility Act of 1980 (RFA) was enacted to ensure thatsmall entities are not unnecessarily and disproportionately burdened byGovernment regulations. The RFA requires agencies to review rules whichmay have ``a significant economic impact on a substantial number of smallentities.'' The small entities which could be potentially affected by the implementationof this proposed rule are unscheduled operators of aircraft for hire owningnine or fewer aircraft. Virtually all of the aircraft operators impacted by this proposed rulewould be those who acquire Mode C transponder capability. The FAA believesthat all unscheduled aircraft operators (namely, air taxi operators) potentiallyimpacted by this proposed rule already have Mode C transponders due tothe fact that such operators fly regularly in or near airports where radarapproach control service has been established. Even if some of these operatorswere to acquire, install, and maintain Mode C transponders, the cost wouldnot have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of them.The annual FAA threshold for significant economic impact is $3,700 (1987dollars) for a small entity. According to FAA Order 2100.14A (RegulatoryFlexibility Criteria and Guidance), the definition of a small entity, interms of an air taxi operator, is one with nine aircraft owned, but notnecessarily operated. If we were to assume that a particular aircraft operator had nine aircraftwithout transponders, then the annual one-time cost per impacted aircraftwould be approximately $210 (undiscounted, for the purpose of comparabilitywith the figure of $3,700). The total annual one-time cost per small entitywould amount to an estimated $1,890. Thus, the annual worst case cost fora small entity would fall far below the FAA's annual threshold of $3,700.Therefore, the FAA believes this proposed rule would not have a significanteconomic impact on a substantial number of small entities under the criteriaof the Regulatory Flexibility Act. <ITAG tagnum="84">International Trade Impact Assessment </ITAG>The proposed rule would neither have an effect on the sale of foreign aviationproducts or services in the United States, nor would it have an effecton the sale of U.S. products or services in foreign countries. This isbecause the proposed rule would only potentially impact small GA aircraftoperators without Mode C, and not aircraft manufacturers. The average costof acquiring Mode C capability is estimated to range from $900 (to upgradefrom a Mode A transponder) to $2,000 (to acquire a Mode C transponder withouthaving a Mode A transponder). The cost of acquiring Mode C capability isnot considered to be high enough to discourage potential buyers of smallGA airplanes. <ITAG tagnum="84">Federalism Implications </ITAG>This proposed regulation would not have substantial direct effects on thestates, on the relationship between the national government and the states,or on the distribution of power and responsibilities among the variouslevels of government. Therefore, in accordance with Executive Order 12612,preparation of a Federalism assessment is not warranted. <ITAG tagnum="84">Conclusion </ITAG>For the reasons discussed under ``Regulatory Evaluation,'' the FAA hasdetermined that this proposed regulation (1) is not a ``major rule'' underExecutive Order 12291; and (2) is not a ``significant rule'' under DOTRegulatory Policies and Procedures (44 FR 11034; February 26, 1979). Itis certified that this proposal, if adopted, would not have a significanteconomic impact on a substantial number of small entities. <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 14 CFR Part 71</ITAG>Aviation safety, Terminal control areas and Airport radar service areas.<ITAG tagnum="84">The Proposed Amendment </ITAG>Accordingly, pursuant to the authority delegated to me, the Federal AviationAdministration proposes to amend part 71 of the Federal Aviation Regulations(14 CFR part 71) as follows:<ITAG tagnum="56">PART 71_DESIGNATION OF FEDERAL AIRWAYS, AREA LOW ROUTES, CONTROLLEDAIRSPACE AND REPORTING POINTS</ITAG>1. The authority citation for part 71 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 49 U.S.C. 1348(a), 1354(a), 1510; Executive Order 10854;49 U.S.C. 106(g) (Revised Pub. L. 97-449, January 12, 1983); 14 CFR 11.69.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 71.403</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>2. andSection; 71.403 is amended as follows:<ITAG tagnum="74">Tampa, FL [New]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Primary Airport</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Tampa International Airport (lat. 27anddegrees;58andmin16;31andmin16;andmin16;N., long. 82anddegrees;32andmin16;00andmin16;andmin16; W.)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">Tampa International Airport </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">(LOC/DME) Antenna (lat. 27anddegrees;54andmin16;29andmin16;andmin16; N., long.82anddegrees;30andmin16;56andmin16;andmin16; W.)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">(ASR) (lat. 27anddegrees;59andmin16;15andmin16;andmin16; N., long. 82anddegrees;32andmin16;40andmin16;andmin16;W.)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73">Boundaries</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Area A. That airspace extending upward from the surface to and including10,000 feet MSL bounded by an area beginning at lat. 27anddegrees;54andmin16;29andmin16;andmin16;N., long. 82anddegrees;30andmin16;56andmin16;andmin16; W., then clockwise alongthe 5-mile arc of the Tampa ASR to lat. 27anddegrees;57andmin16;43andmin16;andmin16;N., long. 82anddegrees;27andmin16;18andmin16;andmin16; W., to the point of beginning.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Area B. That airspace extending upward from 1,200 feet MSL to andincluding 10,000 feet MSL beginning at the Anna Maria Island, FL, shorelineand the Tampa ASR 30-mile arc, north along the shoreline to lat. 27anddegrees;40andmin16;42andmin16;andmin16;N., long. 82anddegrees;44andmin16;21andmin16;andmin16; W.; to lat. 27anddegrees;42andmin16;25andmin16;andmin16;N., long. 82anddegrees;40andmin16;36andmin16;andmin16; W. (the end of the SkywayBridge), north along the shoreline to the 10-mile arc of the Tampa ASRclockwise to Interstate 75, south along Interstate 75 to the 10-mile arcof the Sarasota, FL, VOR then clockwise along the Sarasota 10-mile arcto the 30-mile arc of the Tampa ASR clockwise along the Tampa ASR 30-milearc to the point of beginning.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Area C. That airspace extending upward from 3,000 feet MSL up to andincluding 10,000 feet MSL bounded by a line beginning at the intersectionof Highway 19 and Highway 52, east along Highway 52 to San Antonio, FL,southeast to Zephyrhills, FL, south on Highway 39 to Highway 60, west onHighway 60 to lat. 27anddegrees;56andmin16;15andmin16;andmin16; N., long. 82anddegrees;11andmin16;00andmin16;andmin16;W., south to and along the railroad to Parrish, FL, then southwest to theintersection of Highway 301 and the 10-mile arc of Sarasota, FL, then counterclockwisealong the Sarasota 10-mile DME to Interstate 75, north along Interstate75 to the 10-mile arc of the Tampa ASR then counterclockwise along theTampa ASR 10-mile DME to the shoreline then along the shoreline to lat.27anddegrees;42andmin16;25andmin16;andmin16; N., long. 82anddegrees;40andmin16;42andmin16;andmin16;W.; to lat. 27anddegrees;40andmin16;42andmin16;andmin16; N., long. 82anddegrees;44andmin16;21andmin16;andmin16;W.; then north along the shoreline to the point of beginning.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Area D. That airspace extending upward from 6,000 feet MSL to andincluding 10,000 feet MSL beginning at the Anna Maria Island, FL, shorelineand the 30-mile arc of the Tampa ASR, clockwise along the Tampa 30-mileDME to long. 83anddegrees;00andmin16;00andmin16;andmin16; W., then north alonglong. 83anddegrees;00andmin16;00andmin16;andmin16; W. to the 30-mile arc of theTampa ASR, then clockwise along the Tampa ASR 30-mile DME arc to Dade City,FL, then south on Highway 30 to Zephyrhills, FL, then northwest to SanAntonio, FL, then west along Highway 52 to Hudson, FL, then south alongthe shoreline to lat. 27anddegrees;40andmin16;42andmin16;andmin16; N., long. 82anddegrees;44andmin16;21andmin16;andmin16;W., south along the shoreline to the point of beginning; and that airspacebeginning at Highway 301 and the Sarasota, FL, 10-mile arc, then northeastto Parrish, FL, then northeast along the railroad to lat. 27anddegrees;56andmin16;15andmin16;andmin16;N., long. 82anddegrees;11andmin16;00andmin16;andmin16; W., then east along Highway60 to the intersection of Highway 60 and Highway 39, then south along Highway39 to the 30-mile arc of the Tampa ASR, clockwise along the Tampa ASR 30-mileDME arc to Sarasota, FL, 10-mile arc, then counterclockwise along the Sarasota10-mile DME arc to the point of beginning.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 71.501</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>3. andSection; 71.501 is amended as follows:<ITAG tagnum="74">Tampa International Airport, FL [Removed]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Issued in Washington, DC, on October 11, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Harold W. Becker, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Manager, Airspace-Rules and Aeronautical Information Division.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-13-M 001</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-24412 Filed 10-16-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-13-C</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>