<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR891121-0115 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.11-21-89.f2.A1114</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 50-271]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Corp.; Consideration of Issuance of Amendmentto Facility Operating License and Proposed No Significant Hazards ConsiderationDetermination and Opportunity for Hearing</ITAG>The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is consideringissuance of an amendment to Facility Operating License No. DPR-28 issuedto Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Corporation (the licensee) for operationof Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power Station located south of Brattleboro, Vermont.The proposed amendment would change the Limiting Conditions of Operation(LCO) for the Uninterruptible Power Supply (UPS) out-of-service time. Thischange would be from 7-days to 30-days before requiring initiation of aplant shutdown. The UPSs provide power to certain Low Pressure CoolantInjection (LPCI) valves, and assure power is available in the event offsitepower is lost and the diesel fails to function.In conjunction with this request, on November 9, 1989, the licensee requested,and the staff granted a temporary waiver of compliance from the 7-day LCOin the ACTION STATEMENT for the Uninterruptible Power Supply (TechnicalSpecification 3.5.A.4). Vermont Yankee entered this Action Statement November5, 1989 due to a component failure in the power supply. The licensee hadprevious difficulty with these power supplies and was unsure of their abilityto complete repairs within the limits of the LCO. The licensee requestedthe LCO be extended to 30-days for the duration of this fuel cycle (untilfall 1990) when the UPSs will be replaced. Based on the licensee's submittalof November 9, 1989, the technical staff's evaluation, and after conferringwith the Region, the Division of Reactor Projects issued a temporary waiverof compliance. By Friday, November 10, 1989, the licensee had returnedthe inoperative UPS to service; however, the staff intends to proceed withthe requested amendment to the technical specifications.Before issuance of the proposed license amendment, the Commission willhave made findings required by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended(the Act) and the Commission's regulations.The Commission has made a proposed determination that the request for amendmentinvolves no significant hazards consideration. Under the Commission's regulationsin 10 CFR 50.92, this means that operation of the facility in accordancewith the proposed amendment would not (1) involve a significant increasein the probability or consequences of an accident previously evaluated;or (2) create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident fromany accident previously evaluated; or (3) involve a significant reductionin a margin of safety.The licensee has reviewed the proposed change utilizing the criteria specifiedin 10 CFR 50.92 and has provided an analysis that is summarized below.<ITAG tagnum="21">The Vermont Yankee FSAR addresses the consequences and mitigationof any postulated accidents in conjunction with a single failure and lossof off-site power. The single failure of the DG and Loss of a UPS trainis not currently bounded by the safety analysis. However, Vermont Yankeeconsiders the loss of a UPS train to be addressed by the availability ofan additional off-site power source immediately available and accessiblefrom the Control Room. This is the tie-in to the Vernon Hydro Dam. Further,Vermont Yankee believes that the new LOCA analysis recently completed usingthe Vermont Yankee Analysis Method, which demonstrates that one core spraypump is sufficient to keep the PCT well below the 10 CFR 50.46 limit of2,200anddegrees;F, indicates that this proposed change does not significantlyincrease the probability or consequences of a previously evaluated accident.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">This proposed change does not change the function of the LPCI System,only the LCO out of service time for the UPS power source to be used duringthe 1989/1990 operating cycle, and therefore, does not create the possibilityof a new or different kind of accident from any accident previously evaluated.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Recent analyses by the licensee demonstrates that one core spray pumpis sufficient to keep the PCT well below the 10 CFR 50.46 limit of 2,200anddegrees;F.The pumps and other active components of the system have been tested inaccordance with Technical Specification Section 4.5.A.4. requirements.Therefore, this proposed change presents no reduction in margin of safety.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">The licensee concludes that these proposed changes do not constitutea significant hazards consideration, as defined in 10 CFR 50.92.</ITAG>Therefore, based on the above considerations, the Commission has made aproposed determination that the amendment request involves no significanthazards consideration.The Commission is seeking public comments on this proposed determination.Any comments received within 30 days after the date of publication of thisnotice will be considered in making any final determination. The Commissionwill not normally make a final determination unless it receives a requestfor a hearing.Written comments may be submitted by mail to the Regulatory PublicationsBranch, Division of Freedom of Information and Publications Services, Officeof Administration, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC 20555,and should cite the publication date and page number of this FEDERAL REGISTERnotice. Written comments may also be delivered to Room P-223, PhillipsBuilding, 7920 Norfolk Avenue, Bethesda, Maryland, from 7:30 a.m. to 4:15p.m. Copies of written comments received may be examined at the NRC PublicDocument Room, the Gelman Building, 2120 L Street, NW., Washington, DC.The filing of requests for hearing and petitions for leave to interveneis discussed below.By December 21, 1989, the licensee may file a request for a hearing withrespect to issuance of the amendment to the subject facility operatinglicense and any person whose interest may be affected by this proceedingand who wishes to participate as a party in the proceeding must file awritten petition for leave to intervene. Request for a hearing and petitionsfor leave to intervene shall be filed in accordance with the Commission's``Rules of Practice for Domestic Licensing Proceedings'' in 10 CFR part2. Interested persons should consult a current copy of 10 CFR 2.714 whichis available at the Commission's Public Document Room, the Gelman Building,2120 L Street, NW., Washington, DC 20555 and at the Local Public DocumentRoom located at the Brooks Memorial Library, 224 Main Street, Brattleboro,Vermont 05301. If a request for a hearing or petition for leave to interveneis filed by the above date, the Commission or an Atomic Safety and LicensingBoard, designated by the Commission or by the Chairman of the Atomic Safetyand Licensing Board Panel, will rule on the request and/or petition andthe Secretary or the designated Atomic Safety and Licensing Board willissue a notice of hearing or an appropriate order.As required by 10 CFR 2.714, a petition for leave to intervene shall setforth with particularity the interest of the petitioner in the proceeding,and how that interest may be affected by the results of the proceeding.The petition should specifically explain the reasons why intervention shouldbe permitted with particular reference to the following factors: (1) Thenature of the petitioner's right under the Act to be made party to theproceeding; (2) the nature and extent of the petitioner's property, financial,or other interest in the proceeding; and (3) the possible effect of anyorder which may be entered in the proceeding on the petitioner's interest.The petition should also identify the specific aspect(s) of the subjectmatter of the proceeding as to which petitioner wishes to intervene. Anyperson who has filed a petition for leave to intervene or who has beenadmitted as a party may amend the petition without requesting leave ofthe Board up to fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, but such an amended petition must satisfythe specificity requirements described above.Not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, a petitioner shall file a supplement to thepetition to intervene which must include a list of the contentions whichare sought to be litigated in the matter. Each contention must consistof a specific statement of the issue of law or fact to be raised or controverted.In addition, the petitioner shall provide a brief explanation of the basesof the contention and a concise statement of the alleged facts or expertopinion which support the contention and on which the petitioner intendsto rely in proving the contention at the hearing. The petitiner must alsoprovide references to those specific sources and documents of which thepetitioner is aware and on which the petitioner intends to rely to establishthose facts or expert opinion. Petitioner must provide sufficient informationto show that a genuine dispute exists with the applicant on a materialissue of law or fact. Contentions shall be limited to matters within thescope of the amendments under consideration. The contention must be onewhich, if proven, would entitle the petitioner to relief. A petitionerwho fails to file such a supplement which satisfies these requirementswith respect to at least one contention will not be permitted to participateas a party.Those permitted to intervene become parties to the proceeding, subjectto any limitations in the order granting leave to intervene, and have theopportunity to participate fully in the conduct of the hearing, includingthe opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses.If a hearing is requested, the Commission will make a final determinationon the issue of no significant hazards considerations. The final determinationwill serve to decide when the hearing is held.If the final determination is that the request for amendment involves nosignificant hazards consideration, the Commission may issue the amendmentand make it effective, notwithstanding the request for a hearing. Any hearingheld would take place after issuance of the amendment.If a final determination is that the amendment involves a significant hazardsconsideration, any hearing held would take place before the issuance ofany amendment.Normally, the Commission will not issue the amendment until the expirationof the 30-day notice period. However, should circumstances change duringthe notice period such that failure to act in a timely way would result,for example, in derating or shutdown of the facility, the Commission mayissue the license amendment before the expiration of the 30-day noticeperiod, provided that its final determinaton is that the amendment involvesno significant hazards considerations. The final determination will considerall public and State comments received. Should the Commission take thisaction, it will publish a notice of issuance and provide for opportunityfor a hearing after issuance. The Commission expects that the need to takethis action will occur very infrequently.A request for a hearing or a petition for leave to intervene must be filedwith the Secretary of the Commission, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, Attention: Docketing and Service Branch, or may bedelivered to the Commission's Public Document Room, the Gelman Building,2120 L Street, NW., Washington, DC, by the above date. Where petitionsare filed during the last ten (10) days of the notice period, it is requestedthat the petitioner promptly so inform the Commission by a toll-free telephonecall to Western Union at 1-(800) 325-6000 (in Missouri 1-(800) 342-6700).The Western Union operator should be given Datagram Identification Number3737 and the following message addressed to Richard H. Wessman, ProjectDirector: (petitioner's name and telephone number), (date petition wasmailed), (plant name), and (publication date and page number of this <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice). A copy of the petition should also besent to the Office of the General Counsel. U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, and to R. K. Gad, III Esq., Ropes andamp; Gray, 225Franklin Street, Boston, Massachusetts 02110, attorney for the licensee.Nontimely filings of petitions for leave to intervene, amended petitions,supplemental petitions and/or requests for hearing will not be entertainedabsent a determination by the Commission, the presiding officer or theAtomic Safety and Licensing Board that the petition and/or request shouldbe granted based upon a balancing of the factors specified in 10 CFR 2.714(a)(1)(i)-(v)and 2.714(d).For further details with respect to this action, see the application foramendment dated November 9, 1989, which is available for public inspectionat the Commission's Public Document Room, the Gelman Building, 2120 L Street,NW., Washington, DC 20555 and at the Local Public Document Room locatedat Brooks Memorial Library, 224 Main Street, Brattleboro, VT 05301.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 14th day of November, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Morton B. Fairtile, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Project Manager, Project Directorate II, Division of Reactor Projects_I/II,Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-27336 Filed 11-20-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>