<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89720-0033 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.7-20-89.f2.A1032</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">National Highway Traffic Safety Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">49 CFR Part 571</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 89-15 Notice 1]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 205 Glazing Materials </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>National Highway Traffic Safety Administration (NHTSA),Department of Transportation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Grant of petition for rulemaking; request for comments.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This notice responds to an August 10, 1988 petition forrulemaking from Gila River Products Inc., Madico, Inc., Martin Processing,Inc. and 3M Energy Control Products. The petition seeks permission forapplying tinting film with 35 percent light transmittance to <T3>side and rear</T3> windows of passenger cars. The agency has decidedto grant the petition and to request comments to specific issues raisedin the petition. The light transmissibility requirements for passengercar <T3>windshields</T3> are not at issue. States are particularly invitedto comment whether there are any law enforcement concerns involving theoperation by motorists of vehicles with darkly tinted window film and whetherthere is a need for Federal regulation of aftermarket films. The commentsreceived in response to this notice will aid the agency in deciding whetherto propose any changes to the current requirements.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>Comments must be received on or before September 18, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>Comments should refer to the Docket and notice numbersset forth above and be submitted (preferably in ten copies) to the docketSection, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, Room 5109, 400Seventh Street SW., Washington, DC 20590. (Docket hours are from 8 a.m.to 4 p.m. Monday through Friday.)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Mr. Jere Medlin, Office of VehicleSafety Standards, National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, 400 SeventhStreet SW., Washington, DC 20590. Mr. Medlin's telephone number is: (202)366-5276.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>On August 10, 1988, a group of businesses,Gila River Products, Inc., Madico, Inc., Martin Processing, Inc., and 3MEnergy Control Products, submitted a petition for rulemaking on the issueof the light transmissibility for motor vehicle glazing. Specifically,NHTSA was petitioned ``to amend Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard 205to permit 35 percent minimum luminous transmittance plastic film on glazingin the side and rear locations of passenger cars.' The petition was accompaniedby a report, ``Safety Benefits and Costs of Tinted Vehicle Glazing'' bythe Illinois Institute of Technology Research Institute (IITRI). The IITRIreport summarized previous research conducted on the safety benefits andcosts of tinted vehicle glazing. The report also discussed the methodologyand results of an original study conducted by the IITRI to determine theeffects on driver performance of reduced transmittance glazing in sideand rear window locations.In a letter dated January 11, 1989, NHTSA notified Robert P. Davis, thencounsel to the petitioners, that it had granted the petition. The letterwent on to state: <ITAG tagnum="21">Please note that the granting of this petition does not necessarilymean that the current requirements of Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standard205, Glazing Materials, will be revised as requested. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Rather, the granting of this petition signifies that the agency believesthat a review of the issues raised in the petition appears to have merit.</ITAG>To aid in that review, the agency is issuing this request for comments.<ITAG tagnum="84">Scope of Request for Comments</ITAG>Since petitioners requested that Standard 205 be amended for ``glazingin the side and rear locations of passenger cars,'' this request for commentswill apply only to the issue of lowered transmissibility requirements forside and rear windows in passenger cars. Front windshields are not a subjectof this request for comments. Petitioners have asked NHTSA to ``permit35 percent minimum luminous transmittance plastic film <T3>on</T3> glazing in the side and rear locations of passenger cars.''All windows in passenger cars are currently required to have a transmissibilityof at least 70 percent. The potential impact of this petition on lighttransmissibility of glazing may be seen from the following example. Iffilm with 35 percent luminous transmittance is applied to side and rearwindows with 70 percent transmissibility, those windows would have a transmissibilityof 24.5 percent (.35andmultiply;.70=.245). Petitioners are aware of thisfact, noting with respect to the transmissibility levels discussed in theIITRI report, that: <ITAG tagnum="21">Since the film will reduce transmittance through the glass on whichthe film is installed, IITRI's findings presented in Exhibit andplusmin;1would regulate absolute transmittance levels, taking into account the installationof 35% minimum luminous transmittance film. (See P. I-5) </ITAG>This request for comments has divided petitioners' conclusions and findingsinto four broad categories of issues. First is the potential effect whichimplementing the petitioners' request would have on visibility throughmotor vehicle glazing and, in turn, on safety. Second is the possibilitythat adding the petitioners' film to windows would reduce injuries dueto laceration or ejection. Third is the potential change in driver comfortand health and vehicle design (including cost) that would result from addingthe petitioners' film on vehicle windows. Forth is the effect that placinglow transmittance film on vehicle windows would have on the ability oflaw enforcement officials to observe the actions of motor vehicle occupants,especially occupants in vehicles which have been stopped by those officials.In addition to responding to these four categories of issues, commentersare requested to address general questions raised by this petition. For easy reference, each of the issues or questions has been numbered.Commenters are requested to provide all supplementary data (especiallyquantitative data) necessary to fully explain their answers. <ITAG tagnum="85">1. Effect of Window Transmittance Levels on Driver Visibility andSafety </ITAG>1. A. Studies and References Cited in the Petition The petitioners state that driver perception or driver performance is atleast as good with tinted glazing as without. They cite numerous referencesand the original research conducted by the Illinois Institute of TechnologyResearch Institute (IITRI) in support of this claim. Several of the cited studies date back to the 1950's (Roper, 1953; Heathand Finch, 1953; Doane and Rassweiler, 1955). (Page 8-12 of the report.)In each of these reports, untinted glass with about 89 percent transmittanceis compared to ``heat absorbing'' glass with about 70 percent transmittance.For example, the 1984 Roper and Engel study compared windshields with 88and 79 percent trransmitance, respectively. Even so, each study indicatessome degree of reduction in visibility distance with reduced transmittance.In general, window tinting reduces visibility distance or target visibility.Moreover, most of these studies did not examine transmittances as low asthose requested in this petition. Further, this early research was conductedcomparing tinted and nontinted windshields. Finally, it is unclear whetherthe referenced studies are sufficiently applicable to support the hypothesisstated above, since both the petition for rulemaking and this request forcomments are limited to side and rear windows. (01) The agency seeks comment on the applicability of the referenced studiesto the safety of glazing with a low level of light transmittance on sideand rear windows for passenger cars, and the appropriateness of the conclusionsthat the petitioners have drawn from this research. The agency solicitsany original, newer research available that may demonstrate a correlationbetween light transmittance and object visibility. The agency is particularlyinterested in studies on effect of glazing with a low level of light transmittanceon front side windows of passenger cars and on drivers' ability to pickup movement in the area of peripheral vision, an ability which is criticalin avoiding collisions or near misses. The petitioners cite studies (e.g., Rockwell, 1970, Burger, 1977, and Mortimer,1971) which conclude that visibility through side and rear glazing affectsa small percentage of crashes. These studies all were conducted duringthe 1970's, a time when passenger cars very rarely had tinting appliedto side and rear windows.(02) The agency seeks comments on these studies and whether they supportview that darker tinting is consistent with the needs of motor vehiclesafety. The agency solicits any original, newer research that supportsor refutes the petitioners' hypothesis.The petitioners cite references indicating that other factors such as headlampphotometrics, window distortion, haze, headlamp dirt, headlamp aim, roadcurvature, pedestrian location, pedestrian reflectance, and presence ofa glare vehicle, affect visibility more than tinting would.(03) The agency seeks comment on whether the fact that environmental factorscan cause reduced visibility should lead the agency to permit darker film,which may further reduce visibility.(04) Please comment on whether forward field of view targets are seen bythe driver through the driver's side window and thus, this window has criticalzones of vision as does the windshield. As previously stated, the petitionerdid not petition to change light transmittance values for windshields.(Reference: January 1989 Japan Society of Automotive Engineers (JSAE) Vol.10 No. 1 Paper by Naofumi Nagaike and Yukio Hoshino titled ``A Study ofDriver's Forward Fields of Direct View for Large Trucks.'')1. B. Glare ReductionThe petitioners cite many references showing that tinted windows reduceglare. They state that reduced glare will lead to better visibility andimprove driver performance because of increased driver comfort. There islittle doubt that window tinting reduces glare. The tinting reduces lighttransmittance which reduces the amount of glare light reaching a driver'seyes. However, this is mainly true for windshields, which were not at issuein the petition and are not at issue in this request for comments. Thequestion is whether the reduction of glare as a result of tinting in oron side and rear windows improves driver performance and/or driver visibility.One of the major references cited by the petitioners is a 1955 report byDoane and Rassweiler. The IITRI test report states that these researchers``demonstrated that reduced masking attributable to glare reduction bytinted glazing compensated entirely for the visual effect of reduced brightness.''An examination of the paper shows that although this statement appearsto be true for a few selected times and conditions in the Doane and Rassweilertests, it is not generally true. Throughout most of the visibility/glareencounter situations, seeing distance is greater through clear windows.The best visibility for ``heat-absorbing'' windows occurs under the test(nighttime) conditions where both of the two vehicles approaching eachother are equipped with new headlamps, all headlamps are properly aimed,and the target has the highest reflectance (7 percent as opposed to 3 percent).For almost a half a mile before the vehicles meet, seeing distance is aboutthe same through both types of windshield. On the other hand, immediatelyafter the vehicles have passed one another, visibility distance throughclear windows is about 5 to 10 percent greater through the clear glassthan through the tinted glass, indicating a slower dark adaptation forthe driver of the vehicle with darker windshields. Thus, it appears thatthis study does not support the hypothesis stated above. In addition, thisreport does not address effects of glazing tinted to 35 percent transmittanceor less. (05) Comments are solicited on the above report and agency analysis. The petitioners also indicated that reduced transmittance of rear windowswill reduce ``veiling'' glare. Petitioners define this as:<ITAG tagnum="20">produced when light is uniformly scattered from a reflecting or transparentsurface with scratches, dust, or surface irregularities that scatter lightuniformly across the surface. This scattering reduces the contrast betweentarget and background making the target difficult or impossible to detect.</ITAG>An example of ``veiling'' glare is the glare from the reflection on therearview mirror of the lights of a following vehicle. Miller <T3>et al.</T3> (1974), stated that reflection from a vehicle's windshieldis only a significant problem ``in the presence of condensed moisture onthe windshield or with excessively dirty windshields.'' NHTSA notes thatthese two causes of windshield ``veiling'' glare can be eliminated if thewindshield defogging system is used and if the inside of the windshieldis kept clean.Concerning glare reduction:(06) Miller <T3>et al.</T3> (1974), the reference cited by the petitioner for glare,state that ``veiling'' glare is a significant problem only ``in the presenceof condensed moisture or excessively dirty windshields.'' Do any data existto show veiling glare from a following vehicle is a problem when causedby reflection from other objects such as rearview mirrors?(07) Would veiling glare from the sides and rear be a problem in a passengercar, with scratched or dirty 24.5 transmissibility glazing (35 percentfilm applied onto 70 percent glazing results in a transmissibility of 24.5percent) on the side and rear windows, when approached from straight aheador from behind by a vehicle with high beams or regular headlights on?(08) Do rear mirrors with ``night settings'' or the electronic mirrorswhich automatically switch and are now available on some vehicles, effectivelyeliminate glare from lights to the rear of a vehicle?(09) Do most real world instances of disabling glare involve direct viewingthrough windshields? If so, how would tinting side and rear windows contributeto reduction of disabling glare?(10) What are the glare reduction advantages of tinted window film on sideand rear windows as compared to those from a driver wearing sunglasses?Would the same effects and benefits be achieved? If not, why not?(11) Petitioners assert that ``Sunglasses produce problems due to distortionand other factors that can reduce driving safety.'' (p. 13 of IITRI Report)What are the ``other factors'' reducing driving safety that may be a concernwith sunglasses but not window tinting?1. C. Drivers Field of View and Side Collision AvoidanceThe petitioners state that a 1970 paper by Lyman Forbes indicates thatdrivers ``spend most of their time looking at a small area in the forwardfield of view.'' The petitioners also cited a paper by Rockwell (1972)that indicates that 95 percent of driver foveal (the fovea, a small regionof the center of the retina, subtending about two degrees, is the siteof most distinct vision) viewing is limited to a small area of the windshield.The same reference states that side collision avoidance uses a small areaof the driver's side window and the passenger side windshield. A 1974 paperby Burger <T3>et al.</T3> demonstrates, however, that 5 to 20 percent of ``rear informationseeking glances'' in their study were viewed directly rather than througha mirror.(12) If the 5 to 20 percent of rear information seeking glances, as citedby the 1974 paper by Burger, are direct viewing; how is that consistentwith the finding on side collision avoidance in the 1970 Forbes paper?(13) Is urban driving around blind corners explored in the paper by Rockwell(1972), that indicated that 95 percent of driver forward viewing is limitedto a small area of the windshield?(14) Even if drivers spend most of their time looking through the windshield,is it appropriate to reduce the visibility through those fields of viewthat are used by the driver in side-collision or other collision avoidancesituations?1. D. Reaction TimeThe petitioners rely heavily on an IITRI experiment that sought to ``comparethe effects of various levels of side and rear transmittance upon driverperformance under a variety of roadway conditions.'' The experiment, whichinvolved a laboratory simulation of roadway conditions, was apparentlyperformed to show that tinted glazing causes no detriment to driver visibility.This experiment measured the reaction time required for a subject to locatetargets. The targets, which were light sources, were viewed through glazingwith a 91 percent transmittance for tests of direct visibility. For testsof indirect visibility, they were viewed, via a mirror with 94 percentreflectivity, through tinted films of various levels of transmissivity.The experimenters conclude that, ``the safety impact of tinting, as measuredby response time is not significant compared to other variables.'' Theagency notes that the targets used in the experiment may be representativeof high contrast objects such as the front view of another vehicle, butthey are not representative of low contrast objects such as the low reflectancepedestrian targets used in Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) lightingtests. Visibility of pedestrians and bicyclists is important under a varietyof circumstances, including turning, backing up, and pulling out of a parkingspace. The targets are also unrepresentative of adjacent vehicles thatare seen from the side or the rear.Concerning IITRI's experiment:(15) Does the use of high contrast lights provide a reliable way of evaluatingthe visibility of low reflectance targets such as pedestrians and bicycliststhrough front, side, and rear windows?(16) Since the IITRI sutdy was done with subjects from 18 to 45 years ofage, are the light requirements for older drivers not considered in thisresearch?(17) Since the IITRI study was conducted with subjects with ``normal''visual acuity and that many states issue drivers' licenses to drivers with20/40 vision, should more work be done to consider this type of driver'sability to detect and identify objects at low levels of light?(18) Should the issue of the effect of tinted glazing in combination withdirty or scratched glazing be considered, since the IITRI report identifieddirty and scratched glazing, but not combined effects, as significant impedimentsto driver visibility?(19) Please comment on the fact that accepted models such as ``Detect'',the copyrighted Ford Motor Company computer visibility model, availableunder a licensing agreement from Ford, show that an approximate reductionin seeing distance of some 97 feet for 55 year old drivers would occurif windshield transmittance was lowered from 70 to 24.5 percent (70 percent(glazing) andmultiply; 35 percent (tinting film)) when detecting low contrasttargets such as pedestrians with 8-12 percent reflectance?(20) Would a deeper tinted rear window in the car ahead of a driver reducethe driver's ability to look through the preceding car and see cars aheadof the preceding car? Would any reduction in transmissivity lead to anincrease in the reaction time to actions by the car ahead of the precedingcar? Besides these effects, what other consequences are there of reducedvisibility in this situation?(21) What reduction, if any, in the visibility or detection of high mountedstop lights (and other stop lamps) of cars ahead of the preceding car wouldresult if cars had 24.5 percent rear window light transmittance?1. E. Night Driving and Adaptation to DarknessPetitioners cited a study (p. 13) (McFarland, <T3>et al.,</T3> (1960)) that concluded ``both clear and tinted windshieldglass are impediments to vision under low levels of illumination for personsranging in age from 16 through 89 yr.'' Petitioners argue that driverscontinue to drive at night and ``there is not presently any evidence toindicate that the interaction of tinted glazing and dark adaptation hasin any way decreased driver safety''. This comment appear to have missedthe essence of the McFarland study. That report noted on page 52 that:<ITAG tagnum="21">The evidence from this study and other research clearly indicatesthat filters of all types including sections of tinted windshields interferewith every major visual function. There is no evidence to support the assertionthat tinted windshields aid vehicle drivers in any way.</ITAG>A recent Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE) paper entitled ``Visibilityfrom Motor Vehicles'' authored by Henderson, Smith, Burger, and Stein concludesthat: ``At night luminance levels, however, all relevant research has showntinted windshields to degrade visual performance.''(22) Please provide any additional comments on the studies cited aboveand provide any other available data or studies.(23) Is slower dark adaptation, particularly after two vehicles pass ona two lane road, an inescapable effect of tinted windows? Are any testdata available for glazing as low as 24.5 percent transmittance (35 percent(tinting film) andmultiply; 70 percent (glazing))?(24) Are there any data to support the claim that side and rear windowswith 24.5 percent light transmittance on passenger cars at night, givesequivalent or better performance than glazing with 70 percent light transmittance?(25) Nearly all of the past studies conclude that there is some impairmentof visibility distance and target identification when light transmittanceis reduced, particularly with respect to viewing low contrast targets atnight. Are there any data supporting the view that there is equal or betterperformance under such conditions?(26) Does darker tinting pose any specific problems for the growing populationof elderly drivers, particularly at night?(27) What data on night target detection and identification of low reflectancetargets exists for 24 to 70 percent transmittance glazing? Please describethe data, and provide findings, if any.(28) Are there any experiments regarding backing up at night with 24 to70 percent transmittance rear and side windows and only an inside mirrorand on driver's side passenger car mirror? Are the mirrors and/or backuplights helpful or should larger mirrors and/or brighter backup lights berequired on such vehicles?1. F. Window Transmittance and Mirror ReflectanceThe petitioners argue that trade-offs should be allowed between mirrorreflectance and window transmittance. They cite references that indicatethat there is very little direct viewing through side and rear windows.This appears, however, to be contradicted by the 1974 paper by Burger,<T3>et al.</T3> The petitioners also state that the effects of mirror reflectanceand window transmittance are ``multiplicative and interchangeable''. (p.51)(29) Please provide comments on whether the effects of mirror reflectanceand window transmittance are in fact ``multiplicative and interchangeable''.Please provide any data available.(30) Does the petitioner's claim that there is a multiplicative and interchangeablerelationship between these factors apply to backing up situations in whichdirect viewing is necessary and critical?The IITRI report calculates the total amount of light available to thedriver for visibility, when looking at the rearview mirror, as a combinationof mirror reflectance and glazing transmittance. They cite the overallamount of luminance at the driver's eyes as 21 percent. (70 percent glazingandmultiply; 30 percent reflectivity=21 percent). The report asserts that21 percent<ITAG tagnum="20">has been shown to be acceptable for side and rear viewing under themost critical roadway ambient lights conditions (Olson et al., 1974; Mansour,1971). It is likely that even lower levels of luminance are acceptablefor most roadway conditions and that the glare reductions obtained wouldsignificantly improve overall highway visibility, as indicated by Olsonand Sivak (1984).</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">No basis is provided for the latter assertion about lower levels ofluminance and glare reduction.The above calculation does not take into effect the reduced light transmittancethrough tinting. If tinting is taken into account at the lowest transmissibilitylevel, the calculation would be: 35 percent tinting andmultiply; 70 percentglazing andmultiply; 30 percent mirror reflectivity=7.35 percent luminanceat the driver's eyes.(31) Please comment on the validity of the two calculations made above.Which would be a more realistic assessment, assuming the driver is lookingat the rearview mirror in a passenger car with 35 percent tinted film appliedto 70 percent glazing on the side and rear windows?(32) If the latter assessment is valid, would 7.35 percent liminance atthe driver's eyes be an acceptable level of liminance under real life drivingsituations?(33) Why should higher reflectance mirrors be required in vehicles withwindow tinting in order to provide equivalent visibility? What is the advantageof higher mirror reflectance over higher light transmissibility throughside and rear windows?1. G. Consequences of Incorrect Film Applications on Glazing(34) Are there problems of distorted wision from incorrectly installedwindow film on rear or side windows?(35) Would improperly installed window film tend to allow moisture or condensationbetween the glazing and the film, thus impairing visibility?(36) How common is the problem of bubbling between the glazing and thefilm or creases in the film, that may arise from improper installation?(37) What other problems may arise from improper installation?(38) What mistakes are possible in installing film?(39) How may these mistakes be avoided or corrected?(40) Are there any data that show whether there is a greater or lesserincidence of incorrect tinted film installation among for-profit installersversus installation by individual passenger car owners?(41) How prevalent is the problem of abrasion of the applied film throughnormal use? Is the film vulnerable to abrasion from actions by pets, children,ordinary window washing, or other means?(42) How easy is it to remove the film once it has been applied? Can theindividual passenger car owner personally remove the film or would thisbe a task to be undertaken by professionals?1. H. Light Trucks, Vans, and Multipurpose VehiclesConcerning the issue of MPVs, vans and light trucks being permitted tohave tinted rear side and rear windows below 70 percent transmittance:(43) Should passenger vans have different visibility requirements thancargo vans and light trucks for rear and side windows?(44) Are the mirror requirements for larger fields of view and for outsiderear view mirrors on both sides of a vehicle a significant reason why thesevehicles may not experience any great loss of visibility?(45) Would mirror requirements have to be changed on vehicles with tintedfront side windows to provide equivalent visibility to those vehicles with70 percent transmittance front side windows?(46) Since vans and similar vehicles often do not have rear side windows,or even rear windows, do these vehicles belong in a separate category frompassenger cars for visibility requirements?1. I. Miscellaneous Visibility Issues(47) Is there a need for NHTSA to conduct an extensive research programto investigate what minimum visibility should be allowed through each vehiclewindow?(48) Should the visibility needs for each window be determined separatelyby careful scientific experiments using low contrast targets?(49) Are front side window and rear side window minimum visibility needssimilar? Is front side window visibility more critical than rear side windowvisibility? Please provide any available data on this issue.(50) Are portions of front side windows as critical to visibility as thewindshield? Why should they be different?(51) Is the rear window more critical to visibility than the rear sidewindows?(52) Petitioners claim that the 70 percent transmittance requirement isdesign based and not safety based. What is the transmittance through 70percent transmittance production glazing when mounted at the largest installationangles measured as the driver looks through the window (not perpendicularto the glass)? Please provide curves of transmittance versus installationangle.(53) Do states that allow tinted window film have any safety data to supportallowing less transmittance than the 70 percent required in FMVSS No. 205?Are test data available to demonstrate this?(54) Is glazing that reverts to clear when not exposed to light availableto address glare?Petitioners stated that haze is a serious problem, and is not to be confusedwith reduced transmittance. (p. III-9) They define ``haze'' as a ``generalterm used to describe light scattering by particles suspended in an otherwisenonscattering or transparent medium (Wiedner and Hsai, 1979).'' (p. 38)Research by Rompe and Engel, and subsequently by Weight, was referred to.Petitioners cited the research as showing transmittance levels as low asforty percent on side and rear glazing do not detract from driver performance,and that tinted glazing can substantially reduce the effects of haze.(55) The agency seeks comments on the relevance of these studies to thispetition.(56) Are there data that confirm tinted glazing can reduce the effectsof haze?(57) Are data on acceptable haze levels (allowed by ANS Z2.1) availableto show that lower window transmittance reduces the effect of haze?Petitioners stated that the growing use of larger and more curved glazingsurfaces in vehicles has resulted in problems ``with double images, distortion,astigmatism and differential deviation.'' (p. III-9) Petitioners assertthat at least in the case of double images, tinted glazing can be a substantialremedy.(58) Are there any data that support this assertion?<ITAG tagnum="84">2. Amelioration of Injuries From Laceration and/or Ejection</ITAG>The petitioners argue that tinted film applied to the interior of vehiclewindows makes the glazing perform as (Item 14) glass/plastic glazing whichhas been shown to be highly effective in preventing laceration injuriesand reducing ejections in automobile crashes. Petitioners cite researchby Clark and Sursi (1984) (p. III-12) indicating that an inner plasticlayer in glass-plastic glazing may be strong enough to hold broken glazingtogether to reduce partial ejection of occupants in side impacts. Petitionersstate that the IITRI believes applying tinting film on the side windowsof vehicles may reduce the number of occupant ejections, even without extendingthe film beyond the visible edge of the window.There is little dispute that glass/plastic glazing prevents lacerationand could reduce ejections. However, the agency is unaware of any datawhich show that application of tinted film to glazing will cause that glazingto perform the same as glass/plastic glazing.(59) Are there data on aftermarket-installed film to support petitioners'assertions?(60) How will the installer attach the plastic film to the existing glazingin a passenger car so that it will act as Item 14 glass-plastic glazing?(61) In the case of a new vehicle, if the film and the glazing is to beconsidered as glass/plastic glazing, what difficulties would there be inthe film installer's certifying it as such?(62) Besides lower costs, are there benefits to <T3>not</T3> requiring glazing to be attached so that it acts as glass-plasticglazing?(63) Can there be effective ejection protection if the tinted plastic filmis not attached to the window frame and if application is not certifiedas being done correctly?(64) Are data available to substantiate claims of ejection and lacerationprevention on consumer applied tinted window film?(65) Are there films available which can mitigate ultraviolet radiation,heat, glare, etc., have high transmissibility, and also help mitigate lacerationsand/or ejections?<ITAG tagnum="85">3. Health Effects, Protection of Interior Parts, and Driver Comfort</ITAG>The petitioners also raise several considerations that involve the generalhealth of motor vehicle occupants and light and heat damage to vehiclecomponents. The petitioners argue that tinted film will protect vehicleinteriors and occupants from the effects of ultraviolet (UV) light fromthe sun. They cite damage to upholstery fabrics and injury to occupantskin and eyes as reasons to permit lowered light transmittance on sideand rear windows. Damage to upholstery fabric due to UV light is not asafety issue, and therefore cannot be considered a valid reason to proposeamending FMVSS 205. Injury to the skin and eyes of vehicle occupants dueto UV light may be considered a health issue, but not a motor vehicle safetyissue.The references cited by petitioners indicate that excessive exposure toUV radiation may cause skin and eye damage. However, there is no indicationin these references that current ultraviolet exposure in automobiles exceedscritical levels. The petitioners argue that tinted films will protect vehicleoccupants from eye damage due to infrared (IR) radiation. They also combinethe discussion of the infrared radiation with heat loads and driver comfort.These last two issues are discussed elsewhere, so only the eye damage issueis addressed here.3. A. Eye Damage From Exposure to Infrared RadiationThe petitioners argue that tinted films will protect vehicle drivers fromglare and permanent eye damage due to radiation in the visible spectrum.Petitioners cited only one reference that discussed the possibility ofeye damage due to exposure to infrared radiation. No indication was giventhat infrared radiation within an automobile reaches damaging levels.(66) What data are there to demonstrate that the exposure of automobiledrivers to infrared and ultraviolet radiation is sufficient to cause permanenteye damage?(67) Are there clear films or high transmittance films which have the capabilityto block infrared and ultraviolet radiation?3. B. Adverse Effects on Driver Performance From Excessive Heat and GlareThe petitioners argue that reduced glare and reduced passenger compartmentheat will improve driver comfort and therefore, driver performance. Amongthe studies cited by petitioners, a 1980 study by Beshir and Romsey investigatedthe performance of ``four perceptual motor-tasks (reaction time, pursuittracking, eye hand coordination and mental multiplication) under four differentlevels of temperature: 74 degrees, 90 degrees, 100 degrees and 110 degreesFarenheit Wet Bulb Globe Temperature (WBGT).'' It was found that both heartrate and body temperature increased with ambient temperature. Subjectsalso indicated that they thought their performance decreased with increasingtemperature. Test scores, however, ``indicated that increasing the temperatureto 100 degrees and 110 degrees Farenheit . . . WBGT actually enhanced performanceduring the brief thermal exposure of this study.''Hockey (1986) studied effects of temperature on task performance with respectto time. He concludes: ``For cognitive/reaction time tasks there is a cleartrade-off of time and temperature, though marked impairments . . . arerare below about 35 degrees C (95 degrees F), unless exposure time is greaterthan about 2.5 hr. For the continuous performance tasks (tracking, vigilance,and dual tasks), however, the most striking feature is that decrement isalmost independent of exposure time, though very sensitive to temperatureincreases above about 30 degrees C.'' Though these studies may relate drivercomfort and performance, it is difficult to tell bacause the test tasksare not decribed in the reports. The studies appear to indicate that driverperformance is maintained at a higher temperature than is driver comfort.(68) The agency seeks comments on (a) the relationship of these studiesto safe driving, (b) the interior temperatures at which the driving taskbecomes difficult, and (c) the effects of tinted and clear films on reducinginterior temperatures. Quantitative responses would be most helpful. 3.C. Effect of Heat on Internal Vehicle ComponentsThe petitioners argue that tinted films will reduce heat and thereby reducedamage to internal vehicle components, specifically sensitive electroniccomponents. (69) The agency requests comments on the validity of petitioners' argumentson this issue. The petitioners claim that tinted window films will reduce vehicle heatloads. This, they argue, will reduce air conditioner size and use, andthus, cholorofluorocarbon (CFC) emissions will be reduced. This is nota safety issue. However, the agency is interested not only in the safetyeffects, but also the environmental effects of its standards. (70) What is the relationship, if any, of tinting to CFC emissions? (71) What is the relevance of this point in the future when use of CFCsmay be prohibited (as in Sweden) or it may be mandatory to capture andreprocess any emissions? (72) Are there clear or high transmittance films that will also block heat?4. Law Enforcement IssuesThe petition acknowledged that various state and local law enforcementofficials have raised concerns about the use of tinted films on motor vehiclewindows. Petitions asserted that they have thoroughly investigated theseissues. Petitioners stated that they ``believe that the concerns of lawenforcement authorities arise from misperceptions and from reactions tovery deeply tinted films for which this Petition does <T3>not </T3>seek approval.'' In petitioners' experience, law enforcementofficials' concerns have been alleviated once they ``become more knowledgeableabout tinted film and certain misperceptions have been corrected.''Petitioners asserted that once the law enforcement officials operate motorvehicles with 35 percent luminous transmittance film, ``their objectionstypically disappear'', and they realize that their ability to look safelyinto vehicle interiors is not impaired. Petitioners also asserted the following:<ITAG tagnum="21">Petitoners fully recognize the need to protect the safety of law enforcementofficers. Petitioners are not aware, however, of <T3>any </T3>instances in which law enforcement officers have been assaultedfrom behind the cover of tinted side or rear windows, much less from windowstinted with 35 percent luminous transmittance film.</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">Petitioners cited film cards that display various levels of luminoustransmittance, and lightweight portable photometric sensing devices asaids for law enforcement officials to monitor compliance with luminoustransmittance requirements.(73) What is the minimum transmittance for a vehicle's windows necessaryto enable a person to look through those windows and see objects, persons,and activities within the vehicle in bright sunlight? At night? (74) Have law enforcement officers encountered difficulties when tryingto identify occupants of vehicles or observe activities within vehiclesusing low percent transmittance film? How common an occurrence is this?(75) Are there documented instances in which law enforcemnet officers orother individuals have been unexpectedly assaulted by vehicle occupantswhose actions were obscured by tinting on the glazing? Is there any informationabout the light transmittance of the film plus glazing in these instances?(76) Please comment on the efficacy of film cards and photometric sensingdevices in monitoring compliance with motor vehicle luminous transmittancerequirements. <ITAG tagnum="84">5. Other General Questions Associated With This Petition</ITAG>Answers to the following questions will further help the agency in determiningwhether a rulemaking action on Standard 205 is necessary. (77) What should the light transmissibility standard be? Should the existing70 percent light transmissibility standard be raised, or lowered? Pleaseprovide a rationale and background materials and other information foryour recommendation. (78) How should light transmissibility be measured? Should the agency continueto measure it at a 90 degree angle to the glazing? Should the agency insteadmeasure light transmissibility according to the angle of installation ofthe glazing on the motor vehicle, and how the driver sees through the glazing?(79) Should the agency regulate directly the performance characteristicsof aftermarket window tinting film? If so, how and to what extent? Sincetinted film may be used not just on motor vehicle glazing but on boatsor buildings, how could NHTSA distinguish between film intended for motorvehicle applications and film intended for other uses?(80) The agency requests that domestic and foreign manufacturers supplydata as to what percentage of their passenger car fleet is sold with tintedglazing and what the tint (percent transmittance) is on these various vehiclesaccording to glazing type (both measured perpendicular to the glass andmeasured at the angle at which the driver sees through the glass as installedin his or her vehicle). (81) The agency addresses this question to domestic and foreign manufacturers.If the light transmissibility standard for passenger cars should be loweredto some point below 70 percent, will manufacturers offer, as standard oroptional equipment on new cars, tinted windows that conform to the lowerstandard? If so, will the tinting be in glazing itself, or will it be infilm applied onto the glazing? (82) Are there data at the state level that show the effects of aftermarketwindow tinting on visibility, increase in accidents or near misses, lawenforcement or other issues that are relevant to this request for comment?If so, please cite references, or provide the data.  (83) Why should windows remain tinted at night when technology now existsto change the transmission of glazing to avoid night visibility problems?(84) Is it important for a driver to establish eye contact with anotherdriver for detecting hand signals or intent in various traffic scenarios,which 35 percent light transmissibility film over 70 percent light transmissibilityglazing might make impossible? (85) How should questions of international harmonization on this subjectbe treated? The Japanese Ministry of Transport (MOT) plans to revise theirSafety Regulations for Road Vehicles by introducing new regulations onmotor vehicle windows to which tinted films have been applied. The MOTnotified member nations of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT)of the planned revisions through the GATT Secretariat in December 1988.In summary, the new regulations prescribe that the use of tinted filmswill be restricted to those which allow a light transmission of 70 percentor more after application. Side windows to the immediate left and rightof the driver are regulated. The revisions were scheduled to be implementedin March 1989.  Interested persons are invited to submit comments on the request for comments.It is requested but not required that 10 copies be submitted. All comments must not exceed 15 pages in length. (49 CFR 553.21). Necessaryattachments may be appended to these submissions without regard to the15-page limit. This limitation is intended to encourage commenters to detailtheir primary arguments in a concise fashion. If a commenter wishes to submit certain information under a claim of confidentiality,three copies of the complete submission, including purportedly confidentialbusiness information, should be submitted to the Chief Counsel, NHTSA,at the street address given above, and seven copies from which the purportedlyconfidential information has been deleted should be submitted to the DocketSection. A request for confidentiality should be accompanied by a coverletter setting forth the information specified in the agency's confidentialbusiness information regulation. 49 CFR Part 512. All comments received before the close of business on the comment closingdate indicated above will be considered, and will be available for examinationin the docket at the above address both before and after that date. Tothe extent possible, comments filed after the closing date will also beconsidered. The NHTSA will continue to file relevant information as itbecomes available in the docket after the closing date, and it is recommendedthat interested persons continue to examine the docket for new material.Those persons desiring to be notified upon receipt of their comments inthe rules docket should enclose a self-addressed, stamped postcard in theenvelope with their comments. Upon receiving the comments, the docket supervisorwill return the postcard by mail.<ITAG tagnum="21">Issued on: July 17, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Barry Felrice,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Associate Administrator for Rulemaking.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-17060 Filed 7-17-89; 2:06 pm]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-59-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>