<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89302-0036 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.3-02-89.f2.A1035</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 40 / Thursday, March 2, 1989 /Rules and Regulations <ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Health Care Financing Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">42 CFR Part 405 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[BERC-478-IFC] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Medicare Program; Fee Schedules for Radiologist Services </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA), HHS.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Interim rule with comment period.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>As required by section 4049 of the Omnibus Budget ReconciliationAct of 1987, this interim rule with comment period sets forth the relativevalue scale and the methodology for determining fee schedules upon whichMedicare Part B payment for radiologist services will be determined. Thismethod of payment will be implemented for services furnished on or afterApril 1, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>Effective Date: The amendments to the Code of Federal Regulationsare effective April 1, 1989. By statute, the fee schedules (which are notpublished in the Code of Federal Regulations) are effective for servicesfurnished on or after January 1, 1989. Initial implementation of the feeschedules will be for services furnished on or after April 1, 1989. <T3>Comment Date: </T3>Comments will be considered if we receive them atthe appropriate address, as provided below, no later than 5:00 p.m. onMay 1, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>Mail comments to the following address: Health Care FinancingAdministration, Department of Health and Human Services, Attention: BERC-478-IFC,P.O. Box 26676, Baltimore, Maryland 21207. If you prefer, you may deliver your comments to one of the following addresses:<ITAG tagnum="15">Room 309-G, Hubert H. Humphrey Building, 200 Independence Ave. SW.,Washington, DC. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">Room 132, East High Rise Building, 6325 Security Boulevard, Baltimore,Maryland. </ITAG>In commenting, please refer to file code BERC-478-IFC. Comments receivedtimely will be available for public inspection as they are received, beginningapproximately three weeks after publication of this document, in Room 309-Gof the Department's offices at 200 Independence Ave. SW., Washington, DC,on Monday through Friday of each week from 8:30 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. (phone:202-245-7890).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>William Morse, (301) 966-4520.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Background </ITAG>Currently, under the provisions of sections 1833 and 1842 of the SocialSecurity Act (the Act), payment for most physician and other medical andhealth services furnished under Part B of the Medicare program (SupplementaryMedical Insurance) is made on a reasonable charge basis through contractorsknown as carriers. There are some exceptions to the rule of Part B paymentsmade on a reasonable charge basis such as hospital outpatient services,which are usually reimbursed on a reasonable cost basis, and diagnosticlaboratory services, which are reimbursed on a fee schedule basis. In accordance with section 1842(b)(3) of the Act, when payment is madeon a charge basis, the charge must be reasonable. In determining the reasonablenessof a physician's charge for Medicare purposes, carriers are required toconsider the following factors and, in general, payment for the physicianservices is to be based on the lowest of these factors: andbullet; The actual billed charge for the service. andbullet; The customary charge for similar services generally made by thephysician for the service. andbullet; The prevailing charge in the locality for similar services. After adjustment for the annual deductible amount, Medicare pays 80 percentof the reasonable charge. The rules governing payment of reasonable chargesfor Medicare Part B services are set forth in Part 405, Subpart E (andSection;andSection;405.501through 405.580). <ITAG tagnum="84">II. Summary of New Legislation </ITAG>Section 4049(a)(1) of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act of 1987 (Pub.L. 100-203), which was enacted on December 22, 1987, amended section 1833(a)(1)of the Act by adding a new subparagraph (J) to require that, effectivewith services furnished on or after January 1, 1989, radiologist servicesare reimbursed at 80 percent of the lesser of the actual charge for theservices or the amount set under a radiology fee schedule. Section 4049(a)(2)of Pub. L. 100-203 added a new section 1834(b) to the Act to provide forthe development of a fee schedule for radiologist services. Section 411(f)(8)of the Medicare Catastrophic Coverage Act of 1988 (Pub. L. 100-360) enactedon July 1, 1988, made several amendments to section 4049(a)(2) of Pub.L. 100-203, and those changes are incorporated in our discussion below.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">Section 1834(b) of the Act provides for the following:andbullet; Section 1834(b)(1)(A) of the Act requires the Secretary to developa relative value scale to serve as the basis for payment for radiologistservices. Using this relative value scale and appropriate conversion factors,the Secretary is required under section 1834(b)(1)(B) of the Act to developfee schedules (on either a regional, statewide, or carrier service areabasis) for payment for radiologist services under Medicare Part B. Thefee schedules are to be implemented for those services furnished during1989.andbullet; Section 1834(b)(2) of the Act requires the Secretary, in developingthe relative value scale and fee schedules, to consult closely and regularlywith the Physician Payment Review Commission, the American College of Radiology(ACR), and other organizations representing physicians and suppliers whofurnish radiologist services. The Secretary is required to share with theseorganizations the data and data analysis being used to make the determinationsin developing the relative value scale and fee schedules, including dataon variations in current Medicare payments by geographic area and by serviceand physician specialty.andbullet; Under section 1834(b)(3) of the Act, the Secretary must, in developingthe relative value scale and fee schedules, consider variations in thecost of furnishing radiologist services among geographic areas and anydifferent sites of service. The Secretary may also consider other factorsconcerning the manner in which physicians in different specialties furnishthese services to ensure equitable payment amounts and to promote effectiveand efficient provision of radiologist services by physicians in differentspecialties.andbullet; Section 1834(b)(4) of the Act requires that the Secretary developpreliminary fee schedules for 1989 that are budget neutral; that is, thepreliminary fee schedules are designed to result in the same amount ofaggregate payment (net of coinsurance and deductible amounts) for radiologistservices in calendar year 1989 as would have been made absent the enactmentof section 4049 of Pub. L. 100-203. However, the fee schedules that areestablished for actual payment purposes for radiologist services furnishedin 1989 must be 97 percent of the amounts established in the preliminaryfee schedules. The fee schedules that will be effective in years subsequentto 1989 will be equal to the previous year's fee schedule updated by thepercentage increase in the Medicare Economic Index (MEI). In addition,each fee schedule is required to provide that the payment rate for nonparticipatingphysicians and suppliers is equal to the appropriate percent (as definedin section 1842(b)(4)(A)(iv) of the Act) of the payment rate recognizedfor participating physicians and suppliers.andbullet; Section 1834(b)(5) of the Act requires that the actual chargemade by a nonparticipating physician or supplier for a radiology servicethat is paid on the basis of a radiology fee schedule be limited as follows:<ITAG tagnum="15">_In 1989, the charge must be no more than 125 percent of the applicablefee schedule amount for the service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_In 1990, the charge must be no more than 120 percent of the applicablefee schedule amount for the service.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_In years subsequent to 1990, the charge must be no more than 115percent of the applicable fee schedule amount for the service.</ITAG>If a physician or supplier knowingly and willfully bills in excess of theseamounts, the Secretary may impose sanctions against the physician or supplierin accordance with section 1842(j)(2) of the Act, with the sanctions setforth in that section applying to suppliers in the same manner as thosesanctions apply to a physician. (A separate rulemaking document addressingthese sanction and penalty provisions will be developed by the Office ofInspector General.)andbullet; Section 1834(b)(6) of the Act defines radiologist services asradiology services performed by, or under the direction or supervisionof, a physician who is certified or eligible to be certified by the AmericanBoard of Radiology, or for whom radiology services account for at least50 percent of the total amount of charges made by the physician for MedicarePart B services.<ITAG tagnum="84">III. Consultation Requirements</ITAG>In accordance with the provisions of section 1834(b)(2) of the Act, wehave consulted with interested organizations in the preparation in thisinterim rule. As a part of this process, we shared data on draft conversionfactors and a national relative value scale with the American College ofRadiology (ACR), the Physician Payment Review Commission, the AmericanOsteopathic Association, and other interested organizations. The ACR developedits own relative value scale, which it shared with us. As discussed belowin more detail, we have decided to adopt the ACR's relative value scalefor determining the radiology fee schedules.<ITAG tagnum="84">IV. System of Coding</ITAG>To facilitate the reporting of items and services provided to Medicarebeneficiaries and the processing of claims for those items and services,codes are used in lieu of narrative descriptions. For purposes of the radiologyfee schedules, radiology services will be defined by codes contained inthe HCFA Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS). HCPCS was developed tosatisfy the operational needs of the Medicare and Medicaid fee-for-servicereimbursement programs and to ease communication between them by replacingvarious uncoordinated systems with a single national coding system. HCPCSis based upon the American Medical Association's (AMA) <T3>Physicians' Current Procedure Terminology, Fourth Edition </T3>(commonlyreferred to as CPT-4). In addition to CPT-4, HCPCS contains codes and modifiersdeveloped by other professionals and insurers to meet their reporting needsas well as the codes developed by HCFA, State agencies, and Medicare contractorsto meet the claims processing needs of the Medicare and Medicaid programs.While the coding system is designed to improve the ability of the physiciansand suppliers to communicate the services they furnish, more importantly,the codes offer a degree of specificity and uniformity that permits a uniformapplication of HCFA coverage and payment policies.HCPCS is designed with three levels of codes and modifiers. There is anupward progression of these codes from the lowest level (local assignment)to the highest level (national assignment) with HCFA and other third partiesmonitoring the entire system to ensure uniformity. The first level (nationalassignment) contains only the AMA's CPT-4 codes. These codes are all five-digitnumeric. The AMA maintains responsibility for this level of codes. Thesecond level contains the codes for physician and nonphysician servicesthat are not included in CPT-4, (for example, ambulance, durable medicalequipment, orthotics and prosthetics). These codes are alpha-numeric andare maintained jointly by HCFA, the Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association,and the Health Insurance Association of America. The third level (localassignment) contains the codes for services needed by the individual carrieror State agency to process Medicare and Medicaid claims. These codes areused for services that are not contained in either of the first two levels.The local codes are also alpha-numeric, but are restricted to the coderanges beginning with W, X, Y, and Z. These codes are used for items andservices not having the frequency of use, geographic distribution, or generalapplicability to justify a code assignment at a higher level.<ITAG tagnum="84">V. Provisions of the Interim Rule</ITAG>In order to implement the provisions of section 4049 of Pub. L. 100-203,we are adding new andSection;andSection; 405.530 through 405.533 to the regulationsto provide for the following:A. Effective DateInitially we have decided to implement this interim rule for services furnishedon or after April 1, 1989, instead of the statutory effective date of January1, 1989. This delay is necessary because of unexpected problems in calculatingbudget neutral conversion factors, which prevented publication of thisrule before January 1, 1989. If the statutory effective date remains unchanged,we plan eventually to apply the fee schedule to services between January1 and March 31, 1989. We will announce such a plan in the <T4>Federal Register.</T4>B. ApplicabilityEffective with services furnished on or after April 1, 1989, Medicare PartB payment for radiologist services will be equal to 80 percent of the lesserof_<ITAG tagnum="15">andbullet; The actual charge for the service; or</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">andbullet; The amount set under the applicable radiology fee schedule.</ITAG>In accordance with section 1834(b)(6) of the Act, radiologist servicesare defined as radiology services performed by or furnished under the supervisionof a physician who_<ITAG tagnum="15">andbullet; Is certified by or eligible to be certified by the AmericanBoard of Radiology (ABR); or</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">andbullet; Bills at least 50 percent of his or her total amount of chargesfor Medicare Part B services for radiology services.</ITAG>If a radiology service is performed by or under the supervision of a physicianwho does not meet either of these two requirements, the usual Medicarereasonable charge method of payment will apply. Thus, in order for thefee schedule to apply to a service, the service must meet both the followingcriteria: (1) The service must be a radiology service; and (2) the servicemust be provided by or supervised by an ABR-certified or ABR-eligible physicianor by a physician with at least 50 percent radiology service charges.C. Definition of Radiology Services    For purposes of the radiology fee schedules, the following services aredefined as radiology services:     andbullet; Services represented by level I HCPCS ``Radiology procedure codes(that is, codes beginning with the number 7) from CPT-4.    andbullet; Services represented by level II HCPCS codes that begin with ``R'',including R0070_Transporting of portable X-ray equipment.    andbullet; Services represented by level III (local assignment) HCPCS radiologycodes.    In defining radiology services, we considered prohibiting the use of anylevel III (local assignment) HCPCS codes by the carriers. In fact, carrierswere advised in September, 1988 to convert any of their level III codesfor radiology services to CPT-4 or level II alpha-numeric codes by January1, 1989 so that the services requested by those codes would be subjectto national relative values. However, many of the carriers objected tothe total elimination of all local radiology codes and requested that wereconsider our decision. In support of their request, the carriers identifieda number of local codes for which there are no appropriate CPT-4 or levelII alpha-numeric codes.    We have accepted the carriers' recommendation and will include level III(local assignment) HCPCS codes in our definition of radiology services.These codes will be paid based on local relative values as described belowin section V.E.1 of this preamble. We expect that the number of local codeswill be small and that those carriers that were able to convert many oftheir local codes to CPT-4 or level II alpha-numeric codes, will leavethose conversions in place. we have begun to review all of the remaininglocal codes in use by the carriers and hope to further reduce their usethrough the conversion to an existing code or the assignment of a nationalCPT-4 or alpha-numeric code where appropriate.D. Services Not Included in the Fee Schedule<ITAG tagnum="81">1. Visit and Consultation Services    </ITAG>We are not including the visit and consultation services defined by thecodes in the Medicare section of CPT-4 on the radiology fee schedule. Weconsidered including these services when they are performed by radiologistsbecause, in those cases, the services would often be related to the performanceof radiology procedures. However, if we were to consider visits and consultationsto be ``radiology services,'' it could result in many internists and familypractitioners being included as ``radiologists'' because of the ``at least50 percent of charges'' criterion. Although these visits and consultationswould not usually be related to radiology, if we were to view visits andconsultations to be radiology services, then these physicians and our paymentto them for visits and consultations would be subject to the radiologyfee schedule. We do not believe that this result was intended by Congressin enacting section 4049 of Pub. L. 100-203. In 1985, radiologists performedless than 1 percent of the total number of any single visit code and nomore than five percent of any single consultation service.    Moreover, when ranked by allowed charges, only one visit or consultationservice falls within the top 100 services furnished by radiologists. Thatservice is comprehensive consultation (CPT-4 code 90620) and its 1985 allowedcharges were $4.7 million. The top 100 services represent approximately80 percent of the $1.6 billion in allowed charges for radiologists in 1985.Therefore, only a small percentage of dollars paid to radiologists arefor visit and consultation services. For these reasons, we are providingthat visit and consultation services performed by radiologists continueto be paid for on a reasonable charge basis.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Codes for Injection Procedures    </ITAG>We are not including the codes for injection procedures associated withinterventional radiology procedures or diagnostic studies as radiologyservices on the radiology fee schedule. We do not consider ``injection-only''codes to be radiology services since they generally describe services performedby physicians other than the radiologists performing the associated radiologyservice. Further, codes for these separate injection procedures are notlisted in the ``Radiology'' section but rather in the ``Surgery,'' sectionof CPT-4. The performance of a given diagnostic radiology study may becoded with either a single code from the Radiology section for the completeprocedure or with two codes_one for ``injection only'' from the Surgerysection and one for ``supervision and interpretation only'' from Radiologysection. The CPT-4 definitions for ``complete'' and ``supervision and interpretationonly'' services are as follows:andbullet; Complete Procedures: If a single physician performs an internationalradiology procedure or diagnostic study involving injection of contractmedia and all usual preinjection and postinjection services are included,then the service is designated as a ``complete procedure.'' A completeprocedure includes injection of the necessary local anesthesia, placementof needle or catheter, injection of contrast media, supervision of thestudy, and interpretation of results.    andbullet; Supervision and Interpretation Only: If an interventional radiologyprocedure or diagnostic study is performed by a radiologist-clinician team,the study service is designated as ``supervision and interpretation only''code. This supervision and interpretation only code is used only when aprocedure is performed by more than one physician, for example, a radiologist-clinicianteam.    Numerous CPT-4 codes in the Surgery section describe only the injectionof contrast media, or the introduction of a catheter. For example, thenarrative for CPT-4 code 21116 is ``injection procedure for temperomandibularjoint arthrography.'' The narrative for CPT-4 code 36100 is ``introductionof needle or intracatheter, carotid or vertebral artery.'' These codesgenerally describe the services of a surgeon assisting a radiologist inthe performance of an arthrogram and artheriogram respectively. If the``complete'' radiology service is billed, no payment for the injection-onlyprocedure code is made, because payment for the complete procedure includespayment for the injection procedure.Both the ``supervision and interpretation only'' and ``complete'' radiologyservices will be included on the radiology fee schedule. Thus, to the extentthat injections are included in the complete procedure, they are encompassedin payment for the complete procedure under the fee schedule. <ITAG tagnum="81">3. Procedures Requiring Radiologic Guidance </ITAG>Some CPT-4 codes in the Radiology section represent the performance ofsurgical procedures under radiologic guidance; that is, they include boththe radiologic guidance as well as the performance of the actual procedure.These radiology codes are generally listed as ``complete procedure''. Otherradiologic guidance procedure codes involve only radiologic guidance, andthe procedure for which the guidance is provided is coded and billed separately(usually by a surgeon). These radiology codes are generally listed as ``supervisionand interpretation only''. When a surgical procedure is performed under radiologic guidance by a radiologist-clinicianteam, the surgical procedure itself is not considered to be a radiologyservice and is therefore not included on the radiology fee schedule. Onlythe radiologic guidance itself (as described by the appropriate ``supervisionand interpretation'' code is included on the fee schedule. However, ifthe surgical procedure is performed under radiologic guidance by a singlephysician, then it is coded as a ``complete procedure'' and is includedon the fee schedule. For example, if fluid is removed by a surgeon froma patient's chest cavity through a needle inserted under ultrasonic guidanceprovided by a radiologist, the surgeon bills for his service under code32000, ``Thoracentesis, puncture of pleural cavity for aspiration'' andthe radiologist bills under code 76934, ``Ultrasonic guidance for thoracentesis;supervision and interpretation only''. Code 32000 will not be on the radiologyfee schedule because it is considered to be a surgical procedure. Code76934 will be on the radiology fee schedule because it is a radiology service.If, however, the radiologist performs the thoracentesis alone under radiologicguidance then he would bill under code 76935, ``Ultrasonic guidance forthoracentesis; complete procedure.'' Code 76935 will also be on the radiologyfee schedule because it too is a radiology service. We note, however, that there are some procedures in CPT-4 that includeradiology services that will not be included as radiology services on thefee schedule because they are frequently performed by nonradiologists andthey are listed outside of the Radiology section of CPT-4 (for example,codes 43260 through 43272). We invite public comment on the appropriatenessof excluding these codes from the fee schedule. E. Physicians and Suppliers Subject to the Fee Schedule We will apply the fee schedule when paying any claim for radiology servicessubmitted by the following: andbullet; Physicians who have identified themselves as radiologists to Medicarecarriers. andbullet; Physicians whose charges for radiology services are at least 50percent of their total charges for Medicare Part B services. andbullet; Hospitals billng for the services of hospital-based physicians.andbullet; Multispecialty clinics listed under the HCFA Part B Medicare AnnualData System (BMAD) specialty 70. andbullet; Portable x-ray suppliers listed under HCFA BMAD specialty 63.andbullet; Any other supplier or nonphysician entity. A physician has identified himself or herself as a radiologist if the carrierreports that physician's charges in the BMAD system under specialty 30(radiology), specialty 31 (roentgenology, radiology_osteopaths only), specialty32 (radiation therapy_osteopaths only), or specialty 36 (nuclear medicine).Carriers will be required to review the bills submitted by all physiciansin their areas for the 1989 charge year (that is, July 1, 1987 throughJune 31, 1988) in order to determine which of them meet the ``at least50 percent of charges'' criterion. A physician or other entity may rebut the application of the fee schedule.For example, a physician may demonstrate that although he or she is a radiologiston the carrier's file, he or she is not ABR-certified or ABR-eligible.Similarly, a clinic or portable x-ray supplier billing for a technicalcomponent radiology service may demonstrate that the physician who furnishedor supervised the service was not ABR-certified, ABR-eligible, or did notmeet the at least 50 percent of charges criterion. (In order to be coveredby Medicare, such technical component services must be furnished underthe supervision of a physician (section 2070 of the Medicare Carriers Manual(HCFA Pub. 14)).) A BMAD specialty 70 clinic or a hospital may demonstrate that a physicianother than an ABR-certified, ABR-eligible, or at least 50 percent radiology-billingphysician furnished or supervised a radiology service for which the clinicor hospital is billing and thereby exempt the claim from the fee schedule.Carriers will be required to review the status of physicians for the purposeof determining whether they are subject to the radiology fee schedule onlyat the time of the annual fee screen update. (Update screens are preparedin the fall of each year and are effective on the following January 1.)At that time, carriers will determine which physicians continue to identifythemselves as radiologists or specialty 70 clinics and which physicianscontinue to meet the at least 50 percent of charges criterion. Carriers will make their determinations based on the most recent chargeyear data. The carrier will then decide whether the physician will be paidunder the fee schedule for the upcoming calendar year. Carriers will makethis determination for any entity that receives payment for services underMedicare Part B at the time of the update. Both in the initial year andin subsequent years, physicians and suppliers whose bills are to be subjectto the fee schedule will be permitted to rebut the carrier's assumptionthat the radiology services being billed were furnished directly or underthe supervision of an ABR-certified or ABR-eligible physician or a physicianthat meets the at least 50 percent of charges criterion. A new physician who identifies himself or herself to the carrier as a radiologistand who begins practice after an annual fee screen update and, thus, afterthe latest radiology status review, will, from the outset, be paid underthe fee schedule. The status of these physicians will be reviewed withthe status of other physicians at the time of the next fee screen update.A new physician who does not identify himself or herself as a radiologistwill be paid on a reasonable charge basis and the physician's status willbe subject to review at the time of the next annual fee screen update.As is true for other physicians, a new physician may rebut the carrier'sdetermination that the physician's billings are subject to the fee schedule.For example, a new physician filing as a radiologist may indicate to thecarrier that he or she furnishes the radiology services for which he orshe bills but that he or she is not certified or eligible to be certifiedby the ABR. Any physician not subject to the fee schedule because of not being identifiedas a ``radiologist'' or not meeting the at least 50 percent of chargescriterion may nevertheless demonstrate to the carrier that he or she shouldbe subject to the fee schedule. For example, such a physician may be anABR-certified physician who is not listed as a radiologist with the carrier.F. Development of the Fee Schedules for Radiologist Services As required by section 1834(b)(1) of the Act, the fee schedule for radiologistservices will be based on a relative value scale and appropriate conversionfactors. <ITAG tagnum="81">1. Development of a Relative Value Scale </ITAG>Section 1834(b)(1)(A) of the Act requires that, as a first step in developingradiology fee schedules, we develop a relative value scale for radiologistservices. In accordance with Congressional intent, we are providing a nationalrelative value scale that will be uniform across the country. (See H.R.Rep. No. 391, 100th Cong., 1st Sess. 397 (1987).) We had developed, based on 1986 BMAD data, a charge-based national relativevalue scale. It established relative values for professional services bycomputing the national average submitted charge for each service and weightingthe services in relation to each other, based on those national averagecharges. Consistent with our regulations (andSection; 405.555(c)(2)), ourcharge-based relative value scale valued the professional service at 40percent of the global service. This was accomplished by making the globalvalue 2.5 times the professional value. However, the national relative value scale that we have adopted, and thatis published as Appendix A of this interim rule, was developed by the ACR.It is based on extensive data, including the following: andbullet; A national charge survey sent to more than 3,000 radiology practices.andbullet; A ``magnitude estimation'' survey sent to more than 2,000 radiologists.(Magnitude estimation is a technique for providing comparisons about asubjective dimension, such as the level of technical skill needed to performa procedure.) andbullet; A survey of technical component costs. andbullet; Meetings of consensus panels that used the survey results andjudgments of the survey results in arriving at the values proposed by ACR.According to ACR, its panels were composed of members from academic andnonacademic settings, geographic areas throughout the country, all radiologyspecialty organizations, and all subspecialties of radiology, as well asrepresentatives from the College of Nuclear Physicians, the Society ofNuclear Medicine, and the American Osteopathic College of Radiology. We believe it is appropriate to adopt the ACR relative value scale, ratherthan the charge-based scale that we developed. As noted above, the ACRmethodology appeared to be thorough and inclusive of a wide range of interestsand views and represents a refinement to the charge-based relative valuescale. Appendix C of this interim rule compares the separate sets of valuesfor certain high-volume procedures. We have accepted ACR's relative values for all services except angiographyand interventional radiology. ACR's recommendations for global values formost angiography and interventional radiology codes exceeds ACR's charge-basedvalues for these two types of codes by more than two to one. For all othercategories of services, this is not the case. Because of this apparentdiscrepancy, and because of the low volume of office-based or global angiography,we are not adopting ACR's global relative values for any angiography andinterventional radiology. Instead, these services will be paid for underlocally-established global relative values. The angiography and interventionalcodes to be paid based on local global relative values are listed in AppendixB to this interim rule. Additional services, such as the level II ``RHCPCS'' codes, level III localcodes and services described by any new CTP-4 codes will also be paid basedon local relative values. This is because there are no current nationalrelative values for those services. (See Appendix B.) Carriers will establishlocal values based on advice from their medical directors and the relationshipsbetween charges and allowances for various services. We will review thelocal relative values established by carriers to ensure that those valuesare reasonable. We are aware that another recently released study establishes resourcesbased values for certain radiology services. The study by William C. Hsiao,Ph.D., et al., ``A National Study of Resource-Based Relative Value Scalesfor Physician Services'', <T3>The New England Journal of Medicine,</T3> 319 (1988), 835, was conductedby the Harvard School of Public Health and its subcontractor, the AmericanMedical Association, and funded by HCFA. We intend to review that analysisor other available data that are brought to our attention and, if appropriate,may propose revisions to the radiology relative value scale. Such revisionsmay be made effective at times other than the three-year update intervalsdiscussed below. Currently, in some carrier areas, three aspects of radiology services havebeen or can be billed. The physician can bill for the ``professional only''aspects of a service, such as reading an X-ray. This is a professionalcomponent billing. An entity can also bill for only the technical componentof a radiology service, such as the taking of an X-ray. Finally, therecan also be a bill for the complete or global service (that is, both theprofessional and the technical components). Therefore, a radiology servicemay technically be three services. Only a small amount of technical componentbilling is actually done under the reasonable charge methodology. Mostradiology service billings are on a global or professional only basis.The relative value scale in Appendix A has a global, professional, andtechnical component breakdown for each radiology service listed. The baseprocedure on that relative value scale is the professional component ofcode 71010, single view chest x-ray; that service has been given a valueof one (1.00). Some CPT-4 radiology codes have payment-related modifiers representingsomething other than global, professional, or technical services. For example,some may have a modifier of ``22'', which means that the procedure involvedunusual circumstances. Others may have a modifier of ``52'', which meansreduced services. In carrier areas where prevailing charge screens havenot been established for claims with payment-related modifiers other thanblank (global service), ``26'' (professional service), or ``TC'' (technicalservice) and those claims are instead paid on a case-by-case or individualconsideration basis, this practice will be continued during 1989. If acarrier currently establishes screens for radiology codes with other thanblank, ``26'' or ``TC'' modifiers, the carrier will establish a local relativevalue for the service, as modified. (See Appendix B.) Effective for servicesfurnished on or after January 1, 1990, no payment-related unusual modifierswill be recognized for fee schedule payment purposes. We are recognizingthem for one year to give carriers sufficient time to phase out their use.We do not believe that these modifiers should continue to be recognizedsince the values established in the fee schedule are intended to representthe correct value for the HCPCS identified code, regardless of whetheror not unusual circumstances were associated with furnishing the services.Also, in the relative value scales, values are established for only weeklymanagement radiation therapy codes. No values are established for dailymanagement. This is because, effective April 1, 1989, payment will be madeon only a weekly management basis. Weekly management services will includemost covered services furnished by radiation therapists or in conjunctionwith radiation therapy. Daily management services will no longer be recognizedfor a Medicare payment because of the difficulty of obtaining documentationshowing that daily physician services were provided to a patient. Weeklymanagement, on the other hand, can be payable even if a covered physicianservice is not furnished at the time of each individual treatment. By payinga ``global'' weekly treatment fee, fragmentation of services, which occurswith daily fees, will be reduced. <ITAG tagnum="81">2. Development of Conversion Factors </ITAG>As required by section 1834(b)(1)(B) of the Act, we must develop appropriateconversion factors to be used in determining the fee schedules for radiologistservices. The conversion factor is the dollar value used as a multiplierwith the service's relative value in order to determine the fee scheduleamount for the radiology service. The requirement under section 1834(b)(4) of the Act that the fee schedulesdeveloped for 1989 be budget neutral was a significant consideration inour development of appropriate conversion factors. Budget neutral meansthat the application of the fee schedule is to result in outlays for radiologistservices that are no greater nor any less than would have occurred in 1989had the fee schedules not been implemented.Another issue that we considered was the geographic basis for which conversionfactors should be computed, that is, at the locality, the carrier area,or the national level. The computation of one conversion factor for theentire nation would have the effect of creating one fee schedule applicablenationwide. We decided against this approach in favor of locality conversionfactors, because of the provision in section 1834(b)(3)(A) of the Act thatwe take geographic cost variations into consideration when developing thefee schedules.Locality-specific conversion factors will result in each locality's keepingthe same amount of aggregate payment for radiology services furnished byradiology providers as would have resulted if these services continuedto be paid under the usual reasonable charge methodology. Therefore, tothe extent that geographic variations in our Medicare allowed charges reflectgeographic cost variations, those cost variations have been consideredin the calculation of the conversion factor. The result will be a fee schedulefor each locality in the carrier's service area.We are planning, however, to have carriers compute a carrierwide conversionfactor to be available for fee schedule pricing in localities where nocurrent locality conversion factor can be computed. This could occur inlocalities where there are currently no portable x-ray suppliers or noradiologists. (See subsequent discussion regarding separate conversionfactors for these two groups). A carrierwide factor would be availableto be applied in such localities if a physician or supplier covered bythe fee schedule were to move into the area.The conversion factors (CF) will be computed by dividing the estimatedtotal Medicare charges that would have been allowed in 1989 under the reasonablecharge methodology for physicians and suppliers subject to the fee scheduleby the sum of each radiology service's relative value (RV) times the frequency(Freq) that the service (Proc) was performed by the individuals in theyear ending June 30, 1988. The estimated total Medicare charges are determinedby multiplying the lowest of the 1989 reasonable charge screen (RCS) thatwould have gone into effect absent the fee schedule under the provisionsof andSection; 405.502 and andSection; 405.555(c)(2) for each physician orsupplier (MD), by the frequency (Freq) with which the service (Proc) wasperformed in the year ending June 30, 1988. The quotient is then multipliedby .97 to yield the three percent savings required by law.Thus,<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>4,L0,b1,tp0,p8,8/1,g1,t1,9,1,r150,1</C><H1>CF = 0.97</H1><H1/><T4>T</T4><H1>(Freq MD</H1><T2>1</T2>Proc<T2>1</T2>)(RCS)+ . . . +(Freq MD<T2>1</T2>Proc<T2>n</T2>)(RCS) + (Freq MD<T2>2</T2>Proc<T2>1</T2>)(RCS) + . . . +(Freq MD<T2>n</T2>Proc<T2>n</T2>)(RCS)<H2>(Freq Proc</H2><T2>1</T2>)(RV Proc<T2>1</T2>) + (Freq Proc<T2>2</T2>)(RV Proc<T2>2</T2>)+ . . . +(Freq Proc<T2>n</T2>)(RV Proc<T2>n</T2>)<H1/><T4>U</T4> </ITAG>The conversion factors will be computed by each carrier and will be subjectto HCFA regional office approval.Thus, as required by the statute, we have set the fee schedule paymentamounts at 97 percent of the amounts, in the aggregate, that would havebeen paid in the absence of the fee schedule. To the extent the implementationof the fee schedule results in behavioral changes in the provision of radiologyservices, the fee schedule may not result in a three percent reductionin aggregate Medicare payments. We intend to monitor the aggregate amountsbeing paid under the fee schedule to determine how closely they approximate97 percent of the amounts that would have been payable on a reasonablecharge basis.One aspect that we will specifically evaluate will be the relationshipof actual charges to the fee schedule amount, compared with the relationshipof actual charges to the reasonable charge screens used prior to the feeschedule. Generally, under the reasonable charge system, Medicare paymentis based on the lower of the actual charge or the applicable reasonablecharge screen. In establishing the conversion factor, we used the applicablereasonable charge screen; however, we did not factor into the conversionfactor computation the effect of actual charges lower than the reasonablecharge screen. Our reasons for not doing this are that_andbullet; Situations in which physicians charge less than the reasonablecharge screen are relatively rare and insignificant when they do occur;andandbullet; The degree to which radiologists occasionally charged less thanthe reasonable charge screen in the past will likely be the same underthe fee schedule. Thus, our assumption is that the resultant conversion factors under thefee schedule are budget neutral (minus three percent) compared to whatwould have been paid under the reasonable charge system. During 1989 weintend to closely review both our experience under the fee schedule andhistoric charging practices of radiologists, to evaluate the validity ofour assumptions. If they prove to be incorrect, we will propose an appropriatedownward adjustment in the conversion of factor at the time of a subsequentupdate. Section 1834(b)(3)(B) provides that we may consider specialty differentialsin developing the relative value scale and fee schedules. We have decidedthat carriers should establish conversion factors for portable x-ray suppliersseparate from those applicable to all other entitles. Although portablex-ray suppliers are paid under the same codes as others, the technicalcomponent x-ray services that they furnish are generally different fromthe x-ray services furnished by others. Portable x-ray services tend toinvolve special equipment requiring extra time for assembling and dismantling.Also, the patients are often elderly nursing home or homebound patientsrequiring extra time and care for the set-up of the x-ray. Therefore, tothe extent that the experience of nonportable x-ray suppliers has influencedthe relative value amounts of the ``common'' codes, portable x-ray supplierscould be disadvantaged. A separate conversion factor accommodates for thisand the ultimate payment outcome amounts to a separate relative value scalefor portable x-ray suppliers. Other categories of radiology supplier, onthe other hand, do not often share their high-volume codes with other typesof suppliers. For example, radiation therapy codes are generally billedby only radiation oncologists. Therefore, generally, no other categoryof supplier has influenced the relative values established for these codes.As a consequence, no separate relative value scale or conversion factoris needed to limit the influence of one type of supplier on the most pertinentrelative values of another. <ITAG tagnum="81">3. Code Collapsing </ITAG>There are over 700 codes that we are considering to represent radiologyservices. We receive very few bills for many of those codes. Although weare not deleting or revising any of the radiology codes as a part of thisinterim rule, we are soliciting suggestions for radiology code deletionsor revisions. Any comments we receive concerning the revision or deletionof radiology codes will be considered as a part of any future changes HCFAmay recommend as a part of the CPT-4 procedure code update process. F. Method of Payment Under the Radiology Fee Schedules As discussed above in section IV.A. of this preamble, section 1833(a)(1)(J)of the Act requires that Medicare's payment for radiologist services is80 percent of the lesser of the actual charge or the radiology fee scheduleamount. However, section 1834(b)(4)(D) of the Act requires that the samepayment distinctions between participating and nonparticipating physiciansthat apply to prevailing charges as set forth in section 1842(b)(4)(A)(iv)of the Act also apply to radiology fee schedule payments. Section 4042(c)of Pub. L. 100-203, as amended by 411(f)(2) of Pub. L. 100-360, amendedsection 1842(b)(4)(A)(iv) of the Act to provide that the prevailing chargelevel for nonparticipating physicians is 95 percent of the level for participatingphysicians. Therefore, nonparticipating physicians' and suppliers' feeschedule amounts are equal to 95 percent of the fee schedule amount applicableto participating physicians and suppliers.In addition, sections 1834(b)(5)(A) and (B) of the Act place a limit onthe amount a nonparticipating physician or supplier can charge a Medicarebeneficiary for a service for which payment is made under a radiology feeschedule. In 1989 (that is, April 1, 1989 through December 31, 1989), thenonparticipating physician or supplier can charge no more than 125 percentof the fee schedule amount applicable to the service. In 1990, the limiton charges is 120 percent of the fee schedule amount and after 1990, thelimit on charges is 115 percent of the fee schedule amount. (Since a nonparticipatingphysician's or supplier's fee schedule amount is 95 percent of a participatingphysician's or supplier's fee schedule amount, the limit on the chargemade to the beneficiary in 1989 on or after April 1, 1989, for example,is 125 percent of the 95 percent.) When the charge limit specified by section1834(b)(5)(A) and (B) applies, the maximum allowable actual charges (MAACs),established under section 1842(j)(1)(B) of the Act, do not apply.Under section 1834(b)(5)(C) of the Act, if a physician or supplier knowinglyor willfully imposes a charge in violation of the limit on charges, theSecretary may apply sanctions against the physician or supplier (that is,excluding the physician or the supplier from the program or imposing civilmoney penalties, or both). These regulations do not include details regardingthe sanctions process. Regulations now being developed by the Department'sOffice of Inspector General will include details on this provision.G. Updating the Relative Value Scale and Conversion FactorsAs required in section 1834(b)(4)(C) of the Act, fee schedule values willbe updated annually by the percentage increase in the MEI.We will also revise the radiology fee schedules at least every three years,primarily for the purpose of adding new services or new procedure codes.Until these revisions are made, carriers will pay for any new servicesor new codes under a local fee schedule (that is, on the basis of a localrelative value scale and the locality's conversion factor). (See AppendixB.) New services will be added to the national relative value scale feeschedules after we have had the opportunity to consult with the AmericanCollege of Radiology and other interested organizations regarding appropriatevalues for the new services.At the time of the revisions, new national relative values and conversionfactors will be established.If, after a fee schedule is effective, there is deletion of a CPT-4 codewith a cross-referral to a different current code, we will implement thatchange in the fee schedules when HCPCS changes in the reasonable chargesystem are being made. This will not involve the establishment of new feeschedule values.When there is merely a deletion of a code from HCPCS and no cross-referralto another code, there is no need to develop a new fee schedule value.Implementation of the deletion will occur when HCPCS changes are made inthe reasonable charge system.If there is a fragmentation of a current code and the new codes are notcomponents of the old (for example, procedure code X represents a proceduredone on either the right or the left side and that code is fragmented intotwo_one for the procedure on the left side and the other for the procedureon the right side), each of the one or more new codes will receive thefee schedule value of the predecessor code. Again, there will be no newfee schedule values involved and we will implement the change when theHCPCS changes are made in the reasonable charge system. If the new codeswere components of the old, the relative value of the old code will bedivided evenly among the new codes unless we instruct otherwise.If two or more ``component'' codes are collapsed, into a single new code,the fee schedule values for the resulting codes will be the sum of thevalues of the component services. The change will be implemented when HCPCSchanges are made in reasonable charge.When language revisions are made in the description of a given code, wewill make any appropriate changes in the code's relative value at HCPCSconversion time.H. Continuation of Reasonable Charge ScreensSince the radiology services furnished by physicians and suppliers whoare not subject to the fee schedule continue to be paid under the generalreasonable charge rules, we will continue to compute reasonable chargescreens for radiology services.Customary charges for radiology services will continue to be computed forall physicians and suppliers, including physicians and suppliers who aresubject to the fee schedule. Physicians and suppliers not subject to thefee schedule must continue to have customary charges computed for thembecause they will continue to receive payment for radiology services ona reasonable charge basis. Fee schedule physicians and suppliers also mustcontinue to have customary charges computed for their radiology servicesbecause, as is discussed below, those customary charges will be used tocompute prevailing charges.Carriers will have to continue to compute area prevailing charges for radiologyservices.In carrier areas where radiologists' charges are merged with those of otherphysicians to compute prevailing charges (that is, where there is no uniqueradiology prevailing charge), prevailing charges must be computed_to beapplicable to any physician not subject to the fee schedule_and those prevailingcharges must be based on the customary charges of both physicians subjectto the fee schedule and those who are not.In computing prevailing charges for radiology services, we will includein the array the customary charges of physicians and suppliers who aresubject to the fee schedule. This is because the concept of a prevailingcharge (that is, not the MEI-adjusted prevailing charge) is that it isa measure of how physicians in the area have been charging, not a measureof how they have been or will be paid. It is therefore irrelevant how Medicarepays physicians (on a reasonable charge or a fee schedule basis) when determiningwhether their charges, if available in our data system, should be usedin computing customary and prevailing charges. All actual charges, regardlessof our method of payment to the physicians, will be used. This is consistentwith our regulations at andSection; 405.504, which discuss how prevailingcharges are to be determined. That section does not indicate that onlycustomary charges of physicians under the reasonable charge system areto be used.<ITAG tagnum="84">VI. Regulatory Impact Statement and Flexibility Analysis</ITAG>A. Executive Order 12291Executive Order 12291 (E.O. 12291) requires us to prepare and publish aregulatory impact analysis for any interim rule that meets one of the E.O.criteria for a ``major rule''; that is, that will be likely to result in_andbullet; An annual effect on the economy of $100 million or more;andbullet; A major increase in costs or prices for consumers, individualindustries, Federal, State, or local government agencies, or geographicregions; orandbullet; Significant adverse effects on competition, employment, investment,productivity, innovation, or on the ability of United States-based enterprisesto compete with foreign-based enterprises in domestic or export markets.According to data from HCFA's BMAD system, allowed charges for radiologyprocedures performed by radiologists in calendar year 1986 were approximately$1.6 billion. Section 1834(b)(4) of the Act requires that the Secretarydevelop preliminary fee schedules for 1989 that are budget neutral. However,the fee schedules that are established for actual payment purposes forradiologist services furnished in 1989 must be 97 percent of the amountsestablished in the preliminary fee schedules.We anticipate that this interim rule will result in the following savings:<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>6,L2,i1,s20,r20,r20,r20,r20,r20</C><T4>Table I._Projected Medicare Savings as a Result of Fee Schedules forRadiologist Services \1\</T4><H1>FY 1989 </H1><H1>FY 1900 </H1><H1>FY 1991 </H1><H1>FY 1922 </H1><H1>FY 1993 </H1><H1>FY 1994</H1><ITAG tagnum="21">$15<D/>$35<D/>$40<D/>$50<D/>$55<D/>$60<F>\1\ Rounded to the nearest $5 million.</F></ITAG></ITAG>Although we have reduced the fee schedule amounts by three percent, ourestimates do not reflect a three-percent savings. This is due to the effectsof rounding to the nearest five million dollars, anticipated changes inthe behavior patterns of physicians, savings not being realized in theyear in which the service is furnished due to a time lag in billing, andthe regulation's implementation date of April 1, 1989 (which means thatonly six months of savings are realized).In addition, we anticipate that physicians, in response to this fee schedule,may change their behavioral patterns. These changes may include increasedutilization or increased intensity of services, in order for them to maintaincurrent levels of Medicare reimbursement.This interim rule does not meet the $100 million criterion nor do we believethat it meets the other E.O. 12291 criteria. Therefore, this interim ruleis not a major rule under E.O. 12291, and an interim regulatory impactanalysis is not required.B. Regulatory Flexibility ActWe generally prepare a regulatory flexibility analysis that is consistentwith the Regulatory Flexibility Act (RFA) (5 U.S.C. 601 through 612) unlessthe Secretary certifies that an interim rule will not have a significanteconomic impact on a substantial number of small entities. For purposesof the RFA, all physicians are treated as small entities.This interim rule implements sections 1833(a)(1)(J) and 1834(b) of theAct as amended by section 4049 of Pub. L. 100-203 and section 411(f)(8)of Pub. L. 100-360. We are preparing a regulatory flexibility analysisfor this interim rule because of the large number of physicians who willbe affected and the significance and potential controversy of these provisions.Section 1102(b) of the Social Security Act requires the Secretary to preparea regulatory impact analysis if an interim rule may have a significantimpact on the operations of a substantial number of small rural hospitals.Such an analysis must conform to the provisions of section 604 of the RFA.For purposes of section 1102(b) of the Act, we define a small rural hospitalas a hospital with fewer than 50 beds located outside of a MetropolitanStatistical Area.We are not preparing a rural hospital impact statement since we have determined,and the Secretary certifies, that this interim rule will not have a significanteconomic impact on the operations of a substantial number of small ruralhospitals.<ITAG tagnum="81">1. Impact on Physicians</ITAG>It is clear that the fee schedule established by this regulation will affecta substantial number of physicians. These physicians can be divided intothree categories. Those who are American Board of Radiology (ABR)-certified,ABR-eligible, or physicians for whom at least 50 percent of their totalMedicare Part B charges are for radiology services. As of December 31,1986, there were 8,345 radiologists practicing in the United States with6,365 being certified by their corresponding board (Physician Characteristicsand Distribution in the U.S., 1986. Department of Data Release Services,Division of Survey and Data Resources, American Medical Association, 1987).We expect that most of these physicians will be subject to the fee schedules.In order for the fee schedule to apply to a radiology service, the servicehas to meet the following criteria: (1) The service must be a radiologyservice; and (2) the service must be performed by or under the supervisionof an ABR-certified or ABR-eligible physician or by a physician with atleast 50 percent radiology service charges. Radiologists as a group hada Medicare participation rate of 40 percent in 1987 and a Medicare assignmentrate of 73 percent in 1986.As added, section 1834(b)(4)(A) of the Act provides that the Secretarywill develop preliminary fee schedules for 1989, that are designed to resultin the same amount of aggregate payments (less any coinsurance and deductiblesunder sections 1833(a)(l)(J) and 1833(b) of the Act) for radiologist servicesfurnished in 1989 as would have been made if this section had not beenenacted. Section 1834(b)(4)(B) of the Act requires that the fee schedulesestablished under this paragraph for radiologist services furnished in1989 be 97 percent of the amounts permitted under the preliminary fee schedulesdeveloped under 1834(b)(4)(A) of the Act. Consequently, the overall impactof the fee schedules on the radiology industry as a whole in 1989 willbe an average three-percent reduction in Medicare fee levels. For thoseyears after 1989, fee schedule values will be updated annually by the MedicareEconomic Index. At least every three years, new services will be addedas appropriate and the fee schedule system will be rebased using a newrelative value scale and new conversion factors.a. <T3>Participating Physicians.</T3> The three percent reduction in the feeschedule amounts will not necessarily result in a three percent reductionin Medicare payments to an individual physician. First, there may be redistributionsinvolved in the shift from the reasonable charge payment methodology tothe fee schedule. Payment for an individual service and for the particularmix of services furnished by a physician may be more or less than 97 percentof the amount the physician currently receives on a reasonable charge basisfor the same services. Second, there may be behavioral changes, for example,changes in the volume or mix of services a physician provides, in responseto the different amounts received under the fee schedule that would affectthe total payments received from Medicare. Finally, payments for any nonradiologicservices furnished by the physician are unaffected by the fee schedule.b. <T3>Nonparticipating Physicians.</T3> Nonparticipating physicians willalso be affected by this interim rule to the extent that their coveredservices will be subject to the fee schedule. Section 1834(b)(5)(B) ofthe Act places an upper limit on the amount that a nonparticipating physicianor supplier can charge beneficiaries. In 1989, the first year of implementation,the maximum allowable actual charge will be 125 percent of the fee scheduleamount. In the second year, it will be 120 percent of the fee scheduleamount, and, in the third and subsequent years, it will be 115 percentof the fee schedule amount. A nonparticipating physician's fee scheduleamount will be 95 percent of a participating physician's fee schedule amount.Therefore, in 1989, for example, the nonparticipating physician's uppercharge limit will be 125 percent of 95 percent of the amount allowed forparticipating physicians.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Impact on Portable X-ray Suppliers</ITAG>Portable X-ray suppliers bill using specialty code 63 under the HCFA BMADsystem. As of April 1988, there were approximately 440 portable X-ray suppliersin the United States. These suppliers account for slightly less than twopercent of all total allowed charges for radiology services.We are using a separate conversion factor for portable X-ray suppliersbecause if we were to use a combined conversions factor (that is, one thatincludes both portable X-ray suppliers and physicians furnishing radiologyservices) payments would be redistributed between portable X-ray suppliersand other physicians furnishing radiology services.We believe that the impact on these suppliers will be similar to the oneexperienced by physicians. Our rationale is the same as the one advancedabove for participating physicians.<ITAG tagnum="81">3. Impact on Beneficiaries</ITAG>We believe that this interim rule will have a negligible effect upon beneficiariesout-of-pocket expenses. Our main concern is the effect on Medicare beneficiariesout-of-pocket expenes on nonassigned claims. Congress has addressed thisconcern by placing an upper limit on the amount which a nonparticipatingphysician could charge beneficiaries. In 1989, the upper limit will be125 percent of the fee schedule, in 1990 it will be 120 percent of thefee schedule, and in 1991 and subsequent years it will be 115 percent ofthe fee schedule.C. Alternatives ConsideredOur consideration of alternatives is limited because of the provisionsset forth in section 4049 of Pub. L. 100-203. However, within this overallconstraint, we have latitude in establishing the relative value scale,and the conversion factors. In section V of this preamble, we discuss themethodologies that we considered for each of these policy issues and ourrationale for choosing a particular methodology.D. ConclusonMedicare payment for radiologist services will vary among individual participatingand nonparticipating physicians to the extent that there are differencesin the particular mix of covered radiology services they furnish to Medicarepatients and in the amount physicians charge for covered services priorto the implementation of this fee schedule.Similarly, Medicare payment for radiologist services provided by portableX-ray suppliers will vary among individual suppliers depending on how muchof their business is Medicare derived, and the amounts they charge fortheir services.<ITAG tagnum="84">VII. Other Required Information </ITAG>A. Interim Rule With Comment Period Section 4049(b)(2) of Pub. L.100-203 established January 1, 1989, as theeffective date for the implementation of the radiology fee schedule. However,for the reasons discussed below, we have been unable to meet that deadline.In order to achieve the objectives of section 4049 within a timeframe asclose as possible to the Congressionally-prescribed effective date, wehave determined that it is necessary to publish this regulation as an interimrule pursuant to the authority granted in section 4039(g) of Pub. L. 100-203.This regulation will be implemented April 1, 1989.The development of a new relative value scale and fee schedule for radiologistservices that meets the standards prescribed by Congress has proved tobe an exceedingly complex task. Congress directed that the fee schedulebe based on a variety of factors respecting the manner in which physiciansfurnish radiology services and that the fee schedule be equitable and promoteefficient and effective provision of those services. Congress also directedthat, in developing the schedule, we consult closely with the PhysicianPayment Review commission, the American College of Radiology, and otheraffected organizations. We have acted as expeditiously as possible to gatherdata, to meet with affected parties, to solicit their input on the designof the relative value scale and to discuss with them the numerous optionsthat have come under consideration. We have also sought to expedite theprocess through shortened timeframes. Despite these efforts, publicationby the January 1, 1989 effective date has eluded us.We had expected to publish an interim rule before January 1, 1989. However,shortly before publication, we discovered several methodological problemswith the computation of the conversion factors necessary for translatingthe relative values of the relative value scale into the payment amountsfound on the fee schedule. These methodological errors had the effect oflowering the payment for all services. After consulting with American Collegeof Radiology and other interested groups we determined that it was necessaryto delay implementation of the fees schedule until April 1, 1989 in orderto correct those methodological errors.Section 4039(g) of Pub. L. 100-203 provides that, if necessary, we mayissue regulations to implement certain provisions of that law, includingthe radiology fee schedule and other Medicare reforms, on an interim basis.Congress, in Pub. L. 100-203, charged the agency with developing and implementingseveral significant and complex payment reforms. Congress recognized, however,that the agency may not be able to both develop the regulations necessaryto implement these reforms and engage in the time-consuming and resource-consumingprocess entailed by the notice and comment procedure before the effectivedates which it prescribed. At the same time, Congress recognized that interestedparties should be given an opportunity to comment on implementing regulations.Therefore, it authorized the Secretary to provide a comment period afterimplementation of the regulation and, in the case of the radiology feeschedule, specified that there be close consultation between the agencyand affected groups. For reasons explained below, we believe that thisprocedure is a particularly appropriate means of accommodating the interestsand needs of all parties_the agency, the affected groups, and the publicat large_in this case.Publication of an interim rule is necessary in order for us to realizethe objectives that Congress intended the radiology fee schedule to achieve.Congress intended the radiology fee schedule to provide for an equitablemethod of radiology payment under which payment for those radiology proceduresdetermined to be overvalued would be reduced and payment for hitherto undervaluedprocedures would be increased. The fee schedule was also intended to achievea three percent budgetary savings. Congress, moreover, believed that thepublic interest would be served best if this new payment policy were putin place on January 1, 1989. The methodological errors in the conversionfactors would have resulted in the underpayment of all procedures, therebyfrustrating the goal of equitable payment among radiologists. Therefore,in order to achieve this goal, we felt it necessary to delay implementationof the fee schedule until the errors were corrected. Now that the errorshave been corrected, however, we feel it necessary to proceed as promptlyas possible.Were we to go through the traditional notice and comment process, we wouldhave to leave the current radiology payment policy in place for an extendedperiod of time subsequent to the date Congress intended the new paymentpolicy to go into effect. This would make realization of the three percentsavings more difficult. It would also be contrary to Congress's admonitionthat we put the fee schedule in place by January 1, 1989. We believe thatour delay to correct the erroneous methodology coupled with publicationof this regulation in interim form is necessary to preserve the objectivesof equitable payment, cost-savings, fee schedule integrity, and timelyimplementation to the maximum extent possible.In addition, the process we have employed in the development of this ruleand the process we will employ in the interim between publication of thisinterim rule and publication of a final rule are more than adequate toensure that all interested parties have an opportunity to voice their ideasand concerns and have them considered by the agency. As already noted,we have consulted closely and extensively with the American College ofRadiology and a variety of other groups through each step of the regulation-developmentprocess. Nevertheless, we are interested in comments and advice regardingchanges that should be made to this interim rule. Therefore, we are providinga 60-day comment period for public comments.Because of the large number of items of correspondence we normally receiveconcerning regulations, we cannot acknowledge or respond to the commentsindividually. However, in preparing the final rule, we will consider allcomments that we receive by the date and time specified in the ``Dates''section of this preamble, and we will respond to the comments in the preambleof that rule.B. Paperwork Reduction ActThis interim rule does not impose information collection requirements.Consequently, it need not be reviewed by the Executive Office of Managementand Budget under the authority of the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44U.S.C. 3501-3511).<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 42 CFR Part 405</ITAG>Administrative practice and procedure, Health facilities, Health professions,Kidney diseases, Laboratories, Medicare, Nursing homes, Reporting and recordkeepingrequirements, Rural areas, X-rays.We are amending 42 CFR Part 405, Subpart E as set forth below:<ITAG tagnum="76">CHAPTER IV_HEALTH CARE FINANCING ADMINISTRATION, DEPARTMENT OF HEALTHAND HUMAN SERVICES</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subchapter B_Medicare Program</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 405_FEDERAL HEALTH INSURANCE FOR THE AGED AND DISABLED</ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 405, Subpart E is revised to read asfollows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> Secs. 1102, 1814(b), 1832, 1833(a), 1834(b), 1842 (b)and (h), 1861 (b) and (v), 1862(a)(14), 1866(a), 1871, 1881, 1886, 1887,and 1889 of the Social Security Act as amended (42 U.S.C. 1302, 1395f(b),1395k, 1395l(a), 1395m(b), 1395u (b) and (h), 1395x (b) and (v), 1395y(a)(14),1395cc(a), 1395hh, 1395rr, 1395ww, 1395xx, and 1395zz).</ITAG>2. The table of contents for Part 405 Subpart E is amended by revisingthe title of the subpart, adding the titles for new andSection;andSection;405.530through 405.533, and revising the titles for andSection;andSection;405.551and 405.555, to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="76">Subpart E_Criteria for Determination of Reasonable Charges; RadiologyFee Schedules; and Reimbursement for Services of Hospital Interns, Residents,and Supervising Physicians</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Secs.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">405.530 Payment of radiologist services under a fee schedule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">405.531 Basic methodology for calculating radiology fee schedulesfor calendar year 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">405.532 Calculating radiology fee schedules for calendar years after1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">405.533 Special rules for nonparticipating physicians furnishing radiologyservices.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">405.551 Payment of charges for physician services in providers: Generalprovisions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">405.555 Payment of charges for radiology services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>3. Section 405.501 is amended by revising paragraph (a), redesignatingparagraph (c) as paragraph (d), and adding a new paragraph (c) to readas follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;405.501</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Determination of reasonable charges.</ITAG>(a) Except as specified in paragraphs (b) and (c) of this section, Medicarepays no more for Part B medical and other health services than the ``reasonablecharge'' for such service. The reasonable charge is determined by the carriers(subject to any deductible and co-insurance amounts as specified in andSection;andSection;410.152and 410.160 of this chapter.)<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(c) For services furnished on or after April 1, 1989, payment under MedicarePart B for radiologist services is governed by radiology fee schedulesthat are determined in accordance with the provisions of andSection;andSection;405.530through 405.533.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>4. New andSection;andSection; 405.530 through 405.533 are added to read asfollows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;405.530</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Payment of radiologist services under a fee schedule.</ITAG>(a) <T3>Purpose.</T3> This section and andSection;andSection; 405.531 through 405.533implement sections 1833(a)(1)(J) and 1834(b) of the Act by establishingfee schedules for radiologist services.(b) <T3>Method of payment.</T3> For services furnished on or after April 1,1989, the amount paid under Medicare Part B for radiologist services is80 percent of the lesser of_(1) The actual charge; or(2) The amount provided under the radiology fee schedules.(c) <T3>Definitions.</T3> For purposes of this subpart, the following definitionsapply:<T3>``Radiology services''</T3> means services represented by_(1) Level I HCFA Common Procedure Coding System (HCPCS) radiology procedurecodes (that is, all codes beginning with the number 7) from the Physicians'Current Procedural Terminology, Fourth Edition (commonly referred to asCPT-4);(2) Level II HCPCS alpha-numeric ``R'' codes, including R0070_Transportingof portable x-ray equipment; and (3) Level III (local assignment) HCPCS radiology codes. <T3>``Radiologist services''</T3> means radiology services furnished byor under the direct supervision of a physician_ (1) Who is certified, or eligible to be certified, by the American Boardof Radiology; or (2) For whom radiology services account for at least 50 percent of thephysician's total amount of charges made under Medicare Part B. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;405.531</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Basic methodology for calculating radiology fee schedules for calendaryear 1989.</ITAG>(a) <T3>General rule.</T3> For services furnished on or after April 1, 1989and before January 1, 1990, each carrier establishes a radiology fee schedulefor each locality in its service area based on a national relative valuescale and any appropriate local relative value scale multiplied by locality-specificconversion factors computed as described in paragraphs (b) through (d)of this section. (b) <T3>Relative value scales.</T3> (1) <T3>National relative value scale.</T3> HCFA establishes a national scale.(2) <T3>Local relative value scale.</T3> Each carrier establishes a local scale(at the carrier service area level) for radiology services that are notincluded in the national scale and that are not reimbursed on an individualor case-by-case basis. (c) <T3>Conversion factors.</T3> After separating the portable x-ray data fromall other data, each carrier establishes two conversion factors for eachlocality (one for portable x-ray suppliers and another for all other radiologyphysicians and suppliers) by_ (1) Computing the locality's total Medicare reasonable charges that wouldhave been recognized during 1989 under the reasonable charge methodology(see andSection;andSection; 405.502 and 405.555(c)(2)); (2) Dividing that amount by the sum of each radiologist service's relativevalue, multiplied by the 1989 charge year (that is, July 1, 1987 throughJune 30, 1988) frequency in the locality; and (3) Multiplying that amount by 97 percent. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 405.532 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Calculating radiology fee schedules for calendar years after 1989.</ITAG>(a) <T3>Annual update.</T3> Radiology fee scheduels for services furnishedin a calendar year after 1989 are established by updating the previouscalendar year's fee schedules by the percentage increase in the Medicareeconomic index as described in andSection; 405.504(a)(3)(i). (b) <T3>Revisions.</T3> Using the methodology set forth in andSection; 405.531,at least every three years_ (1) HCFA establishes new relative values; and (2) Carriers established new conversion factors. (c) <T3>New radiology services.</T3> New radiology services are added to thenational relative value scale at the time of a revision under the provisionsof paragraph (b) of this section. Until they are included on the nationalrelative value scale, these services are paid on the basis of local relativevalue scales, established by the carriers. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 405.533 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Special rules for nonparticipating physicians furnishing radiologyservices. </ITAG>(a) <T3>Fee schedule amounts.</T3> The payment amount recognized under theradiology fee schedules for a nonparticipating physician or a nonparticipatingsupplier is limited to the applicable percent (as set forth in section1842(b)(4)(A)(iv) of the Act) of the fee schedule amount. (b) <T3>Limit on actual charge.</T3> The charge made to a beneficiary by anonparticipating physician or a nonparticipating supplier for a radiologyservice for which payment is made under a radiology fee schedule is limitedas follows: (1) In 1989, the charge may not exceed 125 percent of the fee scheduleamount applicable to the service. (2) In 1990, the charge may not exceed 120 percent of the fee scheduleamount applicable to the service. (3) For years after 1990, the charge may not exceed 115 percent of thefee schedule amount applicable to the service. 5. In andSection; 405.550, the introductory text of paragraph (b) is revised,the introductory text of paragraph (e) is republished, and paragraph (e)(1)is revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 405.550 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Conditions for payment of charges for physician services to patientsin providers: General provisions. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(b) <T3>Conditions for payment for services of physicians to provider patients.</T3>The carrier pays for services of physicians to patients of providers ona reasonable charge basis or, for radiologist services, under a fee scheduleonly if the following requirements are met: <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(e) <T3>Effect of physician's assumption of operating costs.</T3> If a physicianor other entity enters into an agreement (such as a lease or concession)with a provider, under which the physician (or entity) assumes some orall of the operating costs of the provider department in which the physicianfurnishes physician services in the provider, the following rules apply:(1) The carrier makes payment under a radiology fee schedule or on a reasonablecharge basis only for a physician's services to an individual patient.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>6. Section 405.551 is amended by revising the heading and paragraphs (a)and (f) to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 405.551 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Payment of charges for physician services in providers: General provisions.</ITAG>(a) <T3>Scope.</T3> The carrier determines payment of charges for physicianservices to patients in providers in accordance with the general rulesgoverning reasonable charge payment in andSection;andSection; 405.501 through405.508, except as provided in paragraphs (b) through (f) of this section.(f) <T3>Rules for certain specialties.</T3> In determining the amount of paymentfor anesthesiology or radiology services furnished by a physician to anindividual patient, the carrier applies the rules in this section and inandSection;andSection; 405.553 and 405.555 in addition to the general rulesgoverning reasonable charges at andSection;andSection; 405.501 through 405.508and the rules concerning payment of radiologist services on a fee schedulebasis at andSection;andSection; 405.530 through 405.533. 7. Section 405.554 is revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 405.554 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Conditions for payment of charges: Radiology services. </ITAG>(a) <T3>Services to patients.</T3> The carrier reimburses radiology servicesfurnished by a physician to an individual patient on a radiology fee scheduleor reasonable charge basis only if the services meet the conditions forreasonable charge payment in andSection; 405.550(b) and are identifiable,direct, and discrete diagnostic or thereapeutic services to an individualpatient, such as interpretation of X-ray plates, angiograms, myelograms,pyelograms, or ultrasound procedures. (b) <T3>Services to providers.</T3> The carrier does not pay on a radiologyfee schedule or reasonable charge basis for physician services to the provider(for example, administrative or supervisory services) or for provider servicesneeded to produce the X-ray films or other items that are interpreted bythe radiologist. However, allowable costs for such services will be paidto the provider by the intermediary. (See andSection; 405.480 for providercosts, and andSection; 405.550(e)(2) for costs borne by a physician, suchas under a lease or concession agreement.) 8. In andSection; 405.555, the heading and paragraph (b) are revised, theintroductory test of paragraph (c) is republished, and paragraph (c)(1)is revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 405.555 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Payment of charges for radiology services. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(b) <T3>Services not furnished in providers.</T3> If the services are furnishedin a radiologist's office, a freestanding radiology clinic, or any othersetting that is not part of a provider, the carrier determines the amountof payment for the services under the general reasonable charge rules inandSection;andSection; 405.501 through 405.508 or the rules governing paymentunder a radiology fee schedule in andSection;andSection; 405.530 through 405.533.(c) <T3>Services furnished in providers. </T3>If the services are furnishedin a hospital radiology department or any other setting that is part ofa provider, the following rules apply: (1) The carrier determines the amount of payment under the payment of chargesrules for physician services in providers in andSection; 405.551 and thegeneral reasonable charge rules in andSection;andSection; 405.501 through 405.508or the radiology fee schedule rules in andSection;andSection; 405.30 through405.533. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(Catalogue for Federal Domestic Assistance Program No. 13.773, Medicare_HospitalInsurance Program) </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: February 16, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Terry Coleman, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Administrator, Health Care Financing Administration. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Approved: February 24, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Don M. Newman, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Secretary.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note:</T4> Appendices A, B, and C will not appear in the Code of FederalRegulations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4120-01-M019 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-4939 Filed 3-1-89; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4120-01-C</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>