<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89313-0054 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.3-13-89.f2.A1053</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Announcement of Western Washington Outer Coast, Washington as an ActiveCandidate for National Marine Sanctuary Designation; Intent To Preparea Draft Environmental Impact Statement and Management Plan; Intent To HoldPublic Scoping Meetings. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Office of Ocean and Coastal Resource Management (OCRM),National Ocean Service (NOS), National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration(NOAA), Department of Commerce. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>NOAA is naming the Western Washington Outer Coast asan Active Candidate for designation as a National Marine Sanctuary andwill proceed with the subsequent steps in the designation process. Thestudy area extends from Duntze Rock (north of Tatoosh Island on the northwesterntip of Washington State), 90 mi (145 km) southward along the coast to PointGrenville. For purposes of gathering information for developing a DraftEnvironmental Impact Statement (DEIS) and Draft Management Plan, the studyarea will extend landward to mean high water adjacent to State or federallyowned lands, and to mean low water where such boundary is contiguous tothe Makah, Quileute, Quinault, Hoh, and Ozette Indian Reservations, andinclude the waters seaward to the 12 mile limit of the territorial sea.The Western Washington Outer Coast study area encompasses an area of approximately1,242 square nautical miles (2,432 km2).Selection of a site as an Active Candidate formally begins the NationalEnvironmental Policy Act (NEPA) process; NOAA will prepare an environmentalimpact statement and management plan to examine the management, boundary,and regulatory alternatives associated with Sanctuary designation. To initiatethis process NOAA will hold scoping meetings in Washington State to solicitinformation and comments on the range of issues related to Sanctuary designationand management. Individuals and representative of interested organizationsand government agencies, including tribal governments are invited and encouragedto attend. Scoping meetings will be held on April 10, 11, 12, and 13, 1989. The firstscoping meeting will be held on April 10, 1989 at 7:00 p.m. in PhillipsLecture Hall, Aberdeen High School, 414 North I Street, Aberdeen, Washington.The second scoping meeting will be held on April 11, 1989 at 7:00 p.m.in the Little Theater, Peninsular College, 502 E. Lauridsen Boulevard,Port Angeles, Washington. A third scoping meeting will be held on April12, 1989 at 7:00 p.m. in the multi-purpose room in Forks Intermediate School,First Avenue and A Street, SE., Forks, Washington. A fourth scoping meetingwill be held on April 13, 1989 at 7:00 p.m. in the NOAA Auditorium, Building9, 7600 Sand Point Way, NE., Seattle, Washington. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2> Joseph A. Uravitch, Chief, orFranklin Christhilf, Regional Manager, Marine and Estuarine ManagementDivision, Office of Ocean and Coastal Resource Management, National OceanService, National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration, 1825 ConnecticutAvenue NW., Suite 714, Washington, DC 20235, (202/673-5126).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Selection Procedures </ITAG>Title III of the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act of 1972,16 U.S.C. 1431 <T3>et seq., </T3>authorizes the Secretary of Commerce to designate discreteareas of the marine environment as National Marine Sanctuaries to protecttheir special conservation, recreational, ecological, historical, research,educational, or esthetic qualities. The Act is administered by the NationalOceanic and Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) through the Office of Oceanand Coastal Resource Management (OCRM), Marine and Estuarine ManagementDivision (MEMD). Selection of a site as an an Active Candidate formallytriggers the National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) environmental impactassessment process. On November 7, 1988, Pub. L. 100-627 was signed into law. Pub. L. 100-627reauthorized, with amendments, Title III of the Marine Protection, Research,and Sanctuaries Act of 1972 (16 U.S.C. 1431 <T3>et seq.</T3>) (the ``Act''). Section 205 of Pub. L. 100-627 directsthe Secretary of Commerce to designate a Western Washington Outer CoastNational Marine Sanctuary not later than June 30, 1990. This notice ofActive Candidate status for the Western Washington Outer Coast is the formalinitiation of the documentation development phase of the Sanctuary designationprocess. Initially, a draft designation document, including terms of the proposeddesignation, a draft management plan to implement the proposed designation,and any proposed regulations needed to implement the terms of the proposeddesignation are prepared. Subsequent steps include scoping meetings; publichearings; preparation of a final environmental impact statement, finalmanagement plan, and final regulations; preparation of Designation Documentationand Findings; and designation by the Secretary of Commerce. Opportunitiesfor comment exist throughout this process and will be announced in the<T4>Federal Register</T4>, the local media, and other appropriate channels.In the development of Sanctuary designation materials, NOAA will describethe extent to which designation will fulfill the purposes and policiesof the Act, and discuss the degree to which: (1) The area is of special national significance due to its resource orhuman-use values; (2) Existing State and Federal authorities are inadequate to ensure coordinatedand comprehensive conservation and management of the area, including resourceprotection, scientific research, and public education; (3) Designation of the area as a National Marine Sanctuary will facilitatecoordinated and comprehensive conservation and management of the area,including resource protection, scientific research, and public education;and (4) The area is of a size and nature that will permit comprehensive andcoordinated conservation and management. Pursuant to section 303(b) ofthe Act (16 U.S.C. 1433(b)), NOAA will consider:(1) The area's natural resource and ecological qualities, including itscontribution to biological productivity, maintenance of ecosystem structure,maintenance of ecologically or commercially important or threatened speciesor species assemblages, and the biographic representation of the site;(2) The area's historical, cultural, archeological, or paleontologicalsignificance;(3) The present and potential uses of the area that depend on maintenanceof the area's resources, including commercial and recreational fishing,subsistence uses, other commercial and recreational activities, and researchand education;(4) The present and potential activities that may adversely affect thefactors identified in the andplusmin; 1-3 listed above;(5) The existing State and Federal regulatory and management authoritiesapplicable to the area and the adequacy of those authorities to fulfillthe purposes and policies of the Act;(6) The manageability of the area, including such factors as its size,its ability to be identified as a discrete ecological unit with definableboundaries, its accessibility, and its suitability for monitoring and enforcementactivities;(7) The public benefits to be derived from Sancturary status, with emphasison the benefits of long-term protection of nationally significant resources,vital habitats, and resources which generate tourism;(8) The negative impacts produced by management restrictions on income-generatingactivities such as living and non-living resources development; and(9) The socioeconomic effects of Sanctuary designation. NOAA will alsoinclude an assessment of its fiscal capability to manage the area as aNational Marine Sanctuary.In preparing the environmental impact statement and management plan (EIS/MP)to examine the management and regulatory alternatives associated with Sanctuarydesignation, NOAA will solicit comments from interested persons, groupsand organizations, the appropriate congressional committees, heads of interestedFederal agencies, the responsible officials of State, local and tribalgovernments, and the appropriate officials of the affected Regional FisheryManagement Council. This will be done during scoping meetings to be heldin the State of Washington prior to preparation of the EIS/MP, and duringpublic hearings to receive comments on the draft EIS/MP.<ITAG tagnum="84">History</ITAG>The Western Washington Outer Coast site was first reorganized for its highnatural resource potential and human resource values by placement on theNational Marine Sanctuaries Program Site Evaluation List (SEL) in Augustof 1983 (48 FR 35568). In 1988, Congress reauthorized and amended the Actand directed the Secretary, in section 205 of Pub. L. 100-627, to issuea notice of designation with respect to the Western Washington Outer CoastNational Marine Sanctuary, as generally described in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> Notice of August 4, 1983, not later than June30, 1990.<ITAG tagnum="84">Natural Resources</ITAG>Oceanographic CharacteristicsThe Western Washington Outer Coast site is affected by major oceanic currents,and by nearshore currents which are influenced by tide, wind, river discharges,and offshore submarine canyons. The Kuroshio, a principal North Pacificoffshore current, splits to form the California current (flowing south)and the Alaska gyre (flowing north). The point of divergence of these twocurrents migrates north and south seasonally. In the winter months theCalifornia current flows south well offshore of the study area and theDavidson current, which originates in southern latitudes, flows north,inshore along the Washington coast. In the summer months, the Davidsoncurrent disperses and the California current moves inshore flowing southalong the coast. Upwelling, which brings nutrient rich waters to the surface,occurs in the summer months due to prevailing northerly winds.Geological Features and HabitatActive plate tectonics caused by stresses between the Juan de Fuca, Pacific,Explorer, and American crustal plates provide the geologic setting forthe Western Washington Outer Coast study area. Characteristic of the westcoast, the continental shelf within the study area is narrow and steep,creating a sharp transition between the continental shelf and the deepabyssal zone. Glacial deposits compose the underlying sediments of thecontinental shelf. Deposits of sand and gravel, and less significant depositsof gold placers, coal, and gemstones are found along the shoreline andin coastal waters. A number of submarine canyons traverse the shelf atvarious intervals, although only the Juan de Fuca canyon extends withinthe boundary of the study area. These submarine canyons enhance upwellingto further enrich the productivity of coastal waters.The coastline environments include rocky headlands, seastacks and sea arches,exposed beaches, protected bays, and extremely diverse and productive tidepools.Fourteen rivers, which originate in the Olympic Mountains, empty into thestudy area. The Western Washington Outer Coast is one of the few regionsof the U.S. coastline which has remained rustic and undeveloped. The highwave energy and steep rocky cliffs make accessibility difficult, contributingto the lack of development along the shoreline. The abundance of offshorerocks and islands creates an ideal environment for a variety of seabirdsand mammal populations.Flora and FaunaThe study area lies within the Columbia biogeographical province. A varietyof marine algae contribute significantly to the foodweb which supportsthe significant fisheries, bird and mammal populations. Lush plankton bloomsare characteristic of the northern temperate region and occur periodicallyin the summer months. Eelgrass beds are important primary producers, servingas a food source and substrate for birds and intertidal species. The tidepoolswhich form around the seastacks and rocky outcrops provide an ideal environmentfor the extremely complex community of intertidal organisms.The diverse assemblages of algae and marine invertebrates support commerciallyand ecologically important species of fish. Salmon, halibut, groundfish,and finfish, as well as numerous species of shellfish are abundant in thestudy area.Many species of birds migrate through or permanently reside along the coastlineof the study area. Tatoosh Island, Destruction Island, Quillayute Needlesand Point Grenville serve as nesting and breeding grounds for a numberof bird species. The area supports the primary U.S. nesting area and thehighest continental population density of the bald eagle, federally listedas endangered under the Endangered Species Act. Other birds which nestand breed in the study area include: auklets, black oystercatchers, glaucous-wingedgulls, pigeon guillemonts, sooty shearwaters, three species of cormorants,common murres, petrels, tufted puffins, peregrine falcons (federally listedas endangered and threatened), osprey, scoters, and grebes.A variety of marine mammals inhabit the offshore rocks and islands of thestudy area. Tatoosh Island and the islands of the Quillayute Needles areused as a haul-out for northern and California sea lions. Destruction Island,Point Grenville, and areas off Cape Alava house harbor seals and are importanthabitats for the southern sea otter, federally listed as threatened. Seaotters have been transferred and released at Point Grenville and the populationhas successfully extended north along the coast. A variety of cetaceansare present off Washington throughout the year. The grey whale, federallylisted as threatened, migrates through the region annually.<ITAG tagnum="84">Human Uses</ITAG>The waters of the study area are used primarily for commercial (Indianand non-Indian) and recreational fishing. Tribal ceremonial and subsistencefisheries, as well as aquaculture are also dependent on the waters of theregion. The Olympic National Park borders a large portion of the studyarea along the coast. Hiking and wilderness camping are permitted alongthe Park's shoreline. Of the estimated 3.5 million annual visits to thePark, approximately one third are visits to the shoreline. The coastalarea is available to the public for marine educational and scientific researchopportunities. University researchers use portions of the study area forfield research and the gathering of baseline data.Four Indian Tribal governments, The Makah, Quileute, Hoh, and Quinault,live along the eastern boundary of the study area. These tribes harvestanadromous fish that pass through their usual and accustomed fishing grounds.These tribes also operate a series of salmon hatcheries, some of whichare maintained in cooperation with the Washington Department of Fisheriesand the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. Extensive archaeological work,oriented toward late prehistoric culture, has been conducted within thestudy area. A major excavation, considered to be one of the most significantin North America, was conducted near Cape Alava. This excavation beganin the later 1960's and spanned approximately 10 years. The archaeologicaldig uncovered a village that had been buried 400 years. Ozette Historicsites are found along the coast of the Olympic Peninsula, and a recordexists of shipwrecks in the nearshore. Some historic sites include: TatooshIsland Lighthouse, remains of WWII Army bunkers at Shi Shi Beach, and evidenceof placer mining.Commercial vessels sail into the Strait of Juan de Fuca to enter portsalong the strait and in Puget Sound. Cargo-carrying vessels traverse thewestern portion of the study area.Oil and gas exploration in the study area is being considered by the MineralsManagement Service (MMS) of the U.S. Department of Interior. In April of1992, MMS plans to conduct Lease Sale andplusmin;132 for offshore oil andgas exploration and development in Federal waters off the Washington andOregon coasts. Proposed Lease Sale andplusmin;132 includes a portion of thestudy area. According to present MMS plans members of the oil and gas industrywill be requested to individual their level of interest in Lease Sale andplusmin;132in November of 1989. If industry representatives indicates sufficient interest,MMS plans to proceed with the lease sale process.Navigational projects (dredge and spoil disposal) in waters adjacent tothe study area are maintained by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, SeattleDistrict. The U.S. Navy conducts defense operations in the study area,and while conducting these activities restricts access to certain partsof the study area including the islands of Copalis, Queets (Sea Lion Rock),Washington Coastal Warning Area, Submarine Test and Trail Areas 3 and 4,and Cape Flattery Warning Area.Existing Protection of Marine ResourcesSeveral agencies operate programs to protect significant resources withinthe Western Washington Outer Coast study area and to provide recreationaland interpretive opportunities. The Olympic National Park, which includesmuch of the shoreline, rain forests and mountains of the Olympic Peninsula,is managed by the National Park Service. Commercial and recreational fisheriesare managed by the State and Federal fisheries agencies. The U.S. CoastGuard is responsible for vessel traffic within the study area.The Park has been dedicated as a World Heritage Site and as a BiosphereReserve. Most of the rocky islands within the study area are divided amongthree National Wildlife Refuges (Quillayute Needles, Flattery, and CopalisWildlife Refuges) and are managed by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.All three refuges (excluding Destruction Island), Washington Island, thecoastal area bordering the Makah Tribe, and some coastal areas within theQuinault reservation are designated as wilderness area.The Designation ProcessThe management plan to be prepared for the proposed Sanctuary will specifythe goals and objectives of Sanctuary designation and describe programsfor resource protection, research and interpretation. The various administrativeand regulatory alternatives for Sanctuary management will be analyzed inthe environmental impact statement.Opportunities for public participation in NOAA's development of an environmentalimpact statement and management plan will be provided through scoping meeting,solicitation of comments on the draft environmental impact statement/managementplan and proposed regulations, and public hearings.The April scoping meetings will identify issues regarding the designationof the Western Washington Outer Coast National Marine Sanctuary and generatesuggestions for resolving them. The following are examples of discussiontopics: (1) Boundary alternatives, (2) management alternatives, (3) resourceprotection, (4) research opportunities and (5) interpretive opportunities.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: March 8, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Thomas J. Maginnis,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Administrator for Ocean Services and Coastal Zone Management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-5678 Filed 3-10-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3510-08-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>