<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89407-0021 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.4-07-89.f2.A1020</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="52">12 CFR Part 545</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[No. 89-1044]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Preapproved Securities Brokerage Service Corporation Activities</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Date: March 28, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Federal Home Loan Bank Board.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Proposed rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Federal Home Loan Bank Board (``Board'') is reproposingto amend 12 CFR 545.74, its federal association service corporation regulations,by inserting a new andSection; 545.74(c)(4) ``Securities brokerage activities,''renumbering subsequent paragraphs and making certain minor modifications,and inserting new andSection; 545.74 (f) and (g) entitled ``Delegation''and ``Appeals.'' In light of extensive public comments and Board reconsiderationof certain issues, the Board has significantly changed an earlier proposal.The purpose of these proposed amendments is to enable service corporationsto commence certain types of securities brokerage activities more quicklythan under the current procedures and regulations and without the needfor a case-by-case application procedure to the Bank Board, by designatingcertain types of securities brokerage and investment advisory activitiesas ``preapproved'' service corporation activities and permitting otherapplications to be approved or denied by the staff pursuant to delegatedauthority.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>Comments must be received by May 8, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>Send comments to Director, Information Services Section,Office of the Secretariat, Federal Home Loan Bank Board, 1700 G StreetNW., Washington, DC 20552. Comments will be available for public inspectionat the Board's Information services Office, 801 Seventeenth Street NW.,Washington, DC 20552.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Dean V. Shahinian, Deputy Directorfor Corporate Activities, (202) 906-7289; V. Gerard Comizio, Director,(202) 906-6411; Corporate and Securities Division, or Julie L. Williams,Deputy General Counsel for Securities and Corporate Structure, (202) 906-6459,Office of General Counsel; Cynthia Miller, Financial Analyst, (202) 906-7492,Kathleen V. Willard, Assistant Director, (202) 906-6789, Patrick G. Berbakos,Director, (202) 906-6720, Office of District Banks; Federal Home Loan BankBoard, 1700 G Street NW., Washington, DC 20552.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Background</ITAG>A. GeneralSection 5(c)(4)(b) of the Home Owners Loan Act of 1933, 12 U.S.C. 1464(c)(4)(B),provides that a federal association may invest up to three percent of itsassets in a corporation chartered in the state where the association hasits home office, provided that at least one-half of the investments inexcess of one percent are for community development purposes. The Boardhas implemented this authority in 12 CFR 545.74, which authorizes investmentsin various types of service corporations.The Board considers service corporations an important adjunct to traditionalassociation activities and recognizes the significant profit contributionsthat they may make. The Board also seeks to ensure that the associationsconduct activities in ways that do not entail undue risk to institutionalsafety and soundness.In recent years, the Board has received numerous applications for servicecorporations to conduct different types of securities brokerage activities.The application process for these filings entails review by the SupervisoryAgent at the District Bank; transmittal to the Board's Office of DistrictBanks, Office of General Counsel, and Office of Regulatory Activities forreview; and then submission to the Board.The Board's staff has noted that while certain applications raise legaland/or safety and soundness concerns or present unusual or problematicfacts, many applications present similar facts and seek permission to conductactivities structured in a way that either does not raise legal or supervisoryconcerns or that raises concerns that can be and have been addressed bythe Board, <T3>e.g.</T3>, by imposing conditions on the approvals. Such applicationsare regularly approved by the Board, and standard types of conditions ofapproval have been developed.The Board is sensitive to the importance of expediting the processing andreview of applications in the minimum time period necessary to satisfythe Board's interests in assuring the safety, soundness, and legality ofa proposed service corporation activity. As a result of this concern, theBoard has in the past delegated authority to the Supervisory Agents ofthe District Banks in certain applications that have been approved by theBoard. In these cases, the Supervisory Agent reviews the documents, analyzesthe materiality of any differences between the application approved bythe Board, and (if these are not material differences) may approve theapplication subject to the conditions that the Board has specified.B. Summary of First ProposalThe Board proposed amendments to 12 CFR 545.74(c) in Board Resolution No.88-303 (April 28, 1988), published at 53 FR 16147 (May 5, 1988) (``FirstProposal''). Section 545.74(c) lists activities in which service corporationsmay engage without prior approval. The First Proposal would have addedcertain securities brokerage activities to those that are preapproved inorder to eliminate the current application process. The First Proposalwould have created a new paragraph (c)(4), ``Securities brokerage activities,''in which certain securities brokerage services are preapproved, and wouldhave made corresponding technical changes.Section 545.74(c)(4), as first proposed, set forth a number of requirementsrelating to the manner in which the preapproved service corporation brokerageactivities could be conducted. The proposed limitations and conditionswere contained in two subsections: (i)(A)-(I), requirements relating tothe manner in which the business would be conducted, and (ii)(A)-(I), activitiesthat the service corporation would be prohibited from conducting withoutexpress Board approval. The First Proposal contained no delegation of theauthority to approve certain types of applications to the staff.Pursuant to the First Proposal, the type of securities brokerage activitiesthat the Board has routinely approved on a case-by-case basis would bepreapproved. For example, a preapproved type of service corporation wouldbe limited to executing transactions in securities on an agency or ``risklessprincipal'' basis because, typically, such transactions do not entail inventoryand other brokerage risks. Because sustained losses could raise supervisoryconcerns, preapproval would have applied only if operations are projectedto be profitable within one year. In addition, to qualify for preapproval,brokerage services were required to be provided in areas segregated fromthe areas of depository activities and advertised in a manner to distinguishthe service corporation from the insured institution in order to minimizethe opportunities for investor confusion between the savings accounts,guaranteed by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corporation (``FSLIC'')and the stocks and other securities which are not FSLIC-insured. Under the First Proposal, where a service corporation contracted with athird-party broker-dealer, the arrangement would not have been eligiblefor preapproval if the broker-dealer and its officers, principals, or ownershad been sanctioned and restricted with regard to securities activitiesby a court, governmental agency, or self-regulatory organization withina specified period of time. Any contract entered into with a third-partybroker-dealer would have been required to be directly with the servicecorporation and to provide that the broker-dealer would indemnify the servicecorporation for misconduct by broker-dealer personnel. A service corporation'suse of any association customer list would have been preapproved solelyfor its own business purposes and not for distribution to third parties.To continue the preapproved status, a service corporation would have beenrequired to provide the Supervisory Agent with certifications regardingthe adequacy of the service corporation's supervisory procedures and itsmaintenance of a separate corporate identity from the association. Theseare certifications that the Board typically has required of brokerage servicecorporations. Notably, under the First Proposal, a service corporation's eligibilityfor preapproval would not have been affected by the form of compensationof the service corporation's employees, who may be compensated on a salaryor commission basis. Until recently, the Board had limited its case-by-caseapprovals to those situations where service corporation employees werecompensated only on a salaried basis. After reexamining the issue, theBoard determined that such a safeguard does not need to be imposed by regulation,and, accordingly, the Board has permitted payment by commissions, salary,or salary plus bonus, to afford the service corporation flexibility instructuring its employment compensation arrangements. Thus, the proposedpreapproval criteria did not distinguish between commission or salary compensationof service corporation employees as a factor affecting preapproved status.Many activities, particularly those that the Board has upon applicationpreviously denied, would not have been preapproved under the First Proposaland would continue to require an application and consideration on a case-by-casebasis by the Board. The First Proposal specifically identified some ofthese activities, including executing transactions as a principal (exceptas a riskless principal); providing certain investment advisory services;paying referral fees to association employees; obtaining association customeraccount balances; soliciting specific securities transactions; indemnifyingthird-party broker-dealers; permitting non-registered employees to performother than clerical and administrative duties; and the association's providingmargin credit or entering certain contracts. The First Proposal also would have required any service corporation thatintended to engage in preapproved securities brokerage activities to furnishto its Principal Supervisory Agent, no later than 30 days prior to thecommencement of operations, a written notice of the identity of the servicecorporation and the brokerage services to be provided, copies of all contractualagreements and memoranda entered into by the service corporation with broker-dealers,investment advisors, and their affiliates, and the parent insured institution,and a legal opinion stating that the activities to be conducted qualifyfor preapproved status. C. Summary of Comments In response to the First Proposal, the Board received 34 letters of commentfrom the public, including one from a private citizen, 17 from savingsand loan associations, five from law firms representing unidentified clients,five from savings and loan industry groups, and seven from securities broker-dealers.The one letter from the private citizen opposed the proposal and calledfor greater regulation while the 33 letters from entities in the savingsand loan and securities industry supported the proposal overall. The lattercommentators suggested various changes that would reduce a federal association'sburden of compliance in order to qualify a service corporation brokerageactivity for preapproved status. The letter opposing the proposal said that the reduced oversight of applicationswould result in entities aggressively seeking large profits entering securitiesjoint ventures with service corporations and engaging in practices thatwould increase the risks to federal associations and result in severe problemsthat ultimately will require much greater examination and supervision inthe future.The 33 public letters that supported the proposal agreed with the principalobjective of streamlining the application process. Several letters specificallysuggested additional changes to further reduce or eliminate review of proposedsecurities activities by the Board.Eighteen commentators objected to the prohibition on referral fees in proposedparagraph (ii)(C) of andSection;545.74(c)(4). They generally felt that suchfees were necessary to motivate thrift employees personally to refer customersto the brokerage services and that such personal employee referrals werenecessary to the success of the brokerage activities.Ten commentators objected to various apsects of the requirements on disseminationof customer personal and account information in proposed paragraphs (i)(C)and (ii)(D). Six of these commentators urged disclosure of customer accountbalances and deposit maturity dates so that sales solicitations could betargeted to individuals who had large amounts of money available for investing.Others requested that the Board permit partial disclosure of the informationor disclosure upon the consent of the customers.Nine comment letters discussed the prohibition on solicitation of specificsecurity transactions in proposed paragraph (ii)(E). Three of these requestedpermission for general solicitations of an entire product line. (The Boardnotes that such general solicitation would have been permissible underthe proposal and will be permissible under the final regulation.) Threeof these commentators wanted no restrictions. Other commentators requestedclarification of the scope of the prohibition.Six commentators objected to the breadth of the requirement in proposedparagraph (i)(F) that specific Board approval is required when a servicecorporation enters a joint venture with a broker-dealer that has been sanctionedby a governmental or self-regulatory agency within the last ten years.Three of these commentators said that federal and state securities authoritiesshould determine whether an entity can engage in securities brokerage andthat the Board should not look at any broker-dealer's history of regulatoryviolations and felonies in determining whether an insured institution mayinvest in a joint venture. Three letters noted that the provision did notdiscriminate between minor violations and more serious violations.Six commentators objected to a requirement in proposed paragraph (iv) thatan opinion be prepared by ``independent counsel'' They stated that an attorney'slegal opinion would not depend upon whether he was opining on behalf ofhis full-time employer or on behalf of a client.Four comment letters advocated increasing the scope of investment advicepermitted in proposed paragraph (ii)(B). Four comment letters requestedmodification of proposed paragraph (ii)(F) to permit cross-indemnificationof broker-dealers.Additional commentators suggested that the Board have no Principal SupervisoryAgent notification period as in proposed paragraph (iii); not require segregatedareas as in proposed paragraph (i)(D); not obtain initial opinions of counselas in proposed paragraphs (i)(A) and (i)(H); not require the service corporationto receive a profit within one year as required in proposed paragraph (i)(B);permit service corporations to underwrite securities without specific Boardapproval as required in proposed paragraph (ii)(A); and make various relatedchanges or provide clarifications.D. The Current ProposalIn light of the extensive public comments and upon reconsideration of severalissues, the Board has significantly changed its proposed amendment involvingthe regulation of preapproved brokerage activities and also proposes delegatingauthority to the Board's Office of District Banks to approve certain servicecorporation applications. The Board seeks public comment on the ``CurrentProposal.'' In particular, the Board has sought to eliminate conditionsof the preapproval treatment that were either duplicative of other, alreadyapplicable regulatory requirements or were determined to be unnecessaryto guard against undue risk to institutional safety and soundness. In addition,the Board has delegated authority to approve many non-preapproved activitiesto the Office of District Banks. The Board identifies below the changesfrom the First Proposal and explains the reasons behind the changes andsupporting the Current Proposal. The discussion of each is keyed to theapplicable section of the First Proposal.Section 545.74(c)(4). The Board will not use the First Proposal's languageregarding the provision of investment advice and now proposes to preapprove``the provision of standardized or individualized investment advice toindividuals and other entities,'' in addition to the execution of securitiestransactions on an agency or riskless principal basis. This change wouldexpand the market for the advisory services that the service corporationcould reach beyond that which was contemplated earlier.The Board has in the past approved on a case-by-case basis various applicationsto provide varieties of investment advice to individuals and certain institutions.The Board has no evidence that these activities have not been carried onresponsibly and, accordingly, believes it appropriate to propose to preapproveall financial advisory services.The Board reminds all service corporations that offer investment advisoryservices that those activities must be conducted in accordance with theInvestment Advisers Act of 1940, 15 U.S.C. 80b (``Advisers Act''). In addition,the service corporation should take all necessary steps to preclude anyconflict of interest between or inconsistency in the advice provided bythe service corporation and the investment decisions made by the associationand any officer thereof, by observing the Board's policy on conflicts ofinterest, 12 CFR 571.7, and usurpation of corporate opportunities, 12 CFR571.9, and any additional or successor statements of policy or rules.Section 545.74(c)(4)(i)(A). The Board proposes to delete the requirementfor the submission of certifications that the service corporation and theassociation are separate corporate identities and are in conformity withapplicable regulations.Although the Board has consistently required this in past year, it nowfinds that this is unnecessary given the regulatory requirements of maintainingseparate corporate identities.While this reporting requirement would not be imposed as a preconditionof the preapproval, the obligation of service corporations and associationsto comply with 12 CFR 563.37 and andSection; 570.10 would not be altered.The absence of submission requirements would not affect associations' responsibilitiesfor obeying the regulation. Importantly, the Board would continue to requirethat the service corporation be adequately capitalized as a separate unitin the light of normal obligations reasonably foreseeable in a businessof its size and character, maintain separate accounts and records, andbe held out to the public as a separate enterprise. An institution wouldfail to meet the Board's separate corporate identities requirement if itdominates the service corporation to the extent that the latter is treatedas a mere department of the former. In this regard, the Board has requiredthat a service corporation enter a separate agreement with its parent associationto lease the premises at fair market value and has required that all agreementswith third-party broker-dealers be entered solely by the service corporationand not by the parent association.The substantive requirements of andSection;andSection; 563.17 and 570.10 wouldbe retained, of course, because maintaining separate corporate identitiesnormally insulates the association from the liabilities of the servicecorporation, protecting it from additional and unintended liabilities.Consistent with this, the Board proposes to add a new andSection; 545.74(b)(7)that reiterates the requirement that a service corporation and associationbe separate corporate identities.Section 545.74(c)(4)(i)(B). The Board would not propose to include therequirement that the service corporation demonstrate that it will receivea profit within the upcoming twelve-month period from the securities brokerageservices due to the difficulty of reliably projecting such information.This lack of such a requirement should not be interpreted as encouragingassociations to invest in service corporations that would enter joint ventureswith broker-dealers under terms that predictably will result in weak financialperformance for an extended period of time.If an association invests in a service corporation engaging in a jointventure that runs too much risk of incurring losses, because of excessivelyexpensive long-term employment contracts, ``signing bonuses'' for employees,minimal compensation from the broker-dealer, or other features of the venture,the Supervisory Agent of the Federal Home Loan Bank can take supervisoryobjection to the agreement. The absence of a requirement of a predictionof profitability as a condition of preapproved status is that the burdenwill be on the management to exercise good business judgment and, secondarily,on the Supervisory Agent to review any agreement and raise any supervisoryconcerns.Section 545.74(c)(4)(i)(C). The Board is omitting the requirement in theFirst Proposal's andSection; 545.74(c)(4) (i)(C) and (ii)(D), both of whichdealt with the association's distribution of information about its customersto the service corporation and to outside third parties. The deletion ofthese customer information regulations would not mean that the Board ispermitting the unrestricted dissemination of customer list information.While this preapproval requirement would be eliminated, the associationand its service corporation would still have to follow applicable BankBoard policy regarding the release of customer information. Pursuant to12 CFR 545.131, Federal mutal associations may not disclose in any mannertheir membership lists to any person, other than association officers andtheir employees acting in the ordinary course of business, except withthe prior approval of the Board or its delegate. The Board has appliedthe same standard to Federal stock associations. The Board has a matterof policy applied a standard under which the association may release customerlists to wholly-owned subsidiaries and service corporations for their useonly in the ordinary course of business and in accordance with a writtenagreement approved by the Supervisory Agent. The Board has also typicallyprohibited an association from releasing the maturity dates of certificatesof deposit or the balances of savings accounts even when other list informationis released. The current Board policy prohibits the release of the customerlist to third-parties.At this time, the Bank Board is considering whether to propose a new regulationregarding the dissemination of customer information. Until a new regulationis adopted, however, federal associations and their service corporationsshould continue to observe the current Board regulation and its interpretation.Depending upon the contents of the new regulation, the association mayconceivably also consider the expectation of its customers regarding theconfidentiality of information such as account balances or certificateof deposit maturity dates and whether disclosure would violate any expectationof confidentiality and result in ill will towards the association. Managementof an institution should ensure that appropriate internal controls arein place to guarantee compliance and, if they are not, the examinationprocess should detect any shortcomings.Section 545.74(c)(4)(i)(D). The Board has modified the language of thisparagraph in the First Proposal to provide greater flexibility in conductingsecurities brokerage and investment advisory services in an area that maintainsa distinction in the minds of customers between the FSLIC-insured productsand services and the non-FSLIC-insured products and services and appropriatelyreflects the separate corporate identities of the Federal association andthe service corporation.Thus, the Current Proposal requires that the activity be conducted in anarea that is readily identified and distinguished as dedicated to the securitiesor investment advisory business from the areas where the association'stypical depository functions are performed. Normally, securities brokerageactivities will be conducted in a segregated area. However, where, forexample, a branch office is small, a distinct area may be identified byeasily recognizable signs at the desk where securities brokerage servicesare offered by the service corporation. This proposed paragraph (i)(A)in the final regulation.Section 545.74(c)(4)(i)(E). This paragraph of the First Proposal, whichwould limit the preapproval to situations in which the advertising by theservice corporation is distinguishable from that of the association anddoes not indicate or imply that the securities sold by or transactionsexecuted by the service corporation are FSLIC-insured, is slightly differentin the Current Proposal and includes advertising of investment advisoryservices plus a requirement that any advertising indicate that the servicecorporation, and not the association, is providing the brokerage services.This is proposed paragraph (i)(B) in the Current Proposal.Section 545.74(c)(4)(i)(F). The Board is omitting the requirement set forthin proposed paragraph (F) that would have required express Board approvalto invest in a service corporation that entered a joint venture with abroker-dealer owned by individuals that within the past ten years had beensuspended, enjoined, etc., from securities industries activities or otherwisesanctioned by a court, governmental agency, or self-regulatory agency.The Board has determined that it would be more appropriate to look to whether,under the oversight of the appropriate federal and state securities agenciesand the self-regulatory organizations, subject broker-dealers are licensedto work in the industry and are not violating existing injunctions or bars. Nonetheless, it is the responsibility of an association's management toassure that their service corporations investigate the past regulatoryhistory of any broker-dealer prior to entering a contract. The servicecorporation should inquire as to whether the broker-dealer has experiencedchronic or severe regulatory problems and whether it has remedied the problems,because past conduct may be a good indication of future conduct. Particularattention should be paid to violations involving customer fraud, becausethe manner in which the broker-dealer treats the association's depositorswho are investors will affect the association's reputation.  In addition, the service corporation should seek to ascertain the generalreputation of the broker-dealer's sales practices and operations in theindustry. A broker-dealer may regularly engage in practices that may beincompatible with an individual association's philosophy even if it hasnot been found to have violated securities laws. For example, some broker-dealersmay ``specialize'' in recommending that clients purchase shares in blindpools or penny stocks, which are highly risky investments, or may adviseclients to buy and sell very frequently and without regard to their circumstancesor goals. Again, customers' experiences with the broker-dealer will reflecton the reputation of the association, and management is responsible forthe safe and sound operation of both the association and its subsidiaries.Appropriate legal and supervisory guidance may be issued from time to timein this and other related areas by the Office of General Counsel and theOffice of Regulatory Activities. In addition, the Supervisory Agent mayrequest additional information at any time regarding the operations ofthe service corporation, as set forth in new andSection;545.74(c)(4)(iv),and may limit or prohibit activities for supervisory reasons, pursuantto 12 CFR 545.74(b)(5).  Section 545.74(c)(4)(i)(G). This paragraph in the First Proposal, whichrequires a service corporation to have a contractual commitment for indemnificationfrom a third-party broker-dealer with which it has entered a joint venture,is paragraph (i)(C) in the Current Proposal. The Board is proposing toadd to this paragraph a new requirement that a written agreement existbetween the service corporation and any third-party broker-dealer withwhich it contracts. The written agreement will set forth operating, marketing,compensation, and other relevant terms. The Board has received applicationsto perform brokerage activities from service corporations that do not haveany written agreement with a third-party broker-dealer and would requirea written document to evidence the contractual agreement.  Section 545.74(c)(4)(i)(H). This paragraph in the First Proposal, whichrequires an opinion that the brokerage program has adequate supervisorycontrols and that the senior securities principal does not know and hasno reason to know of regulatory violations, is paragraph (i)(D) in theCurrent Proposal.  Section 545.74(c)(4)(i)(I). This paragraph is the First Proposal, whichforbids a service corporation from conditioning the execution of securitiestransactions on the utilization of services of the federal association,service corporation, or the broker-dealer, is paragraph (i)(E) in the CurrentProposal.Section 545.74(c)(4)(ii)(B). As discussed earlier, the Board is omittingthis paragraph from the First Proposal, which would have precluded certaintypes of investment advisory services from preapproved status, and is proposingto preapprove the provision of all types of investment advice. Any servicecorporation that offers investment advisory services must observe the Boardpolicy on conflicts of interest, 12 CFR 571.7, and usurpation of corporateopportunities, 12 CFR 571.9, and any additional or successor statementsof policy or rules addressing these subjects. Section 545.74(c)(4)(ii)(C). In light of the extensive comments urgingthe preapproval of the payment of incentive referral fees, the Board isproposing to permit referral fees to association employees if the associationhas in advance obtained a ``no-action'' letter from the United States Securitiesand Exchange Commission (``SEC'') to the effect that the association wouldnot be required to register as a broker-dealer pursuant to section 15(a)of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934,\1\<NOTE/> and provides the Supervisory Agent with a copy of the ``no-action''letter. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\Section 15(a) of the Securities Exchange Act of 1934 (``ExchangeAct'') requires any broker or dealer to register prior to conducting anybusiness. Sections 3(a)(4) and 3(a)(5) of the Exchange Act define ``broker''and ``dealer'' both to exempt ``banks,'' but do not mention savings andloan associations. The Commission has never interpreted the term ``banks''in Section 3 to include savings and loan associations or exempted themfrom registration. However, the Commission, on a case-by-case basis, hasissued ``no-action'' letters permitting savings and loan associations toconduct brokerage activities through service corporation subsidiaries.The Board has determined to require the ``no-action'' letter where referralfees would be paid to association employees because the receipt of referralfees by persons who are not registered representatives could result inthe association being required to register as a broker-dealer under thefederal securities laws and thus would present policy issues that the Boardwould want to consider. Such referral fees are viewed as a type of commissionsharing agreement, and in that regard, sections 23, 24, and 25 of ArticleIII of the Rules of Fair Practice of the National Association of SecuritiesDealers, Inc. (``NASD''), a self-regulatory organization overseeing broker-dealers,prohibits NASD members from sharing commissions and concessions with non-memberbrokers or dealers. the NASD General Counsel's Office issued an opiniondated November 22, 1988, in which it noted that in ``order for [savingsand loan associations and certain other thrift institutions not consideredexcluded from the broker-dealer definitions] to enter commission sharingarrangements with members it has been necessary for them to become registeredas broker/dealers with the SEC, or more commonly, obtain `no-action' writtenadvice from the SEC.'' <T3>See also </T3>NASD Notice to Members 88-24 (March 30, 1988) and 85-48(July 17, 1985). The Board understands that the position of the Division of Market Regulationat the SEC, which interprets the statutes and regulations regarding broker-dealerregistration, has been to permit referral fees without registration onlyif (1) the fees are nominal, fixed dollar amounts that are not contingenton the execution of any securities transactions; (2) the fees are paidto the employees by the association and not by the broker-dealer; and (3)the employees do not discuss with customers any matters that might requirefamiliarity with securities or the exercise of judgment. If these conditionswere not met, the SEC would be unlikely to issue a ``no-action'' letterand could require the association to register as a broker-dealer or theemployees to qualify as registered representatives. Thus, it appears thatif referral fees paid to association employees for securities brokeragewere larger than the nominal amounts given for opening savings accounts,or if they varied with the securities transactions executed, broker-dealerregistration would be required and the preapproval under the Current Proposalwould not be available. The Board believes that the fees permissible under the foregoing standardwould accomplish the purpose expressed in many comment letters of encouragingassociation employees to remind customers of the availability of brokerageservices. Because the requirement to register as a broker-dealer wouldpresent significant legal and policy issues, the Board would conditionthe preapproval on obtaining a ``no-action'' letter from the SEC priorto the commencement of any referral fee program. Service corporations that provide investment advisory services are, ofcourse, required to meet all of the requirements of the Advisors Act, includingthose relating to the payment of referral fees. This provision is paragraph(ii)(B) in the Current Proposal. Section 545.74(c)(4)(ii)(D). As discussed above, this paragraph in theFirst Proposal regarding the release of customer information has been deletedand the service corporation would be required to observe the Board policywith regard to the release of customer information, as set forth in paragraph(i)(C) in the final regulation. Section 545.74(c)(4)(ii)(E). The Board has reworded this paragraph in theFirst Proposal regarding the solicitation of securities transactions. TheCurrent Proposal identifies that a service corporation may not solicita transaction in a particular security. The Board notes, however, thata service corporation may solicit interest in the overall securities orinvestment advisory services program. The service corporation also maymake recommendations in response to a request by a customer. However, itwould not be permitted to recommend a transaction in a specific securityin a ``cold call,'' or unrequested contact to a potential customer. Ofcourse, the service corporation should supervise the practices of the registeredrepresentatives to avoid obtaining a reputation that may reflect negativelyon the reputation of the association. This is paragraph (ii)(C) in theCurrent Proposal. Section 545.74(c)(4)(ii)(F). The Board is revising this paragraph in theFirst Proposal to propose permitting the service corporation to indemnifya third-party broker-dealer to an extent no greater than the extent towhich the third-party broker-dealer indemnifies the service corporation.The Current Proposal continues to prohibit the association from indemnifyinga third-party broker-dealer and is now paragraph (ii)(D). Section 545.74(c)(4)(ii)(G).This paragraph in the First Proposal, whichwould preclude preapproval if the federal association extends margin creditto the customers of the service corporation, is paragraph (ii)(E) in theCurrent Proposal. Section 545.74(c)(4)(ii)(H). This paragraph in the First Proposal, whichwould preclude preapproval if the federal association enters a contractdirectly with the third-party broker-dealer, is paragraph (ii)(F) in theCurrent Proposal. Section 545.74(c)(4)(ii)(I). This paragraph in the First Proposal, whichwould preclude preapproval if non-registered representatives who are dualemployees of the association engage in activities for the service corporationother than clerical or ministerial tasks, is paragraph (ii)(G) in the CurrentProposal. Section 545.74(c)(4)(iii). The Board is rewording this provision in theCurrent Proposal to clarify that the reasoned opinion of counsel, whetheror not ``independent'' of the association, will be acceptable.The Board wishes to respond to certain additional issues raised in thecomment letters. Under current Board policy and under the Current Proposal,the service corporation may compensate its employees by salary, salaryplus bonus, or commissions, or any other reasonable manner. Where the CurrentProposal would require an opinion of counsel, any licensed, practicingattorney in good standing, including counsel to the service corporationor to the broker-dealer, may provide the opinion.Any service corporation that wants to underwrite, make a market or actas principal, other than riskless principal, in securities transactionswould have to apply to the Board for permission. Such activities may entailmore significant economic risks and the Board wishes to have the opportunityto review the individual circumstances of all applicants. This preapprovalwould not affect previous Board approvals or delegations.Finally, the Board is proposing to add a new paragraph (f) to andSection;545.74,to provide for a delegation of authority to the Board's Office of DistrictBanks (``ODB'') to approve service corporation applications for activitiesthat are not preapproved under andSection;545.74(c) including, but not limitedto the securities activities preapproved pursuant to this new rule. ODB,with the concurrence of the Board's Office of General Counsel, would beauthorized to approve or deny any service corporation application thatdoes not present a significant issue of law or policy. This delegationcould further improve the processing of service corporation applications,reserving for the Board's attention only those applications that have significantlegal or policy implications or precedential impact. Applicants who receivean adverse decision could appeal this decision to the Board pursuant toparagraph (g) of andSection;545.74.<ITAG tagnum="84">II. Public Comment Period</ITAG>The Board has determined that a 30-day public comment period is appropriatebecause prompt action is in the public interest in order to make the amendmentsand expedited procedures available as soon as possible.<ITAG tagnum="84">Initial Regulatory Flexibility Analysis</ITAG>Pursuant to section 3 of the Regulatory Flexibility Act, 5 U.S.C. 603,the Board is providing the following initial regulatory flexibility analysis:1. Reasons, objectives, and legal bases underlying the regulationThese elements have been discussed elsewhere in the SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATIONregarding the amendments.2. Small entities to which the regulation would applyThe regulation would apply to all insured institutions.3. Impact of the regulation on small institutionsTo the extent that the regulation would affect small institutions, thishas been discussed elsewhere.4. Overlapping or conflicting federal rules There are no other federal regulations which duplicate, overlap, or conflictwith the final regulation.5. Alternatives to the regulation Other alternatives, such as present regulations, may tend to prolong thewaiting period for permission to engage in brokerage activities. More liberalprovisions may raise questions of statutory authority. <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 12 CFR Part 545 </ITAG>Accounting, Consumer protection, Credit, Electronic funds transfers, Investments,Manufactured homes, Mortgages, Reporting and recordkeeping requirements,and Savings and loan associations. Accordingly, the Board hereby proposes to amend Part 545, Subchapter C,Chapter V, Title 12, <T3>Code of Federal Regulations, </T3>as set forth below. <ITAG tagnum="72">SUBCHAPTER C_FEDERAL SAVINGS AND LOAN SYSTEM </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 545_OPERATIONS </ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 545 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Sec. 5A, 47 Stat. 727 as added by sec. 1, 64 Stat.256 as amended (12 U.S.C. 1425a); sec. 5, 48 Stat. 132, as amended (12U.S.C. 1464); secs. 402-403, 407, 48 Stat. 1256-1257, 1260, as amended(12 U.S.C. 1725-1726, and 1730); Reorg. Plan No. 3 of 1947, 12 FR 4981,3 CFR 1943-1948 Comp., p. 1071.</ITAG>2. Amend andSection; 545.74 by adding a new paragraph (b)(7); by redesignatingthe existing paragraphs (c) (4), (5), and (6) as the new paragraphs (c)(5), (6), and (7); by adding a new paragraph (c)(4); by revising the newparagraph (c)(5)(v); by revising the new paragraph (c)(7); and by addingnew paragraphs (f) and (g) to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 545.74</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Service corporations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(b) <T3>General. </T3>* * * (7) The service corporation and the association are separate corporateentities in conformity with 12 CFR 563.37 and 570.10. (c) <T3>Permitted activities. </T3>* * * (4) <T3>Securities brokerage services. </T3>(i) Execution of securities transactionson an agency or riskless principal basis solely upon the order of and forthe account of customers, and the provision of standardized and individualizedinvestment advice to individuals or entities, provided that the servicecorporation: (A) Conducts securities brokerage and investment advisory activities inan area that is clearly identified and distinguished from the areas wherethe association's typical depository functions are performed; (B) Distinguishes advertising by the service corporation from that of theassociation, particularly so that advertising does not indicate or implythat the securities transactions executed, securities purchased, or investmentadvice provided by the service corporation are insured by the FSLIC; andso that the advertising indicates that the service corporation, and notthe association, is providing the securities brokerage or investment advisoryservices; (C) Where the service corporation contracts with a third-party broker-dealer,has a written contract with the broker-dealer that provides that the broker-dealeragrees to indemnify fully the service corporation and the association forany liability caused by the negligence, recklessness, or intentional conductof the broker-dealer or its employees, and that sets forth operating, marketing,compensation, and other relevant terms; (D) Provides to the Supervisory Agent an initial opinion of counsel oran opinion from the senior securities principal responsible for overseeingthe subject brokerage program that the program has been established pursuantto operational procedures that are intended to ensure that the programis conducted in conformity with applicable securities laws and regulationsand that such procedures include internal controls and supervisory systemsthat have been established and are to be applied to detect and preventviolations of federal securities statutes, the rules adopted thereunder,and the rules of self-regulatory organizations applicable to broker-dealers,including but not limited to those provisions designed to prevent churning,unsuitable recommendations, charging excessive prices, and the making offraudulent representations in connection with the offer, sale, or purchaseof securities (``the regulations''); and on an annual basis thereunderprovides a certification by the senior securities principal responsiblefor supervising and overseeing the subject brokerage program that he orshe has discharged the obligations incumbent upon him or her by reasonof such procedures and systems previously described and has no reasonablebelief or cause to believe that such procedures and systems are not beingcomplied with or that a violation of the regulations has occurred;(E) Does not condition the sale of securities to a customer on the customer'sutilizing services of any affiliate of the association, the service corporation,or a third-party broker-dealer.(ii) Service corporation activities authorized under this paragraph (c)(4)may not include the following activities:(A) Execution of securities transactions on a principal basis, includingmarket-making and underwriting, except on a riskless principal basis andexcept as permitted under paragraph (c)(3);(B) Payment to any employee of the association of referral fee, bonus,or any incentive compensation, in cash or in kind, for referring any customerto the service corporation except as may be consistent with a ``no-action''letter received by the association from the U.S. Securities and ExchangeCommission (``SEC''), stating that the SEC will not recommend enforcementaction if association employees receive the planned referral but do notregister with a broker-dealer and the association does not register asa broker-dealer;(C) Solicitation of a transaction in a particular security by any registeredrepresentative;(D) Indemnification by the service corporation to the third-party broker-dealerto a degree greater than the indemnification that the third-party broker-dealerprovides to the service corporation;(E) Extension of margin credit by the association to customers of the servicecorporation;(F) Entry into any third-party contract with a broker-dealer, directlyby the association;(G) Non-registered representatives who are dual or sole employees of theassociation performing other than clerical or ministerial tasks.(iii) Any association that intends to acquire or establish a service corporationto engage in preapproved securities brokerage activities shall furnishto the Supervisory Agent, no later than 30 days prior to the commencementof operations, written notice containing a full description of the brokerageservices to be provided, together with copies of all executed contractualagreements and memoranda between the service corporation and third-partybroker-dealers, investment advisors, and their affiliates, and the parentinsured institution, a ``no-action'' letter from the SEC if referral feeswill be paid to association employees, and a reasoned legal opinion fromcounsel that the securities brokerage service qualify as preapproved underthis paragraph (c)(4).(iv) The Supervisory Agent may request additional information at any timeregarding the operations of the service corporation if he has supervisoryconcerns about the activity, has evidence that the activity may not bein the best interest of the association or service corporation, or hasquestions as to whether the activities are being conducted in a mannerthat is preapproved.(5)<T3> Other investments.</T3> * * *(v) Investing in the capital of a small business investment company orminority enterprise small business investment company licensed pursuantto section 301(d) of the Small Business Investment Act of 1958 by the U.S.Small Business Administration to invest in small businesses engaged exclusivelyin the activities listed in paragraph (c)(1) through (6) of this section;<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(7) Activities reasonably incident to those listed in paragraphs (c)(1)through (6) of this section <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(f) <T3>Delegation of authority. </T3>Unless an application of a federal associationto invest in a service corporation involves a significant issue of lawor policy or would establish a precedent of national significance, theDirector of the Office of District Banks, with the concurrence of the GeneralCounsel, or their respective designees, is authorized; (1) To approve an application filed pursuant to this section, if it iscomplete and in compliance with regulatory requirements; and (2) To deny an application that does not satisfy the approval criteria.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">If the Director of the Office of District Banks or the General Counsel,or their respective designees, is of the opinion that the application involvesconsiderations of law or policy that warrant resolution by the Bank Board,the Director shall submit the application to the Bank Board for its determinationand notify the applicant. If the Director fails to obtain the concurrenceof the General Counsel, or his designee, the Director shall present theapplication to the Bank Board for its determination and notify the applicant.(g) <T3>Appeals. </T3>Denial of an application by the Office of District Bankspursuant to paragraph (f) of this section may be appealed to the Bank Boardunder the following procedure. Within 30 days after notification of theOffice of District Bank's decision as provided in this section, the applicantmust file a written request for review with the Bank Board stating theapplicant's desire to appeal the Office of District Bank's decision. Therequest for review must identify the party seeking review and describewith specificity the action taken for which review is sought and the reasonswhy the Office of District Bank's denial is contended to be erroneous.Three copies of such request for review shall be submitted to the Officeof District Banks, Applications Division, Federal Home Loan Bank Board,1700 G Street NW., Washington, DC 20552. One copy of such request shouldbe addressed to the attention of ``Office of District Banks;'' one copyto the attention of ``Office of General Counsel, Corporate and SecuritiesDivision;'' and one copy to the attention of ``Office of Regulatory Activities,Corporate Activities Section.'' Also, one copy shall be sent to the appropriateSupervisory Agent. The Office of District Banks shall forward to the Boardits record or a copy thereof used as a basis for the determination togetherwith any other information believed by the Office of District Banks tobe useful in reviewing the determination. If an applicant does not filea request for review within the time permitted under this section, anyobjection to the initial determination by the Office of District Banksis waived. A timely filing of a request for review in accordance with theprovisions of this section shall be mandatory for securing judicial reviewof an initial determination. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">By the Federal Home Loan Bank Board. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">John F. Ghizzoni, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Assistant Secretary. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-8279 Filed 4-6-89; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6720-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>