<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89929-0029 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.9-29-89.f2.A1028</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">National Highway Traffic Safety Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">49 CFR Part 591 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 89-5; Notice 2]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="91">RIN 2127-AD00</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Importation of Vehicles and Equipment Subject to Federal Motor VehicleSafety Standards </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>National Highway Safety Administration (NHTSA), DOT. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The purpose of this rule is to adopt procedures thatwill govern the importation of motor vehicles and equipment subject toFederal safety standards on and after January 31, 1990. This rule supersedesthe existing joint regulation of the Departments of Treasury and Transportationon this subject, 19 CFR 12.80, which has been in effect since 1968. Inmost instances, the new rules are mandated by the Imported Vehicle SafetyCompliance Act of 1988, and primarily affect importation of motor vehiclesnot manufactured to comply with the Federal motor vehicle safety standards.Requirements concerning vehicles and equipment that conform to the Federalsafety standards, and nonconforming equipment, remain unchanged.The Supplementary Information of this notice contains a full discussionof the present regulation, the proposal, and the changes made in responseto that proposal. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>The effective date of the final rule is January 31, 1990.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Taylor Vinson, Office of ChiefCounsel, NHTSA, (202-366-5263). </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>Although NHTSA provided a full discussionof the proposed amendments in its prior proposal, it is repeating muchof that discussion in this notice because of the major changes that therule occasions, and the need that interested persons be fully informedas to the changes and their effect upon importation procedures that havebeen in effect for over 20 years. On October 31, 1988, the President signed Public Law 100-562, the ImportedVehicle Safety Compliance Act of 1988 (``the 1988 Act''). Notice of itsenactment was published by the agency in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on December 5, 1988 (53 FR 49003), and a noticeof proposed rulemaking to establish Part 591 was published on April 25,1989 (54 FR 17772). As the notice stated, the 1988 Act amends those provisionsof the National Traffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966 (``the VehicleSafety Act'') that relate to the importation of motor vehicles subjectto the Federal motor vehicle safety standards (section 108(b), 15 U.S.C.1397(b)). Specifically, the 1988 Act revokes sections 108(b)(3), and (b)(4) of theVehicle Safety Act, effective January 31, 1990. These sections authorizedthe issuance of regulations jointly by the Secretaries of Transportationand Treasury to prohibit the importation of motor vehicles and equipmentnot complying with the Federal motor vehicle safety standards, except undersuch terms and conditions as may appear to them appropriate to ensure thata noncomplying vehicle or equipment item will be brought into conformanceor will be exported or abandoned to the United States. The temporary admissionof nonconforming used vehicles and equipment items by exempted personswas also permitted. Pursuant to this authority, the two Secretaries issuedan implementing regulation, 19 CFR 12.80, which has governed the importationof merchandise subject to Federal motor vehicle safety standards since1968, and will continue to do so through January 31, 1990. Under the 1988 Act, new sections (c) and (j) are added to section 108 toreplace revoked sections (b)(3) and (b)(4). The authority to issue jointregulations is replaced by a rulemaking authority vested alone in the Secretaryof Transportation (and delegated to NHTSA through existing delegationsof authority). The purpose of this notice is to promulgate a final rule to implement the1988 Act, and to explain how importation of motor vehicles and equipmentwill be affected by this new authority. First, the existing regulation,19 CFR 12.80, will continue to be a regulation under the joint authorityof the two Departments with respect to the importation provisions of theMotor Vehicle Information and Cost Savings Act under which the Bumper Standard(49 CFR part 581) and the Theft Prevention Standard (49 CFR part 541) wereissued. With respect to the Vehicle Safety Act, however, the new NHTSAregulation, 49 CFR part 591, will become the primary importation regulation,and 19 CFR 12.80 will become the conforming regulation of the U.S. CustomsService. In the future, substantive changes to importation procedures willbe effected by NHTSA alone, through amendments to part 591, and Customswill make conforming amendments to 19 CFR 12.80, as required.  A similar relationship presently exists between regulations of the EnvironmentalProtection Agency (``EPA'') and Customs (<T3>see,</T3> respectively, 40 CFR 85.1501 <T3>et seq.</T3> and 19 CFR 12.73). This relationship has established aprecedent for Customs to amend its regulations without notice and opportunityfor comment on the basis that full notice and opportunity had been offeredby EPA in promulgating its regulations, and that the amendments by Customswere merely conforming in nature (<T3>See</T3> 53 FR 26240).In establishing part 591, NHTSA has attempted to formulate a program thatwill ensure that all imported motor vehicles conform to the Federal motorvehicle safety standards without imposing unnecessary burdens on importers.Therefore, NHTSA has tried in this rule to impose only those requirementsthat are mandated by the 1988 Act, with amplifications only where it appearednecessary to implement the safety intent of the statute.In response to the proposal published on April 25, 1989, NHTSA received19 written comments, and, as well, several inquiries by telephone. Sevencomments were received from the following motor vehicle manufacturers:BMW of North America, Freightliner Corp., Austin Rover Cars of North America,General Motors Corp., Volkswagen of America, Ford Motor Co., and ChryslerCorp. Five comments were received from the following manufacturing firmsin Canada: Intercontinental Truck Body Ltd., Barber Industries Ltd., CancadeCo., Western-Hydro Air Drilling Ltd., and Canterra Equipment Inc. Alsocommenting from Canada was an import/export consulting firm, All Alta.Agencies Ltd. Two comments were received from importers of vehicles notoriginally manufactured to conform to Federal motor vehicle safety standards:U.S. Trade Corp. and Auburn Motors/Superior Auto Sales (whose submissionwas supported by the National Federation of Independent Businesses). Twocomments were received from trade organizations: National Automobile DealersAssociation and The Dealer Action Association. Written comments were submittedby the State of Texas, and a private citizen, George Ziolo. During thependency of the rulemaking action, questions were raised in telephone conversations,reported to the Docket, and these will be addressed to this notice whereappropriate.The principal paragraphs of part 591 are those dealing with the importer'sdeclarations (andSection; 591.5), documents accompanying declarations (andSection;591.6), and restrictions upon importation and bond requirements (andSection;591.7). As paragraphs 591.6 and 591.7 relate directly to paragraph 591.5,issues that were raised in connection with them will be discussed in theappropriate portions of paragraph 591.5.<ITAG tagnum="84">Importation of Motor Vehicles</ITAG>Under existing andSection; 12.80, a motor vehicle offered for importationinto the United States is admitted pursuant to one of nine declarationsregarding the status of the vehicle in relation to the motor vehicle safetyand bumper standards (andSection; 12.80 is in the process of being amendedto incorporate reference to the theft prevention standard). The requirementsof the 1988 Act affect some of these declarations, and establish new exceptions.A discussion of these changes follows.1. The Vehicle is Not a ``Motor Vehicle''Under 19 CFR 12.80(b)(1)(viii), a vehicle is not required to be broughtinto compliance if it is not a motor vehicle as defined by the VehicleSafety Act, <T3>i.e.,</T3> if it is not ``designed primarily for use on the publicstreets, roads, and highways'' (15 U.S.C. 1391(3). Because of the uncertaintyregarding certain types of vehicles (<T3>e.g.,</T3> golf carts, construction equipment) NHTSA has required thatall importers of self-propelled wheeled vehicles execute a declaration,which has allowed the agency to review the status of vehicles for whichan exemption is claimed, and to require re-entry as a nonconforming vehiclewhen it disagrees with the importer's assessment that the vehicle is notsubject to the Federal motor vehicle safety standards. This exemption remains(paragraph 591.5(a)(i)) because this agency has no jurisdiction regardingnon-motor vehicles under the Vehicle Safety Act and the 1988 Act makesno jurisdictional change. There were no comments on this issue.2. The Vehicle Conforms and is So CertifiedUnder the existing regulation, a motor vehicle is allowed immediate entrywithout the posting of bond upon a declaration that it conforms to allapplicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards and bears a certificationlabel to that effect permanently affixed by the original manufacturer (andSection;12.80(b)(1)(ii)). This same paragraph also allows immediate entry if avehicle is only technically noncompliant, <T3>i.e.,</T3> because readily attachable equipment items are not attached,but will be installed before the vehicle is offered for sale.The 1988 Act makes no change affecting this category of importation. Theagency interprets the new amendments, however, as imposing new restrictionsupon the importation of vehicles that may have been conformed prior toentry but bear a certification by a person other than the original manufacturer.The 1988 Act amends 15 U.S.C. 1397(a)(1)(A) to add the words ``and is coveredby a certification issued under section 114'' as an addition to the existingrequirement that a vehicle may not be imported ``unless it is in conformity''.A certification issued under section 114 is that of the ``manufacturer'',the entity which is responsible for the original assembly of the vehicle,and not that of a converter, whose operations consist of alterations toa previously assembled vehicle. To reflect this amendment, the agency proposed,and is now adopting, a definition of the term ``original manufacturer''(paragraph 591.4) which excludes converters outside the United States whocertify and conform vehicles to the standards after the vehicles have beenmanufactured in fully assembled form by a person other than the converter.The agency believes that the 1988 Act justifies this interpretation. Thedefinition was specifically supported by The Dealer Action Association.An interpretation that would allow entry of a vehicle pursuant to a declarationof conformity and a certification by a person other than its original manufacturercould well result in the importation of vehicles for which the Administratorhad made no determination of capability of modification to meet Federalstandards, and defeat the purpose of the 1988 Act. However, even if theconverted vehicle is one that the Administrator has deemed eligible forentry and is certified as conforming by its converter, under part 591 itmust enter the country only through a registered importer (or through onewho has a contract with a registered importer), under bond, and its compliancemust be established after entry in accordance with the new procedures.One commenter, U.S. Trade Corp., though headquartered in the U.S., apparentlyowns a conversion facility in Germany. Assuming that it will become a registeredimporter, it commented that it ought to be able to import its convertedvehicles without bond, provided that it submitted documentation to NHTSA30 days in advance of the arrival of its vehicles. NHTSA Notes, however,that these are vehicles imported pursuant to 15 U.S.C. 1397(c)(3), andparagraph (c)(2) specifically requires a bond to be furnished ``in thecase of any motor vehicle imported under paragraph (3) * * *'' Though sympatheticto U.S. Trade Corp.'s desire for expedited treatment, NHTSA believes thatit is contrary to the 1988 Act for it to receive certification from animporter in advance of the arrival of a vehicle. Section 1397(c)(3)(E)(i)allows a registered importer to release custody of a vehicle 30 days aftercertification to the Secretary (if the Secretary has not in the interimdemanded an inspection of the vehicle). Acceding to U.S. Trade Corp.'srequest for early submission of certification could result in the 30-dayperiod expiring before arrival of the vehicle in the U.S., and its immediaterelease from custody upon entry. NHTSA does not deem it desirable to demand<T3>pro forma </T3>an inspection of each such vehicle to delay its releasefrom custody. Accordingly, it is informing U.S. Trade Corp. and otherswho are contemplating becoming registered importers that it will not acceptcertification data in advance of the arrival of a vehicle in the UnitedStates, and that the earliest date on which certification documentationmay be submitted is the date of the importation declaration. Consequently,a motor vehicle that has been modified by a registered importer after itsmanufacture and before entry, will be treated as a nonconforming motorvehicle, and subject to the same entry requirements as a nonconformingvehicle.Although the exclusory language in the definition of ``Original manufacturer''remains as proposed, a modification has been made in the preliminary portionwhich defined the term as ``the entity responsible for the original design,engineering, and manufacture of a motor vehicle * * *.'' Volkswagen commentedthat the definition was overly restrictive by its inclusion of design andengineering, and recommended a definition that would be consistent withthe definition of ``manufacturer'' in the Vehicle Safety Act (15 U.S.C.1391(5)). NHTSA concurs with this analysis and recommendation. The agencyis aware that on occasion a vehicle manufacturer in one country may contractwith a firm in another for design and engineering studies for future productionvehicles. Accordingly, the preliminary portion of the final definitionreads ``the entity responsible for the original manufacture or assemblyof a motor vehicle * * *.'' VW also recommended that the definition includemotor vehicle equipment. The agency has not adopted this recommendation,as the amendments of the 1988 Act do not affect motor vehicle equipment.Other issues regarding interpretations of conformity were raised by commenters.Canadian companies who appeared to be final stage manufacturers, and whowere concerned that their vehicles would be treated as ``nonconforming''under the amendments, asked for a clarification. The agency wishes to reassurethese commenters that the new requirements do not affect final stage manufacturersoutside the United States who complete chassis-cabs manufactured and certifiedin the United States, and certify compliance of the finished vehicle withthose U.S. Federal motor vehicle safety standards for which the manufacturerof the chassis-cab has not previously furnished certification. The finalstage manufacturer is and remains the ``original manufacturer'' for purposesof the certification that it furnishes, and vehicles certified by Canadianfinal stage manufacturers will be admissible as conforming vehicles undernew paragraph 591.5(b).With respect to vehicles certified as conforming to the Canadian motorvehicle safety standards, Auburn Motors/Superior Auto Sales, importersof such vehicles, commented that NHTSA had not addressed the issue of vehiclesmanufactured to meet the Federal motor vehicle safety standards, but whichmay not be so certified. In their view, Canadian vehicles do meet the U.S.standards, and special accommodation should be provided for them. Auburn/Superiorcited The Free Trade Act between Canada and the United States in support,as well as a settlement with EPA which was published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on July 8, 1988 (53 FR 25331), which, accordingto Auburn/Superior recognized the identicality of standards. After reviewingAuburn/Superior's comments, NHTSA cannot concur with the conclusion thata special accommodation ought to be made. In many respects, the Canadianstandards may be identical, but they also differ in certain other significantrespects. For example, the Canadian vehicle lighting standard allows theuse of headlamps meetings ECE standards. Federal Motor Vehicle Safety StandardNo. 108 does not allow the use of European light sources, or of replaceablebulb headlamps that do not meet stringent environmental standards whichare not specified in European regulations. Another example: The Canadianstandard on controls and displays requires the use of metric speedometersand odometers; the primary U.S. requirement is that they be in miles perhour, though metric markings are permissible. The fact that similarityexists between the standards of the two nations today does not precludeeither the U.S. or Canada from adopting significantly different ones inthe future, as allowed by Article 603 of the Free Trade Act, if the demonstrablepurpose is to achieve a legitimate domestic objective, such as enhancementof the public safety. The EPA ``settlement'' cited by Auburn/Superior was,in fact, simply a 3-month conditional stay of the applicability of thatagency's new importation regulation, to expire October 1, 1988, based upona petition for reconsideration of the rule. NHTSA notes that only one Federalstandard was involved, engine emissions, and that the Federal safety standardsare far greater in number. Even if vehicles certified to the Canadian safetystandards do meet U.S. emission requirements, that fact is of no relevanceto the quantum of compliance with the U.S. safety standards. A manufacturer'scertification attached to a vehicle remains the statutorily approved methodof establishing a presumption of compliance with the U.S. safety standards.A telephone call was received from Barry Wood, a customs broker, aboutthe treatment of reentry into the United States of a used certified vehiclethat was driven to Canada for modifications involving the installationof a different load-carrying structure. An associated issue is the treatmentof new certified vehicles sent to Canada for modifications requiring theaffixation of an alterer's certificate as required by 49 CFR 567.7. NHTSAreplies that the thrust of the 1988 Act is to regulate vehicles that werenot originally manufactured to comply with Federal safety standards, andnot to ensure continuing compliance of those that were. Assuming that theoriginal manufacturer's certification remains affixed to an altered vehicle,whether that vehicle is new or used, the vehicle should be readmitted tothe United States under paragraph 591.5(b) as a conforming vehicle. Ofcourse, the U.S. owner/importer should ensure with the Canadian altererthat its modifications do not result in changes (such as installation oftinted glass that may not conform with Standard No. 205, or an increasein GVWR) that would raise a question of conformity with the U.S. CustomsService, so as to delay reentry, or require its readmission as a nonconformingvehicle in spite of the presence of its certification label.Ford Motor Company raised the issue of discovery in transit of a noncompliancein vehicles it imports from abroad for sale under its nameplate, but whichare manufactured and certified by a second party. Ford stated that part591 ought to permit importation for modification by Ford as the agent ofthe foreign manufacturer, and asked that the final rule allow such modificationsto be made in the U.S., or confirmation that the rule already allows it.The agency's analysis differs from Ford's although its conclusion shouldmeet Ford's concern. Where a noncompliance is discovered in transit, NHTSAbelieves that only a technical violation of the Vehicle Safety Act wouldoccur with the importation of a motor vehicle certified as conforming tothe safety standards, but in fact known to the importer to be noncompliantwith at least one of them. As an importer for resale, Ford becomes the``manufacturer'' under the Vehicle Safety Act and responsible for all notificationand remedial responsibilities imposed by that Act. Thus, it will be requiredto file a part 573 Noncompliance Report with NHTSA not later than 5 daysafter its determination of the existence of the noncompliance. As the Actforbids sale of a nonconforming vehicle, Ford will be under a legal obligationto remedy the noncompliance before it is sold. Provided that the noncomplianceis corrected before the vehicles are offered for sale, there would appearto be no harm to the public safety by allowing the importation. The agency responds similarly to a comment by General Motors. Under theproposal, a technically noncompliant vehicle could be admitted pursuantto the declaration that ``the vehicle will conform when readily attachableequipment items carried within it are attached.'' This represents a slightdeparture from the current declaration which does not require the equipmentitems to be carried within the vehicle. GM points out that it may wellbe that components will be added from domestic sources prior to sale, orarrive from abroad by separate shipments. Because of the importer's legalobligation not to offer a vehicle for sale in a noncompliant condition,it is irrelevant whether or not the equipment items are carried withinthe vehicle, and NHTSA has eliminated the proposed restriction from thefinal rule, adopting language virtually idential to that presently existingin andSection;12.80(b)(1)(ii). GM also suggested that a manufacturer's ``agents''be permitted to attach the detached equipment items. Given the fact thatthe vehicle must fully comply when offered for sale, NHTSA believes thatthe answer must be a practical one, and that the items may be attachedby the manufacturer or the dealer, as appears best. One further comment regarding paragraph 591.5(b) resulted in minor modificationsin the final rule. Under the proposal, the vehicle or equipment item tobe imported must bear a certification label or tag affixed by the originalmanufacturer ``to the vehicle or to the equipment item or its container.''NADA commented that the language could be construed as allowing certificationof vehicles on vehicle containers rather than on the vehicle itself. Tomeet this concern, NHTSA has placed a comma between the word ``vehicle''and the disjunctive ``or.'' In agreement with NADA's suggestion that theparagraph contain an appropriate citation to labeling regulations as iscurrently done in andSection;12.80, NHTSA has added the statutory references.This should help clarify that the labeling requirement remains the samein spite of the advent of a new importation regulation. 3. The Vehicle is Intended Solely for ExportA nonconforming vehicle is allowed immediate entry without bond upon thedeclaration that the importation is solely for purposes of export, andbears a label to that effect andSection;12.80(b)(1)(iv)). This declarationis allowed pursuant to a specific statutory exclusion in the Vehicle SafetyAct, section 108(b)(5). Under the 1988 Act, the section becomes 108(b)(3),but is otherwise unchanged, and the exclusion remains (Paragraph 591.5(c)).There were no comments on this issue. 4. Nonresident Temporary ImportationsIf the importer is a nonresident of the United States and is importingthe nonconforming vehicle primarily for personal use for a period of 1year or less, the current regulations allow entry without bond and conformance,but the declaration must also state that the importer will not sell thenonconforming vehicle in the United States during that period andSection;12.80(b)(1)(v)).There is no similar provision in the 1988 Act. This provision was intended to benefit two classes of importers. The firstclass is comprised fo U.S. citizens who are between foreign work assignments,and need to use their noncomplying cars while in transit, on home leave,or on temporary assignment in the U.S. The second class of importer iscomprised of non-U.S. citizens. They may be Mexican or Canadian residentswho use the American roads on an infrequent basis, or citizens of othercountries who bring their campers or cars with them to facilitate theirvacations in the U.S. One authority for the previously existing allowance was section 1397(b)(4)which authorized the adoption of regulations allowing the ``temporary importation''of noncomplying vehicles or equipment items. This authority has been deletedby the 1988 Act. However, a further authority for the nonresident exemptionwas the existence of two international treaties to which the United Statesis a signatory that address the movement of vehicles among various countries(I. Customs Convention on the Temporary Importation of Private Road Vehiclesopened for signature June 4, 1954, 8 U.S.T. 2097, T.I.A.S. No. 3943, enteredinto force December 15, 1957. II. Convention on the Regulation of Inter-AmericanAutomotive Traffic, opened for signature December 15, 1943, 61 Stat. 1129,T.I.A.S. No. 1567, entered into force October 29, 1946). NHTSA believesthat elimination of the present allowance may be inconsistent with theintent of the treaties, and proposed that it be retained in clarified form,allowing the temporary importation of any vehicle by a nonresident thatis registered in a country other than the United States, provided it isfor personal use, imported for a period not to exceed one year, will notbe resold in the U.S. during that time, and will be exported at the endof that time (Paragraph 591.5(d)). No commenter disagreed with the concept of temporary importation, thoughconcern was expressed as to the effect of the requirement. Texas commentedthat the proposal was unclear whether nonconforming vehicles of Mexicanor Canadian registry will continue to be treated as before. This was alsothe concern of Western Hydro-Air Drilling of Canada, a mineral drillingspecialist operating in both the U.S. and Canada using the same units inboth countries from time to time. The Dealer Action Association was concernedwith the possible sale of noncomforming vehicles by nonresidents, as wellas NHTSA's lack of substantive proposals to guard against abuse. It soughtto encourage NHTSA to work with Customs to ensure that neither Canada norMexico become a ``grey market export platform.'' George Ziolo commentedthat the phrase ``for personal use'' should not be adopted as ``this includescommercial carriers and may confuse Customs''. The agency believes it must interpret Congressional intent in light ofthe realities of cross-border traffic, and the existence of treaties andagreements to which the U.S. is a party. Under long-standing NHTSA interpretations,cross-border traffic involved in daily operation in the United States overan extended period of time (as opposed to the casual tourist) is deemedsubject to the Vehicle Safety Act and to the Federal motor vehicle safetystandards. However, it must defer to the U.S. Customs Service to identifysuch vehicles, to refuse entry as a nonresident, and then to require entryas a nonconforming vehicle which must be conformed or exported. Becauseof the substantial nature of cross-border traffic, it is obvious that Customscannot require a written declaration of every vehicle of Mexican or Canadianregistry, and NHTSA's legal interpretation has not been capable of rigorousenforcement. These practical considerations are not changed by the 1988Act, nor does NHTSA read the 1988 Act as a mandate from Congress to enhancemotor vehicle safety by increasing restrictions on the use of Canadianor Mexican vehicles operated in the U.S. To respond to the comment of theDealer Action Association, the <T3>modus vivendi</T3> with respect to these vehicles has not, as of thepresent time, resulted in the border countries becoming a grey market exportplatform to any discernible extent. Given the present low volume of greymarket cars expected, less than 3000 per year, it does not appear likelythat this is a realistic concern for the near future. As for Mr. Ziolo'scomment, NHTSA seeks to retain as much of the presently existing regulatorylanguage as is consistent with the 1988 Act, and thus has not stricken``for personal use'' from the final rule. The agency is not aware of anyconfusion that use of this term has caused in the existing regulation.5. The Vehicle Does Not Conform to Federal Safety StandardsThis is the category of motor vehicle whose importation is most affectedby the 1988 amendments. Under 19 CFR 12.80, a nonconforming vehicle isimported pursuant to a declaration that it will be brought into conformancewithin 120 days of entry. The importer gives a bond for the productionof a statement, after conformance, certifying that the conformance workhas been accomplished. The statement describes the conformance work, identifiesthe conformer, and certifies that the vehicle will not be sold until NHTSAhas issued an approval letter to the district director of Customs thatthe bond may be released. The bond is for the dutiable value of the vehicleandSection; 12.80(b)(1)(iii) and (e)). The 1988 amendments impose criteria which motor vehicles must meet in orderto be imported. Under new section 108(c)(3)(A), a vehicle cannot be importedat all (with certain exceptions set out below) unless NHTSA determinesthat it is capable of modification to meet the Federal safety standards.Determinations may be made on NHTSA's own initiative, or upon petitionof any registered importer (see discussion below) or any motor vehiclemanufacturer, and will be subject to public comment. A nonconforming vehicle that is not offered for importation under one ofthe exceptions discussed herein may be imported under either of the followingtwo scenarios. The first scenario, specified by section 108(c)(3)(A)(i)(I),will involve the making of two determinations: (1) That the nonconformingvehicle is substantially similar to a motor vehicle of the same model yearoriginally manufactured for importation into and sold in the U.S., (andthus in compliance with the safety standards) and (2) that the vehicleis capable of being readily modified to conform. The second scenario, specified by section 108(c)(3)(A)(i)(II), will ariseif the agency does not make a determination of substantial similarity regardinga vehicle. In that case, it will still be permissible to import the vehicleif the agency determines that the vehicle's safety features comply withthe U.S. standards, or are capable of being modified to comply with thosestandards, ``based on destructive crash data or such other evidence'' asNHTSA determines is adequate. Under either scenario, a positive determination regarding a vehicle willpermit any registered importer to modify vehicles of the same model coveredby the determination. If the agency makes a negative determination regarding a model's abilityto be modified, the agency will be temporarily prohibited from taking upthe issue of that model's importability again. If the negative determinationwas made in response to a petition, section 108(c)(3)(C)(ii) of the Actprohibits the agency from considering a petition regarding the same modelof vehicle until at least 3 months after that decision. If the negativedetermination was made in a proceeding begun at the agency's own initiative,the agency will not be able to make another determination regarding thesame model of motor vehicle until at least 3 months after the negativeone (section 108(c)(3)(C)(iii)). The agency addresses these matters incompanion final rules published simultaneously with this one, part 592,Registered Importers of Vehicles Not Originally Manufactured to Conformto Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards, and part 593, DeterminationsThat a Vehicle Not Originally Manufactured to Conform to Federal MotorVehicle Safety Standards is Eligible for Importation. Once a vehicle has been determined eligible for importation, it may thenbe imported by a registered importer who will undertake to conform it withthe safety standards (paragraph 591.5(f)(i)). The importer is requiredby section 108(c)(2) to give a bond to ensure conformance or alternativelyto ensure that the vehicle will be exported or abandoned to the UnitedStates. The bond is to be not less than the ``dutiable value'' of the vehicleas determined by the Secretary of the Treasury, and not more than 150 percent of the ``dutiable value.'' The U.S. Customs Service has recommendedthat the term ``entered value'' be used, as under recent changes to itsregulations vehicles imported from certain areas may not have duties imposed.It views ``entered value'' as the equivalent of the statutory term ``dutiablevalue'' for purposes of importations of vehicles under part 591. Both NHTSAand Customs view this bond as one that is separate from the general importationbond, which will continue to be required. Further, the statute is interpretedas requiring a separate bond for each vehicle imported. This means thatthe 1988 Act requires an individual bond to be given for each vehicle imported.A bond is not blanket in nature, covering any vehicle that may be importedby a registered importer. In other words, the required bond will be ofa single entry nature, and not of a continuous nature. The bond is acquiredby the vehicle owner. Thus, a Registered Importer may not import a vehiclein which it has no ownership interest. The new requirements were set forth in proposed andSection; 591.5(f). NADAexpressed its general support. General Motors commented that part 591 asproposed did not state the conditions of the bond, nor that the vehiclewas being imported under bond for conformance purposes. It recommendedeliminating the ambiguity by including a statement of purpose in the declarationrequired in paragraph 591.5(f), specifically that ``the vehicle is beingimported under bond to ensure conformance, delivery to the Secretary ofthe Treasury for export at no cost to the United States, or abandonmentto the United States''. NHTSA agrees with this comment, and an appropriateaddition has been made to the declaration required by paragraph 591.5(f).Because the bond is given to secure performance to the requirements ofthe Vehicle Safety Act, rather than to fulfill obligations under Customs'regulations, it will be a bond of the Department of Transportation. Nomitigation of the bond is contemplated for vehicles that appear to conformonly partially, unlike the practice today. If full conformance is not achieved,the vehicle must be exported, or abandoned to the U.S. If none of theseoccur, the bond is forfeited. NHTSA has decided that the bond shall be150% of the entered value of the vehicle, as determined by Customs. Thebond must have been obtained prior to, or at the time of, entry of thevehicle, and attached to the declaration form. If the bond is not attached,or in an improper amount, the vehicle will be refused entry. 6. The Vehicle Requires Further Manufacturing OperationsUnder new section 108(e), the prohibitions in subsections (a)(1)(A) and(a)(1)(C) shall not apply to any motor vehicle if it requires further manufacturingoperations to perform its intended function (as determined under regulationsprescribed by the Secretary), and is accompanied at the time of entry byits manufacturer's written statement which indicates the applicable Federalmotor vehicle safety standard with which the vehicle does not comply. Thecorresponding current provision is andSection; 12.80(b)(1)(ix): a vehiclemay be imported if it is an ``incomplete vehicle'' as defined by 49 CFRpart 568 Vehicles Built in Two or More Stages. Under part 568, an incompletevehicle manufacturer must provide with an incomplete vehicle a documentthat contains the information specified in paragraph 568.4. With respectto the safety standards, the document must list the specific vehicle typesinto which the incomplete vehicle may be appropriately manufactured, and,with respect to each standard that applies to each such type, make oneof three statements. These statements are (1) that the vehicle when completedwill conform to the standard if no alterations are made to the specifiedcomponents of the vehicle (2) the specific conditions of final manufactureunder which the manufacturer specifies that the complete vehicle will conformto the standard, or (3) that conformity with the standard is not substantiallyaffected by the design of the incomplete vehicle, and that the incompletevehicle manufacturer makes no representation of conformity with the standard.The justification for this exception in andSection; 12.80 has been that thevehicle must conform, and be certified as conforming, upon completion byits final stage manufacturer, and that this is an obligation that existsindependent of the importation process which serves to ensure that safetyneeds are met. As NHTSA noted in its proposal, the question of the type and extent ofmanufacturing required for performance of intended function, will, of course,vary. However, the existing requirements for alterers of certified vehicles(paragraph 568.8) afforded a basis for proposing criteria that distinguishbetween completed vehicles and those that require further manufacturing.Accordingly, NHTSA proposed paragraph 591.5(e), the declaration that ``Thevehicle or equipment item requires further manufacturing operations toperform its intended function, other than the addition of readily attachableequipment items, or minor finishing operations.'' By so doing, NHTSA alsointended to establish a clear dividing line between entry under the technicalnonconformance conditions of paragraph 591.5(b), applicable to completedvehicles, and the greater manufacturing operations required for entry underparagraph (591.5(e). Virginia Department of Motor Vehicles asked what are vehicles requiringfurther manufacturing operations. In commenting on the proposal, The DealerAction Association found the declaration insufficiently comprehensive tolimit its application, and recommended that NHTSA limit this exceptionto original equipment manufacturers, to enable them to manufacture vehiclesin stages, initially outside the United States, and completion within.NADA commented that the further manufacturing specification should be clearlystated as applying to Part 568-type vehicles which must ultimately complywith Federal safety standards. Freightliner stated that it imports ``kits''that are ``incomplete vehicles'' as defined under part 568, and asked whetherit would have to be registered as an importer. NHTSA has carefully considered these comments. The question raised by Virginiais, of course, fundamental to this provision. The proposal indicated thatat a minimum the term included vehicles fitting the definition of ``incompletevehicle'' in part 568. This conclusion is reinforced by reading <T3>in pari passu </T3>the definitions of both ``completed vehicle'' and``incomplete vehicle'' established by part 568, definitions that are mutuallyexclusive. If a vehicle is not incomplete, it is complete. Therefore avehicle requiring further manufacturing operations to perform its intendedfunction is an ``incomplete vehicle'' as defined by part 568.The issue raised by The Dealer Action Association is whether importationunder this provision can be limited to original equipment manufacturers.No such limitation appears upon the face of the statute. The thrust ofthe requirement is towards the vehicle itself: it is one requiring furthermanufacturing, and it is accompanied by an appropriate document. Whilethe vehicle must ultimately conform, the statute does not impose the obligationof conformance upon the importer. NHTSA is loath to read a restrictionof this nature into the 1988 Act that does not appear on its face. Evenwere it sympathetic to the comment, it believes that such a restrictionwould have to be formally proposed for comment. However, NHTSA will monitorimportations under this section and if remedial action appears requiredfor motor vehicle safety, will propose an appropriate restrictive amendment.With respect to NADA's comment, NHTSA has decided to clarify that the documentaccompanying the declaration be a statement in the form specified in part568. This document in its essential respects complies with the languageof section 108(e). If the vehicle is not in compliance with an applicablestandard, that fact will be reflected in the statement made with respectto such standard pursuant to paragraph 568.4. As for a description of thefurther manufacturing operations required for the vehicle to perform itsintended function, NHTSA believes that this must be read within the safetycontext of the 1988 Act. An incomplete vehicle manufacturer will not inmany instances know the manner in which a specific vehicle will be completed,as for example, whether a chassis-cab will be finished with a school busbody, or with a dumping apparatus. But he must make statements relevantto the further manufacturing operations connected with completion of thevehicle in accordance with the Federal safety standards. NHTSA thereforehas decided that this document will satisfy the intent of section 108(e).The only new requirement imposed is that the document must accompany thedeclaration. Finally, with respect to Freightliner's question whether an importer ofa vehicle requiring further manufacturing operations must be registered,the answer is no. There are no safety standards that apply to an incompletevehicle, and the obligation of conformance arises after importation, uponcompletion of manufacture. However, if the incomplete vehicle is a chassis-caband is not certified as required, its importer must be a registered importerwho undertakes to bring it into conformance with applicable standards.Where manufacture has been completed before importation and the vehiclewas not originally manufactured to conform to the standards, the importerof that type of vehicle is required to be registered.Finally, NHTSA wants to make plain that it will countenance no importationsunder paragraph 591.5(e) that appear to be subterfuges to avoid complianceresponsibility. Instances have arisen in the past in which an importeroffered for importation a motor vehicle without its engine, or other runninggear parts, claiming that the merchandise was, in fact, equipment to whichno standard applied, and the importer separately imported the engine orparts. The agency has treated these cases as <T3>de facto </T3>importations of noncomplying motor vehicles, and requiredthem to be entered as nonconforming motor vehicles and evidence of conformityto be subsequently submitted. The agency intends to follow this policy,and will not consider such an assemblage to be a vehicle requiring furthermanufacturing operations. 7. The Importer Has a Contract With a Registered ImporterThe primary eligibility requirements placed by the 1988 Act on personsimporting nonconforming vehicles are that they will have to be, subjectto certain exceptions, registered as importers, or they will have to havecontracts with registered importers to conform the vehicles. A person importingunder contract with a registered importer will have to furnish, at thetime of entry, an appropriate bond (which, under the 1988 amendments, isnot less than 100 percent of the dutiable value of the vehicle and notmore than 150 percent), a copy of the contract or other agreement witha registered importer, and certification that an affirmative decision hasbeen made regarding the eligibility of the vehicle for importation. Thesematters, specified in section 108(f), are covered in paragraph 591.5(f)(ii).Under paragraph 591.6(d), the declaration must be accompanied by a copyof the contract or agreement. The purpose of the new requirements is toincrease the likelihood that nonconforming vehicles will be properly modifiedand actually brought into compliance with the safety standards. 8. The Importer is Eligible To Import Under Present RequirementsNonresidents are affected in another way by the 1988 Act. Under certaincircumstances, and for a limited time, section 108(g) of the Vehicle SafetyAct permits a nonresident (including any member of the Armed Forces) tocontinue to import a vehicle under the present regulation, that is, tohave it conformed by a person other than a registered importer. This exceptionapplies to a single vehicle imported, for personal use and not for resale,between January 31, 1990, and October 31, 1992, by an individual whoseassigned place of employment was outside the United States for the totalperiod between October 31, 1988, and the date of importation, providedthat the vehicle was acquired (or was subject to a binding contract toacquire) before October 31, 1988, and that the individual has not previouslyimported a nonconforming motor vehicle. This amendment is reflected inparagraph 591.5(g). There were no comments on this subject. However, theVirginia Department of Motor Vehicles asked what standard a vehicle purchasedor ordered before October 31, 1988, would have to meet when it is imported.The answer is, those standards that applied to such a vehicle on the dayof its manufacture, i.e., assembly. This requirement of the Vehicle SafetyAct is unchanged by the 1988 Act. 9. Importation by Diplomats and Foreign Military PersonnelAny person who is a member of the armed forces of a foreign country onassignment in the U.S., or any person who is a member of the Secretariatof a public international organization so designated under the InternationalOrganization Immunities Act and who is within the class of persons forwhom free entry of motor vehicles has been authorized by the Secretaryof State may currently import a nonconforming vehicle for the durationof their stay pursuant to the declaration that the vehicle is for personaluse only (andSection; 12.80(b)(b)(1)(vi)). Section 108(h) of the VehicleSafety Act specifically retains this exclusion, but in addition requiresNHTSA to ensure that any such vehicle will be exported or abandoned whenthe importer ceases to reside in the U.S. It also forbids the sale whilewithin the United States of any motor vehicle imported under this provision.The enforcement of this provision would appear to rest with the Officeof Foreign Missions of the Department of State. NHTSA understands thatforeign personnel in the exempted categories who import nonconforming vehiclesinto the United States, are required to register their vehicles with thisOffice. Under the registration process, the Office takes possession ofthe foreign title of the vehicle, and issues registration plates to theimporter after verifying that the vehicle is insured. The importer doesnot take repossession of the title until the registration plates are returnedto the Office. At that time, the Office asks for an explanation. The usualreason is that the importer's assignment in the United States has ended,and that the importer is leaving the country. Documentary proof is required,such as a copy of the importer's orders. Heretofore, however, no documentaryproof has been required that the vehicle is being, or has been, exported.Thus, it is possible that a nonconforming vehicle could be sold betweenthe time the importer repossesses the title and actually leaves the country,but the Office believes that this is only an infrequent occurrence. NHTSAhas informally approached the Office as to the possibility that it couldrequire proof of exportation of diplomatic vehicles, and has found theOffice amenable to that suggestion. This approach appears less cumbersomethan requiring a bond for the exportation of diplomatic vehicles. Accordingly,NHTSA is adopting as one of the declarations a diplomatic importer mustmake under paragraph 595.5(h) that (s)he will provide the Office of ForeignMissions, at the conclusion of a tour of duty and before departure fromthe United States, with documentary proof that the vehicle is being, orhas been, exported.Under the existing law and regulations, it has been the practice to allowan exempted diplomatic importer to sell his or her nonconforming vehicleto another person in one of the exempted categories. The justificationfor this practice is that the exempted buyer is himself eligible to importa nonconforming vehicle. The agency does not construe the 1988 Act as forbiddingthis type of sale between exempted importers.However, the 1988 Act has another effect. Heretofore, the agency had noobjection if sale of a nonconforming diplomatic vehicle to a nonexemptedparty occurred after the vehicle had been brought into conformance withapplicable Federal safety standards. NHTSA commented in the preamble tothe April proposal that if this practice is to continue, it would haveto be greatly modified. If an exempted importer wishes to sell a nonconformingvehicle in the United States, NHTSA indicated that the importer be prohibitedfrom doing so unless (1) the vehicle is one which the Administrator hasdetermined is modifiable to conform to the safety standards, and (2) thevehicle will be conformed through a registered importer. In so suggesting,NHTSA believed that this type of transaction was also within the intentof the 1988 Act, and that otherwise, a nonconforming vehicle may not besold if imported pursuant to the diplomatic exemption. The sole commenteron this declaration. The Dealer Action Association, recommended forbiddingthis type of transaction, and restricting sales to those between diplomaticpersonnel. As an alternative, it suggested establishing procedures analogousto those under paragraph 591.5(f)(2) by which an individual would contractwith a registered importer.The agency has reviewed this comment, and has concluded that sales shouldbe restricted to those between diplomatic personnel. After reviewing the1988 amendments, NHTSA believes that vehicles imported pursuant to thediplomatic exemption should be exported at the end of the diplomat-importer'stour of duty, unless the vehicle is sold to a person who would have beeneligible to have imported it under such exemption. If a diplomat wishesto enter a nonconforming vehicle with the intent of selling it in the UnitedStates, he must do so outside the diplomatic exception and through eithera registered importer, or pursuant to a contract with one. As both a practicaland legal matter, NHTSA would find it difficult to enforce a no sale provisionagainst diplomatic personnel, and the regulation has not been adopted soas to allow this type of sale.10. The Vehicle is 25 or More Years OldA motor vehicle is allowed immediate entry under andSection; 12.80(b)(1)(i)if it was manufactured before any applicable Federal motor vehicle safetystandards were in effect. All motor vehicles, other than motorcycles, manufacturedon or after January 1, 1968, have been covered by safety standards. Accordingly,this declaration has been used only for the entry of vehicles manufacturedbefore January 1, 1968. Under section 108(i), added by the 1988 Act, amotor vehicle may be allowed entry without the necessity of conformanceif it is 25 years old or older. Thus, after January 1, 1993, vehicles thatwere manufactured on or after January 1, 1968, will be relieved of thenecessity to conform as they reach 25 years of age. The existing declarationwill be retained until January 1, 1993, although clarified by specifyingthe January 1, 1968 date (paragraph 591.5(i)). This is necessary to preventthe importers of vehicles which are less than 25 years old but manufacturedbefore January 1, 1968, from being inadvertently required to enter theirvehicles pursuant to the 1988 amendments. During 1992, the agency willamend paragraph 591.5(i) to implement the 25-year old exclusion effectiveJanuary 1, 1993. There were no comments on this aspect of the regulation.11. Importation for Research, Investigations, Studies, etc.Importation of nonconforming vehicles without bond is presently allowedif the importation is solely for the purpose of show, test, experiment,competition, repair, or alteration (andSection; 12.80(b)(1)(vii)). If thevehicle is imported for test or experiment, it may be licensed for useon the public roads for a period not to exceed one year, extendable fortwo successive year periods, or a period of three years in all. Importationfor this class of noncomplying motor vehicles has been permitted pursuantto the assumption that motor vehicle safety would not be affected by thetemporary importation of noncomplying motor vehicles not generally usedon the public roads, and whose appearance on them would be limited.Section 108(j) of the Vehicle Safety Act modifies these categories. Itprovides NHTSA with authority to exempt a vehicle from importation andcertification violations upon such terms and conditions as may be necessarysolely for the purpose of research, investigations, studies, demonstrationsor training, or competitive racing events. It does not include the terms`'show'' and ``repair'' currently in use. In the notice of proposed rulemaking,NHTSA observed that prospective importers ought not to be unduly concernedat this. In NHTSA's experience, importation for repair has averaged, perhaps,one vehicle every two years. Manufacturers who have imported nonconformingproducts for display at auto shows to gauge public reaction to new stylingor engineering features will not be precluded from declaring that suchimportation is for ``research'' or ``demonstrations''. And museums willbe able to bring in nonconforming vehicles under the 25-year exception.NHTSA proposed to allow importation for the statutory purposes specified,provided that the declaration is accompanied by certain information andstatements. If this information indicates that on-road use for a periodthat is greater than 1 year is required for these purposes, the importerwill not be required to petition NHTSA for yearly extensions, as is presentlythe case. At the end of 3 years, the importer is subject to terminationof the Customs Temporary Importation Bond under which the vehicle entered.At that point, the vehicle must be destroyed, exported, or abandoned tothe United States. Alternatively, if duty is paid at the time of importationof the nonconforming vehicle, the vehicle must not remain in the UnitedStates for a period longer than 5 years after entry. The proposal alsoprohibited an importer of a vehicle imported for competitive racing eventsfrom licensing it for use on the public roads.NHTSA also stated in the proposal that it envisioned that a registeredimporter who intends to file a petition under Part 593 for a determinationthat a vehicle is eligible for importation because it is capable of modificationcould avail itself of the demonstration exception to import such vehiclesas may be necessary in order to develop the documentation needed to demonstratethe vehicle's capability for modification.Comments to this proposal varied in nature and content. A number of commenterspointed out a contradiction between the blanket prohibition against licensingfor on-road use contained in proposed paragraph 591.5(j), and the associatedprovision in paragraph 591.6(f) requiring submission of certain informationif the vehicle is to be licensed for on-road use during its stay in theUnited States. BMW suggested that NHTSA conform its provisions to accordwith similar ones of EPA contained in 19 CFR 12.73(h) and 40 CFR 85.1511(b)(2).General Motors, Volkswagen, and Ford recommended specifying the exceptions,such as allowing on road use when such use is an integral part of the purposefor which it was imported. Austin Rover asked NHTSA to clarify that thelicensing for use prohibition applies only to vehicles imported for competitiveracing events, and Volkswagen wanted the prohibition struck for this typeof vehicle. Barry Wood noted in a phone call that the proposal did notcover vehicles imported from Canada for repair and returned to that country.He observed that this was a not infrequent practice in his part of theUnited States. Finally, General Motors asked that this exception not terminateafter 5 years, but be available for an unlimited period of time, citingthe allowance by EPA of unlimited use of vehicles not conforming to Federalemission requirements.The agency agrees that the proposal appears to present a conflict betweenparagraphs 591.5(j) and 591.6(f). The comments have caused NHTSA to reviewclosely the new statutory language, and the agency has concluded that itprovides sufficient flexibility to respond favorably to many of the comments.The specific language of new section 108(j) is ``The Secretary may exemptany motor vehicle or item of motor vehicle equipment from subsections (a)(1)and (c)(1) upon such terms and conditions as the Secretary may find necessarysolely for the purpose of research, investigations, studies, demonstrationsor training, or competitive racing events.'' Subsection (a)(1) containsthe statutory prohibition against importation of noncomplying vehicles,and their introduction into interstate commerce. Subsection (c)(1) containsthe requirement of vehicle certification. In other of the 1988 Act amendments,Congress has flatly stated that subsections (a)(1) and (c)(1) shall notapply provided specified steps are taken. Subsection (j), on the otherhand, implies that subsections (a)(1) and (c)(1) do apply, but that NHTSAhas the flexibility to determine when they do not. For example, if NHTSAhas allowed importation and on-road use for a period of 4 years, and thevehicle is not exported at the end of that time, NHTSA may impose a civilpenalty. As a further example, if NHTSA has determined that indefiniteon-road use is required to achieve the importer's stated purpose, NHTSAcould inform the importer that it would not find that the Vehicle SafetyAct had been violated. If licensing for on-road use is an absolute requirementof a competitive event, NHTSA could allow it for a limited period of time,and under circumstances prescribed in its letter of permission. Thus, thefinal rule has been modified to reflect the agency's conclusions. UnderandSection; 591.6(f), any person seeking to import a motor vehicle underandSection; 591.5(j) must write NHTSA in advance of such importation witha full and complete statement of the purposes of the importation, and whetheron-road use is contemplated. NHTSA's reply, if affirmative, will imposesuch terms and conditions as may seem required for motor vehicle safety.Violations of any of these terms and conditions will be considered a violationof section 108(a)(1)(A) of the Vehicle Safety Act, for which a civil penaltymay be imposed. A copy of NHTSA's letter or permission must be providedCustoms upon entry of the vehicle, attached to the declaration form. UnderandSection; 591.7(f) in its final form, vehicles imported pursuant to paragraph591.5(j) for which duties have been paid, must be exported not later than5 years after entry, unless permission has been obtained from NHTSA.There remains the question raised by Barry Wood, whether a nonconformingvehicle may be imported for ``repair'' in the absence of any express statutoryauthority allowing it, or any discussion of it in the legislative historyof the 1988 Act. Although the joint regulations have permitted this practicefor over 20 years, it was omitted from the categories of vehicles importablepursuant to paragraph 591.5(j). There are really two issues here, ratherthan one. The situation mentioned by Mr. Wood involves vehicles that arereturned to Canada after repair. That is to say, they do not appear tobe vehicles temporarily imported by U.S. residents, but vehicles that aretemporarily exported by their Canadian owners. As such, they appear tobe vehicles involved in international traffic, imported for a limited periodof time by nonresidents of the United States. In NHTSA's view, Canadian-ownedvehicles that are repaired in the United States and returned to Canadaat the completion of repairs are properly entered pursuant to paragraph591.5(d). The other issue is importation by U.S. residents of nonconformingvehicles for repair. The agency has no knowledge of any importation byU.S. residents of nonconforming vehicles for repair, followed by theirsubsequent exportation. At most, it appears highly infrequent, so thatthe failure of Congress to include it in the 1988 Act ought not to worka hardship.<ITAG tagnum="84">Importation of Motor Vehicle Equipment</ITAG>Under 19 CFR 12.80, the first seven of the nine declarations applicableto motor vehicles also apply to motor vehicle equipment. The primary focusof the 1988 Act is upon motor vehicles, however, and some of the new exceptionsdo not apply to motor vehicle equipment. An analysis of the equipment provisionsand final rules follows.First, the agency has no jurisdiction over an item that does not fit thedefinition of motor vehicle equipment, as contained in 15 U.S.C. 1391(4).Thus, such an item may be entered pursuant to the declaration that it isnot a system, part, or component of a motor vehicle (paragraph 591.5(a)(2)).The 25-year old exception for motor vehicles does not extend to motor vehicleequipment. This means that equipment covered by an equipment standard continuesto be importable without the necessity for conformance (absent other exceptions)only if manufactured on a date before a standard applied to it (paragraph591.5(i)(2)).An equipment item that is certified as conforming to applicable equipmentstandards continues to be admissible upon a simple declaration that itconforms (paragraph 591.5(b)).Because the importation for export exception is provided for by the VehicleSafety Act, and not affected substantively by the 1988 Act, nonconformingequipment may continue to be imported for export, provided that it or itscontainer bears a label or tag to that effect at the time of importation.(See section 108(b)(5) of the Vehicle Safety Act, redesignated as 108(b)(3)by the 1988 Act and paragraph 591.5(c)).Under new section 108(e), an equipment item need not comply upon importationif it requires further manufacturing operations to perform its intendedfunction. In the final rule, the agency has decided to adopt terminologyfrom part 568 to implement this requirement for motor vehicles. Manifestly,part 568 does not apply to ``incomplete'' equipment, and the agency isadopting the exact language of the 1988 Act as the requirement for entryof motor vehicle equipment subject to section 108(e).The new provisions regarding importation for purposes of research, investigation,studies, demonstrations or training, or competitive racing events (section108(j)) expressly include motor vehicle equipment as well as vehicles,and thus supersede existing requirements which make no provision for them.This change is reflected in paragraph 591.5(j).Because the 1988 Act is specific about the conditions under which nonconformingequipment items may be admissible, there appear to be certain areas inwhich a right to import a nonconforming equipment item no longer exists.Although andSection; 12.80(b)(1)(iii) allows importation of a nonconformingequipment item under bond for conformance within 120 days of entry, nosimilar provisions appear in the 1988 Act; the bond, registered importer,and eligibility determination provisions apply only to importation of motorvehicles. Therefore, as of January 31, 1990, nonconforming equipment mayno longer be imported pursuant to a declaration that it will be broughtinto conformance. Although NHTSA has incorporated nonresident importationprocedures for motor vehicles without specific authority in the 1988 Act,it does not believe that is required to extend those procedures to covernonconforming equipment items (other than those attached and in use ona vehicle), as is presently provided for under andSection; 12.80(b)(1)(v).Similarly, the diplomatic/foreign military exception will no longer covernonconforming equipment items, as it presently does in andSection; 12.80(b)(vi).Although the agency did not call specific attention to these omissionsin the preamble to the proposal, the omissions are readily apparent inthe text of the proposed regulation.<ITAG tagnum="84">Provision of New Declaration Forms  </ITAG>NADA asked that the agency either revise or publish a new HS-7 importationform as part of the final rule, or indicate how that form will be revisedas part of a new Customs Service regulation.  Development of a new form in its definitive state must await receipt andaction upon petitions for reconsideration, if any, regarding this finalrule. However, NHTSA believes that it would be in the public interest topublish the new form in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>at the earliest practicable time, and will endeavorto do so in a further notice under Docket 89-5.  <ITAG tagnum="84"><T2>Impacts  </T2></ITAG>NHTSA has considered the impacts of this rulemaking action and has determinedthat it is not major within the meaning of Executive Order 12291 ``FederalRegulation''. It implements Public Law 100-562 under which primary authorityto establish regulations governing the importation of motor vehicles andequipment into the United States is shifted to NHTSA, rather than beingjointly shared with the U.S. Customs Service. As such, it establishes therights and duties of those who may import nonconforming motor vehicles,and the types of nonconforming motor vehicles that may be imported. Itis not significant under Department of Transportation regulation policiesand procedures. Less than 3,000 motor vehicles a year are currently imported,and it is anticipated that this number will not increase. There is no substantialimpact upon a major transportation safety program, and the action doesnot involve any substantial public interest or controversy. There is nosubstantial effect on state and local governments. The impact upon theFederal Government is that certain present obligations of the U.S. CustomsService are transferred to the Department of Transportation. As discussedpreviously, many of the new requirements are specified by the 1988 Act,and thus do not reflect any exercise of agency discretion. These includenot only importation through or by contract with a registered importer,but also importation of vehicles and equipment requiring further manufacturingto perform their intended function, importation of vehicles by specifiedforeign diplomatic and military personnel, importation of vehicles morethan 25 years old, and importation of vehicles for the purpose of research,investigations, studies, demonstrations or training, or competitive racingevents, and importation under a separate performance bond. Nevertheless,a regulatory evaluation analyzing the economic impacts of this and therelated final rules required by Public Law 100-562 has been prepared, andis available for review in the docket, as part of the Regulatory FlexibilityAnalysis.  The agency has also considered the effects of this rule in relation tothe Regulatory Flexibility Act. I certify that this rule will not havea significant economic impact upon a substantial number of small entities.Although entities that currently modify nonconforming vehicles are smallbusinesses within the meaning of the Regulatory Flexibility Act, thereis no restriction prohibiting them from registering as importers and continuingtheir activities. Although a registered importer will have to pay a feeor fees to the agency, as required by statute, the agency does not viewthis requirement as resulting in a significant impact. Further, small organizationsand governmental jurisdictions will not be significantly affected as theyare not generally importers and purchasers of nonconforming motor vehicles.However, a Regulatory Flexibility Analysis has been prepared covering allregulations that implement the 1988 Act, and placed in the public docket. NHTSA has analyzed this rule for purposes of the National EnvironmentalPolicy Act. The rule will not have a significant effect upon the environmentbecause it is anticipated that the annual volume of motor vehicles importedunder the rule will not vary significantly from that existing before promulgationof the rule.  The declaration requirements in this rule are considered to be informationcollection requirements, as that term is defined by the Office of Managementand Budget (OMB) in 5 CFR part 1320. The declarations have been submittedto OMB for its approval, pursuant to the requirements of the PaperworkReduction Act (44 U.S.C. 3501 <T3>et seq.</T3>). The information collection requirements in this rulebecome effective when they have been approved by OMB.  The rule has been analyzed in accordance with the principles and criteriacontained in Executive Order 12612 ``Federalism'', and it has been determinedthat it does not have sufficient federalism implications to warrant thepreparation of a Federalism Assessment.  <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 49 CFR Part 591  </ITAG>Imports, Motor vehicles safety, Motor vehicles.  In consideration of the foregoing, a new part 591, Importation of Vehiclesand Equipment Subject to Federal Motor Vehicle Safety Standards, is addedto title 49, chapter V, to read as follows:  <ITAG tagnum="56">PART 591_IMPORTATION OF VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT SUBJECT TO FEDERALMOTOR VEHICLE SAFETY STANDARDS  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">591.1 Scope.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">591.2 Purpose.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">591.3 Applicability.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">591.4 Definitions.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">591.5 Declarations required for importation.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">591.6 Documents accompanying declarations.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">591.7 Restrictions on importations.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Public Law 100-562, 15 U.S.C. 1401, 1407; delegationsof authority at 49 CFR 1.50 and 501.8  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;591.1  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Scope.  </ITAG>This part establishes procedures governing the importation of motor vehiclesand motor vehicle equipment subject to the Federal motore vehicle safetystandards.  <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;591.2  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Purpose.  </ITAG>The purpose of this part is to ensure that motor vehicles and motor vehiclesequipment permanently imported into the United States conform with, orare brought into conformity with, all applicable Federal motor vehiclesafety standards issued under part 571 of this chapter, and to ensure thatvehicles and equipment items imported on a temporary basis are ultimatelyeither exported or abandoned to the United States.  <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;591.3  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Applicability.  </ITAG>This part applies to any person offering a motor vehicle or item of motorvehicle equipment for importation into the United States. Regulations prescribingfurther procedures for importation of motor vehicles and items of motorvehicles equipment into the Customs territory of the United States, asdefined in 19 U.S.C. 1202, are set forth in 19 CFR 12.80.  <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;591.4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions. </ITAG>All terms used in this part that are defined in section 102 of the NationalTraffic and Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1966 (15 U.S.C. 1391) are usedas defined in the Act. <T3>Administrator</T3> means the Administrator of NHTSA. <T3>NHTSA</T3> means the National Highway Traffic Safety Administrationof the Department of Transportation. <T3>Original manufacturer</T3> means the entity responsible for the originalmanufacture or assembly of a motor vehicle, and does not include any person(other than such entity) who converts the motor vehicle after its manufactureto conformance with the Federal motor vehicle safety standards. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;591.5</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Declarations required for importation. </ITAG>No person shall import a motor vehicle or item of motor vehicle equipmentinto the United States unless, at the time it is offered for importation,its importer files a declaration, in duplicate, which declares one of thefollowing: (a)(1) The vehicle was not manufactured primarily for use on the publicroads and thus is not a motor vehicle subject to the Federal motor vehiclesafety standards; or (2) The equipment item is not a system, part, or component of a motor vehicleand thus is not an item of motor vehicle equipment subject to the Federalmotor vehicle safety standards. (b) The vehicle or equipment item conforms with all applicable safety standards(or the vehicle does not conform solely because readily attachable equipmentitems which will be attached to it before it is offered for sale to thefirst purchaser for purposes other than resale are not attached), and bearsa certification label or tag to that effect permanently affixed by theoriginal manufacturer to the vehicle, or to the equipment item or its deliverycontainer, in accordance with, as applicable, 49 CFR parts 555, 567, 568,or 571 (for certain equipment items). (c) The vehicle or equipment item does not comply with all applicable Federalmotor vehicle safety standards, but is intended solely for export, andthe vehicle or equipment item, and the outside of the container of theequipment item, if any, bears a label or tag to that effect. (d) The vehicle does not conform with all applicable Federal motor vehiclesafety standards, but the importer is eligible to import it because: (1) (S)he is a nonresident of the United States and the vehicle is registeredin a country other than the United States, (2) (S)he is temporarily importing the vehicle for personal use for a periodnot to exceed one year, and will not sell it during that time, (3) (S)he will export it not later than the end of one year after entry,and (4) The declaration contains the importer's passport number and countryof issue. (e) The vehicle or equipment item requires further manufacturing operationsto perform its intended function, other than the addition of readily attachableequipment items such as mirrors, wipers, or tire and rim assemblies, orminor finishing operations such as painting, and upon completion of suchfurther manufacturing operations will comply with all applicable Federalmotor vehicle safety standards. (f) The vehicle does not conform with all applicable Federal motor vehiclesafety standards, but the importer is eligible to import it because: (1) The importer has furnished a bond, which is attached to the declaration,in amount equal to 150% of the entered value of the vehicle as determinedby the Secretary of the Treasury, to ensure that the vehicle will be broughtinto compliance with all applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards,or, in the absence of such compliance, that it will be delivered to theSecretary of the Treasury for export, or abandoned to the United States,and that if the Administrator determines that the vehicle has not beenbrought into compliance with all such standards, the importer states (s)hewill deliver to the Secretary of the Treasury for export, or abandon tothe United States, such vehicle within the time limit imposed by the Administrator;and (2)(i) The importer has registered with NHTSA pursuant to part 592 of thischapter, and such registration has not been revoked or suspended, and theAdministrator has determined pursuant to part 593 of this chapter thatthe model and model year of the vehicle to be imported is eligible forimportation into the United States; or (ii) The importer has executed a contract or other agreement with an importerwho has registered with NHTSA pursuant to part 592 of this chapter andwhose registration has not been suspended or revoked; and the Administratorhas determined pursuant to part 593 of this chapter that the model andmodel year of the vehicle to be imported is eligible for importation intothe United States; (g) The vehicle does not conform with all applicable Federal motor vehiclesafety standards, but the importer is eligible to import it because: (1) The importer's assigned place of employment has been outside the UnitedStates at all times between October 31, 1988, and the date the vehicleis entered into the United States; (2) The importer has not previously imported a motor vehicle into the UnitedStates that was subject to the Federal motor vehicle safety standards;(3) The importer had acquired (or entered into a binding contract to acquire)the vehicle before October 31, 1988; and (4) The vehicle will be entered into the United States not later than October31, 1992. (h) The vehicle does not conform with all applicable Federal motor vehiclesafety standards, but the importer is eligible to import it because: (1) (S)he is a member of: (i) The armed forces of a foreign country on assignment in the United States;or (ii) The Secretariat of a public international organization so designatedunder the International Organizations Immunities Act (22 U.S.C. 288) onassignment in the United States; or (iii) The personnel of a foreign government for whom free entry of vehicleshas been authorized by the Department of State; and (iv) The motor vehicle is being imported on a temporary basis, and forthe personal use of the importer. (2) (S)he will not sell the vehicle to any person in the United States,other than a person eligible to import a vehicle under this subsection;and (3) (S)he will provide the Office of Foreign Missions of the State Department,before departing the United States at the conclusion of a tour of duty,with documentary proof that the vehicle is being, or has been, exported.(i)(1) The vehicle was manufactured before January 1, 1968, or, if a motorcycle,before January 1, 1969; or (2) The equipment item was manufactured on a date when no applicable safetystandards were in effect. (j) The vehicle or equipment item does not conform with all applicableFederal motor vehicle safety standards, but is being imported solely forthe purpose of: (1) research; (2) investigations; (3) studies; (4) demonstrations or training; or (5) competitive racing events;</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">and the importer has received written permission from NHTSA. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;591.6 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Documents accompanying declarations. </ITAG>Declarations of eligibility for importation made pursuant to andSection;591.5must be accompanied by the following certification and documents, whereapplicable. (a) A declaration made pursuant to andSection;591.5(a) shall be accompaniedby a statement substantiating that the vehicle was not manufactured foruse on the public roads, or that the equipment item was not manufacturedfor use on a motor vehicle or is not an item of motor vehicle equipment.(b) A declaration made pursuant to andSection; 591.5(e) shall be accompaniedby:(1) (For a motor vehicle) a document meeting the requirements of andSection;568.4 of part 568 of this chapter.(2) (For an item of motor vehicle equipment) a written statement issuedby the manufacturer of the equipment item which states the applicable Federalmotor vehicle safety standard(s) with which the equipment item is not incompliance, and which describes the further manufacturing required forthe equipment item to perform its intended function.(c) A declaration made pursuant to andSection; 591.5(f) shall be accompaniedby a bond in an amount equal to 150% of the entered value of the vehicleas determined by the Secretary of the Treasury for the conformance of thevehicle with all applicable Federal motor vehicle safety standards, or,if conformance is not achieved, for the delivery of such vehicle to theSecretary of the Treasury for export at no cost to the United States, orfor its abandonment.(d) A declaration made pursuant to andSection; 591.5(f) by an importer whois not a Registered Importer shall be accompanied by a copy of the contractor other agreement that the importer has with a Registered Importer tobring the vehicle into conformance with all applicable Federal motor vehiclesafety standards.(e) A declaration made pursuant to andSection; 591.5(g) shall be accompaniedby certification, including appropriate documentary proof that the vehiclefor which declaration is made had been acquired by the importer as of October31, 1988, or, if not so acquired, by a copy of a contract to acquire thevehicle, dated before October 31, 1988, which was binding upon the importer.(f) A declaration made pursuant to andSection; 591.5(h) shall be accompaniedby a copy of the importer's official orders, or, if a qualifying memberof the personnel of a foreign government on assignment in the United States,the name of the embassy to which the importer is accredited. A declarationmade pursuant to andSection; 591.5(j) shall be accompanied by a letter fromthe Administrator authorizing importation pursuant to that paragraph. Anyperson seeking to import a motor vehicle or item of motor vehicle equipmentpursuant to andSection; 591.5(j) shall submit in advance of such importation,a written request to the Administrator containing a full and complete statementidentifying the specific purpose(s) of importation, which describes theuse to be made of the vehicle or equipment item. If use on the public roadsis an integral part of the purpose for which the vehicle or equipment itemis imported, the statement shall request permission to license the vehiclefor use (or use the equipment item) on the public roads, describing thepurpose for which such use is necessary, and stating the estimated periodof time necessary to use the vehicle or equipment item on the public roads.The statement shall also state the intended disposition to be made of thevehicle or equipment item after completion of the purpose for which itis imported. Any violation of a term or condition imposed by the Administratorshall be considered a violation of 15 U.S.C. 1397(a)(1)(A) for which acivil penalty may be imposed.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 591.7</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Restrictions on importations.</ITAG>(a) A vehicle or equipment item which has entered the United States undera declaration made pursuant to andSection; 591.5(j), and for which a TemporaryImportation Bond has been provided to the Secretary of the Treasury, shallnot remain in the United States for a period that exceeds 3 years fromits date of entry.(b) A vehicle or equipment item which has entered the United States undera declaration made pursuant to andSection; 591.5(j), and for which duty hasbeen paid, shall not remain in the United States for a period that exceeds5 years from its date of entry, unless written permission has been obtainedfrom the Administrator, NHTSA.(c) An importer of a vehicle which has entered the United States undera declaration made pursuant to andSection; 591.5(j) may license it for useon the public roads only if written permission has been granted by theAdministrator, NHTSA, pursuant to andSection; 591.6(f).<ITAG tagnum="21">Issued on: September 26, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Jeffrey R. Miller,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-23080 Filed 9-27-89; 11:07 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-59-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>