<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89726-0040 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.7-26-89.f2.A1039</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 142 / Wednesday, July 26, 1989/ Proposed Rules <ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Research and Special Programs Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">49 CFR Parts 171 through 177 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. HM-126F, Notice No. 89-4] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="91">RIN 2137-AB26 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Training for Hazardous Materials Transportation </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY:</T2> Research and Special Programs Administration (RSPA), Departmentof Transportation (DOT).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION:</T2> Notice of proposed rulemaking and notice of public hearing. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY:</T2> RSPA is proposing to amend the Hazardous Materials Regulationsto enhance training requirements for persons involved in the transportationof hazardous materials. Based on information provided to RSPA through itshazardous materials incident reporting system, human error is the probablecause of most transportation incidents, and associated consequences, involvingthe release of hazardous materials. By requiring enhanced training forpersons involved in the transportation of hazardous materials, it is intendedto increase awareness of safety consideration and regulatory requirementsinvolved in transporting hazardous materials and, thus, reduce the occurrenceof hazardous materials incidents caused by human error.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES:</T2> <T3>Comments:</T3> Comments must be received on or before November 24,1989.<T3>Public hearing:</T3> Public hearings will be held 9:30 a.m. to 5:00p.m. on October 3, 1989 in Salt Lake City, Utah and October 11, 1989 inWashington, D.C. If the number of speakers warrants an extra day, the SaltLake City hearing will be extended through October 4.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES:</T2> <T3>Comments:</T3> Address comments to Dockets Unit, Research and SpecialPrograms Administration, Department of Transportation, Washington, DC 20590.Comments should identify the docket and be submitted, if possible, in fivecopies. Persons wishing to receive confirmation of receipt of their commentsshould include a self-addressed stamped postcard. The Dockets Unit is locatedin Room 8421 of the Nassif Building, 400 Seventh St., SW., Washington,DC 20590. Public dockets may be reviewed between the hours of 8:30 a.m.to 5:00 p.m., Monday through Friday, except holidays. <T3>Public hearing:</T3> The October 3, and October 4 if necessary, 1989public hearing will be held at the Doubletree Inn, 215 W.S. Temple Street,Salt Lake City, Utah. The October 11, 1989 hearing will be held at theFAA Auditorium, Third floor, Federal Office Building 10A, 800 IndependenceAvenue, SW., Washington, DC. Any person wishing to present an oral statement at the public hearing shouldnotify the Dockets Unit, by telephone or in writing, at least two daysin advance of the hearing date. Each request must identify the speaker;organization represented, if any; daytime telephone number; and the anticipatedlength of the presentation, not to exceed ten minutes. Written text ororal statements should be presented to the hearing officer prior to theoral presentation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2> Carl V. Strombom or Delmer F.Billings, Standards Division, Office of Hazardous Materials Transportation,RSPA, Department of Transportation, 400 Seventh Street SW., Washington,DC 20590, Telephone: (202) 366-4488.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Purpose and Objectives of This Rulemaking </ITAG>In this document, RSPA is proposing to amend the Hazardous Materials Regulations(HMR) to require that persons who perform functions involving the transportationof hazardous materials receive training concerning regulatory requirementsapplicable to those functions, and persons who work in proximity to hazardousmaterials receive training concerning hazardous materials awareness andsafety procedures. Although RSPA refers to the term ``in proximity'' throughout this notice,the term has not been defined. RSPA is especially interested in obtainingcomments on this term. In particular, RSPA solicits comments on the following:(1) What types of workers would be covered by the term ``in proximity''?,(2) Is the term ``in proximity'' too vague? If so, how should ``in proximity''be defined or clarified? <ITAG tagnum="84">II. Background </ITAG>A. Existing 49 CFR Training Requirements The HMR are codified in Title 49 of the Code of Federal Regulations (49CFR, Parts 171-179). Currently, andSection;andSection; 173.1, 174.7, 175.20,176.13 and 177.800 of 49 CFR contain general requirements for training.Section 173.1(b) states, in part, ``* * * It is the duty of each personwho offers hazardous materials for transportation to instruct each of hisofficers, agents, and employees having any responsibility for preparinghazardous materials for shipment as to applicable regulations in this subchapter.''In Part 174, which addresses carriage by rail, andSection; 174.7 states ``Unlessthis subchapter specifically provides that another person is to performa particular duty, each carrier, including a connecting carrier, shallperform the duties specified and comply with each applicable requirementof this part, and <T3>shall instruct its employees in relation thereto.</T3>'' (emphasisadded). Similar general requirements to instruct employees are containedin andSection;andSection; 175.20, 176.13 and 177.800 for carriage by aircraft,vessel and motor vehicle, respectively. The purpose of these training requirementsis to ensure that persons involved with hazardous materials transportationare aware of their duties and responsibilities under the HMR. In addition to these general requirements for training, the HMR also containspecific training requirements applicable to carriers and drivers who transportflammable cryogenic liquids (andSection; 177.816) and highway route controlledquantities of radioactive materials (andSection; 177.825) by motor vehicle.For these categories of hazardous materials, carriers must insure thatdrivers receive written training which includes, in part, instruction concerningthe requirements in the HMR which pertain to the material being transportedand the properties and potential hazards of that material. B. CRS Report On April 4, 1986, the Congressional Research Service (CRS) published areport entitled ``Should DOT's Training Regulations Affecting Workers Handling,and Drivers Transporting, Hazardous Materials Be Strengthened''. Althoughthe CRS report recognized that the hazardous materials transportation industryhas a good safety record, the report concluded that ``* * * increased trainingcould reduce the frequency of incidents, lives could be saved, the amountof property losses and the number of injuries could be reduced''. The following is the CRS report's analysis of DOT's current regulationswhich pertain to the training of workers handling and drivers transportinghazardous materials by highway: <ITAG tagnum="21">1. DOT's general training regulations covering workers handling hazardousmaterials in highway transportation can, at best, be considered to be vague;and they do not specify the nature, content, objectives, or length of therequired instruction, its desired frequency, or when new employees shouldbe trained. In addition, DOT's regulations do not require a certificationor a testing program designed to ensure that these workers have a basicunderstanding of and sensitivity toward the hazardous properties of, andrisks associated with, the chemical with which they are dealing; nor dothey require testing to ensure worker's awareness and understanding ofappropriate emergency response procedures pertinent to releases of hazardousmaterials. The DOT training concept is, in general, to simply require thoroughinstruction of employees, leaving much in the way of training specifics,techniques, and testing up to the carrier.    </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">2. Unlike many other safety concerns that are governed by complexand detailed HMT regulations, the Department, for the highway mode, appearsto have devoted little attention to regulations addressing the major rolethat human error is judged to play as the probable cause of most hazardousmaterials transportaiton incidents. DOT's HMT training regulations do notemphasize the importance of human error and human engineering factors.   </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">3. Although DOT's training requirements for drivers can vary dependingon the material being transported, they are not consistently based on thepotential risks associated with the commodity being shipped. Fairly rigorousand detailed Federal training requirements exist for drivers transportinghighway route controlled quantity radioactive materials and flammable cryogenicliquids in cargo tanks on a public highway. But, drivers transporting mostother hazardous materials, such as liquified petroleum gas, poisons, corrosives,and various regulated wastes, are generally not subject to the same detailedFederal driver training requirements. Some of these other hazardous materials,if released, can kill and injure, just as can the release of certain radioactiveand flammable cryogenic materials. For example, from a technical and safetyperspective, it makes little sense for DOT to have fairly detaled trainingregulations for drivers transporting liquified natural gas, which is aflammable cryogenic, but not for drivers transporting liquified petroleumgas. Both materials if improperly released, can result in catastrophicevents.    </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">4. DOT's training regulations for drivers are much more geared towardoperational control of the vehicle than toward ensuring recognition of,and appreciation for, the hazards of the materials being transported.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">5. As previously discussed, most drivers transporting hazardous cargoessimply have to take, but not necessarily pass, a 66-question, open-bookexamination; must be certified on various driver qualification requirements,including a road test; and be ``thoroughly instructed'' on the regulations.The eight questions on DOT's written examination dealing with the HMTRdo not comprehensively test knowledge or understanding of these regulations.DOT's examination does not test whether someone is trained in, or has abasic understanding of, emergency response procedures appropriate to thejob and responsibilities of being a driver of a truck transporting hazardousmaterials. A working knowledge of this information might be of life-savingbenefit to drivers, emergency response personnel, such as police and firefighters, and the affected public in case of an incident. Numerous expertswho were interviewed for this report pointed out the need to improve thisexamination.    </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">6. Although DOT's specific requirements for drivers transporting certainradioactive materials and flammable cryogenics are fairly detailed, DOTdoes not require a formal test and demonstration of the required knowledgecalled for by these regulations. DOT simply states that the drivers transportingthese materials must be given written training materials.    </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">7. Although DOT inspectors have cited alleged violations of varioustraining regulations, the Department has only occasionally pursued an enforcementcase to the point of collection of a penalty assessment.    </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">8. DOT's regulations do not provide the Department with any quantitativemeasures of how well drivers or workers have been trained. Currently, DOTmust rely primarily on its infrequent inspections, supplemented with informationfrom State and local inspections, to obtain insights into how well industryis complying with, or understanding, its regulations.</ITAG>The CRS report recognized that many questions remain unanswered when consideringthe adopting of stronger training requirements such as what is an appropriatelevel of training, particularly in terms of cost effectiveness, and whatareas of the regulations training should encompass, i.e., what technicalsubjects and which procedures should be included in a training program.The CRS report points out that: (1) It would be difficult to develop thenumerous training courses necessary to effectively train large segmentsof the hazardous materials transportation industry on the HMR; (2) in manyinstances, the private sector may already be providing a sufficient andcost effective level of training; and (3) the development of regulationsto implement some of the training concepts could prove to be difficultand time consuming and involve DOT in unproductive micromanagement.C. DOD Petition for RulemakingIn a petition for rulemaking dated May 9, 1986, the Military Traffic ManagementCommand (MTMC), on behalf of the Department of Defense (DOD) requestedthat 49 CFR 177.816 be made applicable to all drivers of hazardous materials.Section 177.816 requires motor carriers that transport flammable cryogenicliquids in cargo tanks to provide written training to their drivers. Thetraining must be given before a driver is permitted to transport the hazardousmaterial, and repeated at least once every two years thereafter. The trainingprogram must include instruction pertaining to requirements in the HMRapplicable to cryogenic liquids, requirements in the Federal Motor CarrierSafety Regulations (49 CFR Parts 383, 387, and 390 through 397) applicableto drivers, the properties and potential hazards of the materials transported,safe vehicle operation including handling characteristics, emergency featuresand loading limitations, and procedures to be followed in case of accidentor other emergency. The motor carrier must record the training in the driver'squalification file (required under 49 CFR 391.51), and the record mustinclude the driver's name and operator's license number, the dates whentraining was provided and when next due, name and address of the personproviding training, and a copy of the written training material. The MTMCproposal modified the language of andSection; 177.816 to extend the scopeof applicability to all drivers of motor vehicles transporting hazardousmaterials and to incorporate certain provisions currently found in andSection;177.825 for drivers of highway route controlled quantities of radiocativematerials, which require that a driver have a certificate of training inhis or her possession during transportation.In support of its petition and proposed revision of andSection; 177.816,MTMC states:<ITAG tagnum="20">* * * The provisions in the proposal are essentially a synthesis ofexisting requirements, with the scope of applicability extended to covermore than the two exceptional groups (flammable cryogenics and radioactivematerials). We suggest that it apply to all hazardous materials shipments.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">A change of some sort is needed in 49 CFR 177.816, we feel, in partbecause the title of this section of rules misleads the reader to believethat these will be general training requirements rather than limited category-specificones. Clearly there are needs in the Federal law for training requirementsfor drivers of hazardous material shipments. This section should providewhat is expected and needed under the title ``Training.''    </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Our interest in this action stems from our role as one of the largestdomestic shippers of hazardous materials. Initially, we considered submittinga petition to add to the rules a section similar to 177.816 that wouldapply to shipments of Class A and B explosives. Upon reflection, the recommendationsdescribed above and in the enclosure seem more complete and ultimatelymore useful in preventing or intelligently managing transportation accidentsinvolving dangerous cargoes.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">III. DOT Proposal</ITAG>This notice of proposed rulemaking (NPRM) is generally responsive to theproblems identified by CRS and DOD and RSPA's own evaluation of the needfor enhanced training requirements in the HMR. RSPA agrees, for the mostpart, with the CRS assessment of existing training requirements in theHMR and believes that these requirements are deficient. Enhanced trainingrequirements, as envisioned in this proposal, should improve compliancewith packaging, hazard communication and handling requirements and helpassure that transportation workers are aware of procedures to take whenexposed to unintentional releases of hazardous materials. The requirement to instruct, in the previously mentioned sections of theHMR, applies solely to instruction concerning regulatory requirements.In this notice, it is proposed to expand this requirement to address fourcategories of training: General awareness/familiarization, function-specific,safety and drivers training. The first three categories would apply toall modes of transportation while the fourth category of drivers trainingwould apply only to highway transportation and motor vehicle operators.General awareness/familiarization training is intended to make personsaware of the HMR and the purpose and meaning of hazard communication provisions,such as labeling, marking, and placarding provisions. All persons who performfunctions covered by the HMR or who work in a transportation facility inproximity to hazardous materials would receive this training.Persons who perform functions covered by the HMR would be required to betrained in how to perform those functions. For example, a person responsiblefor executing hazardous materials shipping papers would receive trainingconcerning the applicable requirements of Subpart C of Part 172 and anyapplicable modal requirements, such as those in andSection;174.25 for railshipments or andSection;andSection;176.24 and 176.27 for water transportation.This type of training is essentially what is required under the HMR atpresent.Persons who work in proximity to hazardous materials during the courseof its transportation (e.g., drivers and warehouse workers) and their supervisorswould receive safety training. This training is intended to provide informationconcerning the hazards of the materials to which the person might be exposed,appropriate personal protection measures, and, if applicable, how to useemergency response information, methods and procedures for accident avoidance,and procedures to be followed in the event of an unintentional releaseof hazardous materials. The proposal is not intended to satisfy the trainingneeds and requirements for transportation workers whose primary responsibilitiesinvolve emergency response. These persons are subject to training requirementsprescribed by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA)of the Department of Labor in 29 CFR 1910.120 which are discussed elsewherein this preamble. Rather, the training is intended to address those transportworkers who may have responsibilities for elemental emergency response,such as notifying others of the emergency, using fire extinguishers orother emergency control features, or otherwise mitigating the severityof release of materials. For example, a driver of a cargo tank containinghazardous materials would most likely not be expected to perform full emergencyresponse services in the event of a leaking tank. However, the driver isresponsible for notifying the appropriate authorities and may be assignedresponsibility, by his employer, for using absorbent materials, dikinga minor spill area, or as many similar immediate incident mitigation measuresas possible.Although all modes of transportation are covered by the requirements ofthis proposed rule, the final category of training being proposed is drivertraining for motor vehicle operators. Based on the merits of the CRS reportand RSPA's own evaluation, improved hazardous materials training of driverswould likely have a significant beneficial impact on transportation safety.There are far more shipments of hazardous materials and, correspondingly,incidents involving the release of hazardous materials, in the highwaymode of transportation than for rail, water and air combined. Improvedtraining of drivers has the potential for making significant gains in accidentavoidance and accident mitigation. Another incentive for RSPA's proposalis to continue the rulemaking effort begun by the Federal Highway Administration(FHWA) under Docket MC-120, discussed elsewhere in this preamble.Drivers would be subject, in most instances, to general awareness/familiarization,function specific and safety training. In addition, it is proposed to requiredrivers training on the safe operation of the motor vehicle which theyexpect to operate and the applicable requirements of the Federal MotorCarrier Safety Regulations. At a later date, RSPA may consider more specifictraining requirements for operators of aircraft, trains, and vessels.RSPA's proposal addresses broad subject areas in which training is to bereceived. With the exception of cargo and portable tank operations, detailedcontent of training would not be specified. RSPA does not have the resourcesto develop specialized courses of instruction addressing every phase ofhazardous materials transportation. Furthermore, it is believed that anemployer is better able to determine the training needs of its employees,particularly with regard to function specific, safety and driver training.For the same reason, no attempt has been made to specify the level andduration of training, which will vary with job duties and responsibilities.For example, training for a person who executes shipping papers might consistof a brief orientation on the general provisions of the HMR and writtentraining on applicable shipping paper requirements in Subpart C of Part172. It is believed that in most cases, an employee could receive an appropriateamount of training (to include general awareness, function specific andsafety training) in a session of minimal duration.The DOT recognizes that cargo and portable tank vehicle operations, andthe qualifications and training of tank vehicle drivers, present specialconcerns. For example, in the FHWA's final rule on Commercial Drivers Licenses(CDL), statistics are cited for accidents involving tank vehicles, whichincludes both cargo and portable tanks in the FHWA definition (52 FR 27642).In 1986 there were 818 accidents reported to the Department involving tankvehicles transporting hazardous materials resulting in 136 fatalities,761 injuries, and over $17 million in property damage. The most importantoperating difference between driving a cargo tank motor vehicle or a vehiclecontaining a portable tank and a standard dry freight truck is liquid productsurge. Other factors that may threaten vehicle stability and present asafety risk, include: Sloshing liquids in various tank designs; variousloading conditions; and the impact of liquids on driving maneuvers suchas braking, backing, turning, and combined braking/steering maneuvers.Because of the unique characteristics of cargo tank motor vehicles andvehicles containing a portable tank, and because of the potential for damageinherent in their cargoes, the RSPA regards special training and licensingrequirements for their drivers as essential to the public safety. For example,the FHWA has already ruled (52 FR 27628) that drivers of tank vehiclescarrying placardable hazardous materials must have not only a CDL but alsotwo separate endorsements (``tank vehicle'' and ``hazardous materials''),each of which requires a specialized knowledge test. RSPA believes specialemphasis should be placed on these types of vehicles. Therefore, the ruleproposed herein sets forth additional training requirements in andSection;177.816(b)for this safety sensitive class of vehicles.RSPA has intentionally made the proposed requirements as broad as is practicableto accommodate training programs and materials currently used in both thepublic and private sectors. This approach provides latitude to both theprivate and public sectors for the development of training programs ormaterials.It is proposed that training be received within 30 days of employment ofa person to perform hazardous materials job functions subject to the requirementsof the HMR. This requirement, however, would not restrict a new employeefrom performing their hazardous materials job functions under proper supervisionprior to the employee's receipt of training. Persons would also be retrainedwithin thirty days upon change of hazardous materials job functions andat least once every two years thereafter.RSPA believes a two year cycle is necessary for an employee to remain adequatelyinformed of the HMR because retention of certain kinds of information fadesquickly if it is not frequently applied or reenforced through training,and because of periodic changes in the HMR. RSPA encourages comments onthe two year cycle and whether it should be longer or shorter.While responsibility for providing training would remain on the employer,the required training could be provided by company training programs orthrough the use of outside training firms or consultants. This is consistentwith existing requirements in the HMR.RSPA also proposes a requirement that employers create and maintain a recordreflecting completion of required training for each employee. This requirementis believed necessary in order to verify compliance with the training requirements.Considering the diversity of job functions of persons addressed by thisproposal, RSPA does not believe it is practical to propose requirementsfor testing employees to ensure that they have been succesfully trained.Comments are solicited as to the need, if any, for regulatory requirementsfor testing, the scope and content of such testing requirements, and whoshould be responsible for administering them.Enforcement of the proposed training regulations pertaining to carrierswould remain the primary responsibility of the various modal administrations.For example, the FHWA plans to enforce the proposed training requirementswhen it conducts safety and compliance reviews of individual motor carriers.If motor carriers are determined to be in non-compliance with the trainingrequirements, the FHWA will take remedial actions, which could result inpenalties and fines.The expansion of Federal training requirements proposed in this Noticeinevitably requires consideration of the extent to which such requirementswould preempt related or overlapping state training requirements. In accordancewith Executive Order 12612, RSPA intends to restrict its preemption ofstate law to the minimum level necessary to achieve the objectives of theHazardous Materials Transportation Act (HMTA) and the HMR.However, RSPA views these proposed training requirements, insofar as theyapply to drivers engaged in the highway transportation of hazardous materials,as minimum requirements which a state may only exceed if its greater requirementsdo not directly conflict with the HMR requirements and apply only to individualsdomiciled in that state. Thus, more stringent or more detailed state trainingrequirements for drivers not in conflict with the HMR could be ``consistent,''and therefore, not preempted under section 112(a) of the HMTA (49 App.U.S.C. 1811(a)), so long as they applied only to drivers domiciled in thatstate. The foregoing principles are reflected in proposed andSection; 172.701.The following is an example of how this approach to preemption would operatewith respect to hazardous materials endorsements to drivers licenses. TheCommercial Motor Vehicle Safety Act of 1986 provides for a single commercialdriver's license (CDL) for each driver of a commercial motor vehicle (CMV).Section 12009(a)(14) of that Act and an implementing FHWA rule, 49 CFR383.73 (53 FR 27628, 27651, July 21, 1988), require states to extend reciprocityto CDL's issued by other states. Under the FHWA rule and the rule proposedin this Notice, a state may impose more stringent hazardous materials trainingrequirements upon its own commercial motor vehicle drivers than do Federalregulations_but may not do so with respect to a driver holding anotherstate's CDL with a hazardous materials endorsement thereon.RSPA's proposed approach to this preemption issue is intended to avoida chaotic and burdensome situation in which numerous states would applyseparate and possibly inconsistent training requirements to drivers engagedin the highway transportation of hazardous materials.In addition to the comments requested elsewhere in this notice, RSPA isespecially interested in receiving comments that concern estimates, bymode of transportation, of the cost of training with regard to each ofthe four categories of training proposed_in particular the cost of trainingnot presently provided, estimates of the benefits to be derived from thevarious categories of training in terms of reduction or mitigation of propertydamage and personal injury, and comments concerning the adequacy of theproposed training for drivers and the possible need for additional trainingrequirements for operators in other modes of transportation.<ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Section by Section Summary of Proposals</ITAG>A. Part 171; General Information, Regulations, Definitions<T3>Section 171.8.</T3> The definition of crewmember would be revised toinclude those persons assigned to perform duties on aircraft during flighttime, on a motor vehicle or a vessel during transportation, or in trainor engine service.B. Part 172; Hazardous Materials Table and Hazardous Materials Communicationsand Training Requirements<T3>Part 172.</T3> A new Subpart H_Training, including andSection;andSection;172.700 through 172.704, would be added and the Part title revised to reflectthe additional training requirements.<T3>Section 172.700.</T3> A new andSection; 172.700 would be added, identifyingthe purpose of the training requirements, which are generally to provideinformation and training in the functions a person performs, safety andaccident preventative measures and proper handling of incidents involvinghazardous materials. This section also defines ``training'' as a systematicprogram that ensures a person has knowledge of hazardous materials andthe hazardous materials regulations that govern their transportation. Forexample, an employee may satisfy this requirement by on the job training,showing evidence of previous training in the functions which he/she performs,formal classroom training or by taking correspondence courses. However,successful completion of one or all of the above may be necessary beforean employer is satisfied that the employee is adequately trained in accordancewith the proposed training requirement. Much of this hazardous materialsknowledge can be obtained through present industry and trade organizationtraining programs as mentioned in the discussion of andSection; 172.704 inthis preamble.Employers with employees who have demonstrated hazardous materials knowledgeby obtaining a hazardous materials endorsement to their commercial driverslicenses (CDL), a cargo tank endorsement to the CDL, a USCG license thatrequires hazardous materials knowledge, or through participation in anyother job training or licensing program, may accept such demonstrationof knowledge to satisfy the appropriate requirements of this notice suchas general awareness/familiarization training or other required training.However, all such training would still be subject to the two year frequencyrequirements of this notice.<T3>Section 172.701. </T3>A new andSection;172.701 would be added to emphasizethat OHMT's training requirements are minimum requirements. The sectionwould also authorize a state to impose more stringent training requirementson drivers so long as those requirements do not conflict with the HMR andapply only to drivers domiciled in that state.<T3>Section 172.702. </T3>The proposals contained in this section identifythose persons to whom the training requirements apply. Generally, theserequirements would apply to all persons involved in the preparation, documentation,packaging, marking, labeling, shipping, handling, and transporting of hazardousmaterials. Further, those individual working in proximity to hazardousmaterials would be required to be trained in certain aspects of the regulations,such as labelling, placarding, and marking provisions of the HMR.Although employers would be responsible for ensuring that their employeesare properly trained, it would be acceptable for an employer to use theservices of an employee on loan from another company, a transfer employee,or any other employee that had received the required hazardous materialstransportation training from another source provided that training couldbe verified. Retraining would not be necessary as long as all requiredtraining for the job functions performed had occurred during the two yearfrequency requirement proposed by this notice.<T3>Section 172.704. </T3>This section identifies the three degrees oftraining that would be required. Generally, everyone subject to these trainingrequirements would be required to be provided general awareness and familiarizationtraining. This training would include trianing in such areas as the varioushazard classes and hazard communication requirements and their meaning.Those persons performing specific tasks subject to the HMR, such as packagingor shipping paper documentation, would be required to be provided functionspecific training designed in such a fashion so as to assure that theyare able to perform their task in compliance with the requirements of theHMR. Additional safety training would be required, identifying the hazardsof the materials, proper protection from exposure, use of emergency responseinformation, and the methods and procedures for accident avoidance.Although a specific level, duration, and content of the training providedis not specifically identified, such training would be required to be presentedso that those involved could properly perform their specific functionsand be knowledgeable in the requirements of the HMR. Periodic trainingwould be required. RSPA does not believe that this would cause an undueburden on employers, especially since many employers have established trainingprograms. For instance, rail carriers are required by the Federal RailroadAdministration (FRA) to periodically instruct their employees on the meaningand application of the railroad's operating rules. In addition, rail carriersare required to be familiar with operating timetables. Both the timetablesand the operating rules contain information on hazardous materials. Presentrail carrier training on the rules and timetables would help the rail industrycomply with the requirements of the proposed rule.Professional and trade associations also provide training that could helpmeet the requirements of this section. The American Trucking Associationprovides training through its state organizations and through the saleof items such as the publication, Handling Hazardous Materials, which describesthe harzardous materials regulations in layman's terms, and a slide programthat consists of different modules on specific hazardous materials requirements,such as shipping papers or marking or labeling. The National Tank TruckCarriers, Inc., has produced and sells a slide program and accompanyingmanual for tank truck drivers on flammable liquids, the most commonly transportedhazard class carried by its members.In addition to the various trade organizations, some trucking companiesprovide hazardous materials training for their own personnel or utilizethe resources of various consulting firms to train company employees. Presenttraining performed in this manner could also help meet the requirementsof this proposal.This notice proposes that recurrent training be provided at least onceevery two years, that persons who change hazardous materials job functionsbe trained in those new functions within thirty days of their job change,and that new employees be trained within thirty days after being hiredto perform a function subject to the HMR. However, the requirements ofthis section do not preclude the use of an employee who requires training,in a hazardous materials job function if that employee is under the supervisionof a properly trained and knowledgeable employee.Further, a record of the training would be required to be maintained bythe employer for the duration of the employee's employment and for 90 daysthereafter. The record of training would contain the name and signatureof the person receiving the training, the date it was presented, a copyof the training material presented or a description of the training given,and the name and signature of the individual presenting the training.RSPA encourages readers to submit comments regarding the requirement fora training record. RSPA is particularly interested in comments that addressthe following questions:1. Is the record of training proposed in this notice the best method tocertify completion of required training? If not, what method would be better?2. Would self certification by an employer be an acceptable method to ensurecompletion of required training? What documentation should be maintained?C. Part 173_Shippers_General Requirements for Shipments and Packagings<T3>Section 173.1. </T3>In andSection;173.1 paragraph (b) would be revisedto reflect the proposed new requirements for training of persons involvedin the shipment and transportation of hazardous materials.D. Part 714_Carriage by Rail; Part 175_Carriage by Aircraft; and Part 176_Carriageby Vessel<T3>Sections 174.7, 175.20, and 176.13, respectively. </T3>These respectivesections would be revised to specifically require employers to providethe training as required by the new Subpart H of Part 172. Section 176.13would also require the record of training required by andSection;172.704(c)to be kept on board any vessel with crewmembers.E. Part 177_Carriage by Public Highway<T3>Section 177.800. </T3>The last sentence of paragraph (a) would be deletedand a new andSection;177.800a would be added.<T3>Section 177.800a. </T3>This new section would be added to specify thatemployers provide the training as required in Part 172 and the additionaldriver (operator) training required by this Part.<T3>Section 177.816. </T3>This section would be revised to specificallyidentify the additional training that would be required to be presentedto drivers of motor vehicles. This section would require: Drivers be providedtraining in the requirements of the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations,49 CFR Parts 383, 387, and 390 through 399; the operation of the motorvehicle that the driver will be operating, including vehicle characteristics;proper procedures regarding tunnels, bridges, and railroad crossings; vehiclecontrols, including safety and emergency equipment; requirements for attendanceand parking; and any other aspect relative to the safe operation of themotor vehicle. In addition, specialized training requirements for cargotank motor vehicle operators and drivers of motor vehicles containing portabletanks are contained in this section. To avoid duplication of the requirementsof proposed andSection;172.704, the requirements for a separate special trainingrecord for the drivers of vehicles that contain flammable cryogenic liquidswould not be necessary and would be removed. A discussion regarding theimplementation of andSection;177.816 appears later in this notice.<T3>Section 177.825. </T3>In andSection;177.825, paragraph (d) would be revisedto eliminate unnecessary duplication of the proposed training requirements.Paragraph (d)(1) would be changed to refer the reader to the proposed trainingrequirements found in Subpart H of Part 172 and andSection;177.816. For driversof highway route controlled quantities of radioactive materials, paragraph(d)(2) would be revised to remove the requirement for employers to placea copy of the record of training in the driver's qualification file asthis would be a duplication of the requirements in proposed andSection;172.704.For these drivers, the requirements of paragraph (d) (2) and (3) to havea copy of the record of training and a route plan in the driver's possessionwould remain unchanged.<ITAG tagnum="84">V. Relationship to Other Agencies' Existing or Proposed Rules</ITAG>A. FHWAOn May 13, 1986, FHWA published a notice of proposed rulemaking in the<T4>Federal Register</T4> (51 FR 17572; Docket No. MC-120, Notice No. 86-3)in response to section 206 of the Motor Carrier Safety Act of 1984. Thenotice proposed revisions to driver qualification requirements in the FederalMotor Carrier Safety Regulations to insure that drivers who operate eithercommercial motor vehicles transporting certain categories of hazardousmaterials or cargo tank commercial motor vehicles requiring placards meetadditional or more stringent qualification requirements. In the preambleto Docket No. MC-120, FHWA stated the following:<ITAG tagnum="21">Upon leaving a shipper's facility or a motor carrier's terminal, adriver operating a commercial motor vehicle laden with hazardous materialsis, for all intents and purposes, on his/her own. In the event of an accidentinvolving that motor vehicle, a driver having certain knowledge of thehazardous materials being transported can greatly assist emergency responsepersonnel and can mitigate potential catastrophic occurrences. Further,basic knowledge of the hazardous materials requirements can help keep accidentsand incidents from occurring. With this in mind, the FHWA proposes to requirea driver, who will be operating a commercial motor vehicle used to transportTable 1 hazardous materials or operating a cargo tank commercial motorvehicle which must be placarded, to receive certain basic hazardous materialtraining. We believe that the driver must have a functional knowledge ofthe Hazardous Materials Regulations addressing: (1) Shipping papers, (2)package marking requirements, (3) package labeling, (4) packaging requirements,(5) commercial motor vehicle placarding, and (6) the loading and storageof H/M. Further, the driver must have a functional knowledge of the requirementscontained in Part 397 of the FMCSR pertaining to: (1) Vehicle attendance;(2) vehicle parking; (3) route selection; and (4) smoking by the driver.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Individuals who will be operating cargo tank commercial motor vehiclesrequired to be placarded in accordance with andSection;177.823 of this titlemust, in addition to the training described above, be trained in the: (1)Operation of the emergency control features of the cargo tank; (2) operationof the emergency equipment required by andSection;393.95; and (3) properloading and unloading of the cargo tank, including vehicle attendance requirements.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">The FHWA believes a driver who is knowledgeable on these areas canhelp to insure that shipping papers are properly prepared and that hazardousmaterials packages carried on the vehicle are in fact listed on the shippingpapers. Such a trained driver can also identify improper packaging andlabeling during the loading process and insure that the vehicle is properlyplacarded for the hazardous materials classes being transported. This functionalknowledge will provide an additional measure of safety to highway transportation.</ITAG>Comments to Docket No. MC-120 generally supported the proposed additionaltraining and driver qualification requirements. However, because of similarproposals contained in RSPA's present rulemaking and a rulemaking actionof the FHWA discussed below, FHWA has decided that further action underDocket MC-120 is unnecessary and has withdrawn the docket (54 FR 7191,Feb. 17, 1989). On December 11, 1987, FHWA published a notice of proposed rulemaking inthe <T4>Federal Register </T4>(52 FR 47326; Docket No. MC-87-18) concerningcommercial driver testing and licensing standards. A final rule (FR) wasissued on July 15, 1988 (53 FR 27628). The FR establishes standards forcommercial driver licensing and testing procedures to be used by the States;knowledge, skills and abilities which drivers of different types of commercialmotor vehicles must possess; and the information to be contained on thecommercial driver's license (CDL) issued by the States. Of interest tothe present discussion is that the FHWA rule requires specific endorsementsto the CDL for hazardous materials drivers and (cargo) ``tank vehicle''drivers. When requirements for the CDL are fully implemented, an applicantfor a CDL will have to pass a knowledge test pertaining to safe operationsregulations, safe vehicle control, vehicle inspections and certain otherareas, and a driving skills test pertaining to basic vehicle control skillsand safe driving skills. An applicant for a hazardous materials endorsementwill have to pass an additional knowledge test pertaining to the HMR, hazardousmaterials handling, operation of emergency equipment and emergency responseprocedures. Also, a driver who applies for renewal of a hazardous materialsendorsement will be retested. An applicant for a tank vehicle endorsementwill have to pass a knowledge test pertaining to cargo tank safety. RSPA has attempted to align the training requirements proposed in thisNPRM with the testing and knowledge requirements adopted by the FHWA inDocket No. MC-89-18 and believes that this has been accomplished. If adriver has successfully obtained the hazardous materials and tank vehicleendorsements to the CDL, these endorsements may be used to satisfy some,if not all, of the training requirements proposed in this notice, especiallythe awareness and general knowledge portions. However, it would remainthe responsibility of the employer to insure that their drivers are properlytrained. The responsibility to train would also cover other employees subjectto training, including drivers that are not required to have CDL endorsementssuch as drivers of vehicles that do not require placards. To ascertain what role, if any, CDL endorsements might play in satisfyingproposed training requirements of this notice, RSPA solicits comments onthe following questions. 1. To what extent should the CDL hazardous materials and tank vehicle endorsementsbe allowed to satisfy the training proposals in this notice? 2. Should drivers who have received these endorsements be excepted fromsome or all of the training requirements proposed in this NPRM? 3. This notice proposes that training be performed every two years. Althoughthe FHWA does not specify a time limit for the CDL, most states allow afour year time span before the CDL expires and retesting of HM driversis required. Should RSPA's proposed training requirements be closely alignedwith current CDL licensing practice for drivers and be required every fouryears, or should RSPA's required training be on a two year or more frequentbasis?B. FRA On June 22, 1988, the 100th Congress enacted Pub. L. 100-342 to amend theFederal Railroad Safety Act of 1970 (45 U.S.C. 431). Commonly known asthe Rail Safety Improvement Act of 1988, Pub. L. 100-342 has provided theFRA with numerous statutory amendments, some of which concern trainingrequirements. For instance, the 1988 Act amended section 202 to require the developmentof rules, regulations, orders, and standards as necessary to establisha program requiring the licensing or certification of any operator of alocomotive. The Act further specifies that any program developed must provideminimum training requirements and shall also require a comprehensive knowledgeof applicable railroad operating practices and operating rules. Rules concerningthe 1988 Act are presently under development by the FRA. In addition to the requirements of the Rail Safety Improvement Act of 1988,the 49 CFR Part 217 currently requires each railroad to file a copy oftheir operating rules, timetables, and timetable instructions with theFRA. These rules and timetables contain information on railroad operatingpractices, including the rail transportation of hazardous materials. Eachrailroad is required to instruct its employees in the operating rules andmust periodically conduct operational tests and inspections to determinethe extent of compliance with its code of operating rules, timetables,and any timetable special instructions. In this manner, carriers can determineif their employees understand how to apply the hazardous materials informationcontained within the operating rules. RSPA believes the training requirements of this NPRM will not conflictwith the rail industry's current training on operating rules and timetables.In addition, the training standards contained in this proposed rule arewritten in a manner that should supplement any future rulemaking by theFRA regarding the requirements of the Rail Safety Improvement Act of 1988.However, to ensure that the proposed training requirements of this NPRMare compatible with present rail training programs, RSPA solicits commentsconcerning the following question: Would RSPA's proposed training requirementscomplement, or conflict with, present rail industry training efforts?C. USCG The International Maritime Dangerous Goods (IMDG) Code is recognized asthe worldwide standard for the carriage of packaged hazardous materialsby vessel. It is incorporated by reference in the HMR as an optional alternativefor carriage of hazardous materials on vessels. Nearly all of the internationalhazardous materials trade by vessel now moves in conformance with the IMDGCode. Consequently, crews of vessels and personnel at port facilities willencounter IMDG Code classed, marked, labeled, placarded, packaged, stowed,and segregated shipments as the norm rather than the exception. The U.S. Coast Guard requires persons seeking licenses which authorizeservice as master or mate of a vessel to successfully complete examinationswhich include material on hazardous materials cargo handling and stowage,loading and discharging operations, and the HMR. Section 176.57 of theHMR requires all hazardous materials handling and stowage aboard a vesselto be under the direction and observation of a qualified person specificallyassigned to this duty. Except for limited domestic voyages, where the qualifiedperson may be an employee of the carrier, this function must be carriedout by a licensed officer. In addition, Coast Guard regulations requirethe master of a vessel to conduct weekly emergency drills in which allcrewmembers are exercised in their assigned response duties. RSPA understandsthat these drills often include exercises that may satisfy some of theproposed training requirements. For example, shipboard firefighting drillscould satisfy the emergency response requirements of andSection; 172.704(a)(3)(ii) or (iv). In view of the widespread use of the IMDG Code, the supervisory roles ofthe master and other licensed officers, and the existing emergency drillsrequired aboard vessels, RSPA and the Coast Guard are especially interestedin comments concerning the vessel transportation of hazardous materialsin the following areas: 1. Should training in the maritime mode be based on the IMDG rather thanthe HMR? Should training on the IMDG Code be accepted as a alternativeto training on the HMR, or should training be required in both the IMDGCode and the HMR? 2. Licenses authorizing service as master or mate are renewed every fiveyears, provided the holder has recent service under the license, withoutfurther examination on hazardous materials subjects. Is the proposed twoyear retraining requirement appropriate for these personnel? 3. Would currently required emergency drills, as noted in the vessels log,be an adequate substitute for the proposed training and record keeping?D. OSHA On November 25, 1983, OSHA published a Hazard Communication Standard (48FR 53280) which required that manufacturers have hazard communication programsfor their employees exposed to hazardous chemicals. This standard was amendedon August 24, 1987, with publication of a final rule entitled ``HazardCommunication'' (52 FR 31852). This amendment extended applicability ofthe existing standard from employees in manufacturing industry (SIC Codes20 to 39) to also include employees in the non-manufacturing industry sector,such as those covered by 40-series SIC Codes for transportation. Underthe amended standard, virtually all employers are required to inform theiremployees about the hazardous chemicals which are present in the work place.Generally, employers are required to establish for their employees writtenhazard communication programs that inform their employees about the hazardouschemicals present in the work place. Further, employers are also requiredto establish training programs which teach employees how to protect themselvesfrom the hazardous chemicals to which they may be exposed by using engineeringcontrols and following safe operating procedures. In the amended standard, OSHA recognized that there were various typesof work situations in the non-manufacturing sector where it was not feasibleto comply with these requirements; therefore, OSHA excepted certain workplaces and facilities from its requirement for a written hazard communicationprogram. Specifically, paragraph (b)(4) of andSection; 1910.1200 of the OSHAstandard exempts ``work operations where employees only handle chemicalsin sealed containers which are not opened under normal conditions of use(such as are found in marine cargo handling, warehousing, or retail sales)''.This exception applies to many transportation facilities. However, employersmust ensure that their employees are provided with information and training``* * * to the extent necessary to protect them in the event of a spillor leak of a hazardous chemical from a sealed container.''RSPA issued a final rule on June 27, 1989, addressing emergency responsecommunication standards (Docket HM-126C; 54 FR 27138). The rule requiresthat facilities and vehicles involved in hazardous materials transportationmaintain certain emergency response information regarding the hazardousmaterials which are present. It is possible to comply with this informationrequirement by having a copy of DOT's Emergency Response Guidebook (ERG),material safety data sheets, or similar emergency response document. TheRSPA training requirements now being proposed which pertain to hazard communicationand the handling of hazardous materials incidents have a direct correlationto, and complement, the information requirements adopted in Docket HM-126C.Conformance with the information and training requirements proposed inthis notice and those adopted in Docket HM-126C should fulfill the intentof OSHA's final rule pertaining to hazard communication.On December 19, 1986 (51 FR 45554), OSHA published an interim final ruleon hazardous waste operations and emergency response that was requiredby Congress in the Superfund Amendments and Reauthorization Act of 1986(SARA; Pub. L. 99-499). On August 10, 1987, OSHA published an NPRM in the<T4>Federal Register</T4> (52 FR 29620) that proposed to amend the OSHAstandards for hazardous waste and emergency response in 29 CFR 1910.120.On March 6, 1989 a final rule was published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> (54 FR 9294). When the final rule becomes effectiveon March 6, 1990 the interim final rule of December 19, 1986 will be revoked.The interim OSHA rule will remain in effect until then.The interim OSHA rule covers workers involved in operations covered bythe Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation and Liability Actof 1980 as amended (CERCLA; 42 U.S.C. 9601 <T3>et seq</T3>.), in certain hazardous waste operations conducted underthe Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 as amended (RCRA; 42U.S.C. 6901 <T3>et seq</T3>.), and in any emergency response to incidents to incidentsinvolving hazardous substances. The standard provides for employee protectionduring initial site characterization and analysis, monitoring activities,materials handling activities, training, and emergency response.Of interest to the present discussion are certain provisions that impacton transportation workers, particularly with regard to training. Section1910.120(l) (1) of the March 6, 1989 OSHA final rule addresses emergencyaction plans which comply with 29 CFR 1910.38(a). Under andSection; 1910.38(a),emergency action plans are used to establish evacuation procedures to beused in emergency circumstances. Employers must review with employees thoseparts of the plan which the employee must know to protect the employeein the event of an emergency. In RSPA's proposal, andSection; 172.704(a)(3)(iv)would require that employees receive training concerning ``immediate proceduresto be followed in the event of an unintentional release of a hazardousmaterial, an accident, or other emergency, including any emergency responseprocedures for which the person is responsible, operation of emergencyequipment, and personal protection procedures to be followed if exposedto the release of a hazardous material''. This RSPA proposed provisioncould be used to satisfy, at least in part, the OSHA provision with respectto transportation workers.In 29 CFR 1910.120(e)(7), OSHA requires training for employees who areengaged in responding to hazardous emergency situations at hazardous wasteclean up sites. OSHA requires that these employees are trained in how torespond to such emergencies. Section 1910.120(p)(8)(iii) of OSHA's March6, 1989 final rule requires completion of training for emergency responseemployees before they are called upon to perform in real emergencies. Generally,these employees are required to receive training in the elements of theemergency response plan, standard operating procedures the employer hasestablished for the job, the personal protective equipment to be worn andprocedures for handling emergency incidents. The training of emergencyresponse personnel is beyond the scope of RSPA's proposal. RSPA proposesto include a note at the end of paragraph (a) of andSection; 172.704 to advisepersons of OSHA requirements for emergency responders. However, it shouldbe noted that the training required under this portion of the OSHA proposalcould be used to satisfy RSPA requirements in proposed andSection; 172.704.Further, there are certain categories of workers who are excepted fromthe OSHA requirement for complete emergency response training for whomthe training required by RSPA may be used to satisfy other OSHA trainingrequirements. For example, employees that do not have responsibility tocontrol the emergency, but may first respond to an incident, are exceptedfrom various aspects of the training if they have sufficient awarenesstraining to recognize that an emergency response situation exists and areinstructed to summon fully-trained emergency responders and not attemptto control activities for which they are not trained (see 29 CFR 1910.120(p)(8)(iii)(A)).A second exception provided in 29 CFR 1910.120(p)(8)(iii)(A) wherein certainemployees need only be trained to have sufficient awareness training torecognize the emergency and call a designated fully-trained emergency responseteam. For both of these aforementioned categories of workers, RSPA's proposedtraining requirements could be used to satisfy OSHA requirements.In addition to the OSHA requirements of 29 CFR Part 1910, there are specificOSHA training requirements for marine terminal personnel found in 29 CFRParts 1917 and 1918. In particular, 29 CFR Part 1917 are regulations formarine terminals and apply to ``* * * employment within a marine terminal,including the loading, unloading, movement or other handling of cargo,ship's stores or gear within the terminal or into or out of any land carrier,holding or consolidation area, or any other activity associated with theoverall operation and functions of the terminal, such as the use and routinemaintenance of facilities and equipment.'' Section 1917.28 outlines standardsfor hazard communications and includes requirements for container labelingand other forms or warning, material safety data sheets and employee training.Identical requirements to Part 1917 are also contained in 29 CFR 1918.90and apply to longshoremen and others (not including vessel crew members)involved in cargo handling operations aboard the vessel while it is inport.Training performed to satisfy either OSHA or RSPA requirements could beused to satisfy, at least in part, the other agencies' hazardous materialstraining requirements. Although there is a certain amount of overlap inthe RSPA proposal and OSHA final rule of March 6, 1989 due to differingstatutory considerations, RSPA believes that the overall provisions arecomplementary and will not result in duplicative requirements.To help determine the actual training burden that OSHA's rules and RSPA'sproposed training requirements may cause, RSPA encourages readers of thisNPRM to respond to the following questions:1. Some employees may be covered by both OSHA and DOT training requirements.Are RSPA's proposal compatible with OSHA's? Could training required byOSHA help satisfy RSPA's proposed training? How much of an additional trainingburden will RSPA's proposals cause for those employees that are coveredby both OSHA's and RSPA's training requirements?2. In some cases organizations may have distinct groups of employees whoperform different responsibilities. Some of these workers may be coveredby only OSHA training requirements, while other employees of the same organizationare subject to RSPA training requirements. How much of an additional trainingburden on employers will RSPA's proposals cause in this case?<ITAG tagnum="84">VI. Administrative Notices</ITAG>A. Executive Order 12291The RSPA has determined that this proposed rule (1) is not ``major'' underExecutive Order 12291; (2) is ``significant'' under DOT's regulatory policiesand procedures (44 FR 11034); (3) will not affect not-for-profit enterprisesor small governmental jurisdictions; and (4) does not require an environmentalimpact statement under the National Environmental Policy Act (42 U.S.C.4321 <T3>et seq</T3>.). A preliminary regulatory evaluation is available forreview in the Docket.B. Executive Order 12612This proposed action has been analyzed in accordance with the principlesand criteria in Executive Order 12612 and, based on the information availableto it at this time, RSPA does not believe that the proposed rule wouldhave sufficient Federalism implications to warrant the preparation of aFederalism Assessment. RSPA is proposing minimum standards and is not requiringstates to adopt them. Furthermore, states would be able to impose morestringent requirements to highway transportation_so long as they did notconflict with the Federal regulations or interfere with the rights of otherstates (e.g., each state's right to impose its own training requirementson employees domiciled in the state, including its own commercial driver'slicense (CDL) requirements within FHWA prescribed parameters). Thus, underproposed andSection; 172.101, a state would be permitted to impose its morestringent highway requirements only upon ``persons'' domiciled in thatstate.C. Impact on Small EntitiesRSPA is aware that amendments of such broad applicability may produce aneconomic impact on industry segments, a substantial number of which maybe small enterprises. These enterprises may include hazardous materialsshippers, carriers, warehousemen, freight forwarders, manufacturers ofhazardous materials containers, and other transportation organizationsthat have small numbers of employees and limited gross revenues. Basedon limited information concerning size and nature of entities likely affectedby this notice, I certify this regulation will not have a significant economicimpact on a substantial number of small entities. A regulatory evaluationis available for review in the Docket.D. Paperwork Reduction ActThe collection of information in this notice of proposed rulemaking isbeing submitted to the Office of Management and Budget for review in accordancewith the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3504(h)). Commentson the collection of information should be sent to the Office of Informationand Regulatory Affairs, Office of Management and Budget, Washington, DC20503, attention: Desk Officer for the Department of Transportation. Allcomments must reference the title for this notice. ``Training for HazardousMaterials Transportation''.The collection of information requirements of this notice are found inandSection; 172.704(c), Recordkeeping. The record would be required by theDepartment of Transportation to assure compliance with the training requirementsproposed in Subpart H of this notice. The likely respondents and recordkeepersare hazardous materials transportation concerns of all types including,but not limited to, shippers, trucking companies, railroads, operatorsof water vessels, air freight companies, warehousemen, freight forwarders,etc.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects</ITAG>49 CFR Part 171Hazardous materials transportation, Matter incorporated by reference.49 CFR Part 172Hazardous materials transportation, Training.49 CFR Part 173Hazardous materials transportation, General requirements.49 CFR Part 174Hazardous materials transportation, Carriage by rail.49 CFR Part 175Hazardous materials transportation, Carriage by aircraft.49 CFR Part 176Hazardous materials transportation, Carriage by vessel.49 CFR Part 177Hazardous materials transportation, Carriage by highway motor vehicle.In consideration of the foregoing, 49 CFR Parts 171 through 177 would beamended to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 171_GENERAL INFORMATION, REGULATIONS, AND DEFINITIONS</ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 171 would continue to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>49 U.S.C. 1802, 1803, 1804, 1808; 49 CFR Part 1, unlessotherwise noted.</ITAG>2. In andSection; 171.8, the definition for ``crewmember'' would be revisedto read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 171.8</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions and abbreviations.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>``Crewmember'' means a person assigned to perform duty in an aircraft duringflight time, on a motor vehicle or a vessel during transportation, or intrain or engine service.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">PART 172_HAZARDOUS MATERIALS TABLES AND HAZARDOUS MATERIALS COMMUNICATIONSAND TRAINING REQUIREMENTS</ITAG>3. The authority citation for Part 172 would continue to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>49 U.S.C. 1803, 1804, 1805, and 1808; 49 CFR Part 1,unless otherwise noted.</ITAG>4. The title to Part 172 would be revised to read as set forth above.5. A new Subchapter H would be added to Part 172 to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="41">Subpart H_Training</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">172.700 Purpose and scope.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">172.701 Preemptive effect.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">172.702 Applicability and responsibility for training.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">172.704 Training requirements.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart H_Training</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 172.700 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Purpose and scope.</ITAG>(a) This subpart prescribes training requirements concerning_(1) The risks of hazardous materials;(2) The requirements of this subchapter which apply to functions that personsperform;(3) Safety and accident avoidance; and(4) Handling hazardous materials incidents. (b) ``Training'' as used in this subpart means a systematic program thatensures a person has knowledge of hazardous materials and the hazardousmaterials regulations. Such knowledge may be obtained through the use oftraditional industry training, instruction, testing or other means of trainingthat would normally be tailored to an employee's specific job functions.(c) Additional training requirements for the individual modes of transportationare prescribed in Parts 174, 175, 176 and 177 of this subchapter.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 172.701 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Preemptive effect.</ITAG>This subpart and the parts referenced in andSection; 172.700(c) prescribeminimum training requirements for the transportation of hazardous materials.For motor vehicle drivers, however, a state may impose more stringent trainingrequirements only if those requirements_(a) Do not conflict with the training requirements in this subpart andin Part 177 of this subchapter, and(b) Apply only to drivers domiciled in that state.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 172.702 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Applicability and responsibility for training.</ITAG>(a) It is the responsibility of each employer of a person subject to therequirements of this subpart to ensure that each employee is properly trainedin accordance with the minimum requirements prescribed in this subpart.(b) The requirements of this subpart apply to each person who_(1) Classifies hazardous materials:(2) Packages hazardous materials;(3) Marks and labels packages containing hazardous materials;(4) Prepares shipping papers for hazardous materials;(5) Offers or accepts hazardous materials for transportation;(6) Handles hazardous materials (e.g., loads, unloads, secures, or storesin transit);(7) Marks or placards transport vehicles, bulk packagings or freight containers;(8) Operates or crews transport vehicles, aircraft, or vessels; (9) Is employed in a transportation facility and performs functions inproximity to hazardous materials which are in transportation; or(10) Otherwise performs functions subject to the provisions of this subchapter,such as inspecting or testing specification packagings or representing,marking, certifying, selling or offering packagings as meeting the requirementsof this subchapter or an exemption issued under Subchapter B of this chapter.(c) For purposes of this subchapter, a person who performs any functionin proximity to a hazardous material during the course of its transportation(e.g., in warehouses and terminals) is considered to be performing a functionrelated to the transportation of hazardous materials, even though thatperson may not be involved directly in handling the hazardous material.(d) A person (including a self-employed person) who performs any functionsubject to the requirements of this subchapter may not perform that functionunless that person has been trained in accordance with the requirementsprescribed in this subpart.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 172.704 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Training requirements.</ITAG>(a) Persons subject to the requirements of this subpart shall be providedthe following training:(1) <T3>General awareness/familiarization training. </T3>Each person shallbe provided training designed to provide familiarity with the general provisionsof this subchapter, such as the hazard communication requirements of SubpartsC, D, E, and F of this part and the various classes of hazardous materials.(2) <T3>Function specific training.</T3> Each person shall be provided detailedtraining concerning requirements of this subchapter which are specificallyapplicable to the functions the person performs.(3) <T3>Safety training.</T3> Each person who performs any function in proximityto a hazardous material, and each first line supervisor of that person,shall be provided training concerning safety information applicable tothe hazardous material and their job function, including_(i) Emergency response information required by this part, and how to useit;(ii) General dangers presented by the various hazard classes of hazardousmaterials and how persons can protect themselves from exposure to thosehazards, including the use of personal protective clothing and equipment;(iii) Methods and procedures for accident avoidance, such as proper useof package handling equipment; and(iv) The immediate procedures to be followed in the event of an unintentionalrelease of a hazardous material, including any emergency response proceduresfor which the person is responsible and personal protection proceduresto be followed if exposed to a hazardous material. (Note: In addition toany applicable requirements of this subchapter, training requirements areprescribed in 29 CFR 1910.120 for employees for whom there exists the reasonablepossibility of responding to emergencies.)(b) <T3>Initial and recurrent training.</T3> Training shall be received within30 days, except that persons employed prior to [Insert effective date ofrule] shall receive training prior to [Insert date 30 days from effectivedate of rule]. Employees requiring training may be used in their hazardousmaterials job functions while they are being trained if they are underthe supervision of a properly trained and knowledgeable employee. A personshall be retrained:(1) upon change to a job function subject to this subpart, within 30 days;and(2) at least once every two years.(c) <T3>Recordkeeping.</T3> A record of the training provided as required bythis subpart and andSection; 177.816 of this subchapter, shall be createdand retained by the employer for as long as the person is employed andfor 90 days thereafter. The record shall include_(1) The person's name and signature;(2) The date the person was provided the training;(3) A copy of the training material, a reference indicating the locationof a readily available copy thereof, or a description of the training given;and(4) The name and signature of the person providing the training.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 173_SHIPPERS_GENERAL REQUIREMENTS FOR SHIPMENTS AND PACKAGINGS</ITAG>6. The authority citation for Part 173 would continue to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 49 U.S.C. 1803, 1804, 1805, 1806, 1807, 1808; 49 CFRPart 1, unless otherwise noted.</ITAG>7. In andSection; 173.1, paragraph (b) would be revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 173.1 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Purpose and scope.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(b) A shipment that is not prepared for shipment in accordance with thissubchapter may not be offered for transportation by air, highway, rail,or water. It is the duty of each person who offers hazardous materialsfor transportation to instruct each of their officers, agents and employeeshaving any responsibility for preparing hazardous materials for shipmentin the applicable regulations as specified in Part 172, Subpart H of thissubchapter.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">PART 174_CARRIAGE BY RAIL</ITAG>8. The authority citation for Part 174 would continue to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>49 U.S.C. 1803, 1804, 1805, 1808; 49 CFR Part 1, unlessotherwise noted.</ITAG>9. Section 174.7 would be revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 174.7 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Responsibility for compliance and training.</ITAG>(a) Unless this subchapter specifically provides that another person mustperform a particular duty, each carrier, including a connecting carrier,shall perform the duties specified and comply with all applicable requirementsof this part and shall instruct its employees in relation thereto.(b) Each employer of a person subject to the requirements of this subpartshall provide that person with the training required by Subpart H of Part172 of this subchapter.(c) A carrier may not transport a hazardous material by rail unless eachtrain crewmember receives the training required by Subpart H of Part 172of this subchapter.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 175_CARRIAGE BY AIRCRAFT</ITAG>10. The authority citation for Part 175 would continue to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>49 U.S.C. 1803, 1804, 1805, 1807, 1808; 49 CFR Part1, unless otherwise noted.</ITAG>11. Section 175.20 would be revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 175.20 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Compliance and training.</ITAG>(a) Unless this subchapter specifically provides that another person mustperform a particular duty, each operator shall comply with all applicablerequirements in Parts 107, 171, 172, 173, and 175 of this subchapter andshall thoroughly instruct employees in relation thereto. (See also 14 CFR121.135, 121.401, 121.433a, 135.323, 135.327 and 135.333.)(b) Each employer of a person subject to the requirements of this subpartshall provide that person with the training required by Subpart H of Part172 of this subchapter.(c) An aircraft operator may not transport a hazardous material by aircraftunless each crewmember receives the training required by Subpart H of Part172 of this subchapter.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 176_CARRIAGE BY VESSEL</ITAG>12. The authority citation for Part 176 would continue to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 49 U.S.C. 1803, 1804, 1805, 1806(b), 1808; 49 CFR Part1, unless otherwise noted.</ITAG>13. Section 176.13 would be revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 176.13 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Responsibility for compliance and training.</ITAG>(a) Unless this subchapter specifically provides that another person mustperform a particular duty, each carrier, including a connecting carrier,shall perform the duties specified and comply with all applicable requirementsin this part and shall instruct employees in relation thereto.(b) Each employer of a person subject to the requirements of this partshall provide that person with the training required by Subpart H of Part172 of this subchapter.(c) A carrier may not transport a hazardous material by vessel unless eachcrewmember receives the training required by Subpart H of Part 172 of thissubchapter.(d) A record of training required by andSection; 172.704(c) must be kepton board any vessel with crewmembers subject to the training requirementsof this subchapter.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 177_CARRIAGE BY PUBLIC HIGHWAY</ITAG>14. The authority citation for Part 177 would continue to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 49 U.S.C. 1803, 1804, 1805; 49 CFR Part 1, unless otherwisenoted.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 177.800 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>15. In andSection; 177.800, the last sentence of paragraph (a) would be removed.16. Section 177.800a would be added to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 177.800a</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Responsibility for compliance and training. </ITAG>(a) Unless this subchapter specifically provides that another person mustperform a particular duty, each carrier, including a connecting carrier,shall perform the duties specified and comply with each applicable requirementof this part and shall instruct employees in relation thereto. (b) Each employer of a person subject to the requirements of this subpartshall provide that person with the training required by Subpart H of Part172 of this subchapter. (c) A carrier may not transport a hazardous material by motor vehicle unlesseach driver and crewmember receives the training required by this partand Subpart H of Part 172 of this subchapter.17. Section 177.816 would be revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 177.816</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Driver training. </ITAG>(a) In addition to the training prescribed in Subpart H of Part 172 ofthis subchapter, each driver shall receive training concerning the applicablerequirements of 49 CFR Parts 383, 387, 390 through 399 and the proceduresnecessary for the safe operation of the motor vehicle which the driveroperates or intends to operate. Training shall include the following subjects:(1) Pre-trip safety inspection; (2) Use of vehicle controls and equipment, including operation of emergencyequipment; (3) Operation of vehicle including turning, backing, braking, parking andhandling, and vehicle characterisitics such as those related to vehicleinstability, effects of braking and curves on stability, effects of speedon vehicle control, dangers associated with maneuvering through curvessuch as on and off ramps, and high center of gravity; (4) Procedures for navigating tunnels, bridges, and railroad crossings;and (5) Requirements pertaining to attendance of vehicles, parking, smoking,routing and incident reporting. (6) Loading and unloading of materials, including_(i) Mixed load cargo compatibility and segregation; (ii) Package handling methods; (iii) Load securement. (b) <T3>Specialized requirements for cargo tanks and portable tanks. </T3>Noperson may operate a cargo tank, or a vehicle carrying a portable tankwith a capacity of 1000 gallons or more, unless that person receives trainingon appropriate practices and procedures and the applicable requirementsof Subchapter C and has the appropriate state issued license as requiredby Part 383. In addition to the requirements of paragraph (a) of this section,training shall include the following: (1) Operation of emergency control features of the cargo tank or portabletank; (2) Special vehicle handling characteristics to include: high center ofgravity, fluid load subject to surge, effects of possible product surgeon braking, characteristic differences in stability among baffled, unbaffledand multi-compartmented tanks; and effects of partial loads on vehiclestability; (3) Loading and unloading procedures; (4) The properties and hazards of the material transported; (5) Retest and inspection requirements for cargo tanks, and; (c) The training required by paragraphs (a) and (b) of this section mustconform to the requirements of andSection; 172.704 of this subchapter withregard to the frequency of training and recordkeeping.18. In andSection; 177.825, paragraph (d) would be revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 177.825</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Routing and training requirements for radioactive materials. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(d) No person may transport a package of highway route controlled quantityradioactive materials as defined in andSection; 173.403(1) of this subchapter,on a public highway unless: (1) The driver has received training as required by Subpart H of Part 172and andSection; 177.816. (2) The driver has in his immediate possession a copy of the record oftraining required by andSection; 172.704. (3) The driver has in his immediate possession the route plan requiredby paragraph (c) of this section and operates the motor vehicle in accordancewith the route plan.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Issued in Washington, DC on July 20, 1989 under authority delegatedin 49 CFR Part 106, Appendix A. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Alan I. Roberts, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director, Office of Hazardous Materials Transportation. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-17451 Filed 7-25-89; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-60-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>