<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR891017-0002 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.10-17-89.f2.A1001</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">Food and Nutrition Service</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">7 CFR Part 250 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Donation of Food for Use in the United States, Its Territories, Possessionsand Areas Under Its Jurisdiction </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>agency:</T2> Food and Nutrition Service, USDA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>action:</T2> Final rule.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>summary:</T2> This final rule amends the Food Distribution ProgramRegulations (7 CFR part 250) by: (1) Improving the manner in which agriculturalcommodities acquired by the Department of Agriculture are distributed torecipient agencies; (2) establishing mandatory criteria to be used by distributingagencies in determining distribution charges; and (3) establishing minimumperformance standards to be followed by distributing agencies responsiblefor intrastate distribution of donated commodities. The changes will improvethe manner in which commodities are distributed to recipient agencies asrequired under the provisions of the ``Commodity Distribution Reform Actand WIC Amendments of 1987.''</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>effective date:</T2> This final rule is effective November 16, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>for further information:</T2> Susan E. Proden, Chief, Program AdministrationBranch, Food Distribution Division, Food and Nutrition Service, U.S. Departmentof Agriculture, 3101 Park Center Drive, Alexandria, Virginia 22302 or telephonearea code (703) 756-3660.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>supplementary information: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Classification </ITAG>This action has been reviewed under Executive Order 12291 and has beenclassified as not major. We anticipate that this rule will not have anannual impact on the economy of more than $100 million. No major increasein costs or prices for consumers, individual industries, Federal, Stateor local government agencies, or geographic regions is anticipated. Thisaction is not expected to have significant adverse effects on competition,employment, investment, productivity, innovation, or on the ability ofU.S.-based enterprises to compete with foreign-based enterprises in domesticor export markets. This action has been reviewed with regard to requirements of the RegulatoryFlexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601-612). The Administrator of the Food and NutritionService (FNS), has certified that this action will not have a significanteconomic impact on a substantial number of small entities. This program is listed in the catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance under10.550 and is subject to the provisions of Executive Order 12372 whichrequires intergovernmental consultation with State and local officials(7 CFR part 3015, subpart V, and the final rule-related noticed at 48 FR29114, June 24, 1983). <ITAG tagnum="84">Paperwork Reduction Act Notice </ITAG>In accordance with the Paperwork Reduction Act of 1980 (44 U.S.C. 3501-3520),the additional recordkeeping and reporting requirements contained in therule at andSection;250.14(a) are subject to review and approval by the Officeof Management and Budget (OMB). The public reporting burden for the collectionsof information are estimated to average 360 hours per response, includingthe time for reviewing instructions, searching existing data sources, gatheringand maintaining the data needed, and completing and reviewing the collectionof information. Send comments regarding these burden estimates, includingsuggestions for reducing this burden, to Department of Agriculture, ClearanceOfficer, OIRM, room 404-W, Washington, DC 20250; and to the Office of Managementand Budget, Paperwork Reduction Act Project, Washington, DC 20503. With the exception of andSection;250.14(a) described above, the current reportingand recordkeeping requirements found in part 250 are approved by OMB undercontrol number 0584-0007. <ITAG tagnum="84">Background</ITAG>On January 8, 1988, President Reagan signed Public Law 100-237, ``The CommodityDistribution Reform Act and WIC Amendments of 1987.'' The purpose of thelaw is to improve the manner in which agricultural commodities are distributedto recipient agencies, to improve the quality of the commodities that aredistributed and to increase the degree to which the distribution respondsto the needs of recipient agencies while still carrying out the Department'sresponsibilities to support agricultural prices and remove surpluses fromthe market. On October 20, 1988, the Department proposed rules to implementthe following sections of Public Law 100-237:<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>2,L2,tp0,i1,s25,r50</C> <H1>Section</H1><H1>Topic</H1><ITAG tagnum="1">Section 3(b)(1)(B) <D>Monitoring of distributing agencies.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Section 3(d)(1)-(4) <D>Warehousing and distribution requirements for distributing agencies.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Section 3(e)(1)(A) <D>Distribution charges for commodities.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">Section 3(e)(1)(B) <D>Performance standards for distributing agencies.</D></ITAG></ITAG>The proposed rules contained several of the most complex provisions requiredby the law. For a more comprehensive description of those provisions, readersshould refer to the preamble of the proposed rule (53 FR 41172). Commentswere solicited to assist the Department in developing regulations whichwill provide for a more efficient, effective and uniform operation of theFood Distribution Program. Specifically the Department proposed changesto the current Food Distribution Program Regulations (7 CFR part 250) concerningthe use of commodity warehousing and delivery systems, mandatory criteriafor establishing distribution charges that some States charge recipientagencies, and minimum performance standards for distributing agencies.Analysis of CommentsA total of 115 comment letters were received from various entities includingthe American School Food Service Association, National Frozen Food Association,International Food Service Directors Association, National Associationof State Agencies for Food Distribution, and the International Associationof Refrigerated Warehouses. Other commenters included commercial distributors,local school food authorities, distributing agencies, State educationalagencies, processors and private consultants.The Department would like to take this opportunity to extend its gratitudeto each of the commenters who spent time reviewing the proposal, analyzingthe content and making recommendations for improvements. In the remainderof this preamble, the Department will explain where commenters' recommendationscould or could not be incorporated into this final regulation. The Departmentwould also like to remind readers that both the proposed and final ruleswere generated as a result of legislation in which Congress imposed veryspecific requirements upon the Department and program administrators. Inmany instances where commenters made recommendations for revisions, theDepartment had no discretion to alter the requirements. It is true thatthe intent of the legislation is to improve the manner in which commoditiesare distributed while being responsive to the needs of the recipient agencies,however, it was quite specific in placing the burden on distributing agenciesusing State warehousing and distribution systems to show that these systemswere more cost effective and efficient than commercial facilities. TheDepartment, therefore, was restricted as to the number of approaches thatcould be taken to improve the warehousing and distribution services torecipient agencies.Commenter reaction to each of the regulatory requirements is explainedin detail below. Readers should refer to the preamble of the October 20,1988 proposed rule (53 FR 41172) for a more comprehensive description ofthe history of the program and of the legislative requirements of PublicLaw 100-237 that this rule is intended to implement.System For Warehousing and Distributing Donated FoodsUnder andSection; 250.14(a)(1) of the proposed rule, distributing agencieswere required to use the most cost effective and efficient system for providingwarehousing and distribution services to recipient agencies. Commercialfacilities were defined as commercial enterprises that provide for warehousingand delivery.Fourteen commenters requested that the definition of commercial facilitiesbe clarified to allow for separate warehousing and delivery contracts.The commenters claimed that the regulations as they were proposed requireda single contract to cover both the warehousing and delivery of donatedfood.It was not the intent of the Department to define commercial facilitiesin such a way that it limits such facilities only to those that can provideboth warehousing and delivery services. Based on the commenters recommendations,andSection; 250.14(a)(1) of this final rule is amended to clarify the definitionof commercial facilities so that separate warehousing and delivery agreements/contractscan be negotiated.Evaluation of Current SystemsSection 250.14(a)(2) of the proposed regulations required distributingagencies to evaluate their current warehousing and distribution systems.Initial evaluations were to be completed by June 30, 1989 and updates submittedeach June 30 thereafter. Each of the requirements for the evaluation andthe commenters' reactions are described below.Six commenters supported the requirement that all distributing agenciesevaluate their existing systems. Three commenters suggested that the TemporaryEmergency Food Assistance Program be exempt from the requirement. Reflectingthe same sentiments, two commenters requested an exemption for the NutritionProgram for the Elderly and three commenters requested an exemption forthe Commodity Supplemental Food Program. Three distributing agencies recommendedthat States currently using commercial warehousing and distribution systemsor States currently in the process of converting to commercial systemsshould not be required to do a costly evaluation. Two commenters statedthat the regulations were geared only to the National School Lunch Program.Under the provisions of Public Law 100-237, the distributing agencies forall programs must evaluate their system for warehousing and distributingdonated food. No exceptions to this requirement were provided by the law.Therefore, the requirement remains in this final rule as proposed.Section 250.14(a)(2)(i) of the proposed rule required that the followinginformation be included in the description of the principal warehousing/deliverytechniques used by the distributing agency: (A) The frequency of delivery available;(B) The timeframes for making deliveries;(C) The type of delivery service offered;(D) The system for recipient agencies to order specific amounts of foodfrom available inventory;(E) The system for handling recipient agencies complaints; and(F) The system for recipient agencies to offer input regarding other servicesthey may find desirable.Eleven commenters stated that the evaluation should not include the descriptionof the system for handling recipient agency complaints or the system forrecipient agencies to offer input regarding services they may find desirable.Of those who commented on these particular provisions, two commenters alsoquestioned how they could determine a cost figure for these two services.Public Law 100-237 requires that the distribution of donated foods be responsiveto the needs of the recipient agencies. If recipient agencies have complaintsabout the warehousing and distribution services they are receiving, theremust be a formalized procedure for registering complaints. Also, thereshould be a mechanism in place for recipient agencies to offer suggestionsfor improvements in the way donated food is distributed. In response toother provisions of the legislation, both of these avenues for collectinginformation are addressed under the performance standards in andSection;240.24 (e) and (f) of this regulation. This provision only requires a descriptionof the existing system; cost information is dealt with in andSection; 240.14(a)(3)(ii) and (a)(4). Nevertheless, the Department has deleted subparagraphs(E) and (F) from this section of the final rule in order to avoid confusion.Section 250.14(a)(2)(ii) of the proposed rule required distributing agenciesto identify all costs incurred in administering the Food Distribution Program.These costs were to include transportation, storage and handling of donatedfoods (if the current distributing agency system does not include deliveryto recipient agencies, identification of costs incurred by recipient agenciesto pick up commodities at a warehouse and deliver the food to a centralizedstorage facility or the individual preparation sites), salaries of personsdirectly connected with the administration of the program and other programrelated expenses including fringe benefits, travel expenses, rent, utilities,accounting/auditing services, computer services, and the costs of providingprogram services to recipient agencies such as the costs for administeringand monitoring the State's processing program, technical assistance workshops,etc.Nineteen commenters stated that they would have a problem identifying costsincurred by recipient agencies for picking up commodities. They also believedthat the result of identifying such costs could be that recipient agencieswould have to pay for services that were previously provided by anotheragency (maintenance department, general services department, transportationdepartment, etc.). These commenters further stated that if there is nodirect cost for these services against the food service program, they shouldnot be considered a cost in the evaluation of existing systems.The Department does not have the flexibility to make the suggested changesto the regulation. The legislation is quite specific in requiring distributingagencies to use the most cost effective and efficient system for providingwarehousing and distribution services to recipient agencies. In order todetermine the most cost effective and efficient system, the distributingagencies must compare commercial and distributing agency-operated systems.Such a comparison will not be valid unless all costs incurred in administeringthe Food Distribution Program are identified. Section 250.14(a)(2)(ii)of the final rule has been revised to clarify that the cost informationis to be an estimate for the upcoming school year. A parallel change hasbeen made to the cost comparison provision (andSection; 240.14(a)(4)) toensure that the data will be for the same time period.Section 250.14(a)(2)(ii) of the proposed rule required all distributingagencies to complete initial system evaluations by June 30, 1989, and updateseach June 30 thereafter.Eighteen commenters stated that the deadline for submitting the initialevaluations to the regional offices was unreasonable. They further statedthat guidelines were needed to assist distributing agencies in conductingmeaningful evaluations prior to implementation of the requirement. Fourdistributing agencies requested that USDA make State Administrative Expenses(SAE) funds available to fund the additional workload associated with implementingthe new regulation requirements. They further commented that the workloadassociated with the rules is unrealistic and disconcerting.Based on the comments received in response to the proposed rule, andSection;240.14(a)(2) is amended in this final rule to provide a one year delayto the due date by requiring initial evaluations to be submitted to theFNSRO by June 30, 1990. Additionally, the Department would like to pointout that technical assistance materials and reallocated State AdministrativeExpense funds are available to assist distributing agencies in evaluatingtheir current warehousing and distribution system.Twenty-four commenters believed that the annual review of existing systemsis unnecessary. Of these commenters, 18 recommended that distributing agenciesshould only be required to evaluate their warehousing and delivery systemsonce every three years. Two commenters recommended that evaluations beconducted once every five years and two commenters believed that evaluationsshould only be required when the State modifies an existing system. Theremainder of the commenters felt that complete evaluations were unnecessaryaltogether.Fourteen commenters believed updates should only be required if a changeoccurs in the level of service provided or the price of the service increases.The legislation does provide the Department some discretion with respectto the frequency of these evaluations. In an effort to reduce the burdenon the distributing agencies associated with the annual evaluation of theircurrent warehousing and distribution system, the Department has decidedto change the proposed frequency and to exempt commercial systems fromroutine reevaluations. The Department believes that the competitive bidprocess used to obtain commercial warehousing and distribution will serveas an adequate basis for reevaluating commercial systems and that to requirereevaluations through the process set forth in this rule would be unnecessarilyduplicative. The final rule requires distributing agencies that do notuse commercial facilities to reevaluate their current system once everythree years by March 31. For purposes of consistency, as described laterin this preamble, cost comparison data will also be required on the samecycle.In order to permit FNS to continuously monitor changes in all distributingagencies' activities. andSection; 250.14(a)(7) of the final regulation providesthat at least 90 days before reducing the level of service provided orincreasing distribution charges beyond normal inflation, the distributingagency must request approval from the FNSRO for the proposed change andsubmit justification. This request will provide FNS the opportunity toreview those distribution systems making changes, especially commercialsystems that will not automatically fall under the three year reevaluationprocess set forth in andSection; 250.14(a)(2). Upon reviewing a request fora change, should FNS determine that a complete reevaluation of a commercialor noncommercial system is in order, andSection; 250.14(a)(6)(ii) of thisrule specifies that FNS may require a complete reevaluation of the systembeing used.Comparison of Existing System with Commercial SystemsSection 250.14(a)(3) of the proposed rule required all distributing agencieswhich do not use commercial facilities to compare the cost of warehousingand distributing commodities under their current system with the cost ofcomparable services under a commercial system. The cost comparison wasto be made between the cost of providing a minimum level of service underthe current system with the cost of obtaining an equivalent level of servicefrom commercial facilities. This minimum level of service was to consistof the transportation, storage and handling of donated food from the timeof delivery by the Department to a distributing agency until delivery toa recipient agency's centralized storage facility or individual preparationsites with monthly deliveries of donated food to all recipient agencies.A distributing agency could base its cost comparison on a level of servicein excess of the minimum and/or services not currently provided. However,in all cases, the proposal required that the comparison be made on thecosts of providing a comparable level of service under the existing systemversus a commercial system.One commenter requested that the Department provide a clearer definitionof ``minimum level of service.'' In response to that recommendation, theterminology has been revised in the final rule to refer to a ``basic levelof service'' which consists of storing and warehousing donated food andmaking monthly deliveries to all recipient agencies.Seven commenters stated that obtaining cost comparison data from commercialfacilities involves a bid process that can be very cumbersome at the distributingagency level. Commenters claim that going through the whole bid processto obtain cost information from commercial enterprises when a distributingagency may or may not award the bid has serious implications. Accordingto the commenters, it is unethical, inappropriate, and unconscionable,if not illegal, for a distributing agency which has no intention of awardinga contract to solicit cost information from commercial enterprises.The Department is not suggesting that distributing agencies should issueformal requests for contracts that will not be awarded. In order to meetthe requirements of the law, distributing agencies must only obtain informationon the cost of commercial warehousing and distribution of commodities inthat State. Price information must cover a basic level of service whichconsists of storing and warehousing donated food and making monthly deliveriesto all recipient agencies. The Department is in the process of developingguidance to assist distributing agencies in collecting cost informationand in making appropriate cost comparisons. The guidance will be distributedas soon as it is developed.Five commenters questioned why distributing agencies should obtain costinformation for using commercial facilities in those States that have lawsprohibiting the use of commercial facilities for the delivery of donatedfood. The Department believes that Public Law 100-237 supersedes any Statelaws that prohibit commercial facilities from warehousing or deliveringdonated food.Seventeen commenters believed that requiring monthly deliveries to allrecipient agencies will result in increased costs that they would be unwillingto pay. Eight commenters stated that they were happy with the service theywere receiving under the current system and claimed that no commercialfirm could give the level of service that the distributing agency gives.Nine commenters recommended that the Department permit distributing agenciesand recipient agencies to mutually agree on delivery schedules other thanonce a month. They claimed that fewer deliveries help keep costs to a minimum.These commenters are misconstruing this provision. This provision doesnot itself require monthly deliveries to all recipient agencies. Instead,it uses monthly deliveries as a basic level of service for purposes ofcomparison between commercial and distributing agency-operated systems.Section 250.13(a)(2), added by an interim rule on June 16, 1988 (53 FR22469), is the provision which requires distributing agencies to make monthlydeliveries. However, the Department never intended this requirement topreclude a distributing agency and recipient agency from agreeing to lessfrequent distributions, such as school food authorities which do not needmonthly deliveries when classes are not in session. In order to be consistentwith this interpretation of the requirement, the description of the basiclevel of service in andSection; 250.14(a)(4)(i) is revised to specificallystate this modification. The Department will make the corresponding clarificationto the monthly delivery requirement in andSection; 250.13(a)(2) when finalizingthat provision.Section 250.14(a)(3) of the proposed rule required that all data regardingthe cost of the current warehousing and distribution system and the costfor comparable commercial facilities be submitted to FNS for review byJune 30, 1989 and each June 30 thereafter.Thirteen commenters were opposed to the requirement that cost comparisondata be submitted each year. Nine commenters stated that cost comparisondata should only be needed once every three years. One commenter statedthat the data should only be required once every two years. Three commentersrequested clarification on what dates to base the cost comparison data.These commenters claim that the data could be based on a calendar, Stateor fiscal year basis. Another commenter claimed that the annual cost comparisonis not necessary if there is satisfaction with the distributing agency'scurrent system. Several commenters claimed it is better to have multi-yearcontracts to ensure better pricing, service and inventory controls.Based on the comments to the proposed rule and in order to coordinate withthe date for submission of the evaluation, andSection; 250.14(a)(4)(iv) isrevised to specify that the initial cost comparison data must be submittedby June 30, 1990 and that updated data must be submitted by March 31 everythird year.In addition as discussed above, andSection; 250.14(a)(7) has been added torequire distributing agencies to provide FNS at least 90 days notice beforereducing the level of service provided or increasing the distribution chargesbeyond normal inflation. The distributing agency must request approvalfrom the FNSRO for the proposed change and submit justification for thechange. In the case of a noncommercial system, this justification mustinclude updated cost comparison data.The final rule is also revised to clarify that all cost data are to besubmitted on a school year basis.Approval to Use Other SystemsSection 250.14(a)(4) of the proposed rule required distributing agenciesnot opting to implement a commercial warehousing and distribution systemto apply to the FNSRO for approval to use other facilities proving thatother facilities are more cost effective and efficient. Each request wasto be considered on a case by case basis. The FNSRO would inform the distributingagency whether it could continue to use the alternative system. Approvalto use the alternative system would be granted for no more than one year.After one year, the distributing agency must implement a commercial systemor apply to the FNSRO for approval to continue to use the alternative system.Fourteen commenters stated that the regulations should focus more on theneeds of recipient agencies and less on the commercialization of the storageand delivery of donated food. Nineteen commenters claimed that recipientagency satisfaction should count as evidence that the current system isacceptable. These commenters claimed that acceptability of the currentsystem by the State food distribution advisory council and the State schoolfood service association should be considered in determining whether togrant approval to use other systems.Eight commenters claimed that commercial systems (although generally themost cost effective) may not be the best for all distributing agencies.All of these commenters were concerned that they may be forced into doingbusiness with a distributor they find unacceptable. Nine commenters requestedthat distributing agencies be permitted to modify their current systemsto make them more cost effective and efficient rather than forcing themto convert to a commercial system.Three commenters recommended that distributing agencies should be allowedto maintain their current system if they can provide evidence that thereis no competition for a commercial system. Also, two commenters claimedthat the largest school districts in a State will dictate the level ofservice to be provided to all recipient agencies. These commenters wouldlike to see an end to the whole idea of using commercial facilities. Onecommenter claimed that commercial systems do not lend themselves to slow-movingcommodities. The commenter claimed that distributors will be unwillingto handle commodities for which requests for the item are infrequent and/orin small amounts.The Department is aware that this rule may impose hardships upon some distributingagencies and is sympathetic to those agencies. However, the legislationis very clear on this requirement and allows the Department very littlelatitude to offer any relief. Under section 3(d)(3) of Public Law 100-237,distributing agencies that do not implement a commercial warehousing anddistribution system must apply to the Secretary for approval to use otherfacilities and must provide justification that other facilities are morecost effective and efficient. Therefore, andSection; 250.14(a)(5) of thisfinal rule remains as proposed with the following modifications.In recognition of commenter concerns and in order to be consistent withthe date for submission of the system evaluation and cost comparison, andSection;250.14(a)(5) has been revised to require the initial requests to be madeby June 30, 1990 and subsequent requests (where appropriate) to be madeevery three years by March 31. In addition, at least 90 days before reducingthe level of service provided or increasing in the distribution chargesbeyond normal inflation, the distribution agency must request approvalfrom the FNSRO for the proposed change and request continued approval touse an alternative system. As discussed above, the request must includejustification, and if a noncommercial system, updated cost comparison data.System ImplementationSection 250.14(a)(5) of the proposed rule required distributing agenciesto implement the most cost effective and efficient system by July 1, 1990.Twelve commenters stated that the deadline for implementation of the newrequirements was unreasonable. The Department concurs with the commentersand changed the requirement in andSection; 250.14(a)(6) to a new implementationdate of July 1, 1991. The additional year should give distributing agenciessufficient time to evaluate their current system for warehousing and distributingdonated food, compare that system with the cost of comparable commercialalternatives and make the decision to request a waiver or convert to acommercial system.Section 250.14(a)(5) of the proposed rule also stated that if at any timeFNS determines that the warehousing and distribution system in place isnot cost effective based on distribution charge information or other information,the distributing agency will be required to reevaluate its system within90 days of notification by the FNSRO.Two commenters stated that requiring the reevaluation of a warehousingand distribution system at the whim of a regional office is impractical.At the present it is the intent of the Department to require distributingagencies to reevaluate warehousing and distribution systems only when thesystems are no longer the most cost effective and efficient based on distributioncharge information they submit. However, the Department believes it isnecessary to retain general authority to require distributing agenciesto reevaluate their systems should the Department otherwise have groundsfor questioning a system's cost effectiveness or efficiency. For thesereasons, that portion of the final rule remains as proposed.The final rule has been revised to clarify that in any instance in whichan interim evaluation, cost comparison and/or request for approval to usean alternative system is required pursuant to andSection; 250.14(a)(6)(ii),the next required submission for noncommercial systems will be the thirdMarch 31 following the date of the interim submission.Section 250.14(a)(6) of the final rule has been revised to specify thetimeframe for conversions to commercial systems after the initial evaluationcycle. Any time a distributing agency's evaluation and cost comparisondata indicates that a commercial system is more cost effective and efficient,the distribution agency must convert to the commercial system within sixmonths of the submission of the data to the FNSRO, unless otherwise approvedby the FNSRO. Further, any time a request to use an alternative systemis denied, the distributing agency must convert to a commercial systemwithin six months of the date of the denial, unless otherwise approvedby the FNSRO.As described previously in the preamble, a paragraph (a)(7) has been addedto andSection; 250.14 to require all distributing agencies to request approvalfrom the FNSRO 90 days prior to any reduction in service or increase indistribution charges beyond normal inflation. This request will provideFNS the opportunity to review the systems, especially the commercial systemsabout which FNS will not be receiving routine updates every three years.This review will provide FNS the opportunity to determine if a completereevaluation of the system is necessary.Summary of Warehousing and Distribution Requirements.<T3>Evaluations</T3>_All distributing agencies must submit an initial evaluationof their warehousing and distribution systems by June 30, 1990. Distributingagencies that do not use commercial facilities must submit updates by March31, 1993 and every third March 31 thereafter. To provide FNS the opportunityto determine the need for an interim evaluation, all distributing agenciesmust request approval from the FNSRO at least 90 days prior to increasingdistribution charges or reducing service levels. Interim evaluations mustbe conducted within 90 days of a request by the FNSRO. In cases where noncommercialfacilities are used and in which an interim evaluation has been made, thenext update must be submitted no later than the third March 31 followingsubmission of the interim evaluation. All evaluations must meet the requirementsin andSection; 250.14(a)(3).<T3>Comparisons with Commercial Systems</T3>_Distributing agencies notusing commercial systems must make an initial comparison between theircurrent system and a commercial system using a comparable level of serviceby June 30, 1990 and must update this cost comparison data every thirdMarch 31. In cases in which an interim cost comparison has been made, thenext update must be submitted no later than the third March 31 followingsubmission of the interim cost comparison. If after conducting a cost comparisona distributing agency chooses to continue to use a non-commercial system,a request for approval must be submitted with the evaluation and cost comparison.If an agency is not able to locate a commercial distributor, documentationof this must be submitted in accordance with the deadlines above. In addition,when requesting approval of reductions in service levels or increases indistribution charges beyond normal inflation, distributing agencies usingnoncommercial systems must include updated cost comparison data with theirjustification. All cost comparisons must meet the requirements in andSection;250.14(a)(4).<T3>System Implementation</T3>_The most cost effective and efficient systemof warehousing and distribution must be implemented by July 1, 1991. Inaddition, any time a distributing agency's subsequent evaluation and costcomparison data indicates that a commercial system is more cost effectiveand efficient, the distribution agency must convert to the commercial systemwithin six months of the submission of the data to the FNSRO, unless otherwiseapproved by the FNSRO. Further, anytime a request to use an alternativesystem is denied, the distributing agency must convert to a commercialsystem within six months of the date of the denial, unless otherwise approvedby the FNSRO.Distribution ChargesSection 250.15(a)(1) of the proposed rule required distributing agenciesthat assess recipient agencies for distribution charges to submit to theFNSRO for approval a description of their system with supporting allowablecost data used in calculating the rate to be used for the upcoming schoolyear. This description and data was to be submitted by May 1 of each year.Before making any changes to the distribution charges during the schoolyear, the distributing agency must submit to the FNSRO for approval a descriptionof the change together with supporting data used to calculate the change.One commenter claimed that if distributing agencies obtain competitivebids for distribution services and base the distribution charges on thosebids it is not necessary to submit distribution charge information to USDAfor approval. Six commenters were opposed to the requirement that distributingagencies should have to justify distribution charges to the FNSRO on ayearly basis. Of these commenters, two believed the information shouldonly be submitted if costs escalate or recipient agency dissatisfactiondevelops. Another commenter stated the information on distribution chargesshould only be required once every three years. One commenter pointed outthat if recipient agencies pay for transportation fees directly to a companybased on a competitive bid, it would be inappropriate for FNS to approvethose fees.The Department recognizes that if a distributing agency has a contractin place for the distribution of commodities and passes on to the recipientagencies the full cost of the contract in the form of distribution charges,it may be difficult for the distributing agency to alter the distributioncharge structure. Further, the Department does not intend that its reviewof proposed distribution charges would force the contract to be terminated.In reviewing the distribution charge information, the Department will takeinto consideration existing contracts and, where necessary, require changesto be made when the contracts are next renegotiated. The Department believesthat this process, together with the cost effective and efficient requirementsof andSection;250.14, will ensure that distribution charges are kept to appropriatelevels. The Department also wishes to point out that to the extent thata recipient agency itself contracts for transportation and pays the companydirectly, the distribution charge provisions do not apply. Section 250.15(a)applies only to fees for distribution charged by the distributing agency.However, distributing agencies may not use such a system to avoid reviewof distribution charges since andSection;250.14(a) requires the distributingagency to take into account the costs incurred by recipient agencies inpicking up commodities when evaluating its warehousing and distributionsystem.In response to the commenters who questioned the requirement for annualsubmissions and in order to coordinate with the dates for submissions ofsystem evaluations and cost comparisons, the Department amended andSection;250.15(a)(1)(i)of the final rule to require distributing agencies to submit the initialdescription of their system for assessing distribution charges with supportingallowable cost data used in calculating the rate to be used for the upcomingschool year to the FNSRO for approval by June 30, 1990. Updates to thisinformation will be required once every three years by March 31. In addition,andSection;250.15(a)(1)(ii) has been revised to require distributing agenciesto request approval from the FNSRO at least 90 days before increasing distributioncharges beyond normal inflation.Section 250.15(a)(1) of the proposed rule stated that distribution chargesmay not be based solely on a percentage of the value of the commoditiesdistributed.Two commenters agreed that distributing agencies should be prohibited fromassessing distribution charges based on the value of the commodities. However,six commenters disagreed with the provision stating that distributing agenciesshould be permitted to assess distribution charges based on a percentageof the value of the donated food as long as total charges do not exceedincurred costs. These commenters claim that assessing distribution chargesin this manner ensures that each school food authority pays their fairshare. One commenter remarked that the basis a distributing agency usesto assess distribution charges should remain the prerogative of each individualagency as long as the method is applied equally and fairly to all recipientagencies. Two commenters stated the wording in the proposed rule was unclearin that distribution charges could not be based solely on a percentageof the value of the commodities distributed. The commenters wanted to seethe word ``solely'' removed because they felt the proposed revision wouldpermit distributing agencies to base distribution charges on a percentageof the value of the donated food as well as other costs which must be passedon to recipient agencies.The Department continues to believe that distribution charges should bedistributed among recipient agencies based on the volume of food receivedby each recipient, as measured on a unit or weight basis. The value ofthe food bears little relationship to the costs of handling it. Section250.15(a)(1)(vi) of the final rule, however, has been amended by removingthe word ``solely'' from the text to eliminate any confusion on the partof distributing agencies.Section 250.15(a)(1)(v) of the proposed rule required FNS to review thedistribution charge information and inform the distributing agency of theappropriateness of its distribution charges. If it was determined thata distributing agency's proposed distribution charges were excessive orincorporated inappropriate costs, the distributing agency would be requiredto adjust the distribution charges to an appropriate level or submit furtherjustification sufficient to satisfy the FNSRO that the proposed distributioncharges were essential to cover allowable costs and services.One commenter stated that if distribution charges are found to be excessiveand were established by a bid obtained under State procurement activity,no random adjustments or changes would be legal.As discussed above, the Department does not intend to force distributingagencies to void their warehousing and distribution contracts. Instead,the Department will review the circumstances to determine if a distributingagency's distribution charges are found to be substantially higher thanwhat other distributing agencies charge for a comparable level of service.If the charges appear to be excessive, the distributing agency with thehigher charges will be required to justify or further explain how the levelof distribution charges was determined. If necessary the distributing agencymay be required to make changes when renegotiating the contracts. Onlyin an extrme situation would a distributing agency be required to absorbthe excess costs. Section 250.15(a)(1)(v) of the final rule remains asproposed.Corrective Action PlansSection 250.19(d) of the proposed rule required that corrective actionplans be submitted whenever a distributing agency is found by the FNSROto be substantially out of compliance with a performance standard or anyother provision of the regulations. The corrective action plan should identifythe actions and the timeframes needed to correct the deficiencies foundby the FNSRO. The plan should be written, signed by the proper officialin the State, and submitted to the FNSRO within 60 days following receiptof the report of deficiencies. Extensions beyond the 60 days may be made,for cause, with written justification to and approved by the FNSRO.One commenter supported the requirement that distributing agencies mustsubmit a corrective action plan within 60 days of the FNSRO report. Onecommenter stated that FNS should state how monitoring will be carried out,how often and on what schedule.The Department is using this requirement to assure that deficiencies thatmay be identified are also corrected. Deficiencies in program operationsmay be discovered during routine management evaluations, during auditsor other review procedures. With the advent of legislation requiring minimumperformance standards that agencies must meet, the Department believesthat it is appropriate to ensure that distributing agencies correct anydeficiencies in their operations as expeditiously as possible. The requirementremains as proposed and is redesignated as andSection;259.19(c) of this finalrule.Distributing Agency Performance StandardsSection 250.24 of the proposed rule established minimum performance standardswhich must be followed by distributing agencies responsible for intrastatedistribution of donated commodities and products. The seven standards addressthe level of service that should be provided to recipient agencies. Theminimum standards include the following:The first, <T3>Program Management and Evaluation,</T3> required distributing agenciesto conduct reviews in accordance with andSection; 250.19 of this part. Distributingagencies were also to assess the adequacy of their service to recipientagencies. No comments were received regarding this requirement and therequirement as proposed has been retained in Section 250.24(a) of thisfinal rule.The second performance standard, <T3>Information Dissemination,</T3> required distributing agencies to providerecipient agencies with information needed for informed participation onthe program. Distributing agencies were to provide program informationrelative to:(1) Current program regulations;(2) Summaries of commodity specifications;(3) Results of any test evaluations and surveys;(4) Advisory council membership recommendations;(5) Recipes; and(6) Written procedures for ordering commodities, handling commodities whichare stale, spoiled, out-of-condition or not in compliance with specifications,submitting complaints and other written policy which affects program operations.Five commenters were opposed to this performance standard and one commentersupported it. The commenter in favor of the standard supported it but saidthat in order to satisfy the requirement it was necessary for the FNSROsto furnish information in a timely manner. Those commenters who opposedthe standard stated that compliance with the requirement was contingentupon receiving timely information from USDA, especially regarding informationabout stale, spoiled or out of condition donated food. One commenter recommendedthat FNS establish a standard for itself to respond in writing to distributingagencies within 30 days of receiving a complaint. The Department is awarethat it must promptly furnish information regarding commodities which arefound to be stale, spoiled, out of condition or not in compliance withspecifications including procedures for replacement. Information is passedon to recipient agencies as soon as it is received so distributing agenciescan take actions to alleviate the problem(s). The standard simply requiresdistributing agencies to establish procedures so when information is receivedfrom the Department, they can act immediately to correct the situation.The requirement in andSection; 250.24(b) of this final rule remains as proposed.The third performance standard, <T3>Fiscal Responsibility,</T3> required distributing agencies to maintaina financial management system which ensures fiscal integrity and accountabilityfor all funds and includes a recordkeeping system which conforms to generallyaccepted accounting practices and Office of Management and Budget circulars.No comments were received regarding this section. However, the Departmenthas noted that OMB circulars are not generally applicable to non-Federalgrant funding. Therefore, reference to these circulars has been deletedin the final rule.The fourth standard,<T3> Ordering and Allocation, </T3>required distributing agencies to ensurethat donated food is provided on an equitable basis and, to the extentpracticable, in the types and forms most usuable by recipient agencies.Distributing agencies were to be responsible for: (1) Obtaining and utilizing semi-annual commodity acceptability information;(2) Providing recipient agencies with information regarding commodity availability;(3) Providing recipient agencies with information regarding commodity assistancelevels;(4) Ordering and allocating donated food based on participation data forthose programs which serve meals;(5) Ensuring the availability of commodities, to the extent possible, inquantities requested and at times specified by the recipient agencies;(6) Permitting recipient agencies to refuse all or a portion of a commodityprior to delivery to the distributing agency if time permits;(7) Permitting recipient agencies to change orders for Group B and unlimitedbonus commodities prior to submission of an order to the Department;(8) Providing recipient agencies with ordering options and commodity values;(9) Offering schools participating in the National School Lunch Programthe per meal value of donated food; and(10) Consider the preparation and storage capabilities of recipient agencieswhen ordering donated food, including capabilities of such agencies tohandle commodity product forms, quality, packaging and quantities.Seven commenters were opposed to various provisions contained in this standard.One commenter recommended changing the word ``allocating'' to ``offering.''Five commenters stated that to enable distributing agencies to be responsiveto recipient agency needs, the Department should establish practices andprocedures to ensure that distributing agencies receive the commoditiesin the types and forms that will allow them to be responsive to recipientagency needs. One commenter recommended that language be added to requirethe vendor or the Department to reimburse the distributing agency or therecipient agency for storage and distribution costs associated with out-of-conditionfoods. Another commenter stated that the rules seemed to apply only toschool food authorities. If all types of recipient agencies are to be included,the Department should establish entitlement rates for all programs.The Department has made many improvements to commodity distribution programsover the past few years. Many of the changes to the ordering and allocationsystem have been made based on feedback from the distributing agencies.The Department is attempting to order donated food items as requested bythe recipient agencies. It is also attempting to purchase food items inamounts requested and deliver the food in a timely manner so it can beutilized during the school year. This performance standard is designedto ensure distributing agencies provide food on an equitable basis andto give recipient agencies the greatest flexibility possible in ordering/requestingdonated food. Concerning the comment requesting reimbursement of distributionand storage costs for out-of-condition foods, it is the Department's positionthat once a distributing agency accepts a commodity, the distributing agencyis responsible for any storage and distribution costs for that commodity.In those instances where a distributing agency later attempts to revokeacceptance, the Department will consider claims for reimbursement of distributionand storage costs in accordance with principles of commercial law. Forthese reasons the Department continues to support this performance standardrequirement as proposed.The fifth standard, <T3>Warehousing and Distribution,</T3> required distributing agencies touse a warehousing and distribution system that is efficient, cost effectiveand responsive to the needs of recipient agencies. In addition, it requireddistributing agencies to encourage recipient agencies capable of receivingdirect shipments to order donated food directly into their warehouses.It required distributing agencies to solicit information regarding theindividual delivery needs of recipient agencies and maintain distributionschedules which are equitable and reliable, recognizing hours of operation,holidays and vacations and other special needs of recipient agencies. Thisstandard also required the distributing agencies to make donated food availableat least monthly; however, the distributing agency would not be held responsiblefor delays in deliveries of donated food when the delays were due to latedeliveries of donated food to the distributing agency by the Department.Many of the comments received regarding this performance standard paralleledthe comments received on andSection; 250.14(a) of the proposed regulationsregarding warehousing and distribution systems. Eight commenters were opposedto the standard as proposed and two commenters were in favor of the requirement.Those commenters who opposed the requirement stated that donated food doesnot have to be delivered monthly. These commenters stated that requiringmonthly deliveries will add unnecessary costs. They stated that deliveriesshould be mutually agreed upon by the distributing agencies and the recipientagencies. One commenter supported the provision to impose minimum performancestandards on the distributing agencies, placing emphasis on the basic servicesto be provided to recipient agencies. Another commenter supported the basicrequirements of this performance standard but was opposed to the requirementfor monthly deliveries. This commenter further stated that schools do notneed deliveries during the summer. The commenter wanted the provision changesto require monthly deliveries during the school year only.As discussed in connection with andSection; 250.14(a), the Department didnot intend to preclude a distributing agency and recipient agency fromagreeing to less frequent distributions, such as school food authoritieswhich do not need monthly deliveries when classes are not in session. Section250.24(e) has been amended to clarify this point.The Sixth performance standard, <T3>Disposition of Damaged or Out-of-Condition Commodities, </T3>requireddistributing agencies to establish a system for handling recipient agencycomplaints and to notify the Department of any commodity losses and toarrange for replacement of lost commodities.One commenter supported the inclusion of this requirement in the regulationand four commenters opposed the requirement. Those who opposed the requirementdid so stating that distributing agencies cannot arrange for commodityreplacement without the Department's commitment to the system. These commenterswanted the rule changed to make the distributing agencies' responsibilityto be contingent upon action by the Department to replace lost commodities.One commenter recommended that language be added to impose responsibilitiesand timeframes upon the Department for arranging for the replacement ofdonated food.The Department is committed to arranging for replacing commodities thatare delivered damaged or out-of-condition as provided for in andSection;250.13(g) of the interim rule published June 16, 1988 (53 FR 22469); however,there are circumstances where immediate replacement cannot be made. TheDepartment will arrange for replacement commodities as soon as possibleand continues to rely on distributing agencies to notify them of problemsexperienced in the replacement of commodities found to be damaged and/orout-of-condition. In andSection; 250.24(f), the performance standard remainsas proposed.The seventh performance standard, <T3>Processing, </T3>required distributing agencies to administer an acceptableprocessing program. It also required distributing agencies to inform recipientagencies annually of the processing options available to them for facilitatingtheir participation in local, State or National processing contracts. Distributingagencies were also to test end products prior to entering into processingcontracts and to monitor the acceptability of processed end products.Fifteen commenters opposed the provisions contained in this performancestandard and six were in favor of the requirements. Those who supportedthe requirement stated that it was a good idea to inform all recipientagencies of the processing options available to them. These commentersfurther recommended creating a requirement that distributing agencies mustnegotiate Statewide contracts when at least 20 percent of the recipientagencies request a particular processed end product.Those commenters which opposed the provisions contained in this performancestandard objected to the requirement that distributing agencies be requiredto test processed end products. These commenters stated that the testingof end products should be the responsibility of the purchasing recipientagency. These commenters further stated that the State has neither thefacilities nor the qualified staff required to test products. They statedthat the ultimate test of a product is the students' acceptability of theproduct.Although section 3(d)(5) of Public Law 100-237 specifically requires thetesting of end products, the Department never intended for the distributingagency itself to have to test each and every end product approved undera processing contract. It was implied that recipient agencies could testthe products and inform the distributing agency whether or not the productsare acceptable. In andSection; 250.24(g) the Department amended the requirementin this final rule to clarify that distributing agencies may delegate thetesting of end products to the purchasing recipient agencies.The Department has also made minor technical changes and reordered certainlanguage in the final rule for purposes of clarification.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 7 CFR Part 250</ITAG>Aged, Agricultural commodities, Business and industry, Food assistanceprograms, Food donation, Food processing, Grant programs, Reporting andrecordkeeping requirements, School breakfast and lunch programs, Surplusagricultural commodities.Accordingly, 7 CFR part 250 is amended to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 250_DONATIONS OF FOOD FOR USE IN THE UNITED STATES, ITS TERRITORIESAND POSSESSIONS AND AREAS UNDER ITS JURISDICTION</ITAG>1. The authority citation for part 250 is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Sec. 32, Pub. L. 74-320, 49 Stat. 744 (7 U.S.C. 612c);Pub. L. 75-165, 50 Stat. 323 (15 U.S.C. 713c); secs. 6, 9, Pub. L. 79-396,60 Stat. 231, 233 (42 U.S.C. 1755, 1758); sec. 416, Pub. L. 81-439, 63Stat. 1058 (7 U.S.C. 1431); sec. 402, Pub. L. 81-665, 68 Stat. 843 (22U.S.C. 1922); sec. 210, Pub. L. 84-540, 70 Stat. 202 (7 U.S.C. 1859); sec.9, Pub. L. 85-931, 72 Stat. 1792 (7 U.S.C. 1431b); Pub. L. 86-756, 74 Stat.899 (7 U.S.C. 1431 note); sec. 709, Pub. L. 89-321, 79 Stat. 1212 (7 U.S.C.1446a-1); sec. 3, Pub. L. 90-302, 82 Stat. 117 (42 U.S.C. 1761); secs.409, 410, Pub. L. 93-288, 88 Stat. 157 (42 U.S.C. 5179, 5180); sec. 2,Pub. L. 93-326, 88 Stat. 286 (42 U.S.C. 1762a); sec. 16 Pub. L. 94-105,89 Stat. 522 (42 U.S.C. 1766); sec. 1304(a), Pub. L. 95-113, 91 Stat. 980(7 U.S.C. 612c note); sec. 311, Pub. L. 95-478, 92 Stat. 1533 (42 U.S.C.3030a); sec. 10, Pub. L. 95-627, 92 Stat. 3623 (42 U.S.C. 1760); sec. 1114(a),Pub. L. 97-98, 95 Stat. 1269 (7 U.S.C. 1431e); Title 11, Pub. L. 98-8,97 Stat. 35 (7 U.S.C. 612c note); (5 U.S.C. 301); Pub. L. 100-237, 101Stat. 1733 (7 U.S.C. 612 note).</ITAG>2. In andSection; 250.14, the section title is revised, paragraphs (a), (b),(c), (d), and (e) are redesignated (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f), respectively,and a new paragraph (a) is added to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 250.14</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Warehousing, distribution and storage of donated foods.</ITAG>(a) <T3>Standards for Warehousing and Distribution Systems_</T3>(1) <T3>Use of cost efficient and effective facilities. </T3>Distributing agenciesshall use the most cost effective and efficient system for providing warehousingand distribution services to recipient agencies. For the purpose of thispart, commercial facilities are defined as enterprises that provide commercialwarehousing services or commercial delivery services, or those commercialenterprises that provide both warehousing and delivery services.(2) <T3>Timeframes for evaluation. </T3>All distributing agencies shall evaluatetheir current warehousing and distribution systems. Initial evaluationsshall be submitted to the FNSRO by June 30, 1990. Subsequent evaluationsof noncommercial systems shall, at a minimum, be submitted to FNS everythree years by March 31. (3) <T3>Evaluation of current systems. </T3>The evaluation of the system inplace shall, at a minimum, include the following information: (i) A description of the principal warehousing/delivery techniques usedby the distributing agency. The description should include: (A) The frequency of delivery available; (B) The timeframes for making deliveries; (C) The type of delivery service offered (to the loading dock or placementin the storeroom); and (D) The system for recipient agencies to order specific amounts of foodfrom available inventory; and (ii) An estimate of all costs that will be incurred in administering theFood Distribution Program for the upcoming school year. These costs includetransportation, storage and handling of donated foods (if the current distributingagency system does not include delivery to recipient agencies, identificationof costs incurred by recipient agencies to pick up commodities at a warehouseand to deliver the food to a centralized storage facility or the individualpreparation sites), salaries of persons directly connected with the administrationof the program and other program related expenses. These expenses shallinclude fringe benefits, travel expenses, rent, utilities, accounting/auditingservices to recipient agencies such as the costs for administering andmonitoring the State's processing program, and technical assistance workshops.(4) <T3>Comparison of existing system with commercial systems. </T3>All distributingagencies which do not use commercial facilities for a basic level of warehousingand distribution services shall compare the cost of warehousing and distributingcommodities under their current system with the cost of comparable servicesunder a commercial system for the upcoming school year. (i) The cost comparison shall be made between the cost of providing a basiclevel of service under its current system and the cost of obtaining anequivalent level of service from commercial facilities. This basic levelof service shall consist of the transportation, storage and handling ofdonated food from the time of delivery by the Department to a distributingagency until delivery to a recipient agency's centralized storage facilityor individual preparation sites and shall include monthly deliveries ofdonated food to all recipient agencies except those that have agreed toless frequent deliveries. (ii) A distributing agency may base its cost comparison on a level of servicein excess of the basic level and/or on services not currently provided.In all cases, the comparison must be made on the costs of providing a comparablelevel of service under the existing system (as identified in andSection;250.14(a)(2)) versus a commercial system. (iii) If a distributing agency is unable to locate any commercial facilitiesexpressing interest in providing the basic level of warehousing and distributionservices, the distributing agency shall indicate this in its cost comparisonsubmission, together with documentation of its efforts to obtain cost estimatesfrom commercial facilities. (iv) All initial data regarding the cost of the current warehousing anddistribution system and the cost for comparable commercial facilities shallbe submitted to the FNSRO by June 30, 1990. Subsequent cost comparisonsshall, at a minimum, be submitted to FNS once every three years by March31. (5) <T3>Approval to use other systems. </T3>Distributing agencies that do notimplement a commercial warehousing and distribution system shall applyto the FNSRO for approval to use other facilities and must demonstratethat other facilities are more cost effective and efficient. All requestsfor a waiver shall be accompanied with a full evaluation of the existingsystem complete with cost comparison data. Each request will be consideredon a case by case basis. Initial requests for approval of alternative systemsshall be submitted to the FNSRO by June 30, 1990. Subsequent requests shall,at a minimum, be submitted to the FNSRO once every three years by March31. (6) <T3>System implementation. </T3>(i) Distributing agencies shall implementthe most cost effective and efficient system for warehousing and distributionservices to recipient agencies by July 1, 1991. Unless otherwise approvedby the FNSRO, subsequent to July 1, 1991, a distributing agency shall convertto a commercial system within six months of: (A) The date of submission of evaluation and cost comparison data indicatingthat a commercial system is more cost effective and efficient (if no requestfor approval of an alternate system is made); or (B) The date of the denial of a request to use an alternative system. (ii) If at any time FNS determines that the warehousing and distributionsystem in place is not cost effective or efficient, the distributing agencywill be required to reevaluate its system (including a cost comparisonand request for continued approval to use an alternative system) in accordancewith this subsection within 90 days of notification by the FNSRO. (7) <T3>Revisions in system. </T3>All distributing agencies (using either commercialor noncommercial systems) shall request approval from the FNSRO at least90 days in advance of any planned reduction in the level of service providedor any increase in distribution charges beyond normal inflation. If FNSdetermines the proposed changes are inappropriate, FNS may require thedistributing agency to submit additional justification, deny the request,or request a reevaluation of the system in accordance with paragraph (a)(6)(ii)of this section. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>3. In andSection; 250.15, paragraph (a)(1) is revised to read as followsand paragraph (a)(2) is amended by removing the first part of the firstsentence which reads ``For the period May 1, 1983 through September 30,1988'' and by capitalizing the next word ``Whenever.''<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 250.15 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Financial management. </ITAG>(a) <T3>Distribution charges. </T3>(1) Recipient agencies may be required topay part or all of the direct costs for intrastate storage and distributionof donated food through distribution charges assessed by the distributingor subdistributing agency, except as provided in paragraph (a)(2) of thissection.  (i) Distributing and subdistributing agencies assessing distribution chargesshall submit a description of their system with all data used in calculatingthe rate to be used for the upcoming school year to the FNSRO for approval.The initial description and data shall be submitted by June 30, 1990. Updatesto this information shall, at a minimum, be submitted to the FNSRO forapproval every three years by March 31. (ii) At least 90 days before increasing distribution charges beyond normalinflation, the distributing/subdistributing agency shall submit to theFNSRO a description of the change together with all data used to calculatethe change. FNS will take action on the proposed increase in accordancewith paragraph (a)(1)(v) of this section. (iii) Allowable costs include but are not limited to those program costsreferenced in paragraph (f)(2) of this section, i.e. transportation, storageand handling of donated foods, salaries of persons directly connected withthe administration of the program and other program related expenses. Examplesof other program related expenses are administrative costs such as fringebenefits, travel expenses, rent, utilities, accounting/auditing services,computer services, and the costs of providing program services to recipientagencies such as the cost for administering and monitoring the State'sprocessing program, and technical assistance workshops. (iv) Distribution charges shall not be assessed for costs which would beunallowable under the Cost Principles in the Department's Uniform FederalAssistance Regulations, 7 CFR part 3015, subpart T. In no case may distributioncharges be assessed for costs which are paid for by State AdministrativeExpense (SAE) funds, State or local appropriated funds or any other fundsavailable to the distributing or subdistributing agency to administer theprogram. Distribution charges shall not be based on a percentage of thevalue of the commodities distributed. (v) FNS shall review the information and inform the distributing agencyof the appropriateness of its distribution charges. If it is determinedthat a distributing agency's proposed distribution charges are excessiveor incorporate inappropriate costs, the distributing/subdistributing agencywill be required to adjust the distribution charges to reflect an appropriatelevel or submit further justification sufficient to satisfy the FNSRO thatthe proposed distribution charges are essential to cover allowable costsand services. This further justification shall include information fromrecipient agencies regarding their satisfaction with services provided.(vi) Distribution charges, including any excess distribution charges whichmay accrue (as defined in paragraph (f)(4) of this section) shall be usedin accordance with provisions of paragraph (f) of this section. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>4. In andSection; 250.19, paragraph (c) is redesignated as paragraph (d)and a new paragraph (c) is added to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 250.19 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Reviews. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(c) <T3>Corrective action plans. </T3>Corrective action plans shall be submittedwhenever a distributing agency is found by the FNSRO to be substantiallyout of compliance with a performance standard or any other provision ofthis part. The corrective action plan shall identify the corrective actionsand the timeframes needed to correct the deficiencies found by the FNSRO.The plan shall be written, signed by the proper official in the State,and submitted to the FNSRO within 60 days after the distributing agencyreceives notification from the FNSRO of a deficiency. Extensions beyond60 days may be made, for cause, with written justification to and approvedby the FNSRO. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>5. A new andSection; 250.24 is added to subpart B to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 250.24 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Distributing agency performance standards. </ITAG>This section establishes basic performance standards which must be followedby distributing agencies responsible for intrastate distribution of donatedcommodities and products. The seven standards address the level of servicethat shall be provided to recipient agencies. The basic standards includethe following: (a) <T3>Program management and evaluation. </T3>Distributing agencies shallconduct reviews in accordance with andSection; 250.19. Distributing agenciesshall also assess the adequacy of the service provided to recipient agencies.(b) <T3>Information dissemination. </T3>Distributing agencies shall providerecipient agencies with all information needed for informed participationin the program. Distributing agencies shall provide program informationrelative to: (1) Current program regulations, (2) Summaries of commodity specifications upon request (andSection; 250.13(j))and commodity fact sheets, (3) Results of any test evaluations and surveys, (4) Advisory council membership recommendations, (5) Recipes, and (6) Written procedures for ordering commodities, handling commodities whichare stale, spoiled, out-of-condition or not in compliance with specifications(including procedures for replacement by the Department under andSection;250.13(g)), submitting complaints and other written policy which affectsprogram operations. (c) <T3>Fiscal responsibility. </T3>Distributing agencies shall maintain afinancial management system which ensures fiscal integrity and accountabilityfor all funds and includes a recordkeeping system which conforms to generallyaccepted accounting practices. Distributing agencies shall submit informationrelative to distribution charges to FNS in accordance with andSection; 250.15(a).(d) <T3>Ordering and allocation. </T3>Distributing agencies shall ensure thatdonated food is provided on an equitable basis and, to the extent practicable,in the types and forms most usable by recipient agencies. Distributingagencies shall be responsible for: (1) Obtaining and utilizing semi-annual commodity acceptability informationin accordance with andSection; 250.13(k); (2) Providing recipient agencies with information regarding commodity availability;(3) Providing recipient agencies with information regarding commodity assistancelevels; (4) Ordering and allocating donated food based on participation data forthose programs which serve meals; (5) Ensuring the availability of commodities, to the extent possible, inquantities requested and at times specified by recipient agencies; (6) Permitting recipient agencies to refuse all or a portion of a commodityprior to delivery to the distributing agency if time permits; (7) Permitting recipient agencies to change orders for Group B (grain,dairy, peanut and oil products) and unlimited bonus commodities prior tosubmission of an order to the Department; (8) Providing recipient agencies with ordering options and commodity values(andSection; 250.13(a)(5)); (9) Offering schools participating in the National School Lunch Programthe per meal value of donated food in accordance with andSection; 250.48(c);and (10) Consider the preparation and storage capabilities of recipient agencieswhen ordering donated food, including capabilities of such agencies tohandle commodity product forms, quantity, packaging and quantities. (e) <T3>Warehousing and distribution. </T3>Distributing agencies shall usea warehousing and distribution system that is efficient, cost effectiveand responsive to needs of recipient agencies in accordance with andSection;250.14(a). In addition, distributing agencies shall: (1) Work with recipient agencies capable of receiving direct shipmentsto order donated food directly into their warehouses; (2) Solicit information and recommendations regarding the individual deliveryneeds of recipient agencies; (3) Maintain distribution schedules which are equitable and reliable, recognizehours of operation, holidays and vacations and other special needs of recipientagencies; (4) And make donated food available at least monthly to all recipient agenciesexcept those that have agreed to less frequent deliveries (andSection; 250.13(a)(6));however, the distributing agency shall not be held liable for delays indeliveries of donated food when such delays are due to late deliveriesof donated food to the distributing agency by the Department. (f) <T3>Disposition of damaged or out-of-condition commodities. </T3>Distributingagencies shall establish a system for handling recipient agency complaints,notifying the Department of any commodity losses in accordance with andSection;250.13(f) and arranging for the replacement of lost commodities in accordancewith andSection; 250.13(g). (g) <T3>Processing. </T3>Distributing agencies shall administer an acceptableprocessing program in accordance with andSection; 250.30. In addition, distributingagencies shall inform recipient agencies annually of processing optionsavailable to them in facilitating participation in State or National processingcontracts. Prior to entering into a processing contract, distributing agenciesshall test end products. The end product testing may be delegated to thepurchasing recipient agency provided that test results are reviewed bythe distributing agency. Distributing agencies shall monitor the acceptabilityof processed end products as required in andSection; 250.30(b)(1). <ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: October 10, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">G. Scott Dunn, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Administrator. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-24455 Filed 10-16-89; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3410-30-M  </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>