<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR891031-0084 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.10-31-89.f2.A1083</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Application No. D-7902, et al.] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Proposed Exemptions; Ohio Bank andamp; Savings Company Employees' ProfitSharing Plan and Trust, et al.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY:</T2> Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION:</T2> Notice of proposed exemptions. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY:</T2> This document contains notices of pendency before theDepartment of Labor (the Department) of proposed exemptions from certainof the prohibited transaction restrictions of the Employee Retirement IncomeSecurity Act of 1974 (the Act) and/or the Internal Revenue Code of 1954(the Code). <ITAG tagnum="84">Written Comments and Hearing Requests </ITAG>All interested persons are invited to submit written comments or requestsfor a hearing on the pending exemptions, unless otherwise stated in theNotice of Pendency, within 45 days from the date of publication of this<T4>Federal Register</T4> Notice. Comments and requests for a hearing shouldstate the reasons for the writer's interest in the pending exemption.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS:</T2> All written comments and requests for a hearing (at leastthree copies) should be sent to the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration,Office of Regulations and Interpretations, Room N-5671, U.S. Departmentof Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20210. Attention:Application No. stated in each Notice of Pendency. The applications forexemption and the comments received will be available for public inspectionin the Public Documents Room of Pension and Welfare Benefit Programs, U.S.Department of Labor, Room N-5507, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington,DC 20210. <ITAG tagnum="84">Notice to Interested Persons </ITAG>Notice of the proposed exemptions will be provided to all interested personsin the manner agreed upon by the applicant and the Department within 15days of the date of publication in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. Such notice shall include a copy of the noticeof pendency of the exemption as published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> and shall inform interested persons of theirright to comment and to request a hearing (where appropriate).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2> The proposed exemptions were requestedin applications filed pursuant to section 408(a) of the Act and/or section4975(c)(2) of the Code, and in accordance with procedures set forth inERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). Effective December31, 1978, section 102 of Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1978 (43 FR 47713,October 17, 1978) transferred the authority of the Secretary of the Treasuryto issue exemptions of the type requested to the Secretary of Labor. Therefore,these notices of pendency are issued solely by the Department. The applications contain representations with regard to the proposed exemptionswhich are summarized below. Interested persons are referred to the applicationson file with the Department for a complete statement of the facts and representations.<ITAG tagnum="84">Ohio Bank and Savings Company Employees' Profit Sharing Plan and Trust(the Plan) Located in Findlay, OH </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Exemption Application No. D-7902] </ITAG>Proposed Exemption The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsections 406(a), 406 (b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to (1) the proposedpurchase by the Plan of certain real property (the Property) located inFindlay, Ohio which is leased to the Ohio Bank and Savings Company (theEmployer), the sponsor of the Plan; (2) the proposed lease of the Propertyby the Plan to the Employer; and (3) the proposed potential purchase ofthe Property by the Employer from the Plan; provided that all terms ofsuch transactions are no less favorable to the Plan than those which thePlan could obtain in arm's-length transactions with an unrelated party.Summary of Facts and Representations 1. The Plan is a defined contribution plan with 143 participants and totalassets of $959,718.00 as of December 31, 1988. The Employer is a state-charteredbank organized under the laws of the state of Ohio with its corporate headquartersin Findlay, Ohio. The Employer serves as the trustee and administratorof the Plan through committees appointed from among its employees, officersand directors. 2. The Employer maintains its principal place of business in premises locatedin downtown Findlay, Ohio at 236 South Main Street. Situated nearby isthe Property, which is utilized as a parking lot by the Employer. The Employerleases the Property (the Original Lease) from W. Dean Fouts and Joyce M.Fouts (Fouts), whom the Employer represents to be unrelated to the Planand the Employer. The Original Lease, a ten-year triple-net lease effectiveNovember 1, 1988, was executed after the Employer loaned the Fouts $140,000(the Loan) to adapt the Property for use as the Employer's parking lot.Since the Original Lease was executed, the Fouts have expressed a desireto sell the Property and the Employer has determined that ownership ofthe Property and income therefrom under a lease to the Employer would constitutea desirable investment for the Plan. Accordingly, the Employer is proposingthat the Plan purchase the Property for cash from the Fouts and immediatelycommence leasing the Property to the Employer under an agreement whichprovides for the Employer's potential future purchase of the Property fromthe Plan. The Employer is requesting an exemption to permit such transactionsunder the terms and conditions described herein. 3. The interests of the Plan with respect to the proposed transactionswill be represented by an independent fiduciary, Ronald C. Pfeiffer (theFiduciary), an institutional investment services professional with thefirm of McDonald andamp; Company Securities, Inc. in Findlay, Ohio, who representsthat he has substantial knowledge and experience in fiduciary responsibilitiesunder the Act and that he is independent of the Employer. The Fiduciarywill represent the Plan in the Plan's proposed purchase of the Propertyfrom the Fouts, in the execution of the proposed lease with the Employer(the New Lease) and in the oversight and enforcement of the Employer'sobligations under the New Lease for its duration. The Fiduciary will alsorepresent the Plan in any potential sale of the Property to the Employerpursuant to one of three provisions in the New Lease as described herein.4. The Property consists of eight contiguous lots of commercially-zonedreal property located at 100 North Main Street in the central businessdistrict in the City of Findlay, County of Hancock, Ohio. All buildingson the Property, having been condemned, were removed by the Fouts in preparationof the Property's 19,200 square feet of surface area for asphalt pavingsuitable for automobile parking. This adaptation of the Property has resultedin the creation of fifty-six parking spaces and the Property remains accessibleto full utilities and municipal police and fire protection. As of August17, 1988, the Property had a fair market value of $149,000, according toLarry E. McCormick and J.F. Lamberjack, professional real property appraiserswith the firm of Midwest Appraisal Service (Midwest) in Findlay, Ohio.5. It is proposed that the Plan will pay the Fouts cash for the Propertyin the amount of $142,000, a price negotiated with and accepted by theFouts. The Fouts will deliver to the Plan fee simple title in the Propertyfree of all liens and mortgages. The Loan will be repaid in full beforethe transfer of the Property.6. The New Lease will be a triple-net lease for an initial term of tenyears commencing on the date of the Plan's purchase of the Property. ThePlan's interests as landlord under the New Lease will be represented exclusivelyby the Fiduciary. With the Fiduciary's approval and ninety days advancewritten notice, the New Lease is renewable at the expiration of the initialterm for one additional term of five years under the same terms applicableto the initial term. The New Lease authorizes the Fiduciary to terminatethe New Lease without penalty of any sort to the Plan in the event, duringthe New Lease, the Fiduciary receives and accepts a bona fide offer forthe purchase of the Property. Under the New Lease the Employer will payannual rent in monthly installments at the rate of no less than the Property'sfair market annual rental value. The New Lease provides that during itsfirst three years the annual rent will be the greater of $14,784 or theProperty's fair market annual rental value upon commencement of the NewLease as determined by an independent professional real estate appraiserselected by the Fiduciary. Thereafter, the Fiduciary shall cause the Propertyto be appraised every three years by an independent appraiser, at the expenseof the Employer, and the annual rent will be increased in the amount, ifany, by which the Property's fair market rental value has increased sincethe previous appraisal. In addition to obligations for payment of all taxes and all costs of maintenanceand repair on the Property, the Employer is required under the New Leaseto provide full fire and extended coverage insurance of the Plan's interestsin the Property and to provide general public liability insurance. TheEmployer is also required to obtain rent insurance in the amount of sixmonths net rent. Under the New Lease the Employer will agree to indemnifyand hold harmless the Plan against and from any and all claims of any naturearising from the Employer's use of the Property. 7. The New Lease will include a provision granting the Employer a rightof first refusal (the Right) with respect to the Property. Accordingly,upon the Fiduciary's acceptance of a bona fide offer for the purchase ofthe Property or any part thereof during the New Lease, including any renewal,and after the Fiduciary has determined such acceptance to be in the bestinterests of the Plan's participants and beneficiaries, the Employer willbe entitled to purchase the Property or part thereof from the Plan uponthe same terms as the bona fide offer accepted by the Fiduciary. However,the Right authorizes only a cash purchase of the Property by the Employer,regardless of other non-cash terms of the bona fide offer, and the bonafide offer is limited to one which equals or exceeds the Property's fairmarket value at the time of the offer as determined by an independent professionalreal estate appraiser selected by the Fiduciary. 8. A purchase option (the Option) on the part of the Employer will alsobe among the New Lease's provisions. Pursuant to the Option, the Employerwill have the right, subject to the approval of the Fiduciary, to purchasethe Property from the Plan by providing written notice in compliance withthe Option at least ninety days prior to the expiration of the initialor renewal term of the New Lease. The Fiduciary represents that it willapprove of a sale of the Property by the Plan only after having determinedthat the continued holding of the Property would not be in the best interestsof the participants and beneficiaries of the Plan. The Option providesthat any purchase of the Property thereunder will be for cash in the amountof no less than the greater of $142,000 or the Property's fair market valueas determined at the time of such purchase by an independent professionalreal estate appraiser selected by the Fiduciary. In any sale pursuant tothe Option the Employer will pay all closing costs and other fees and expensesrelated to the transfer of the Property. 9. The New Lease also includes a provision (the Put) which empowers theFiduciary to require the Employer to Purchase the Property from the Planany time after the tenth year of the New Lease, following two consecutiveyears of unsuccessful efforts to sell the Property, if the Fiduciary soelects. Any purchase of the Property pursuant to the Put will be for cashin the amount of the greater of $142,000 or the fair market value of theProperty at the time of the Put's exercise as determined by an independentprofessional real property appraiser selected by the Fiduciary. In anysale pursuant to the Put the Employer will pay closing costs and otherexpenses related to the transfer of the Property. 10. The Fiduciary represents that after a complete investigation of theproposed transactions, including an inspection of the Property, he hasdetermined that the Plan's acquisition of the Property and its lease tothe Employer under the New Lease would be in the best interests and protectiveof the participants and beneficiaries of the Plan. The Fiduciary has ascertainedthat the Plan's investment in the Property will leave the Plan appropriatelyliquid and diverse, as it will constitute the Plan's sole investment inreal property and will represent less than twenty five percent of the Planassets. In this regard, the Fiduciary notes that, because of the particularprovisions of the New Lease, the Plan will not be compelled to retain theProperty among its assets in the event, which he represents to be unlikely,that ownership of the Property ceases to be in the best interests of theparticipants and beneficiaries of the Plan. The Fiduciary finds littleor no risks to the Plan from the proposed transactions due to the protectiveprovisions of the New Lease.The Fiduciary represents that he will continually monitor and oversee theperformance by the Employer of the tenant obligations under the New Leaseand will move without delay to remedy any breaches or defaults thereunder.The Fiduciary states that in the event the Right, the Put or the Optionare exercised under the New Lease, he will cause the Property to be soldonly at such time as he determines that continuing to hold the Propertyis not in the best interests of the Plan and will ensure that the Propertyis sold only for no less than its fair market value. 11. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transactionssatisfy the criteria of section 408(a) of the Act for the following reasons:(1) The interests of the Plan with respect to the purchase of the Property,the execution and maintenance of the New Lease and the potential sale ofthe Property to the Employer pursuant to the New Lease will be representedexclusively by the Fiduciary, who represents himself to be independentof the Employer; (2) The Plan will pay the Fouts cash for the Propertyin an amount not exceeding its fair market value and will obtain fee simpletitle free of all liens; (3) The Plan's ownership of the Property as proposedwill present little or no risks to the Plan due to the protective and triple-netprovisions of the New Lease which ensure that the Plan will receive rentalpayments of no less than the Property's fair rental market value; (4) TheNew Lease provides for its termination if the Fiduciary determines to sellthe Property before the completion of the initial or renewal terms of theNew Lease; (5) The Put enables the Plan to require the Employer to purchasethe Property in the event the Fiduciary determines that it is not in thebest interests of the Plan to retain the Property and is not able to sellthe Property to an unrelated buyer; (6) Any sale of the Property to theEmployer under the New Lease will occur only after the Fiduciary has determinedthat continued ownership of the Property would not be in the best interestsof the Plan; and (7) The sale provisions of the New Lease ensure that thePlan will receive cash in the amount of no less than the Property's fairmarket value.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2> Ronald Willett of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.) <ITAG tagnum="84">Capital Guardian Trust Company (Capital Guardian) Located in Los Angeles,CA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">(Application No. D-7929) </ITAG>Proposed Exemption The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsection 406(b)(2) of the Act shall not apply to the cross-trading of securitiesby Capital Guardian for employee benefit plan accounts (Plans) for whichCapital Guardian acts as a fiduciary. Conditions and Definitions 1. This exemption is subject to the following conditions: (a) A Plan's participation in the cross-trade program is subject to a writtenauthorization executed in advance by a fiduciary with respect to each suchPlan, the fiduciary of which is independent of Capital Guardian; (b) The authorization referred to in paragraph (a) is terminable at willwithout penalty to such Plan, upon receipt by Capital Guardian of writtennotice of termination; and (c) Before an authorization is made, the authorizing Plan fiduciary mustbe furnished with any reasonably available information necessary for theauthorizing fiduciary to determine whether the authorization should bemade, including (but not  limited to) a copy of this exemption, an explanationof how the authorization may be terminated, a description of Capital Guardian'scross-trade practices, and any other reasonably available information regardingthe matter that the authorizing fiduciary requests; 2. (a) No more than three (3) business days prior to the execution of anycross-trade transaction, Capital Guardian must inform an independent fiduciaryof each Plan involved in the cross-trade transaction: (i) That CapitalGuardian proposes to buy or sell specified securities in a cross-tradetransaction if an appropriate opportunity is available; (ii) the currenttrading price for such securities; and (iii) the total number of sharesto be acquired or sold by each such Plan; (b) Prior to each cross-trade transaction, the transaction must be authorizedeither orally or in writing by the independent fiduciary of each Plan involvedin the cross-trade transaction; (c) If a cross-trade transaction is authorized orally by an independentfiduciary, Capital Guardian will provide written confirmation of such authorizationin a manner reasonably calculated to be received by such independent fiduciarywithin one (1) business day from the date of such authorization; (d) The authorization referred to in this paragraph (2) will be effectivefor a period of three (3) business days; and (e) No more than ten (10) days after the completion of a cross-trade transaction,the independent fiduciary authorizing the cross-trade transaction mustbe provided a written confirmation of the transaction and the price atwhich the transaction was executed; 3. (a) The cross-trade transaction is effected at the closing price forthe security on the date of the transaction, and such price is within 10percent of the closing price of the security on the day before the dateon which Capital Guardian receives authorization by the independent Planfiduciary to engage in the cross-trade transaction; (b) The securities involved in the cross-trade transaction are those forwhich there is a generally recognized market; and (c) The cross-trade transaction is affected only where the trade involvesless than 5 percent of the aggregate average daily trading volume of thesecurities which are the subject of the transaction for the week immediatelypreceding the authorization of the transaction; 4. (a) Capital Guardian furnishes the authorizing Plan fiduciary at leastonce every three months, and not later than 45 days following the periodto which it relates, a report disclosing: (i) A list of all cross-tradetransactions engaged in on behalf of the Plan; and (ii) with respect toeach cross-trade transaction, the highest and lowest prices at which thesecurities involved in the transaction were traded on the date of suchtransaction; and(b) The authorizing Plan fiduciary is furnished with a summary of the informationrequired under this paragraph 4(a) at least once per year. The summarymust be furnished within 45 days after the end of the period to which itrelates, and must contain the following: (i) A description of the totalamount of Plan assets involved in cross-trade transactions during the period;(ii) a description of Capital Guardian's cross-trade practices, if suchpractices have changed materially during the period covered by the summary;(iii) a statement that the Plan fiduciary's authorization of cross-tradetransactions may be terminated upon receipt by Capital Guardian of thefiduciary's written notice to that effect; and (iv) a statement that thePlan fiduciary's authorization of the cross-trade transactions will continuein effect unless it is terminated; 5. The cross-trade transaction does not involve assets of any Plan establishedor maintained by Capital Guardian or any of its affiliates; 6. All Plans which will participate in the cross-trade program will havetotal assets of at least $25 million; 7. Capital Guardian receives no fee or other compensation (other than itsagreed investment management fee) with respect to any cross-trade transaction;8. Capital Guardian is a discretionary investment manager with respectto Plans participating in the cross-trade program; 9. For purposes of this exemption: (a) ``cross-trade'' transaction means a purchase and sale of securitiesbetween accounts for which Capital Guardian or an affiliate of CapitalGuardian is acting as a trustee or investment manager; (b) ``affiliate'' means any person directly or indirectly through one ormore intermediaries, controlling, controlled by, or under common controlwith Capital Guardian; (c) ``Plan account'' means an account holding assets of one or more employeebenefit plans which are subject to the Act, for which Capital Guardianacts as a fiduciary. Summary of Facts and Representations 1. Capital Guardian is a trust company organized under the laws of theState of California and supervised by the California banking authorities.Capital Guardian is a wholly-owned subsidiary of the Capital Group, anorganization which, through its subsidiaries, provides a broad range offinancial services to a variety of different clients, including employeebenefit plans, registered investment companies, college endowment funds,and foundations.\1\<NOTE/> Capital Guardian currently provides investment managementservices to 120 employee benefit plans. Other companies affiliated withthe Capital Group provide investment advisory services to accounts, principallymutual funds, the underlying securities of which the applicant representsare not plan assets subject to the Act. Capital Guardian currently hasmore than $16 billion in assets under management. With respect to the Plansparticipating in the cross-trading program, it is represented that CapitalGuardian is a discretionary investment manager.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ All future references to Capital Guardian will also includeaffiliated companies in the Capital Group. 2. Capital Guardian sometimes receives instructions from an employee benefitplan or other client to liquidate all or a portion of an investment account.In addition, Capital Guardian sometimes must dispose of securities heldin a client account in order to bring the portfolio into compliance withclient-imposed investment guidelines. For example, such investment guidelinesfor an account may require the sale of a security that has increased invalue which Capital Guardian might otherwise continue to hold in the account.In addition, an affiliate of Capital Guardian may make a discretionarydetermination to dispose of securities for an account not involving planassets. However, it is represented that cross-trade transactions will notinvolve assets of any Plan established or maintained by Capital Guardianor any of its affiliates. 3. It is represented that Capital Guardian's disposition of a particularsecurity for one client account may involve a security which a portfoliomanager may desire to purchase for one or more of Capital Guardian's otheraccounts. If Capital Guardian acquires such securities for one of its otheraccounts, it has an opportunity to save substantial commissions for boththe liquidating account and the acquiring account. This saving is causedby an independent broker effecting a cross-trade transaction, which involvesmatching Capital Guardian's sell orders for a particular day with its buyorders for the same day and the execution of trades between the accountsin off-market transactions. The independent broker is prepared to executethese transactions for Capital Guardian for one cent per share. By contrast,if Capital Guardian were to execute the same trades on the open market,it is represented that the commission would be six to seven cents per sharefor each of the purchase and sale transactions. Accordingly, cross-tradetransactions can be made at lower costs than open market trades. 4. Capital Guardian's portfolio managers make decisions regarding whichsecurities to purchase or sell for client accounts considering all of therelevant facts and circumstances, including the composition of the portfoliosand the liquidity requirements of the Plan accounts. Such decisions, itis represented, are not influenced by the fact that an opportunity fora cross-trade transaction may, or may not, be available. The matching ofsale and purchase orders is represented to be largely automatic. 5. Under the proposed exemption, only Plans with at least $25 million inassets will participate in the cross-trade program. A Plan fiduciary whichis independent of Capital Guardian must provide written authorization allowingthe Plan's participation in Capital Guardian's cross-trade program beforeany specific cross-trade transactions are executed. This authorizationwill be terminable at will upon written notice by the appropriate independentPlan fiduciary. Capital Guardian will receive no additional fee for providingsuch service. No penalty or other charge will be made as a result of thetermination of a Plan's participation in the program. In addition, beforeany such general authorization is granted, Capital Guardian will providethe authorizing Plan fiduciary with all materials necessary to permit anevaluation of the cross-trade program. These materials will include a copyof the exemption, an explanation of how the authorization may be terminated,a description of Capital Guardian's cross-trade practices, and any otheravailable information which the authorizing Plan fiduciary may reasonablyrequest.6. In addition to requiring a general authorization of a Plan's participationin Capital Guardian's cross-trade program, an independent fiduciary ofeach Plan must specifically authorize each cross-trade transaction. Anysuch authorization will be effective only for a period of three (3) businessdays and will be subject to certain pricing and volume limitations (seerepresentations 9 and 10, respectively). The authorization to proceed withthe transaction may be either oral or written. If a cross-trade transactionis authorized orally by an independent fiduciary, Capital Guardian willprovide a written confirmation of such authorization in a manner reasonablycalculated to be received by such independent fiduciary within one (1)business day from the date of such authorization. The Plan fiduciary willbe sent a written confirmation of the cross-trade, including the priceat which it was executed, within ten (10) days of the completion of thetransaction. 7. At least once every three months and not later than forty-five (45)days following the period to which it relates, Capital Guardian will providethe authorizing Plan fiduciary with a report setting forth: (a) A listof all the cross-trade  transactions conducted on behalf of the Plan accountduring the previous period; and (b) with respect to each cross-trade transaction,the highest and lowest prices at which the subject securities were tradedon the date of such transaction. In addition, at least once a year, andnot later than 45 days after the end of the period to which it relates,each Plan fiduciary will be provided with a summary of the quarterly reports,including: (a) A description of the total amount of Plan assets involvedin cross-trade transactions completed during the year; (b) a statementthat the Plan's fiduciary's authorization to participate in the cross-tradeprogram can be terminated without penalty upon Capital Guardian's receiptof a written notice to that effect; (c) a statement that the fiduciary'sauthorization of the Plan's participation in the program will continueunless it is terminated; and (d) a description of any material change,if any, in Capital Guardian's cross-trade practices during the period coveredby the summary. It is represented that these reports will provide the Planfiduciaries with a mechanism for monitoring the operation of the cross-tradeprogram. The applicant further represents that the authorization procedures,particularly the requirement of specific authorization for each cross-tradetransaction, would prevent Capital Guardian from favoring one account atthe expense of another in a cross-trade transaction. 8. The securities involved in the cross-trade transaction will be thoseonly for which there is a generally recognized market. 9. A cross-trade transaction will be effected at the closing price forthe security on the date of the transaction. Such price must be within10 percent of the closing price of the security on the day before the dateon which Capital Guardian receives authorization by the independent Planfiduciary to engage in the cross-trade transaction. This condition, togetherwith the specific authorization requirements, it is represented, wouldprevent Capital Guardian from using cross-trade transactions to benefitone client to the detriment of another client. This safeguard requiresmonitoring market activity and avoids executing trades at prices that werenot contemplated at the time the independent fiduciaries authorized suchtransactions. 10. A cross-trade transaction will be effected only where the trade involvesless than 5 percent of the aggregate average daily trading volume for thesecurities involved in the transaction for the week immediately precedingthe authorization of the transaction. It is represented that this conditionwill help to minimize the potential impact which a large trade might havein the sale of securities on the open market. 11. Capital Guardian represents that it is highly unlikely that situationswill arise in which it will be necessary to allocate cross-trade opportunitiesamong several accounts. It is possible, however, that situations may arisewhere securities to be sold for a client account present an attractiveinvestment opportunity for more than one other account. In this regard,the applicant represents that the issues presented in allocating cross-tradeopportunities among client accounts are no different than the issues whichCapital Guardian must face daily in determining the allocation of limitedinvestment opportunities among client accounts. Capital Guardian will makethese decisions considering all the relevant facts and circumstances ina manner which it believes to be consistent with its fiduciary responsibilitiesunder the Act and which is equitable to all accounts involved. In makingsuch allocation decisions, Capital Guardian will consider, among otherthings, the relative liquidity needs of the accounts, the composition ofthe portfolios and the number of cross-trade opportunities which have beenmade available to the accounts. In this regard, Capital Guardian does notbelieve that an automatic allocation system would be appropriate becauseit would interfere with the proper discharge of its fiduciary duties asan investment manager.\2\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ The Department is expressing no opinion herein as to theapplicability of any of the provisions of part 4 of title I of the Actto the allocation decisions made by Capital Guardian on behalf of the Plansparticipating in the cross-trading program. 12. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transactionsatisfies the criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because among otherthings: (a) An independent Plan fiduciary must provide written authorization, whichis terminable at will, to Capital Guardian to permit the Plan to participatein the cross-trading program; (b) Oral or written authorization must be provided by the independent Planfiduciary to Capital Guardian prior to each cross-trade transaction; (c) All cross-trades will be executed at the closing price for the securityon the date of the transaction; (d) A cross-trade transaction will be effected only if certain price andvolume requirements are satisfied; (e) All securities involved in cross-trades will be ones for which thereis a generally recognized market; (f) Capital Guardian will receive no additional fees as a result of theproposed cross-trades; (g) Capital Guardian will provide periodic reporting of the cross-tradetransactions to the participating Plan's independent fiduciary; (h) The Plans participating in the cross-trade program will save significantsums of money because of reduced brokerage commissions; (i) All Plans participating in the cross-trade program must have assetsof not less than $25 million; and (j) The cross-trade transaction does not involve the assets of any Planestablished or maintained by Capital Guardian or any affiliates thereof.<T3>For Further Information Contact: </T3>Mrs. B.S. Scott of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8883. (This is not a toll-free number.) <ITAG tagnum="84">Samuel Shapiro andamp; Co., Inc. Profit Sharing Trust (the Plan) Locatedin Baltimore, Maryland </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Exemption Application No. D-8072] </ITAG>Proposed Exemption The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedure set forth in ERISA Procedures 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a), 406 (b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to the proposedsale by the Plan of common stock of Samuel Shapiro andamp; Co. (of D.C.),Inc. (the D.C. Company), to Samuel Shapiro andamp; Co., Inc. (the Company),the sponsor of the Plan and a Subchapter S Corporation under the Code,in connection with the proposed merger of the Company and the D.C. Company,provided that the sales price for the stock is not less than the fair marketvalue of the stock on the date of sale.Summary of Facts and Representations 1. The Plan is a profit sharing plan which, as of December 31, 1988, hadapproximately 54 participants and total assets of approximately $6,491,114.The Profit Sharing Trust Committee (the Committee) is the named fiduciaryof the Plan. The members of the Committee are M. Sigmund Shapiro (Mr. Shapiro),Morris E. Horwitz and Julius Braverman. The trustee of the Plan (the Trustee)is the Mercantile-Safe Deposit andamp; Trust Company, located in Baltimore,Maryland. The Committee has the authority under the Plan to appoint an investmentadvisor to invest the Plan's assets. The Committee has appointed Rothchildand Company of Baltimore, Maryland (the Advisor) as an investment advisor.The applicant states that the decision-makers for investment of the Plan'sassets are the Committee and the Advisor. 2. The Company is a Maryland corporation and the D.C. Company is a Delawarecorporation (together, the Companies). The Companies are engaged in thebusiness of providing customs brokerage and freight forwarding services.Mr. Shapiro is the President and the Chairman of the Board of Directorsof the Company. Mr. Shapiro owns 92.5% of the stock of the Company (theCompany Stock). The Company owns 72% of the common stock of the D.C. Company (the D.C.Company Stock) and Mr. Shapiro owns 3% of the D.C. Company Stock. The Planowns 25% of the D.C. Company Stock. The Plan acquired the D.C. CompanyStock as a contribution from the Company in 1969 prior to the effectivedate of the Act. The applicant represents that because the Company is aSubchapter S Corporation under the Code, Mr. Shapiro is a shareholder-employeewith respect to the Plan as the owner of more than 5% of the Company Stock.\3\<NOTE/> However, the D.C. Company is not a Subchapter S Corporationunder the Code. The applicant states that the D.C. Company presently cannotoperate as a Subchapter S Corporation due to the Plan's ownership of theD.C. Company Stock (see section 1361 of the Code).<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\ Section 408(d) of the Act prohibits any transaction inwhich a plan acquires for the plan any property from or sells any propertyto any person who is with respect to the plan an owner-employee, as deflnedunder section 401(c)(3) of the Code, or shareholder-employee, as definedunder section 1379 of the Code. However, the Department has the authorityunder section 408(a) of the Act to provide an exemption for such a transaction.3. The applicant represents that a proposal has been made to merge theCompanies (the Merger), in order to simplify administration and eliminateduplication of operational expenses. After the Merger, the combined organizationwill be a Subchapter S Corporation. The applicant states that the Merger would be accomplished as follows:(1) The Board of Directors of the Companies would recommend to the stockholdersthat the Companies be merged; (2) the stockholders of each of the Companieswould approve the Merger by at least a two-thirds vote; (3) an Agreementof Merger (the Agreement) would be filed with the Secretary of State ofDelaware and Articles of Merger (the Articles) would be filed with theState Department of Assessments and Taxation of Maryland; (4) pursuantto the Agreement and the Articles, the  D.C. Company would be merged intothe Company, and the assets and liabilities of the D.C. Company would betransferred to the Company; (5) pursuant to the Merger all stockholdersof the D.C. Company (except the Plan) would receive Company Stock in exchangefor their D.C. Company Stock; and (6) the Plan would receive cash in changefor its D.C. Company Stock. Therefore, the Plan would not own any D.C.Company Stock after the Merger and would not own any Company Stock as aresult of the Merger.4. The Committee and the Advisor (together, the Plan Fiduciaries) representthat the Plan's continued investment in the D.C. Company Stock is not inthe best interest of the Plan. The Plan Fiduciaries state that the D.C.Company Stock has limited potential for appreciation and that the interestof the Plan's participants and beneficiaries would be served better byan investment which is more likely to appreciate in value. In this regard,the Plan Fiduciaries state that the D.C. Company has had an erratic earningshistory and that the future profitability of the D.C. Company is uncertain.Moreover, the Plan Fiduciaries note that the long-term management directionof the D.C. Company is unclear due to the age of the key executive, Mr.Shapiro. In addition, the Plan Fiduciaries believe that the progressivelyincreasing expenses of operating the D.C. Company may cause a decline inthe value of the D.C. Company Stock. Finally, the Plan Fiduciaries statethat the D.C. Company Stock is not publicly traded and the Plan shouldhave an investment which is more liquid in nature. 5. The D.C. Company Stock was appraised on July 10, 1989 by Harvey D. Gold(Mr. Gold), an independent, qualified appraiser in Baltimore, Maryland,as having a fair market value of $9000 per share as of May 31, 1989. Theapplicant states that Mr. Gold will update his appraisal of the D.C. CompanyStock prior to the Merger. 6. The Plan Fiduciaries represent that the proposed sale of the D.C. CompanyStock to the Company would be in the best interest of the Plan and itsparticipants and beneficiaries. The Plan Fiduciaries state that the Planwill receive cash equal to the value of the D.C. Company Stock, as establishedby Mr. Gold's appraisal. In addition, the proposed ttansaction will providethe Plan with funds which can be invested in assets with more certain incomeearning potential and greater likelihood for future appreciation. The Planwill not pay any commissions or other expenses with respect to the proposedsale. 7. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transaction willmeet the statutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2)of the Code because: (a) the sale will be a one-time transaction for cash;(b) the Plan will receive an amount which is not less than the fair marketvalue of the D.C. Company Stock, as established by an independent, qualifiedappraiser; (c) the Plan will not pay any commissions or other expenseswith respect to the sale; and (d) the transaction will allow the Plan todivest itself of the D.C. Company Stock and acquire investments yieldinga higher rate of return.<T3>For Further Information Contact:</T3> Mr. E.F. Williams of the Departmentat (202) 523-8883. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="84">Dudley M. Baker, M.D. Profit Sharing Plan and Trust (the Plan) Locatedin Bennington, Vermont </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-8157]  </ITAG>Proposed Exemption The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408 (a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsection 406(a), (406)(b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1)(A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to the proposedloan of $25,000 (the Loan) to Dudley M. Baker, M.D. (Dr. Baker), a partyin interest with respect to the Plan, by Dr. Baker's individually directedaccount in the Plan, provided that the terms and conditions of the proposedLoan are no less favorable to the Plan than those obtainable in an arm's-lengthtransaction with an unrelated third party at the time of the making ofthe proposed Loan. Summary of Facts and Representations 1. The Plan is a frozen Keogh plan with two participants, one of whom isDr. Baker. As of the end of the Plan's 1988 plan year the assets in Dr.Baker's individually directed separate account amounted to $160,033. Dr.Baker, a surgeon doing business as a sole proprietor, is an owner-employeeas defined in section 401(c)(3) of the Code. 2. It is proposed that a loan of $25,000 be made to Dr. Baker from hisseparate account in the Plan. The Loan will not affect the account of thePlan's other participant. The Loan would be secured by the account of Mrs.Geraldine Baker (Dr. Baker's wife) in Massachusetts Financial Services'Managed Municipal Bond Trust which held 8,143.098 shares worth $10.71 eachas of July 19, 1989. The applicant represents that the account balancesecuring the Loan will at all times exceed the outstanding Loan balance.3. The Loan will be at a rate 2 percent over the prime rate charged forsimilar loans on the date of the Loan by First Vermont Bank and Trust Company(the Bank) of Bennington, Vermont, an unrelated bank, and will be repaidover a five-year period with equal quarterly payments of principle andinterest. The applicant and the Bank represent that these terms are noless favorable to the Plan than those obtainable from an unrelated thirdparty. 4. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transaction willsatisfy the provisions of section 408 (a) of the Act because: (a) The Loanwill be adequately secured at all times; (b) Only 15.6% of Dr. Baker'saccount will be invested in the Loan; (c) The terms and conditions of theLoan are no less favorable to the Plan than those obtainable from an unrelatedparty; and (d) Dr. Baker, the only participant whose account is affectedby this proposed transaction, has determined that the proposed transactionwould be in the interest of his account in the Plan, and desires that theproposed transaction be consummated. <T3>Notice to Interested Persons: </T3>Because Dr. Baker is the only personin the Plan to be affected by the proposed transaction, it has been determinedthat there is no need distribute the notice of proposed exemption to interestedpersons. Comments and requests for a public hearing are due 30 days fromthe date of publication of this notice of proposed exemption in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. <T3>For Further Information Contact: </T3>Joseph L. Roberts III of theDepartment, telephone (202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="84">Hotel Employees and Restaurant Employees International Union WelfarePlan (the Plan) Located in Naperville, Illinois </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. L-7754] </ITAG>Proposed Exemption The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and in accordance with the procedures setforth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemptionis granted, the restrictions of section 406(a) of the Act shall not applyto: the lease arrangement (the Arrangement) comprising five written agreementsexecuted on July 6, 1988_namely: a Lease of Personal Property, a ComputerSecurity Agreement, an Option To Purchase (covering leased computer equipment),a Software Program License Agreement, and a Software System Support Agreement_between(a) the Plan and (b) Resource Information Management Systems (RIMS) andits wholly owned subsidiary, Winthrop Financial Group, Inc. (Winthrop),parties in interest with respect to the Plan, covering computer equipmentand software previously leased to the Plan's former administrator, WilliamL. Meyers, Inc. (Meyers), provided the terms of the Arrangement are asfavorable to the Plan as those the Plan could obtain in a similar transactionwith unrelated parties.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>Effective Date: </T2>If the proposed exemption is granted, the exemptionwill be effective as of July 6, 1988, the date the agreements comprisingthe Arrangement were executed. Summary of Facts and Representations <ITAG tagnum="81">1. The Plan </ITAG>The Plan was established by the Hotel Employees and Restaurant EmployeesInternational Union to provide health and welfare benefits for its members.It is administered by a Taft-Hartley joint board of trustees (the Trustees),of whom there are currently seventeen. As of September 12, 1988, the Plancovered approximately 106,000 participants. The approximate fair marketvalue of the total assets of the Plan was $65,749,327 as of March 31, 1987.The percentage of the fair market value of the Plan's total assets involvedin the exemption transaction is 0.5%. As of September 12, 1988, no Planassets were invested in loans to any party in interest involved in thisexemption transaction, in property leased to any such party in interest,or in securities issued by such party in interest. <ITAG tagnum="81">2. Meyers </ITAG>From its inception to July 31, 1988, the Plan was administered by Meyers.The applicant, the Martin E. Segal Company (Segal), the independent fiduciaryin charge of (among other things) the Plan's agreements with RIMS and Winthrop,states that as the size of the Plan increased, the Trustees became awareof the development of a number of administrative problems and delays inclaim processing. Consequently, in 1986 the Trustees retained Segal asa consultant to evaluate Plan administration, particularly relating tothe services provided by Meyers. <ITAG tagnum="81">3. Segal_General Information </ITAG>The applicant, Segal, represents that it: was founded in 1939, is amongthe largest employee benefit consulting firms in the country, is headquarteredin New York, has 15 regional offices around the country, and provides,through its 600 employees, consulting and actuarial services to more than3,000 employee benefit plans covering nearly eight million employees andtheir dependents. Segal also represents that it has substantial experiencewith the establishment and operation of welfare benefit plans and that,as a major employee benefit consulting firm, it has substantial experiencein advising clients on the selection of computer equipment and softwareand is familiar with current state-of-the-art systems. Segal states thatit was already familiar with the RIMS system before Segal became involvedin the termination of Meyers' contract with the Plan (described below)and that in Segal's November 1986 report to the Trustees, Segal commentedfavorably on the RIMS system. Segal represents that it has no interestin or relation to Meyers, RIMS, or Winthrop.<ITAG tagnum="81">4. Segal's Evaluation of and Recommendations re: Plan Administration</ITAG>In November 1986, Segal submitted its report on Meyers' administrativeservices. This report was critical of the Meyers operation, particularlywith respect to the abilities of its management-level executives, whilenoting, nevertheless, that a number of very capable and knowledgeable employeeswere trying to do a competent job. This report also identified alternativesolutions to the Plan's administrative problems, suggesting that the Trustees(a) select another third-party administrator to replace Meyers, or (b)self-administer the Plan, either by acquiring the services of Meyers' staffor by hiring entirely new employees. After studying the relative meritsof each proposal, the Trustees decided to self-administer the Plan. TheTrustees at that time hoped to acquire the services of many of Meyers'employees and to acquire Meyers' offices, equipment, and computer systems,either by purchase or lease. <ITAG tagnum="81">5. The Plan's Negotiations with Meyers </ITAG>In September 1987, the Trustees authorized Segal, along with outside counselfor the Trustees, to begin negotiations with Meyers concerning the terminationof Meyers' administrative contract and the possible sale of Meyers' assetsto the Plan. On November 13, 1987, the Trustees formally adopted a resolutionto terminate Meyers for cause as Plan administrator. The Trustees directedSegal to discharge Meyers at an appropriate time, based on the progressof Segal's negotiations with Meyers, and to negotiate the acquisition ofMeyers' assets at a price determined by Segal. On January 28, 1988, Segal notified Meyers that, pursuant to the six-monthtermination provision in Meyers' contract with the Plan, Meyers would beterminated as Plan administrator effective July 31, 1988. Segal then continuednegotiations with Meyers regarding Meyers' termination and the transitionto self-administration. Segal states that these negotiations were lengthyand difficult, involving a number of disputes with Meyers, some of whichwere not resolved as of the date of the exemption application. Segal representsthat in conducting these negotiations, it was guided by the following principlesand concerns: (a) Meyers must remain in operation to provide services to the Plan untilJuly 31, 1988, thereby avoiding any disruption in Plan administration;(b) The Plan must obtain access to Meyers' employees to arrange for theiremployment by the Plan; (c) Plan employees must be provided with full, active cooperation by Meyersand its employees, and complete access to those documents, information,data, and software that are the Plan's property in Meyers' possession;(d) It would be more efficient and less expensive for the Plan to use certainequipment and office space currently used by Meyers; and (e) The Plan's new administrative system must be operational as of August1, 1988. For this reason, time deadlines were imposed on negotiations,and alternative courses of action, including court enforcement actions,were considered. In the negotiation process, Segal initially explored the possibility ofthe Plan's purchasing all of Meyers' assets, including its office furniture,computer software, and equipment leases, but because the parties involvedwere unable to agree to the terms for these transactions, this possibilitywas rejected. However, the Plan has sublet some office space leased byMeyers in connection with its Plan administration activities.\4\<NOTE/>  <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\4\ The Department is proposing no exemption with respectto such subleasing and is expressing no opinion herein as to whether ornot such subleasing satisfies the requirements of either section 408(b)(2)or section 404(a)(1) of the Act.<ITAG tagnum="81">6. Segal's Appointment as Independent Fiduciary for the Plan </ITAG>By May 12, 1988, Segal was appointed Independent Fiduciary for the Planin connection with the settlement of litigation concerning the administrationof the Plan. In both <T3>McLaughlin </T3>v. <T3>Hanley,</T3> No. 86-421-LDG (D. Nev. 1988) and <T3>McLaughlin </T3>v. <T3>Gerace,</T3> No. 85-3669 (D. N.J. 1988), the Secretary of Labor allegedviolations of Part 4 of Subtitle B, Title I of the Act in connection withcertain aspects of the Plan's administration. These cases were settledpursuant to the entry of two substantially similar Consent Decrees, onMay 12, 1988 and April 12, 1988, respectively, after lengthy negotiationsamong the parties. Segal was not a party to this litigation and thereforehad no direct role in the settlement negotiations or the preparation ofthe Consent Decrees. Among other things, these Consent Decrees providedfor the appointment of an independent named fiduciary with certain specificallyenumerated responsibilities relating to Plan administration, including,for example, the authority to terminate Meyers as Plan administrator, tooversee benefit delivery arrangements, to monitor performance of Plan serviceand benefit providers, and to oversee record keeping and claims processing.Segal's authority as Independent Fiduciary is limited to the authoritygranted under the Consent Decrees, which provide that Segal, as IndependentFiduciary, must generally make either binding or non-binding recommendationsto the Trustees for their approval before undertaking actions on behalfof the Plan. The Consent Decrees allocate to the Trustees authority ina number of areas involving Plan investments and operation, as well asthe authority to monitor the activities of the Independent Fiduciary andto petition the courts for its removal. By the terms of the Consent Decrees,the district courts retain jurisdiction over the parties and Segal ``forthe purpose of administration, application and interpretation'' of theConsent Decrees. Segal is required to provide to the courts, the Trustees,and the Secretary semi-annual reports describing its activities as IndependentFiduciary for the Plan. <ITAG tagnum="81">7. Termination of Meyers' Contracts </ITAG>Meyers, Segal, and the Trustees executed a severance agreement on July6, 1988, governing all aspects of the termination of Meyers and the transitionto self-administration. The termination of Meyers' position as Plan administratorbecame effective on July 31, 1988, as scheduled. Segal states that as ofAugust 1, 1988, the Plan commenced administration at its new offices inNaperville, Illinois. Segal advises that through the period ending July 31, 1988, the paymentof benefits on behalf of the Plan was made by Meyers through a computersystem supplied by RIMS. As part of this system, Meyers entered into anexclusive licensing agreement with RIMS for the use of RIMS software. Segalexplains that under the terms of the licensing agreement, Meyers alonehad the right to use this software and could not transfer that right toany other entity, including the Plan. Segal states that because Meyers' position as administrator of the Planwas terminated as of July 31, 1988, a termination of the lease betweenRIMS and Meyers was made possible. Meyers and RIMS and Winthrop executeda termination agreement on July 6, 1988, under which Meyers relinquishedall its rights and title to the RIMS equipment and software it had leased.In return, RIMS released Meyers from its obligations, including the financialobligations incurrcd by Meyers in connection with the lease and exclusivesoftware licensing agreement. <ITAG tagnum="81">8. The Plan's Acquisition of Computer Equipment and Software </ITAG>Segal represents that in connection with the transition to self-administration,it considered various methods of acquiring or leasing computer equipmentand software for the Plan. Among other things, Segal took into accountthat a major cost of the change to self-administration would be the expenseof computer conversion, part of which is attributable to the cost of softwareand hardware (programming and equipment). Segal explains that this expensealso involves the cost of moving the equipment, the effort needed to identifythe data elements and acquaint new technical staff with the style and locationof information within the existing computer files, the transfer and controlof the current and historical data from the old computers to their replacements,and the start-up and training of technical and operation staff handlingthe new systems. Segal states that all these conversion efforts requireexpertise and a great deal of staff time. Segal considered purchasing or leasing computer equipment and softwaredifferent from that which had been used by Meyers. However, Segal concludedthat the acquisition of an entirely different computer system would beimpractical because the Plan would have to transfer all its data from theold system to the new system as well as to spend time correcting the inevitableerrors accompanying such a transfer. Segal noted that an important considerationwas that staff would have to be retrained to operate the new equipmentand software. Segal determined that this alternative was unnecessarilycostly and impractical at this time. In considering possible computer systems for the Plan, Segal contactedRIMS to discuss leasing new, upgraded equipment and software which wouldbe generally compatible with the then-existing system. Although the softwareused by Meyers would be compatible with the new system the software licensedexclusively to Meyers would not be available to the Plan absent a separateagreement between the Plan and RIMS. Segal states that RIMS was willingto sell a new computer system and to license software to the Plan for approximately$480,000. At the same time, Segal considered the possibility of leasing the RIMSsystem then leased to Meyers. Segal asserts that using this system wouldavoid the disruption of services which would be inherent in any changeof computer systems, particularly as the Plan planned to hire employeeswho had experience using the same RIMS system. Segal states that RIMS waswilling to lease the equipment and software to the Plan (assuming thatit was available and no longer used by Meyers) for approximately $360,000,a present value equivalent of $315,000 after discounting for time paymentsover three years at ten percent. Segal determined that leasing the RIMS system previously used by Meyerswas the most cost effective and efficient method of securing computer servicesfor the Plan. Segal's prior experience had shown that the RIMS system wascompetitively priced and a good system. In Segal's opinion, continued useof the existing system would reduce the start-up costs for switching toself-administration of the Plan. Moreover, significant training and start-upcosts would be eliminated due to the familiarity with the system of Meyers'staff, whom the Plan intended to hire. Furthermore, the computer softwarewas already in place to handle the Plan's benefit claims. Thus, serviceto participants and beneficiaries would suffer the least disruption throughthis decision. Consequently, Segal began negotiations with RIMS to leasethe system then used by Meyers.In connection with the severance agreement, and in light of the terminationagreement between RIMS and Meyers, Segal made a binding recommendationto the Trustees for the approval of the RIMS lease for the computer systemused by Meyers. The Trustees reviewed this recommendation at their meetingon June 29, 1988, and approved a resolution putting this recommendationinto effect. Pursuant to this resolution, RIMS (and its wholly owned subsidiary,Winthrop) and the Plan entered into an agreement providing for a 32-monthlease for the computer system. They also executed an option-to-purchaseagreement which gives the Plan the ability to purchase the equipment itcurrently leases. The lease of computer equipment and software from RIMS and Winthrop bythe Plan comnenced on August 1, 1988, pursuant to the contracts betweenthe Plan and RIMS or Winthrop executed July 6, 1988. Because the RIMS systemwas already substantially in place when the Plan took over its own administrationon August 1, 1988, no shutdown of administrative services was necessary.Segal states that some RIMS computers were installed in the Naperville,Illinois office over the weekend of July 30-31, and they were operationaland paying claims on August 1; while in other Plan offices, the systemswere already in place. Segal asserts that only leasing the equipment previouslyused by Meyers could have achieved this result, and that leasing this systemsuccessfully avoided any shutdown of Plan operations. Thus, Segal opinesthat the leasing of the subject computer equipment and software was clearlyin the best interests of the Plan's participants and beneficiaries, andnecessary and appropriate for the efficient and economical administrationof the Plan. <ITAG tagnum="81">9. The Party-in-Interest Status of RIMS and Winthrop </ITAG>Segal asserts that although RIMS has had a contractual relationship withMeyers, RIMS has had no relationship (as a service provider or otherwise)with the Plan prior to the Plan's lease with RIMS and Winthrop. Segal alsorepresents that although the Plan entered into a lease for the same equipmentand software previously leased by Meyers, the Plan did not assume Meyers'lease, and Meyers is not a party, directly or indirectly, to the leaseagreement between RIMS and the Plan. Segal explains that Winthrop is theleasing agent for RIMS and, as such, provided no services with respectto the hardware or software formerly leased to Meyers. However, upon executionof the Software System Support Agreement (described below), RIMS becamea service provider to the Plan and, therefore, a party in interest thereto,as did Winthrop due to its status as a wholly owned subsidiary of RIMS,pursuant to paragraphs (B) and (G), respectively, of section 3(14) of theAct. <ITAG tagnum="81">10. Current RIMS/Winthrop Contractual Arrangements </ITAG>Segal explains that the Plan currently has the following contractual relationshipswith RIMS or Winthrop: (a) A Lease of Personal Property between the Plan and Winthrop; (b) A Computer Equipment Security Agreement between the Plan and Winthrop;(c) The Option: An Option To Purchase the computer equipment leased bythe Plan from Winthrop; (d) A Software Program License Agreement between the Plan and RIMS; and(e) A Software System Support Agreement between the Plan and RIMS. Segal represents that all of these agreements are standard form contractswhich represent the common practice within the industry and summarizesthe terms of these agreements as follows: (a) Lease of Personal Property: This is the lease of computer hardwarefor 32 months by the Plan from Winthrop. The equipment was installed atthe Plan's administrative offices in Naperville, Illinois and AtlanticCity, New Jersey. For the first 27 months of the lease, rental paymentsare $13,039.10 per month; for months 28 through 32, the rental paymentsare reduced to $2,811.96. (The last five payments are reduced to reflectthe deposit supplied to Winthrop by the Plan.) (b) Computer Equipment Security Agreement: The Plan provided to Winthropa security interest in the Qantel computer and computer-related equipmentuntil the Plan's obligations under the Lease of Personal Property are satisfied.(c) The Option: The Plan has the right to purchase the computer equipmentfrom Winthrop for approximately $19,000, representing 10 percent of theinitial computer equipment cost, at the expiration of the term of the computerequipment lease (see (a), above) or any renewal or extension term thereof.The computer equipment would be sold in an ``as is'' condition. (d) Software Program License Agreement: RIMS provides to the Plan a non-exclusivelicense to use its programs on the equipment rented from Winthrop and willalso provide training for Plan personnel. In return, the Plan will payRIMS $96,500. (e) Software System Support Agreement: RIMS agrees to provide the Planwith telephone support services for the use of its licensed programs. Inaddition, RIMS will supply all final versions of all new releases of theprograms during the terms of the lease. The Plan is required to maintainat each installation site a key operator who has taken the RIMS trainingprogram. These key operators will be the sole Plan employees to requestsupport from RIMS. This agreement has a term of one year, beginning August1, 1988, with automatic one-year renewals unless either party providesthe other party with 30-days prior written notice of its intent not torenew. The Plan will pay RIMS a fee of $1,845.58 per month for the firstone year term.<ITAG tagnum="81">11. Comparison of the Plan's and Meyers' Contracts </ITAG>Segal states that Meyers and RIMS/Winthrop had standard form contractswhich represented the common practice within the industry and that Meyershad the following agreements with RIMS or Winthrop: (a) Lease of Personal Property, (b) Software Program Licenses Agreement, and (c) System Support Agreement. Segal also represents that the agreements between the Plan and RIMS/Winthropand the agreements between Meyers and RIMS/Winthrop are substantially thesame and are all the standard form contracts developed by RIMS/Winthropwhich were in use at the time the parties entered into the contracts. Segal represents that although the first year fee paid by the Plan forsystem support services is greater than the initial fee paid by Meyersunder its 1985 systems support services agreement with RIMS, the increasein the amount of the fee from 1985 (payable by Meyers) to 1988 (payableby the Plan) was a result of changing market conditions. Segal representsfurther that the fee currently charged by RIMS reflects industry fee levelsand is reasonable in light of the services to be provided. Further, Segalrepresents that the overall cost increases reflected in the Plan's 1988agreements with RIMS and Winthrop merely indicate changes in the marketfor this equipment and these services since 1985. Segal notes that thelease payments by the Plan are essentially the same as those paid by Meyersand will result in a significant savings for the Plan. While the systemsservicing fees have increased, Segal states that those increased fees representreasonable compensation for the services rendered and that leasing theRIMS equipment previously used by Meyers is clearly in the best interestsof the Plan and its participants and beneficiaries because of the efficienciesand cost savings involved. <ITAG tagnum="81">12. Monitoring by Segal </ITAG>Segal represents that as court-appointed independent fiduciary to the Plan,Segal will monitor the Plan's agreements with RIMS and Winthrop and willact to protect the Plan's interest therein throughout the duration of saidagreements. With regard to the Option (see 10(c), above), Segal makes thefollowing representations: (a) The Option is appropriate and commercially reasonable in a lease ofthis type (see 10(a), above); (b) If Segal elects to exercise the Option, such election will only bemade to the extent that the purchase of the equipment is in the Plan'sbest interest; (c) Segal will ensure that the Option is not exercised if Segal determinesthat the Plan's purchase of the equipment is not in the Plan's best interests;and (d) If the Option is to be exercised, Segal will determine the leased equipment'sfair market value as of the date of purchase by the Plan and will ensurethat the purchase price to be paid by the Plan does not exceed said fairmarket value. <ITAG tagnum="81">13. Summary </ITAG>In summary, Segal (the applicant) represents that the Arrangement satisfiesthe exemption criteria set forth in section 408(a) of the Act because:(a) Having considered alternative arrangements, Segal, an independent fiduciarywith respect to the Plan, believes that the Arrangement is in the bestinterests of the Plan and its participants and beneficiaries because itpreserves the continuity of Plan administration, including the processingof participants' and beneficiaries' claims, while conserving the Plan'sassets;(b) Segal, which has extensive experience in the operation of multiemployerbenefit plans and is familiar with state-of-the-art computer systems, hasnegotiated the terms of the Arrangement on behalf of the Plan, with theapproval of the Trustees; (c) As independent fiduciary to the Plan, Segal has expressed the opinionsthat (i) the increases (compared to the amounts payable by Meyers underits contracts with RIMS/Winthrop) in payments required from the Plan underits Lease of Personal Property with Winthrop (see 10(a), above) and underits Software System Support Agreement with RIMS (see 10(e), above) aredue to changing market conditions, and (ii) although the first year feepaid by the Plan for system support services is more than the initial feepaid by Meyers under its 1985 systems support services agreement, the feecurrently charged to the Plan reflects industry fee levels and is reasonablein light of the services to be provided; (d) As independent fiduciary to the Plan, Segal is responsible for oversightof record keeping and claims processing for the Plan, among other duties,and will monitor the contracts between the Plan and RIMS or Winthrop, pursuantto the Arrangement, acting to protect the Plan's interests therein throughouttheir duration; and (e) With respect to the Option, Segal represents that: (i) the Option isappropriate and commercially reasonable in a lease of this type (see 10(a),above); (ii) if Segal elects to exercise the Option, such election willonly be made to the extent that the purchase of the equipment is in thePlan's best interest; (iii) Segal will ensure that the Option is not exercisedif Segal determines that the Plan's purchase of the equipment is not inthe Plan's best interests; and (iv) if the Option is to be exercised, Segalwill determine the leased equipment's fair market value as of the dateof purchase by the Plan and will ensure that the purchase price to be paidby the Plan does not exceed said fair market value.<T3>For Further Information Contact: </T3>Mrs. Miriam Freund, of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8194. (This is not a toll-free number.) <ITAG tagnum="84">General Information </ITAG>The attention of interested persons is directed to the following: (1) The fact that a transaction is the subject of an exemption under section408(a) of the Act and/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code does not relievea fiduciary or other party in interest or disqualified person from certainother provisions of the Act and/or the Code, including any prohibited transactionprovisions to which the exemption does not apply and the general fiduciaryresponsibility provisions of section 404 of the Act, which among otherthings require a fiduciary to discharge his duties respecting the plansolely in the interest of the participants and beneficiaries of the planand in a prudent fashion in accordance with section 404(a)(1)(B) of theAct; nor does it affect the requirement of section 401(a) of the Code thatthe plan must operate for the exclusive benefit of the employees of theemployer maintaining the plan and their beneficiaries; (2) Before an exemption may be granted under section 408(a) of the Actand/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code, the Department must find that theexemption is administratively feasible, in the interests of the plan andof its participants and beneficiaries and protective of the rights of participantsand beneficiaries of the plan; and  (3) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be supplemental to, and notin derogation of, any other provisions of the Act and/or the Code, includingstatutory or administrative exemptions and transitional rules. Furthermore,the fact that a transaction is subject to an administrative or statutoryexemption is not dispositive of whether the transaction is in fact a prohibitedtransaction. (4) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be subject to the expresscondition that the material facts and representations contained in eachapplication are true and complete, and that each application accuratelydescribes all material terms of the transaction which is the subject ofthe exemption.<ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, this 25th day of October 1989.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Ivan Strasfeld, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director of Exemption Determinations, Pension and Welfare BenefitsAdministration, U.S. Department of Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-25566 Filed 10-30-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4510-29-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>