<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89126-0049 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.1-26-89.f2.A1048</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Economic Regulatory Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Proposed Consent Order With Quintana Energy Corp. et al. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Economic Regulatory Administration, Department of Energy.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of proposed consent order and opportunity for publiccomment. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Economic Regulatory Administration (ERA) announcesa proposed Consent Order between the Department of Energy (DOE) and QuintanaEnergy Corporation, Quintana Refinery Co., and Quintana Petrochemical Company(hereinafter collectively referred to as ``Quintana''). The agreement proposesto resolve matters relating to Quintana's compliance with the federal petroleumprice and allocation regulations for the period January 1, 1973 throughJanuary 27, 1981. If this Consent Order is approved, Quintana shall paya total of $3,800,000 within fifteen days of the effective date of theConsent Order. DOE's Office of Hearings and Appeals (OHA) will be petitionedto implement Special Refund Procedures pursuant to 10 CFR Part 205, SubpartV, in which proceedings any persons who claim to have suffered injury fromQuintana's alleged overcharges would have the opportunity to submit claimsfor payment. Pursuant to 10 CFR 205.199J, ERA will receive written comments on the proposedConsent Order for thirty (30) days following publication of this notice.ERA will consider all comments received from the public in determiningwhether to accept the settlement and issue a final Order, renegotiate theagreement and issue a modified agreement as a final Order, or reject thesettlement. DOE's final decision will be published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>, along with an analysis of and response to thesignificant written comments, as well as any other considerations thatwere relevant to the final decision. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Dorothy Hamid, Economic RegulatoryAdministration, Department of Energy, 1000 Independence Avenue SW., Washington,DC 20585, (202) 586-4167. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="25">I. Resolution of Regulatory Issues </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">II. Determination of Reasonable Settlement Amount </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="25">III. Terms and Conditions of the Consent Order </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Resolution of Regulatory Issues </ITAG>Quintana is a petroleum refiner subject to the audit jurisdiction of ERAto determine compliance with the Federal Petroleum Price and AllocationRegulations. During the period covered by this proposed Order (January1, 1973 through January 27, 1981), Quintana engaged in, among other things,the production, importation, refining, and sale of crude oil; and the saleof residual fuel oil, motor gasoline, middle distillates, aviation fuel,propane and other refined petroleum products. ERA conducted an audit of Quintana's compliance for the period beginningin January 1978 through December 1980. During this audit, ERA identifiedcertain areas in the pricing, refining, and sales of crude oil in whichit believed that Quintana had failed to comply with the requirements ofthe Federal price and allocation regulations. On June 24, 1988, ERA issued to Quintana a Proposed Remedial Order (PRO)to the Quintana-Howell Joint Venture (hereinafter Joint Venture), a Texasjoint venture composed of Quintana Refinery Co., and Howell Corporation,which operated refineries in Corpus Christie and San Antonio, Texas. ThePRO alleged violations of 10 CFR 211.66 (b) and (h) and andSection; 205.202as a result of the Joint Venture's significant understatement on its entitlementsreports of its receipts of controlled tier crude oil at the two refineries,during the period April 1978 through December 1980. Specifically, ERA allegedthat during this period the Joint Venture failed to correctly report thevolumes of controlled tier certification associated with substantial volumesof its crude oil receipts at the two refineries. Instead, the Joint Venturereported such volumes as uncontrolled crude oil. ERA alleges that the JointVenture's actions circumvented and contravened, or resulted in the circumventionand contravention of, the requirements of the Entitlements Program. Asa remedy for these alleged violations, the Proposed Remedial Order seeksto recover jointly and severally from Quintana and Howell $10,322,848,which is the amount of Joint Venture's reduced post-entitlement crude costs.With interest, Quintana's interest in the Joint Venture represents approximately$4.9 million, plus interest of approximately $9 million; Howell Corporation'sshare of the total liability, $5.4 million plus interest of nearly $10million, would not be resolved by this Consent Order. <ITAG tagnum="84">II. Determination of Reasonable Settlement Amount </ITAG>The settlement calls for Quintana to pay $3.8 million, to discharge infull its obligations under the price and allocation regulations. Underthe terms of the proposed Consent Order, only the liability of Quintanawould be resolved. The other partner to the Joint Venture, Howell Corporation,continues to be liable for the remaining principal sum of approximately$5.4 million, plus interest. ERA took into consideration for settlementpurposes, the fact that Quintana benefitted from these transactions onlyin the amount of approximately $4.9 million, and that the case is in itsrelatively early stages of litigation. Moreover, inasmuch as Quintana tookaffirmative steps to end the types of transactions which subsequently cameinto dispute, significant amounts of overcharges that may have occurredwere estopped. In addition, Quintana was not the principal manager of thetransactions which did occur due to the Joint Venture. ERA has preliminarilyagreed to the settlement amount after considering the factual aspects relatedto the various issues, assessing the litigation risks associated with establishingthe alleged overcharges, and considering the benefit to the public froma significant settlement of the issues which would take years of continuedlitigation to resolve. Based on all of these considerations, ERA has tentatively concluded thatthe resolution of these matters for $3.8 million is an appropriate settlementand in the public interest. <ITAG tagnum="84">III. Terms and Conditions of the Consent Order </ITAG>If the Consent Order is made final, Quintana will pay DOE $3.8 millionwithin fifteen (15) days of the effective date of the Consent Order. ERA will petition OHA to implement Special Refund Procedures under theprovisions of Subpart V of the regulations. In these proceedings, OHA woulddevelop procedures for the receipt and evaluation of applications for refundin order to distribute the settlement monies. To ensure that OHA has sufficientinformation to evaluate the claims, the proposed Consent Order requiresthat Quintana provide customer identification and purchase volume informationto OHA upon request. Quintana and DOE mutually release each other from claims and actions arisingunder the subject matters covered by the proposed Consent Order. The proposedOrder does not affect the right of any other party to take action againstQuintana, or of Quintana or the DOE to take action against any other party.<ITAG tagnum="84">Submission of Written Comments:</ITAG>The proposed Consent Order cannot be made effective until the conclusionof the public review process, of which this Notice is a part.Interested parties are invited to submit written comments concerning thisproposed Consent Order to: Quintana Consent Order Comments, RG-30, EconomicRegulatory Administration, 1000 Independence Avenue SW., Washington, DC20585. All comments received by the thirtieth day following publicationof this notice in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>, will be considered before determining whetherto adopt the proposed Consent Order as a final Order. Any modificationsof the proposed Consent Order which significantly alter its terms or impactwill be published for additional comments. If, after considering the commentsit has received, ERA determines to issue the proposed Consent Order asa final Order, the proposed Order will be made final and effective by publicationof a notice in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>.Any information or data considered confidential by the person submittingit must be identified as such in accordance with the provisions of 10 CFR205.9(f).<ITAG tagnum="21">Issued in Washington, DC, on January 18, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Milton C. Lorenz,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Chief Counsel for Enforcement Litigation, Economic Regulatory Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Consent Order</ITAG>I. Introduction101. This Consent Order is entered into between Quintana Energy Corporation,Quintana Refinery Co., and Quintana Petrochemical Company (hereinaftercollectively referred to as ``Quintana'') and the United States Departmentof Energy (``DOE''). Except as otherwise provided herein, this ConsentOrder settles and finally resolves all civil and administrative claimsand disputes, whether or not heretofore asserted, between the DOE, as hereinafterdefined, and Quintana, as hereinafter defined, relating to Quintana's compliancewith the federal petroleum price and allocation regulations, as hereinafterdefined, during the period January 1, 1973, through January 27, 1981 (allthe matters settled and resolved by this Consent Order are referred tohereinafter as ``the matters covered by this Consent Order'').II. Jurisdiction, Regulatory Authority and Definitions201. This Consent Order is entered into by the DOE pursuant to the authorityconferred upon it by sections 301 and 503 of the Department of Energy OrganizationAct (``DOE Act''), 42 U.S.C. 7151 and 7193, Executive Order No. 12009,42 FR 46267 (1977); Executive Order No. 12038, 43 FR 4957 (1978); and 10CFR 205.199J.202. The Economic Regulatory Administration (``ERA'') was created by Section206 of the DOE Act, 42 U.S.C. 7136. In Delegation No. 0204-4, the Secretaryof Energy delegated responsibility for the administration of the federalpetroleum price and allocation regulations to the Administrator of theERA. In Delegation No. 0204-4A, the Administrator delegated to the SpecialCounsel authority to audit the compliance of refiners, including Quintana,with the federal petroleum price and allocation regulations and to takeappropriate enforcement actions based upon such audits.203. For purposes of this Consent Order, the phrase ``federal petroleumprice and allocation regulations'' means all statutory requirements andadministrative regulations and orders regarding the pricing and allocationof crude oil, refined petroleum products, natural gas liquids, and naturalgas liquid products, including the entitlements and mandatory oil importsprograms, administered by the DOE. The federal petroleum price and allocationregulations include (without limitation) the pricing, allocation, reporting,certification, and recordkeeping requirements imposed by or under the EconomicStabilization Act of 1970, the Emergency Petroleum Allocation Act of 1973,the Federal Energy Administration Act of 1974, Presidential Proclamation3279, all applicable DOE regulations codified in 6 CFR Parts 130 and 150and 10 CFR Parts 205, 210, 211, 212, and 213, and all rules, rulings, guidelines,interpretations, clarifications, manuals, decisions, orders, notices, forms,and subpoenas relating to the pricing and allocation of petroleum products.The provisions of 10 CFR 205.199J and the definitions under the federalpetroleum price and allocation regulations shall apply to this ConsentOrder except to the extent inconsistent herewith. Reference herein to ``DOE''includes, besides the Department of Energy, the Cost of Living Council,the Federal Energy Office, the Federal Energy Administration, the Officeof Special Counsel (``OSC''), the Economic Regulatory Administration andall predecessor and successor agencies. References in this Consent Orderto ``Quintana'' shall include: (1) Quintana Energy Corporation, QuintanaPetrochemical Company, Quintana Refinery Co., and all of their subsidiariesand affiliates, except the entity of the Quintana-Howell Joint Venture,(2) all of Quintana's petroleum-related activities as refiner, producer,operator, working interest or royalty interest owner, reseller, retailer,natural gas processor, or otherwise, and (3) except for purposes of ArticleIV, <T3>infra, </T3>Quintana's directors, officers, and employees.III. FactsThe stipulated facts upon which this Consent Order is based are as follows:301. During the period covered by this Consent Order, Quintana was a ``refiner,''``producer,'' and ``reseller'' as those terms are defined in the federalpetroleum price and allocation regulations and was subject to the jurisdictionof the DOE. Quintana engaged in, among other things, the production, importation,sale, and refining of crude oil, the sale of residual fuel oil, motor gasoline,middle distillates, aviation fuel, propane, and other refined petroleumproducts.302. DOE conducted an audit to determine Quintana's compliance with thefederal petroleum price and allocation regulations. During the course ofthe DOE's audit, the enforcement proceedings instituted by the DOE andthe negotiations that led to this Consent Order, the DOE raised certainissues with respect to Quintana's application of the federal petroleumprice and allocation regulations. The DOE has taken an administrative enforcementaction against Quintana, through the issuance of a Proposed Remedial Orderon June 24, 1988. Quintana maintained, however, that it had calculatedits costs, determined its prices, sold its crude oil and petroleum products,and operated in all other respects in accordance with the federal petroleumprice and allocation regulations. The DOE and Quintana have disagreed inseveral respects concerning the proper application of the federal petroleumprice and allocation regulations to Quintana's activities with respectto the matters covered by this Consent Order, and each has asserted itsbelief that its respective legal and factual positions on the matters resolvedby this Consent Order are meritorious. These positions were emphasizedin the intensive review and exchange of information conducted during theaudit and subsequent settlement negotiation process. However, in orderto avoid the expense of protracted and complex litigation and the disruptionof its orderly business functions, Quintana has agreed to enter into thisConsent Order. The DOE believes this Consent Order constitutes a satisfactoryresolution of the matters covered herein and is in the public interest.IV. Remedial Provisions401. In full and final settlement of all matters covered by this ConsentOrder and in lieu of all other remedies which have been or might be soughtby the DOE against Quintana for such matters under 10 CFR 205.199I or otherwise,Quintana shall pay a total amount of three million eight hundred thousanddollars ($3,800,000) to the DOE in the manner specified in paragraph 402.402. The payment pursuant to paragraph 401 shall be made within fifteen(15) days of the effective date of the Consent Order by wire transfer inaccordance with instructions furnished to Quintana by the DOE in a timelymanner.403. Payments made by Quintana pursuant to this Consent Order shall bedistributed by the DOE pursuant to the special refund procedures prescribedby 10 CFR Part 205, Subpart V.V. Issues Resolved501. All pending and potential civil and administrative claims, whetheror not known, demands, liabilities, causes of action or other proceedingsby the DOE against Quintana regarding Quintana's compliance with and obligationsunder the federal petroleum price and allocation regulations during theperiod covered by this Consent Order, whether or not heretofore raisedby an issue letter, Notice of Probable Violation, Notice of Proposed Disallowance,Proposed Remedial Order, Remedial Order, action in court or otherwise,including DOE's claim against Quintana as a joint venturer in the Quintana-HowellJoint Venture, are resolved and extinguished as to Quintana by this ConsentOrder. This Consent Order, however, does not resolve, extinguish, or otherwiseaffect DOE's claims against any other party, except as follows: (1) TheDOE agrees to reduce the principal amount of its claim against Howell Corporationas a joint venturer in the Quintana-Howell Joint Venture, as set forthin Section VII(A) of the June 24, 1988 Proposed Remedial Order (at 41-42),from $10,322,848.09 to $5,407,966.44; the interest on this reduce amountaccrued through April 30, 1988 totals $9,916,981.00; and (2) DOE agreesthat it will not seek to obtain a judgment against the Quintana-HowellJoint Venture entity, provided that the liability of Howell Corporationand its subsidiaries, or the DOE's ability to sue Howell Corporation andits subsidiaries, is not reduced, resolved, or extinguished in any manneras a result of the DOE's agreement to not seek to obtain a judgment againstthe Quintana-Howell Joint Venture entity, and provided further that ifa judgment is obtained against the Quintana-Howell Joint Venture, DOE agreesnot to enforce such judgment against Quintana.502. (a) Except as otherwise provided herein, compliance by Quintana withthis Consent Order shall be deemed by the DOE to constitute full compliancefor administrative and civil purposes with all federal petroleum priceand allocation regulations for matters covered by this Consent Order. Inconsideration for performance as required under this Consent Order by Quintana,the DOE hereby releases Quintana completely and for all purposes from alladministrative and civil judicial claims, demands, liabilities or causesof action, including without limitation claims for civil penalties, thatthe DOE has asserted or might otherwise be able to assert against Quintanabefore or after the date of this Consent Order for alleged violations ofthe federal petroleum price and allocation regulations with respect tomatters covered by this Consent Order. The DOE will not initiate or prosecuteany such administrative or civil judicial matter against Quintana or causeor refer any such matter to be initiated or prosecuted, nor will the DOEor its successors directly or indirectly aid in the initiation of any suchadministrative or civil judicial matter against Quintana or participatevoluntarily in the prosecution of such actions. The DOE will not assertvoluntarily in any administrative or civil judicial proceeding that Quintanahas violated the federal petroleum price and allocation regulations withrespect to the matters covered by this Consent Order or otherwise takeany action with respect to Quintana in derogation of this Consent Order.However, nothing contained herein shall preclude the DOE from defendingthe validity of the federal petroleum price and allocation regulations.(b) The DOE will not seek or recommend any criminal fines or penaltiesbased on information or evidence presently in its possession for the matterscovered by this Consent Order, provided, however, that nothing in thisConsent Order precludes the DOE from (1) seeking or recommending such criminalfines or penalties if information subsequently coming to its attentionindicates, either by itself or in combination with information or evidencepresently known to DOE, that a criminal violation may have occurred or(2) otherwise complying with its obligations under law with regard to forwardinginformation of possible criminal violations of law to appropriate authorities.Nothing contained herein may be construed as a bar, estoppel or defenseagainst any criminal or civil action brought by an agency of the UnitedStates other than the DOE under (i) section 210 of the Economic StabilizationAct of 1970 or (ii) any statute or regulation other than the federal petroleumprice and allocation regulations. Finally, this Consent Order does notprejudice the rights of any third party or Quintana in any private action,including an action for contribution by or against Quintana.(c) Quintana releases the DOE completely and for all purposes from alladministrative and civil judicial claims, liabilities, or causes of actionthat Quintana has asserted or may otherwise be able to assert against theDOE relating to the DOE's administration of the federal petroleum priceand allocation regulations. This release, however, does not preclude Quintanafrom asserting any factual or legal position or argument as a defense toany action, claim, or proceeding brought by the DOE, the United States,or any agency of the United States. Nor does it preclude Quintana fromasserting a defense, counterclaim or offset to any action, claim or proceedingbrought by any other person.(d) Quintana hereby releases any and all claims that Quintana may havefor refunds of crude oil overcharges pursuant to any special refund proceduresimplemented pursuant to 10 CFR Part 205, Subpart V.503. (a) Within thirty (30) days after the Effective Date of this ConsentOrder, Quintana and the DOE will file or cause to be filed appropriatepleadings and will take all other steps necessary to withdraw all claimsand dismiss with prejudice all proceedings against Quintana covered bythis Consent Order then pending before the DOE's Office of Hearings andAppeals or the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission and to dismiss withprejudice any court proceeding then pending against Quintana involvingan appeal from or seeking review of a decision by the OHA or the FERC inany such proceeding.(b) Within fifteen (15) days after the execution of the Consent Order byboth parties, DOE agrees to join with Quintana in written notificationto DOE's Office of Hearings and Appeals, the Federal Energy RegulatoryCommission and any appropriate court of the fact of such execution, whichnotice shall request that said administrative or judicial tribunal stayall further action against Quintana in the proceedings covered by thisConsent Order until such time as DOE provides notice to said tribunalsthat the Consent Order has become effective or has been withdrawn pursuantto Article IX of this Consent Order.504. Execution of this Consent Order constitutes neither an admission byQuintana nor a finding by the DOE of any violation by Quintana of any statuteor regulation. The DOE has determined that it is not appropriate to seekto impose civil penalties for the matters covered by this Consent Order,and the DOE will not seek any such civil penalties. None of the paymentsor expenditures made by Quintana pursuant to this Consent Order are tobe considered for any purpose as penalties, fines, or forfeitures or assettlement of any potential liability for penalties, fines, or forfeitures.505. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, with respect to the matterscovered by this Consent Order, the DOE reserves the right to initiate anenforcement proceeding or to seek appropriate penalties for any newly discoveredregulatory violations committed by Quintana, but only if Quintana has concealedfacts relating to such violations. The DOE also reserves the right to seekappropriate judicial remedies, other than full rescission of this ConsentOrder, for any misrepresentation of fact material to this Consent Orderduring the course of the audit or the negotiations that preceded this ConsentOrder or upon discovery of information that is materially inconsistentwith the information which has been furnished by Quintana upon which thisagreement is based.<T3>VI. Recordkeeping, Reporting and Confidentiality</T3>601. Quintana shall maintain such records as are necessary to demonstratecompliance with the terms of this Consent Order and records related toQuintana's purchases, sales, exchanges or other transfers of crude oilduring the period January 1, 1978, through January 27, 1981. To assistDOE in the distribution of the monies paid pursuant to this Consent Order,Quintana shall also retain sales volume data and customers' names and addressesregarding its sales of crude oil and refined petroleum products for thetransactions covered by this Consent Order until thirty (30) days afterfinal distribution by DOE of such monies. If requested, Quintana shallmake such information available to DOE. Except as otherwise provided inthis paragraph, upon timely payment to DOE of the amount required to bepaid under paragraph 402 of this Consent Order, Quintana is relieved ofits obligation to comply with the recordkeeping requirements of the federalpetroleum price and allocation regulations relating to the matters settledby this Consent Order.602. Except for formal requests for information regarding other firms subjectto the DOE's information gathering and reporting authority, Quintana willnot be subject to any audit requests, report orders, subpoenas, or otheradministrative discovery by DOE relating to Quintana's compliance withthe federal petroleum price and allocation regulations relating to thematters settled by this Consent Order.603. The DOE will treat the sensitive commercial and financial informationprovided by Quintana pursuant to negotiations which were conducted withrespect to this Consent Order or obtained by the DOE in its audit of Quintanaand related to matters covered by this Consent Order as confidential andproprietary and will not disclose such information unless required to doso by law, including a request by a duly authorized committee or subcommitteeof Congress. If a request or demand for release of any such informationis made pursuant to law, the DOE will claim any privilege or exemptionreasonably available to it. The DOE will provide Quintana with ten (10)days actual notice, if possible, of any pending disclosure of such information,unless prohibited or precluded from doing so by law or request of Congress.The DOE will retain the audit information which it has acquired duringits review of Quintana's compliance with the federal petroleum price andallocation regulations in accordance with the DOE's established recordsretention procedures. Notwithstanding the otherwise confidential treatmentafforded such information by the terms of this Consent Order, the DOE willmake such information available to the Department of Justice (``DOJ'')in response to a request pursuant to the DOJ's statutory authority by aduly authorized representative of the DOJ. If requested by the DOJ, theDOE shall not disclose that such a request has been made. Nothing in thisparagraph shall be deemed to waive or prejudice any right Quintana mayhave independent of this Consent Order regarding the disclosure of sensitivecommercial and financial information.VII. Contractual Undertaking701. It is the understanding and express intention of Quintana and theDOE that this Consent Order constitutes a legally enforceable contractualundertaking that is binding on the parties and their successors and assigns.Notwithstanding any other provision herein, Quintana (and its successorsand assigns) and the DOE each reserves the right to institute a civil actionin an appropriate United States district court, if necessary, to secureenforcement of the terms of this Consent Order, and the DOE also reservesthe right to seek appropriate penalties and interest for any failure tocomply with the terms of this Consent Order. The DOE will undertake thedefense of the Consent Order, as made effective, in response to any litigationchallenging the Consent Order's validity in which the DOE is named a party.Quintana agrees to cooperate with the DOE in the defense of any such challenge.VIII. Final Order801. Upon becoming effective, this Consent Order shall be a final orderof DOE having the same force and effect as a remedial order issued pursuantto section 503 of the DOE Act, 42 U.S.C. 7193, and 10 CFR 205.199B. Quintanahereby waives its right to administrative or judicial review of this Order,but Quintana reserves the right to participate in any such review initiatedby a third party.IX. Effective Date901. This Consent Order shall become effective as a final order of theDOE upon notice to that effect being published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. Prior to that date, the DOE will publish noticein the <T4>Federal Register</T4> that it proposes to make this Consent Order finaland, in that notice, will provide not less than thirty (30) days for membersof the public to submit written comments. The DOE will consider all writtencomments to determine whether to adopt the Consent Order as a final order,to withdraw agreement to the Consent Order, or to attempt to renegotiatethe terms of the Consent Order.902. Until the Effective Date, the DOE reserves the right to withdraw consentto this Consent Order by written notice to Quintana, in which event thisConsent Order shall be null and void. If this Consent Order is not madeeffective on or before the one hundred fiftieth (150th) day following executionby Quintana, Quintana may, at any time thereafter until the Effective Date,withdraw its agreement to this Consent Order by written notice to the DOE,in which event this Consent Order shall be null and void.I, the undersigned a duly authorized representative of Quintana, herebyagree to and accept on behalf of Quintana the foregoing Consent Order.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: January 1, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">H. P. Riley,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Vice President, Quintana Energy Corporation, Quintana Refinery Co.,Quintana Petrochemical Company.</ITAG>I, the undersigned, a duly authorized representative of DOE, hereby agreeto and accept on behalf of the DOE the foregoing Consent Order.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: January 9, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Milton C. Lorenz,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Chief Counsel for Enforcement Litigation, Economic Regulatory Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-1877 Filed 1-25-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6450-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>