<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89418-0049 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.4-18-89.f2.A1048</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[C-351-802] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Final Affirmative Countervailing Duty Determination; Steel WheelsFrom Brazil</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Import Administration, International Trade Administration,Department of Commerce.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of final affirmative countervailing duty determination. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>We determine that certain benefits which constitute subsidieswithin the meaning of the countervailing duty law are being provided tomanufacturers, producers or exporters in Brazil of steel wheels, as describedin the ``Scope of Investigation'' section of this notice. The estimatednet subsidy and duty deposit rates are specified in the ``Suspension ofLiquidation'' section of this notice.We have notified the U.S. International Trade Commission (ITC) of our determination.If the ITC determines that imports of steel wheels materially injure, orthreaten material injury, to a United States industry, we will direct theU.S. Customs Service to resume suspension of liquidation of all entriesof steel wheels from Brazil that are entered, or withdrawn from warehouse,for consumption on or after the date of publication of the countervailingduty order, and to require a cash deposit as described in the ``Suspensionof Liquidation'' section of this notice.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>April 18, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Philip Pia or Bernard Carreau,Office of Countervailing Compliance, Import Administration, InternationalTrade Administration, U.S. Department of Commerce, 14th Street and ConstitutionAvenue, NW., Washington, DC 20230; telephone: (202) 377-2786.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Final Determination</ITAG>Based on our investigation, we determine that benefits which constitutesubsidies within the meaning of section 701 of the Tariff Act of 1930,as amended (the Act), are being provided to manufacturers, producers orexporters in Brazil of steel wheels. For purposes of this investigation,we find the following programs to confer subsidies:andbullet; CACEX Preferential Working Capital Financing for Exportsandbullet; Income Tax Exemption for Export Earningsandbullet; CIC-OPCRE 6-2-6 Financingandbullet; BEFIEX: IPI Export Credit Premium, and Import Duty and IPI TaxReductionsandbullet; FINEX (Resolution 509) Export Financingandbullet; Upstream Subsidy (steel input)We determine the estimated net subsidy to be 1.82 percent <T3>ad valorem</T3> for Borlem S.A. and 17.29 percent <T3>ad valorem</T3> for all other manufacturers, producers or exportersin Brazil of steel wheels. <ITAG tagnum="84">Case History</ITAG>Since the publication of the preliminary determination (<T3>Steel Wheels From Brazil; Preliminary Affirmative Countervailing DutyDetermination and Initiation of Upstream Subsidy Investigation</T3>) (53FR 43749; October 28, 1988), the following events have occurred. Respondentssubmitted a supplemental response containing information pertaining toBorlem do Nordeste on December 23, 1988, and a response to our upstreamquestionnaire on January 6, 1989. We conducted verification in Brazil,from January 25, to February 3, 1989, of the questionnaire responses ofthe Government of Brazil (GOB), Rockwell-Fumagalli, Borlem, S.A., Borlemdo Nordeste (BNE), and Usinas Siderurgicas de Minas Gerais (USIMINAS).Petitioner requested a public hearing. Petitioner and respondents filedpre-hearing briefs on March 1, 1989. We held a public hearing on March3, 1989. Petitioner and respondents filed post-hearing briefs on March27, 1989.<ITAG tagnum="84">Scope of Investigation</ITAG>The United States, under the auspices of the Customs Cooperation Council,has developed a system of tariff classification based on the internationalharmonized system of Customs nomenclature. On January 1, 1989, the UnitedStates fully converted to the Harmonized Tariff Schedule (HTS), as providedfor in section 1201 <T3>et seq</T3>. of the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1988.All merchandise entered, or withdrawn from warehouse, for consumption onor after that date is now classified solely according to the appropriateHTS item number(s).The products covered by this investigation are steel wheels (except customwheels), assembled or unassembled, consisting of both a disc and a rim,designed to be mounted with both tube type and tubeless pneumatic tires,in wheel diameter sizes ranging from 13.0 inches to 16.5 inches, inclusive,and generally for use on passenger automobiles, light trucks and othervehicles. In 1988, such merchandise was classifiable under item 692.3230of the Tariff Schedules of the United States Annotated. This merchandiseis currently classifiable under HTS item number 8708.70.80.In our preliminary determination, we stated that ``until we have sufficientinformation to make a definitive scope ruling, we tentatively determinethat rims or discs, imported separately, are included in the scope of thisinvestigation.''Petitioner argues that rims should be included within the scope of theorder to prevent circumvention. The petition described the merchandisecovered as wheels from Brazil, which included rims and centers for suchwheels so as to avoid possible circumvention through the shipment of wheelcomponents rather than finished wheels. In an October 7, 1988 letter tothe department, petitioner restated this position with regard to the rimsmarket by asserting that its ``intention was not to include within thescope of the imports subject to investigation rims sold as distinct articlesof commerce and, therefore, not in circumvention of an order. . . . Petitioner'sconcern lies with circumvention.'' In other submissions, petitioner wasinconsistent regarding the reasons for including rims in the scope. Weconclude, however, that petitioner's primary concern is circumvention.We verified that during the period of review the only parts of steel wheelsimported from Brazil into the United States were rims. Discs were not imported.These rims were purchased by unrelated custom wheel manufacturers who combinedthe rims with non-Brazilian discs to make custom wheels at their own facilities.The discs add significant value to the rims.The rims that are now imported are not of concern to the petitioner. Therims that are currently being imported are used exclusively for the manufactureof custom wheels, and the petitioner has explicitly indicated that it didnot wish to include custom wheels in the scope of the order (October 7,1988 letter). Nor is it likely that imports of these rims would underminethe effectiveness of a countervailing duty or antidumping order on steelwheels. While the steel wheels that are subject to this investigation arepurchased by original equipment manufacturers (i.e., automobile manufacturers),the custom wheels that incorporate the rims currently being imported aresold exclusively in the aftermarket (<T3>i.e.</T3>, to automobile owners).In past cases where petitioners have raised concerns about circumventionof any resulting order, the department has specifically included partsin the scope of an investigation because of uncertainty as to the authorityof the Department to include parts subsequent to the publication of anorder where parts are imported to circumvent the order. See, <T3>e.g., Cellular Mobile Telephones from Japan</T3> (50 FR 42577 (1985)).Now, however, section 781 of the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Actof 1988 not only clarifies that the Department has such authority but setsforth the criteria for dealing with this type of circumvention. Therefore,notwithstanding pre-1988 Act administrative precedents, it is neither necessarynor appropriate to include rims in the scope of the proceeding at thistime. If in the future there is evidence of circumvention of the orderon steel wheels by importation of Brazilian rims and discs, the Departmentwill invoke the remedies available under section 781.<ITAG tagnum="84">Analysis of Programs</ITAG>For purposes of this final determination, the period for which we are measuringsubsidies (``the review period'') is calendar year 1987. Based upon ouranalysis of the petition, the responses to our questionnaire, verification,and written comments filed by petitioner and respondents, we determinethe following:I. Programs Determined To Confer SubsidiesWe determine that subsidies are being provided to manufacturers, producersand exporters in Brazil of steel wheels under the following programs.<ITAG tagnum="81">(1) CACEX Preferential Working Capital Financing for Exports</ITAG>Under this program, the Department of Foreign Commerce (``CACEX'') of theBanco do Brasil provides short-term working capital financing to exportersat preferential rates. The loans have a term of one year or less. Duringthe period of review, Fumagalli made interest payments on CACEX loans,but Borlem did not use this program.On August 21, 1984, resolution 950 make CACEX working capital financingavailable through commercial banks at prevailing market rates, with interestdue at maturity. It authorized the Banco do Brasil to pay the lending institutionan ``equalization fee,'' or rebate, of up to 10 percentage points overthe commercial interest rate, which we verified the lending institutionpassed on to the borrowers. On May 2, 1985, Resolution 1009 increased theequalization fee to 15 percentage points.Since the interest charged on CACEX export financing under Resolutions950 and 1009 is at prevailing market rates, this program would not be countervailableabsent the equalization fee and the exemption from the IOF (a tax on financialtransactions). Therefore, the interest differential for these loans isequal to the equalization fee plus the 1.5 percent IOF. Because this programprovides financing at preferential rates only to exporters, we determinethat it is countervailable.We consider the benefit from loans to occur when the borrower makes theinterest payments. For CACEX loans on which interest was paid during theperiod of review, we multiplied the interest differential by the lengthof the loan and the loan principal. We allocated the result over Fumagalli'stotal exports. On this basis, we determine the benefit from this programto be zero for Borlem and 1.10 percent <T3>ad valorem</T3> for Fumagalli and all other firms.<ITAG tagnum="81">(2) Income Tax Exemption for Export Earnings</ITAG>Under this program, exporters of steel wheels are eligible for an exemptionfrom income tax on the portion of their profits attributable to exports.According to Brazilian tax law, the tax-exempt fraction of profit is calculatedas the ratio of export revenue to total revenue. Because this program providestax exemptions that are limited to exporters, we determine that it is countervailable.Fumagalli used this program in 1987, but Borlem did not.The nominal corporate tax rate in Brazil is 35 percent. However, Braziliantax law permits companies to reduce their income taxes by investing upto 26 percent of their tax liability in specified companies and funds.This tax credit effectively reduces the nominal 35 percent corporate taxrate. Because Fumagalli invested in the specified companies and funds,its effective tax rate was lower than the nominal 35 percent rate duringthe period of review.We calculated Fumagalli's effective tax rate by dividing its net tax liabilityby its taxable profit. We calculated the benefit by multiplying the amountof tax-exempt profit by the effective tax rate and allocating the resultover Fumagalli's total exports. On this basis, we determine the benefitfrom this program to be zero for Borlem and 0.39 percent <T3>ad valorem</T3> for Fumagalli and all other firms.<ITAG tagnum="81">(3) CIC-OPCRE 6-2-6 (CIC-CREGE 14-11) Financing</ITAG>Under its Circular CIC-CREGE 14-11, later modified by Circular CIC-OPCRE6-2-6, the Banco do Brasil provides preferential financing to exporterson the condition that they maintain on deposit a minimum level of foreignexchange. The interest rate is based on the cost of funds to banks plusa spread of three percentage points, which is below our benchmark rate.The loans have a term of one year and a variable interest rate, which changesevery quarter. Because this program provides loans at preferential ratesonly to exporters, we determine that it is countervailable.Fumagalli made payments on a loan under this program during the periodof review. The interest payments on this loan were made on the last dayof each month, and the full principal was repaid at maturity. Borlem didnot participate in this program during the review period.Based on information gathered during verification from commercial bankingsources in Brazil, we have determined that the ``taxa ANBID'' rate publishedby <T3>Gazeta Mercantil,</T3> a Brazilian daily financial publication, isa broader measure of the rates available for short-term financing and isa more accurate basis for calculating our benchmark than the rate for thediscounting of accounts receivable used in our preliminary determination.Because of the complex calculations necessary to convert the rates on discountsof accounts receivable into an annual benchmark, certain distortions canoccur that sometimes lead to a benchmark below the rate of inflation. The``taxa ANBID'' is an average monthly lending rate calculated by the NationalAssociation of Brazilian Investment Banks (ANBID) and is based on a surveyof the monthly rates on short-term loans charged by Brazilian commericalbanks. We calculated our annual average benchmark by compounding the ``taxaANBID'' rate published for each month during 1987.To calculate the benefit, we compared the benchmark with the preferentialrate and multiplied the differential by the term of the loan and the loanprincipal. We then divided the result by Fumagalli's total exports. Onthis basis, we determine the benefit from this program to be zero for Borlemand 0.14 percent <T3>ad valorem </T3>for Fumagalli and all other firms.Because we verified that, effective September 20, 1988, the interest rateon all CIC-OPCRE 6-2-6 loans was equal to the ANBID rate (our commercialbenchmark rate), we determine that these loans are not longer preferential.Therefore, for purposes of the cash deposit of estimated countervailingduties, we determine the benefit from this program to be zero for all firms.<ITAG tagnum="81">(4) BEFIEX</ITAG>The Commission for the Granting of Fiscal Benefits to Special Export Programs(``BEFIEX'') allows Brazilian exporters, in exchange for export commitments,to take advantage of several types of benefits, such as import duty reductions,an IPI export credit premium, and tax exemptions or tax credits. Becausethese benefits are provided only to exporters, we determine that this programis countervailable.(a) <T3>The IPI Export Credit Premium.</T3> This benefit is a cash paymentby the Brazilian government to exporters. The amount of the payment isa fixed percentage of the f.o.b. price of the exported merchandise. Thepayment is made through the bank involved in the export transaction. Fumagalliwas eligible for the maximum IPI export credit premium, which was 15 percentduring the period of review. Borlem was not eligible to receive this benefitduring the period of review.We calculated the benefit by dividing the amount of IPI credit premiumsreceived by Fumagalli on shipments of the merchandise to the United Statesby the company's exports of the merchandise to the United States. On thisbasis, we determine the benefit from this program to be zero for Borlemand 12.47 percent <T3>ad valorem</T3> for Fumagalli and all other firms.(b) <T3>Import Duty and IPI Tax Reductions on Imported Capital Equipment.</T3>Fumagalli received reductions of customs duties and the IPI tax on importedcapital equipment used in the manufacture of the subject merchandise duringthe review period.To calculate the benefit, we divided the total amount of the reductionsreceived in 1987 by Fumagalli's total exports in 1987. On this basis, wedetermine the benefit to be zero for Borlem and 0.43 percent <T3>ad valorem</T3> for Fumagalli and all other firms.<ITAG tagnum="81">(5) FINEX Export Financing</ITAG>Resolutions 68 and 509 of the Conselho Nacional do Comercio Exterior (CONCEX)provide that CACEX may draw upon the resources of the Fundo de Financiamentoa Exportacao (FINEX) to subsidize short- and long-term loans for both Brazilianexporters (Resolution 68) and foreign importers (Resolution 509) of Braziliangoods. CACEX pays the lending bank an ``equalization fee'' that makes upthe difference between the subsidized interest rate and the prevailingcommercial rate. CACEX also provides the lending bank with a ``handlingfee'' equal to two percent of the loan principal in order to encourageforeign bank participation in the program. During the period of review,the interest rates on Resolution 509 dollar loans ranged between 5.25 percentand 8.19 percent per annum, which are below our benchmark rate. Becausethis program provides loans at preferential rates only to exporters (ortheir foreign importers), we determine that it is countervailable.We consider loans to U.S. importers to be equivalent to loans to theircorresponding exporters. One of Fumagalli's importers had Resolution 509FINEX loans on which it made interest payments in 1987. Neither Borlemnor its importers used this program during the period of review. SinceResolution 509 loans to U.S. importers are given in U.S dollars, we choseas a benchmark interest rate the average quarterly interest rate for commercialand industrial short-term dollar loans, as published by the United StatesFederal Reserve Board. The average rate was 10.47 percent per annum in1986 and 9.81 percent per annum in 1987.To calculate the benefit, we multiplied the value of the loan principalon which interest payments were due in 1987 by the differential betweenthe preferential interest rate and our benchmark. Since we were able totie these loans to exports to the United States, we divided the resultby Fumagalli's exports of steel wheels to the United States in 1987. Onthis basis, we determine the benefit to be zero for Borlem and 1.04 percent<T3>ad valorem </T3>for Fumagalli and all other firms.<ITAG tagnum="81">II. Upstream Subsidy</ITAG>Petitioner has alleged that steel wheel producers benefit from an upstreamsubsidy, as defined in section 771A of the Act, by virtue of domestic subsidiesprovided to producers of the major raw material imput in steel wheels:hot-rolled sheet and coil. We verified that USIMINAS supplied all of thesteel used in the merchandise exported to the United States in 1987. Wedetermine that USIMINAS benefited from two domestic subsidies in 1987:government provision of equity and import duty and IPI tax reductions underCDI.<ITAG tagnum="81">A. Government Provision of Equity of USIMINAS </ITAG>Siderurgia Brasileira S.A. (SIDERBRAS) is a government-controlled corporationunder the jurisdiction of the Ministry of Industry and Commerce. Pursuantto Decree Law No. 6159 of December 6, 1974, SIDERBRAS became the holdingcompany for the federally-owned steel corporations. SIDERBRAS is a majorityshareholder of nine Brazilian steel producers, including USIMINAS, anda minority shareholder of one small Brazilian steel producer. From 1977through 1987, SIDERBRAS made equity infusions in USIMINAS.We have consistently held that government provision of, or assistance inobtaining, capital does not <T3>per se </T3>confer a subsidy. Government equity purchases or financialbacking bestow a countervailable benefit only when provided on terms inconsistentwith commercial considerations. Because USIMINAS' shares are not publiclytraded, there is no market-determined price for its shares. Therefore,we examined whether USIMINAS was a reasonable investment (a condition wehave termed ``equityworthy'') in order to determine whether the equityinfusions were inconsistent with commercial considerations.A company is a reasonable investment if it shows the ability to generatea reasonable rate of return within a reasonable period of time. For purposesof this determination, we reviewed the company's financial data and otherfactors on the record. We focused on the rate of return on equity and long-termprospects for the company in question for the period 1980 through 1987.(Petitioner alleged that USIMINAS was unequityworthy based on prior determinationsby the Department. We did not investigate equity infusions from 1977 through1979 because we have previously determined that USIMINAS was equityworthyin those years.) We examined financial ratios, profitability, and otherfactors, such as market demand projections and current operating results,to evaluate the company's current and future ability to earn a reasonablerate of return on investment.Based on these factors, as applied to information on the record, we concludethat USIMINAS was unequityworthy between 1980 and 1987 (see also, <T3>Certain Carbon Steel Products from Brazil; Final Affirmative CountervailingDuty Determinations</T3> (49 FR 17988; April 26, 1984) (USIMINAS unequityworthybetween 1980 and 1982); <T3>Final Affirmative Countervailing Duty Determination; Certain AgriculturalTillage Tools from Brazil </T3>(50 FR 34525; August 26, 1985) (USIMINASunequityworthy in 1983); <T3>Certain Carbon Steel Products from Brazil; Final Results of CountervailingDuty Administrative Review</T3> (52 FR 829; January 9, 1987) (USIMINASunequityworthy in 1984). Accordingly, we determine that the actions ofthe Government of Brazil in taking an equity position in USIMINAS in theyears 1980 through 1987 were inconsistent with commercial considerationsand may confer a subsidy.To the extent that we find government investment to be commercially unreasonableand the government's rate of return on its investment less than the nationalaverage rate of return on investment, we consider the investment to providea countervailable benefit. Starting in the year such an infusion is made,we examine the ``rate of return shortfall,'' which is the difference betweenthe national average rate of return on equity and the company's rate ofreturn on equity. We continue to examine the shortfall in each year ofa 15-year period, the average useful life of capital assets in integratedsteel mills according to the Asset Guideline Classes of the U.S. InternalRevenue Service. For example, we would examine the rate of return shortfallfor the 1980 equity infusion in each year through 1994. If no shortfallexists for any year under review during the 15-year period, there is nocountervailable subsidy for that particular year. If a shortfall does existfor the year under review, we multiply the rate of the shortfall by theamount of the original equity infusion to find the benefit for the reviewperiod. For purposes of this determination, we consider the amounts received fromSIDERBRAS as ``advances for future capital increase'' and ``capitalizedfunds'' in a particular year as the amount of the equity infusion in thatyear. According to generally accepted accounting principles in Brazil,these amounts become part of a firm's capital account at the time of receipt,and they appeared as part of USIMINAS' capital account in its financialstatements. That the amounts in these accounts are later transferred tothe paid-in capital account with the formal issuance of shares has no impacton the total amount in the capital account. Furthermore, when determiningthe rate of return on equity, it is standard accounting practice in Brazilto include advances for future capital increase and capitalized funds asequity in that calculation. Due to inflation, the nominal values of the original equity infusions inUSIMINAS have increased substantially. All companies in Brazil must regularlyrestate the value of certain accounts (including equity) according to astandard factor for monetary correction. The index used for monetary correctionis the readjusted value of Brazilian Treasury bills, <T3>Obrigacoes do Tesouro Nacional </T3>(``OTN,'' formerly ORTN). For eachyear's equity infusions, we converted the actual cruzeiro (or cruzado,after the February 1986 currency reform) amount received into an OTN equivalentby dividing the amount received by the average value of the OTN in thatyear. To obtain the 1987 cruzado value of the government's equity infusionssince 1980, we multiplied the OTN equivalents by the average cruzado valueof the OTN in 1987. We measured USIMINAS' rate of return by dividing its net loss in 1987 byits total capital and compared the result with the national average rateof return on equity in Brazil in 1987, as reported in a September 1988special annual edition of <T3>Exame, </T3>a Brazilian business publication. USIMINAS' rate of returnwas lower than the national average. We then multiplied this rate of returnshortfall by the 1987 cruzado value of all equity infusions (back to 1980)that we have found to be inconsistent with commercial considerations. However, because USIMINAS' net loss was very large during the 1987 reviewperiod, the benefit calculated using the rate of return shortfall methodologyexceeded the amounts we would have calculated for the review period hadwe treated the equity infusions as outright grants rather than equity.Under no circumstances do we countervail in any year an amount greaterthan what we would have countervailed in that year had we treated the government'sequity infusions as outright grants. Therefore, we have capped the subsidyfor the review period at the level that would have resulted if we had treatedthe equity infusions as grants. To determine the grant cap for the review period, we allocated the OTNequivalents of the equity infusions in each year from 1980 through 1987using a declining balance methodology and the 15-year allocation period.Because there is no nongoverment long-term cruzado borrowing in Brazil,we have used as a discount rate the highest rate the Brazilian governmentpays on its longest-term OTNs' 8 percent on 5-year OTNs. (The discountrate we normally use in our grant methodology is a rate that incorporatesboth the ``real'' and inflation components of an interest rate, and weapply this discount rate to the original amount of the grant. However,by converting the equity amounts to OTNs as a means of determining theirvalue over time, we have accounted for the effects of hyperinflation onthe amount of the original equity infusions. Therefore, we have used asour discount rate the interest rate on OTNs, which is a real interest rate,as the basis for allocating the inflation-adjusted OTN values over time.)We then converted the OTN benefit allocated to 1987 into cruzados by multiplyingthat benefit by the average value of the OTN in 1987. Finally, we dividedthis cruzado benefit by the value of USIMINAS' total sales in 1987. Onthis basis, we determine the subsidy to USIMINAS from this program to be5.82 percent <T3>ad valorem. </T3><ITAG tagnum="81">B. Fiscal Benefits by Virtue of a Project Approved by CDI </ITAG>Under Decree Law 1428, the Industrial Development Council (``CDI'') providesfor the exemption of up to 100 percent of the customs duties and up to10 percent of the IPI tax, a value-added tax on domestic sales, on certainimported machinery for specific projects in 14 industries approved by theBrazilian goverment. The recipient must demonstrate that this machineryor equipment is not available from a Brazilian manufacturer. Decree Law 1726 repealed this program in 1979. However, companies whoseprojects were approved prior to the repeal continue to receive benefitsfrom this program pending completion of the project. USIMINAS receivedbenefits under this program during 1987. Because this program is limitedto specific enterprises of industries, we determine that it is countervailable.To calculate the benefit, we divided the total amount of import duty andIPI tax reductions in 1987 by USIMINAS' total 1987 sales. On this basis,we determine the subsidy to USIMINAS from this program to be 0.79 percent<T3>ad valorem. </T3><ITAG tagnum="81">C. Competitive Benefit</ITAG>Section 771A(a)(2) provides that the domestic subsidies described abovemust bestow a competitive benefit on the merchandise. Section 771(A)(b)states:<ITAG tagnum="21">* * * a competitive benefit has been bestowed when the price for theinput product referred to in subsection (a)(1) for such use is lower thanthe price that the manufacturer or producer of merchandise which is thesubject of a countervailing duty proceeding would otherwise pay for theproduct in obtaining it from another seller in an arms-length transaction.</ITAG>To determine the price that steel wheel producers would have paid in anarm's length transaction, we first look to see at what price a steel wheelproducer could have bought the input from an unsubsidized seller in Brazil.During the review, the only producers in Brazil of hot-rolled sheet andcoil were USIMINAS, Companhia Siderurgica Paulista (COSIPA) and CompanhiaSiderurgica Nacional (CSN). Although we have not determined in this investigationwhether COSIPA and CSN received countervailable subsidies, we determinedin a past investigation and administrative review (see the final determinationand final results of review on <T3>Certain Carbon Steel Products </T3>(op. cit.)) that both companiesbenefited from countervailable government provisions of equity. Based onour equity methodology, most of these equity infusions would continue toprovide benefits in 1987 to the extent that these companies' rates of returnfell below the national average rate of return on equity. Furthermore,a report submitted by the GOB, ``Evaluation of the Financial Restructuringof the SIDERBRAS Group: Report to the SIDERBRAS Directors'' (February 1989),indicates that both COSIPA and CSN received additional equity infusionsfrom SIDERBRAS through 1988_in fact, more than USIMINAS received. The reportalso indicates that COSIPA and CSN had worse profitability, liquidity andleverage ratios than USIMINAS in 1987. Based on this information, we believe it is reasonable to assume that otherdomestic suppliers of hot-rolled sheet and coil received subsidies duringthe period of review. Therefore, the prices charged by these companieswould not be an appropriate benchmark for determining whether a competitivebenefit arises through the steel wheels producers' purchase of this inputfrom USIMINAS. In the absence of an unsubsidized domestic price, we look to world marketprices as a potential benchmark. Generally, we will use the price of oneof the world's lowest-cost producers. During the review period, one ofthe lowest-cost producers of steel was the Republic of Korea (ROK). Ifthe world market price is lower than the price that producers of the merchandiseactually paid for the input product, we would conclude that there is nocompetitive benefit on the merchandise. If the world market price is higherthan the price that producers paid for the input product, we would concludethat there is a competitive benefit on the merchandise. The amount of thecompetitive benefit would depend on the difference between the subsidizedprice and the world market price. As the best estimate of the price of Korean steel in Brazil, we used theaverage monthly c.i.f. price for hot-rolled sheet and coil, with the specificationsneeded to produce wheels, imported into the United States from the ROKin 1987. We found that the Korean prices were on average over 50 percenthigher than domestic Brazilian prices in 1987. Therefore, we conclude thatthere is a competitive benefit. <ITAG tagnum="81">D. Significant Effect </ITAG>For purposes of determining whether the competitive benefit has a significanteffect on the cost of producing the merchandise, we multiplied the <T3>ad valorem </T3>subsidy rate on the steel input by the proportion ofthe total production costs of steel wheels accounted for by the steel input.Multiplying those proportions by the total domestic subsidy for USIMINASyields a rate of 2.66 percent for Fumagalli and 2.31 percent for Borlem.In the <T3>Final Affirmative Countervailing Duty Determination; Certain AgriculturalTillage Tools from Brazil </T3>(50 FR 34525; August 26, 1985), we establishedthresholds regarding the existence of a significant effect. We stated thatwe would presume no significant effect if the <T3>ad valorem </T3>subsidy rate on the input product multiplied by theproportion of the input product in the cost of manufacturing the merchandiseaccounted for less than one percent. If the result of this calculationis higher than five percent, we would presume that there is a significanteffect. If the result is between one and five percent, we would examinethe effect of the input subsidy on the competitiveness of the merchandise.Since in this case the input subsidy allocated to the merchandise yieldsrates that are between one and five percent for both Fumagalli and Borlem,we have examined the price sensitivity of steel wheels. A steel wheel is a relatively unsophisticated product made by welding acircular rim to a disc. This process requires standard technology thatis available both in Brazil and the United States. The quality of the productmade in Brazil is similar, if not identical, to that made in the UnitedStates. In fact, the wheels imported into the United States from Brazilare made to standard specifications. These specifications include size,thickness, Society of Automotive Engineer grades of steel, and, in certaininstances, the casting process for making the steel used in the wheels.For example, we verified that, in at least one contract, a U.S. importerrequired that continuous cast steel be used in the wheels. USIMINAS, which supplied all of the steel used in the wheels exported tothe United States during the period of review, has a special line of steelused exclusively for the production of wheels. Fumagalli, which accountedfor over 95 percent of the wheels exported to the United States from Brazilduring the period of review, is owned entirely by Rockwell InternationalCorp., A U.S. firm. Fumagalli exports over 90 percent of the wheels itproduces, mostly to the United States. Rockwell maintains strict qualitycontrol over the wheels produced by Fumagalli. In Fumagalli's product manual,every type of wheel produced is matched to specific models of cars producedby the world's major automobile manufacturers. The only U.S. importers of steel wheels from Brazil are original equipmentmanufacturers (OEM's) of automobiles. The ITC found in its preliminarydetermination (<T3>Certain Steel Wheels from Brazil; Investigation No. 701-TA-246 (Preliminary))</T3>that a wheel producer must be approved by the OEM's purchasing andengineering departments before it can submit a bid. Once the supplier isapproved, it achieves the same status as all other approved suppliers.Both Fumagalli and Kelsey-Hayes, the petitioner, are approved suppliersfor all the major U.S. automobile manufacturers. The ITC found that anOEM's request for a quotation usually includes a set of specificationsand criteria for the wheels.The ITC also found that steel wheel producers have little bargaining powerin the contract negotiations because of the market power of the large automobilemanufacturers. The overwhelming majority of the demand for steel wheelsstems from the demand for new automobiles. The ITC report quotes the petitioneras saying ``* * * because the market for steel wheels is static, from thestandpoint that there are no new potential customers for wheels, pricecompetition is severe.'' (p.A-34). Although we recognize, as stated in the ITC report, that there are nonpricefactors, such as long-standing supplier relationships and reliability indelivery, that may affect the outcome of the bid, we conclude, given theuniformity of the Brazilian and U.S. product, that price is the singlemost important factor in determining which supplier wins the bid. Therefore,we conclude that subsidies to the input supplier have a significant effecton the competitiveness of Brazilian steel wheels.In summary, we have determined that: (1) There are domestic subsidies toinput suppliers; (2) there is a competitive benefit bestowed on producersof steel wheels; and (3) subsidies to input producers have a significanteffect on the cost of manufacturing steel wheels. Therefore, we determinethat producers of steel wheels in Brazil benefit from an upstream subsidy.Since the amount of the differential between the Korean and Brazilian pricesis higher than the amount of domestic subsidy on USIMINAS steel, we concludethat there is a full pass-through of the subsidy from USIMINAS to the wheelproducers. To determine the amount of the upstream subsidy, we multipliedthe total domestic subsidy on the input product by the proportion of the<T3>value </T3>of the merchandise accounted for by the input product. (Althoughwe use the <T3>cost </T3>of the merchandise for purposes of determining whether theinput subsidy has a significant effect on the merchandise, we calculatethe upstream subsidy, as we do most other subsidies, on an <T3>ad valorem </T3>basis.) We determine the upstream benefit for Borlemto be 1.82 percent <T3>ad valorem </T3>and 1.72 percent <T3>ad valorem </T3>for all other firms. III. Programs Determined Not To Be Used We determine that manufacturers, producers and exporters in Brazil of steelwheels did not receive benefits during the review period under the followingprograms: (1) Accelerated depreciation for Brazilian-made capital goods; (2) Financing for the storage of merchandise destined for export (``Resolution330''); (3) Federal stock (EGF) loans; and (4) Industrial enterprise (FST) loans. <ITAG tagnum="84">COMMENTS</ITAG><T3>Comment 1: </T3>The Government of Brazil (GOB) argues that the Departmentoverstated the amount of the benefit attributable to the income tax exemptionfor export earnings. The Department mistakenly divided the benefit receivedby Fumagalli by the total exports of Borlem. Furthermore, the Departmentshould allocate the benefits from this program over total sales insteadof total exports. Since the program rebates direct taxes, it is a domesticsubsidy, which requires the Department to allocate the benefit over totalsales. In addition, effective January 1, 1988, the GOB decreed that exportearnings are no longer fully exempt from income taxes and are now subjectto a 3 percent tax. Therefore, the Department should take into accountthis program-wide change in calculating the rate of cash deposit of estimatedcountervailing duties for this program.<T3>Department's Position: </T3>We have corrected the clerical error madein our preliminary determination by dividing the benefit to Fumagalli bythat firm's total exports. We have considered and rejected in other Braziliancountervailing duty cases the GOB's claim that the income tax exemptionis a domestic subsidy. See, <T3>e.g., Certain Carbon Steel Products From Brazil </T3>(op. cit.). TheGOB has provided neither new evidence nor new arguments that convince usto reconsider this issue. With respect to program-wide changes in thisprogram, we do not have sufficient information to recalculate the cashdeposit rate. Because none of the companies we verified has yet filed incometax statements incorporating this change, we are unable to measure theeffect of the change.<T3>Comment 2: </T3>The GOB argues that the Department overstated the benefitfrom CACEX preferential export financing by failing to take into accountthe length of each loan when calculating the benefit. In addition, theGOB claims that, in calculating the short-term interest rate benchmark,the Department should not include the IOF tax. The IOF functions as anindirect tax, and neither the exemption nor the rebate of an indirect taxis considered a subsidy under the General Agreements on Tariffs and Tradeand U.S. law. Inclusion of the IOF in the benchmark improperly countervailsan exemption of an indirect tax applicable to exports. In addition, theDepartment should also take into account a reduction in the equalizationrate from 15 to 7.5 percent, effective November 30, 1988, for purposesof calculating the cash deposit rate.<T3>Department's Position: </T3>We have corrected the clerical error offailing to take the length of the loans into account. We have consideredand rejected in other Brazilian countervailing duty cases the GOB's claimconcerning the propriety of including the IOF tax in our benchmark. See,<T3>e.g., Certain Castor Oil Products From Brazil; Final Results of CountervailingDuty Administrative Review </T3>(48 FR 40534, September 8, 1983). The Braziliangovernment has provided neither new evidence or new arguments that convinceus to reconsider this issue. We have not taken into account the reductionin the equalization rate because it is our policy to consider only thoseprogram-wide changes that occur prior to our preliminary determination,which was published on October 28, 1988.<T3>Comment 3: </T3>The GOB argues that loans issued pursuant to the Bancodo Brasil's CIC-CREGE 14-11 circular (later modified by circular CIC-OPCRE6-2-6) do not constitute a government program and, therefore, cannot confera subsidy on exports of steel wheels. The Banco do Brasil receives no financialsupport from the GOB for this program and operates the program in a mannerconsistent with commercial considerations. Even assuming, <T3>arguendo, </T3>that the program is countervailable, the Departmenthas overstated the benefit by using an incorrect benchmark. The Departmenthas used the discounting of accounts receivable rate in past investigationsand administrative reviews because there was no published short-term commercialinterest rate information available. In this investigation, the Departmentshould use the``taxa ANBID'' rate published in <T3>Gazeta Mercantil, </T3>which it has verified is the general commercialrate for short-term loans. Furthermore, if the Department uses the discountingof accounts receivable as its benchmark, it should adjust its methodologyfor compounding interest. <T3>Department's Position:</T3> We have considered and rejected in otherBrazilian countervailing duty cases the GOB' argument concerning whetherthis program is countervailable. <T3>See, e.g., Final Affirmative Countervailing Duty Determination; BrassSheet and Strip From Brazil, </T3>(51 FR 40837, November 10, 1986). TheBrazilian government has provided neither new evidence nor new argumentsthat convince us to reconsider this issue. As noted in the discussion insection I(3) of this notice, we have used the ``taxa ANBID'' rate as ourbenchmark.<T3>Comment 4: </T3>The GOB argues that the Department overstated the benefitattributable to the IPI export credit premium program by dividing the amountof the benefit received on Fumagalli's total exports by the firm's exportsto the United States. In addition, the Department verified that Fumagalliwill not be eligible for the IPI credit premium on exports made after December31, 1989. The Department should adjust the deposit rate automatically onJanuary 1, 1990 to reflect this change.<T3>Department's Position: </T3>We have corrected our calculation of thebenefit from this program by dividing the IPI export credit premiums receivedon shipments of the subject merchandise to the United States by exportsof this merchandise to the United States (see section I(4) of this notice).Regarding Fumagalli's future ineligibility for the IPI export credit premium,it is our policy to take into account only those program-wide changes thatoccur prior to our preliminary determination. Any program-wide change thatis scheduled to occur in 1990 can only be addressed in the context of anadministrative review. <T3>Comment 5: </T3>The GOB argues that Decree Law 1428, which allows importduty exemptions on imported capital equipment of firms with projects approvedby the Conselho de Desenvolvimento Industrial (CDI), is not limited toan industry or group of industries and is therefore, not countervailable.<T3>Department's Position: </T3>We disagree. We have found that CDI benefitsare provided by the government to specific industries (see section II.B.).<T3>Comment 6: </T3>The GOB argues that the Department should adjust thedeposit rate to take into account a program-wide change, effective May18, 1988, whereby the exemption of imported capital equipment from theIPI tax is no longer specifically provided under the BEFIEX and CDI programsand is now generally available. <T3>Department's Position: </T3>We disagree. Although we verified thatprogram-wide changes took place, the availability of this exemption isstill subject to certain conditions. At this time, we do not have sufficientinformation to make a determination that this program is not specificallyprovided and no longer countervailable. For this reason, we are not adjustingthe rate of cash deposit of estimated countervailing duties for this program.<T3>Comment 7: </T3>The GOB argues that FINEX financing under Resolutions68 and 509 is not countervailable because the program is consistent withthe Arrangement on Guidelines for Officially Support Export Credits, whichis not considered an illegal export subsidy under item (k) of the IllustrativeList of Export Subsidies annexed to the Agreement on Interpretation andApplication of Articles VI, XVI, and XXIII of the General Agreement onTariffs and Trade (the Subsidies Code). The Department verified that thelending rate for FINEX financing is LIBOR plus a spread of 0.5 precent,a rate comparable to commercial lending rates for importers in the UnitedStates. Furthermore, the Department verified that, effective January 4,1989, the FINEX program as suspended. This should be taken into accountin any calculation of the rate of cash deposit of estimated countervailingduties.<T3>Department's Position: </T3>We disagree. Since the FINEX loans in thiscase are short-term loans, they are not covered by the Arrangement and,hence, do not fall within the second paragraph of item (k). Regarding thepreferentiality of FINEX lending rates, the Banco Central do Brasil (BCB)provides all or some portion of a spread (the equalization fee) above aninterest rate based on LIBOR. Exporters and importers were unable to demonstrateeither the value of the spread or the portion of the spread that was retainedby the intermediary bank. Therefore, we have assumed that the full benefitfrom the equalization fee was passed through to the importer. Since Resolution509 short-term loans are given in U.S. dollars, we maintain that the appropriatebenchmark is the average rate for comparable short-term loans in the UnitedStates, as published by the Federal Reserve. We have no documentation regardingan average lending rate based on LIBOR. Concerning the suspension of thisprogram, it is our policy to take into account only those program-widechanges that occur prior to our preliminary determination. <T3>Comment 8: </T3>The GOB argues that, in alleging an upstream subsidy,petitioner never made an allegation that the GOB's equity infusions inUSIMINAS provided a subsidy during the period of review. On this basis,the GOB contends that the statutory requirements for initiating and upstreamsubsidy investigation were not met on this issue. The GOB further arguesthat if petitioner intended to imply, by referring to the section 751 administrativereview on <T3>Certain Carbon Steel Products from Brazil; Final Results of CountervailingDuty Administrative Review </T3>(52 FR 829; January 9, 1987), that USIMINASwas unequityworthy for the years 1980 through 1984, then petitioner's impliedallegation only provides a basis for investigation equity infusions inthose years.<T3>Department's Position: </T3>We disagree. In making the upstream subsidyallegation, petitioner cites the administrative review on carbon steelproducts. Petitioner based the allegation on the amount of the domesticsubsidies determined in that review. Although the various domestic subsidieswere not specifically identified, a clear reading of the results of thatreview leaves no doubt that petitioner was alleging the existence of equityinfusions in an unequityworthy company. Subsidies from equity infusionsfrom 1980 through 1984 were the single largest component of the total domesticsubsidy found in that review. With respect to the investigation of equityinfusions since 1984, the Department would be remiss in its administrationof the countervailing duty law if it did not examine additional equityinfusions in a company it had previously determined to be unequityworthy.<T3>Comment 9: </T3>The GOB asserts that the Department's determinationthat USIMINAS was not equityworthy from 1980 through 1984 in the administrativereview of carbon steel products was incorrect and should be reversed. TheGOB contends that the methodology employed by the Department in determiningthe USIMINAS was not equityworthy was erroneous because it: (1) Placedundue reliance on marginal returns on equity in the late 1970s to evaluatelong-term future earnings potential; (2) relied on financial ratios thatwere distorted by the inclusion of expansion project assets not yet inoperation; (3) improperly used subsequent operating performance to judgethe reasonableness of SIDERBRAS' rate of return expectations at the timethe equity was provided; (4) did not address evidence submitted by respondentsconcerning projections of long-term growth in steel demand in both thedomestic Brazilian and international markets; and (5) ignored independentstudies by the World Bank and other reputable sources which had favorableviews on the prospects of the Stage III project as well as USIMINAS' performanceand projected relatively high rates of return in the long-term on the investmentsmade by SIDERBRAS.The GOB argues that the factors that should be examined in assessing theprospects for future performance include: the long-term market environment,the company's anticipated costs of production, the company's ability tooperate efficiently, and the company's ability to operate profitably.<T3>Department's Position: </T3>We disagree. We stand by the methodologyused in our determination in the administrative review of carbon steelproducts, which was upheld by the Court of International Trade in <T3>Companhia Siderurgica Paulista, S.A., et al. v. United States, </T3>700F. Supp. 38, Slip Op. 88-158, November 9, 1988. Although USIMINAS was nota party to this court proceeding, the methodology used in the administrativereview to determine that the GOB's equity infusions in COSIPA, CSN andUSIMINAS were countervailable was identical for all three companies.<T3>Comment 10: </T3>The GOB argues that the Department incorrectly determinedthe USIMINAS was not equityworthy from 1980 through 1984. The Departmentevaluated government investments by SIDERBRAS from the point of view ofa private outside investor instead of a private owner-investor. The GOBargues that its motive, as an owner-investor, is to maximize average returnson its past and future investments in USIMINAS, not to maximize marginalreturns on investments, as an outside investor would. Therefore, it isunreasonable to expect SIDERBRAS to treat past equity infusions as sunkcosts.The GOB contends that the equity infusions in these years are directlytied to the massive long-term Stage III expansion project undertaken byUSIMINAS. The government's decision to invest in Stage III was made in1975. The decision relied on favorable long-term domestic and internationalmarket projections and World Bank appraisals which showed favorable financialreturns for the projects. The GOB further contends that if it no longerprovided equity, consequently forcing the Stage III project to a halt itwould forego the future benefits from the expansion project, and therefore,realize no return on its past investments.<T3>Department's Position: </T3>We disagree. Both a rational outside investorand a rational owner-investor make investment decisions at the margin.The relevant question for both types of investors is: What is the marginalrate of return on each cruzeiro/cruzado invested? An investor in USIMINASdoes not ignore the potential return from the assets that the company hasalready acquired. The potential for a favorable return from those assetsis an integral part of the investment calculus. However, a rational investordoes not let the value of past investments affect present or future investmentdecisions. The decision to invest is only dependent on the marginal returnexpected from each additional equity infusion. Therefore, new equity infusionscontemplated by investors such as the Brazilian government should not beaffected by past investments or sunk costs.We do not dispute the findings of the long-term market projections or WorldBank project reports made in 1975. The GOB designed the Stage III expansionprojects as a keystone in its Second National Development Plan (1971-1979).The plan explicitly called for steel investments with the objective ofnational self-sufficiency by 1979. With an anticipated completion dateof 1979, Stage III was designed to supply steel for the Development Plan'slarge public sector investment program. The decision to sign the contractsfor Stage III was based on the national goal of public welfare maximizationand not necessarily on commercial considerations.Although the decision to invest was made in 1975, actual construction beganin the late 1970s. By that time, the investment climate had deteriorated,international markets for steel began to decline, and public sector investmentdried up. Stage III may still have yielded positive financial returns despitethe financial and economic conditions at the time. However, because a sufficientrate of return on equity depends on the performance of the firm as a whole,an investor will invest based on the rate of return for the entire firm,not the rate of return for an individual project such as Stage III.Current and anticipated future economic conditions and the effects of massiveexpansion projects on a steel company are just as important as projectedlong-term markets in an investor's prediction of USIMINAS' long-term viabilityand, therefore, the decision to invest in the company. Consistent withthe desire to maximize overall profits, a rational owner-investor mustconstantly reevaluate projects such as Stage III in light of other investmentopportunities before determining whether those projects should be continued,delayed or abandoned.<T3>Comment 11: </T3>The GOB argues that the Department's evaluation ofthe performance of USIMINAS during the Stage III expansion program wasshort-sighted in that it incorrectly focused on financial performance insteadof current operating performance. The short-term static financial ratiosand overall operating performance that the Department relied on are insufficientmeasures of long-run investment potential and future company performance.If the Department continues to depend on short-term indicators, it shouldadjust USIMINAS' overall operating performance by eliminating nonproductiveassets (<T3>i.e., </T3>assets under construction) and related liabilities fromthe calculation of the financial ratios. When made, these adjustments reveala healthy current operating performance for USIMINAS during the periodsthe Department found the company not equityworthy. More importantly, suchadjustments show strong profit margins and asset turnover, current operatingperformance measures which are fundamental determinants in the rate ofreturn on equity.The GOB contends that the economic constraints existing in the late 1970sand early 1980s, such as government price increases, high real domesticand international interest rates, a temporary cyclical downturn in thesteel market, and lower-than-expected government equity infusions wereunanticipated transient problems that were insufficient to cause SIDERBRASto abandon its long-term investment plans. These transient problems andtheir effects on the companies are relatively unimportant because theydo not have a direct bearing on the company's long-term prospects.The GOB believes that the logical conclusion from the evaluation of equityworthinessis that the only problem faced by the firms was undercapitalization, orlack of equity infusions. Therefore, the GOB believes that SIDERBRAS shouldhave infused more, not less, equity into the companies.<T3>Department's Position: </T3>We disagree. The most significant factorin determining the required rate of return on an investment is the degreeof risk. The greater the risk of the investment, the higher the expectedrate of return. From the point of view of an investor, the purchase ofequity is highly risky compared to other types of investments.In contemplating an equity purchase, an investor will evaluate past andpresent company performance, anticipated future economic conditions, andoverall investment climate. Important determinants in the evaluation includethe financial stability of the company (<T3>e.g., </T3>asset structure, funding sources, and risk of insolvency),past earnings, and the amount of financial leverage in the company's capitalstructure. Therefore, we disagree with the Brazilian government that presentand past performance indicators are relatively unimportant in an investmentdecision.Investors will also assess the potential future performance of the company.In this case, the GOB undertook a massive expansion program designed toexploit the projected increase in the demand for steel. In evaluating theequityworthiness of USIMINAS, we do not rely exclusively on the futureprospects of the expansion project. We also cannot ignore, just as an investorwould not have ignored, the effects of such an expansion on the company'spresent operations and future viability. An investor purchases equity basedon the rate of return of the firm as a whole, not on the financial returnsfrom a specific project.From an investor's point of view, there is no relevant distinction betweenfinancial and operating results. Rather, an investor will look to the rateof return on equity, which is primarily a function of three variables:profit margin (income/sales), asset turnover (sales/assets), and financialleverage (assets/equity).Evaluation on the basis of current operating results (profit margin andasset turnover), without considering nonoperational assets and accompanyingliabilities, may be an appropriate approach for managing or analyzing profitcenters with a company. An investor, however, is concerned with the company'soverall performance. An investor must evaluate the effects of the StageIII expansion project on the whole company. Nonperforming assets not onlydrag down overall operating performance, but the chance that they mightnever come on-stream creates additional uncertainty for future earningsand therefore increases the risk of the investment.The rate of return on equity equation shows the fundamental interrelationshipbetween financial performance (financial leverage) and operating performance(profit margin and asset turnover). The decision to continue Stage IIIin the face of inadequate equity infusions from the Brazilian governmentled to substantial increases in the company's financial leverage. Thereis a direct relationship between financial leverage and earnings variability.Therefore, both are also directly related to investment risk.In the late 1970s and early 1980s the Brazilian steel industry was characterizedby Stage III construction delays, marginal or negative earnings, and amounting economic and financial crisis. The lack of funding in the industrybecame critical. (The GOB had a history of underfunding steel expansionprojects.) By 1982, USIMINAS would have required hundreds of millions ofdollars in equity to correct its financial position. Although it is nowclear that the company were severely undercapitalized, we cannot base ourequityworthiness decision on what the financial standing of the companymight have been if this were not the case.USIMINAS responded to its condition in the late 1970s by contracting variable-ratedebt at a time of high real interest rates and using increasing amountsof short-term debt. Not only was USIMINAS undercapitalized, but it mismatchedlong-term assets with expensive short-term debt.During this time, an investor would have found that USIMINAS was incapableof covering the additional debt expense with internally-generated funds.The company had a low probability of increasing earnings over the short-and medium- term from domestic sales because of the squeeze between supplierprice increases and the government's policy of steel price suppression.Further, it became increasingly evident that there was a long-term declinein the world-wide demand for steel, continuing the depression of steelprices in the international market.A project such as Stage III can have future positive returns only if thecompany does not become insolvent. In this case, the continuation of StageIII severely jeopardized USIMINAS' financial standing. Even if we disregardprofit margins and asset turnover, we cannot disregard the adverse effectsof increased financial leverage on the company's equity standing. The additionalrisk in the highly leveraged company would have dissuaded any private investorfrom purchasing equity in USIMINAS during the periods we consider it notto be equityworthy.<T3>Comment 12:</T3> The GOB argues that its investments in USIMINAS in1987 were not on terms ``inconsistent with commercial considerations.''The investments were part of the SIDERBRAS Restructuring Plan, by whichUSIMINAS transferred some of its debt to SIDERBRAS. This transfer was reflectedas a reduction in long-term and short-term debt and an equal increase inthe equity held by SIDERBRAS. The Restructuring Plan also provided forthe recapitalization of SIDERBRAS; operational improvements and investmentsto improve operating efficiency and reduce costs; a commitment to supporta realistic pricing policy to allow USIMINAS to recover its costs; anda commitment that SIDERBRAS not undertake investments unless adequate fundingis available. The effect of these measures has been to greatly improvethe ability of USIMINAS to meet its debt service obligations and earn areasonable rate of return. A study by independent financial experts hasprojected substantial returns on equity over the next ten years for USIMINAS.Thus, when the GOB invested additional equity in USIMINAS under the RestructuringPlan, it had a reasonable expectation of a very high real return on itsinvestment.<T3>Department's Position: </T3>We disagree. From the perspective of arational private investor, USIMINAS was no more attractive as a potentialinvestment in 1987 than it was in any of the earlier years in which wedetermined it to be unequityworthy. Its financial ratios since 1984 indicatedno appreciable improvement and, in many areas, had deteriorated. The companyhad become even more severely leveraged and, in those years in which itdid not have a loss, did not demonstrate the ability to generate more thanminimal profits.While the GOB's decision to convert some of USIMINAS' debt to equity clearlyaddressed one of the basic problems facing USIMINAS, there were still considerablerisks associated with any further investment in USIMINAS. The debt conversionwas only one component of the Restructuring Plan, and its success was dependenton other contingencies, such as a proper pricing policy. The suppressionof steel prices throughout the 1980s as part of the GOB's policies to counterinflation, and the GOB's failure to provide scheduled equity infusionsdue to budgetary constraints, led to results considerably different fromthe attractive rates of return projected for USIMINAS in the studies conductedin relation to earlier investment plans.In this respect, there is a clear distinction between a reasonable privateinvestor's expectations and those of a government owner-investor. In lightof the past, a private investor would have to consider the possibilitythat future macroeconomic concerns of the GOB could jeopardize any investmentin an ailing, if recovering, company, whereas the GOB at any time coulddecide to renege on its commitments to the improvement of USIMINAS' financialhealth in favor of national economic and social obligations. In doing so,the GOB might again choose to sacrifice the interests of USIMINAS to somemore important public welfare goal.The GOB refers to a study submitted by independent financial experts toSIDERBRAS in February 1989 evaluating the results of the RestructuringPlan through 1988. This study projects substantial rates of return on equityfor USIMINAS as a result of the Restructuring Plan. While the projectionsof this study may prove accurate, they were not contemporaneous with theRestructuring Plan, and we cannot consider the results of this study tobe the basis on which the GOB made its investment decisions in 1987. TheGOB provided us with no studies contemporaneous with its investment decision.<T3>Comment 13:</T3> The BOG claims that the amounts for ``advances forfuture capital increase'' that appear in the ``Statement of Changes inFinancial Position'' are end-of-year amounts that in certain years includeinterest and monetary correction accrued during the year. Therefore, theGOB argues that the Department should use the OTN rate at the end of theyear when converting these amounts into OTN equivalents.<T3>Department's Position:</T3> We disagree. Advances for future capitalincrease are received at various points during the year. It is not apparentfrom the ``Statement of Changes in Financial Position,'' nor could we verify,that in some years these amounts included interest and monetary correction.We have assumed that the amounts of the advances that we used for calculatingthe value of the equity infusions are the nominal amounts received duringthe year. Therefore, we used the average OTN rate for the year when convertingthese amounts into OTN equivalents.<T3>Comment 14:</T3> Respondents argue that it is inappropriate to includeinvestments made during the year of review when calculating the benefitfrom equity infusions. Respondents claim that it is improper to assumethat the investor would expect a return on equity for investments madeduring the year equal to the rate of return on investments for a full year.Therefore, respondents argue that the Department should either excludesuch equity infusions or calculate a prorated return based on the numberof months since the equity infusion was made.Respondents further argue that, when calculating USIMINAS' loss as a percentageof its total capital, the Department should add back any losses deductedfrom capital. To do otherwise would overstate the percentage of the loss.<T3>Department's Position:</T3> We disagree. Adjusting the rate of returncalculation to exclude or prorate equity infusions during the year wouldeither reduce the rate of return on equity in profitable years or increasethe rate of loss on equity in unprofitable years. The methodology proposedby respondents runs counter to standard accounting practices in Brazil.By using USIMINAS' total capital (including all equity received and lossesincurred), we calculated a negative rate of return for USIMINAS in 1987that was identical to that reported in the September 1988 edition of <T3>Exame.</T3><T3>Comment 15: </T3>The GOB argues that the Department should change itspolicy of using as its benchmark a national average rate of return anduse instead an average rate of return applicable to heavy industry, thusrecognizing the structural differences and increased capital requirementsof heavy industries.<T3>Department's Position:</T3> We disagree. A national average rate ofreturn is a more accurate reflection of the return that a reasonable investorcould expect from a prudent investment than an industry-specific rate.A national average rate of return reflecting the different rates of returnand levels of risk in the whole economy is a better benchmark with whichto compare rates of return for particular investments. Only by comparingthe expected returns and risks across the whole economy can the investordecide where to invest his money most effectively. In contrast, an industry-specificbenchmark rate would not serve as a reasonable basis for comparison becauseit does not take into account the variety of investment options availableto an investor.Furthermore, the use of an industry-specific average rate of return wouldbe especially inappropriate in this case because a large portion of thesteel industry in Brazil is controlled by the government. For this reason,the use of the steel sector rate of return would not provide an objectivestandard. It is far more reasonable to use the national average rate ofreturn because it includes the rates of return for government-owned firmsand private firms as well as for profitable and unprofitable firms.<T3>Comment 16:</T3> Respondents argue that the Department should use 1988as the review period for the upstream subsidy portion of this investigation.Calendar year 1988 is the most recently completed fiscal year prior tothe date of the upstream subsidy questionnaire response. Information from1988 provides the most accurate basis for determining the existence ofan upstream subsidy.Petitioner contends that the Department cannot measure upstream subsidiesfor a different year than that used for all other subsidies.<T3>Department's Position:</T3> We agree with petitioner. We announcedin our initiation notice on August 24, 1988 that the period of review wascalendar year 1987. We must use the same period for measuring all subsidiesbecause to do otherwise might distort the average benefit we attempt tocapture in our ``snapshot'' view of the firm. Furthermore, we cannot usea review period that did not conclude until after our preliminary determination.<T3>Comment 17: </T3>Fumagalli contends that, because the government controlsthe price of steel, the Department should treat the alleged below-marketprices of steel as a direct subsidy, not as an upstream subsidy. Fumagallinotes the Department's practice in a number of cases involving productsfrom Mexico (<T3>e.g., Anhydrous and Aqua Ammonia from Mexico </T3>(48 FR 28522) and<T3>Oil Country Tubular Goods from Mexico</T3> (49 FR 47054)). In thosecases, where the Department examined the effect of the Mexican government'sprice control on natural gas, the Department found that low-priced naturalgas was available to a wide variety of users and not limited to a particularindustry or group of industries. Since the Brazilian government controlsthe price of steel, and steel is available to a wide variety of users,the provision of steel at government-regulated prices to wheel producersis analogous to government controls on natural gas prices in Mexico. Therefore,the Department should analyze both situations in the same way.<T3>Department's Position:</T3> The cases that Fumagalli refers to dealwith the alleged preferential pricing of inputs, which is a direct subsidy,not an upstream subsidy. The statute includes a special provision for upstreamsubsidies, as well as a specific three-pronged test for determining whetheran upstream subsidy exists. We do not believe that the existence of pricecontrols precludes us from invoking the the upstream subsidy provision(see our response to Comments 18 and 20).<T3>Comment 18: </T3>Fumagalli argues that the specificity analysis thatapplies to any domestic subsidy also applies to upstream subsidies. Thus,an upstream subsidy is only countervailable if the benefit of that subsidyon downstream products is limited ``to a specific enterprise or industry,or group of enterprises or industries.''Fumagalli cites <T3>Certain Steel Products from the Federal Republic of Germany </T3>(47FR 26321), where the petitioner alleged that German steel producers benefitedfrom subsidies provided by the German government to coal producers. Inits preliminary determination in that case, the Department found therewas no benefit because low-priced coal was not limited to the steel industrybut was, in fact, available to a wide variety of users in the FRG.Fumagalli contends that the legislative history of the Trade and TariffAct of 1984 makes clear that the upstream subsidy provision did not changebasic Department practice regarding subsidies. Congress intended that thespecificity test be used to determine whether the low-priced input wasmade available only to a specific industry or group of industries. In fact,in a letter to Congress, the former Secretary of Commerce indicated thatthe Department intended the upstream subsidy provision to apply ``wherean input is provided to a particular industry or group of industries, .. .  ''Petitioner argues that it is clear in the statute and in the legislativehistory that the specificity test applies only at the upstream level (<T3>i.e.</T3>, on the input product). The statute clearly states that theDepartment is to look at the competitive benefit from the upstream subsidyon the merchandise under investigation. To determine competitive benefit,the Department must compare the price of the input product from the subsidizedproducer with a benchmark price. In situations where prices of the inputproduct are artificially depressed in the country under investigation,the statute authorizes the Department to use other sources for the benchmarkprice, presumably including prices outside the country. This provisionwould make no sense if there were a specificity requirement at the downstreamlevel.<T3>Department's Position:</T3> We agree with the petitioner that a second-tierspecificity test is not required in the analysis of upstream subsidies.If Congress had intended to include a separate specificity test, it wouldhave included the same specificity language in the upstream subsidy provisionthat is included in the definition of domestic subsidy, as provided forin section 771(5)(B) of the Act. Domestic subsidies given directly to theinput producer (in this case, the steel producer) must be specificallyprovided, and domestic subsidies given directly to the downstream producer(in this case, the wheel producers) must be specifically provided, butsubsidized inputs purchased by downstream producers need not be specificallyprovided in order to be countervailable.The House Conference Report describes an upstream subsidy as a subsidypaid by a government on an input product used to manufacture the merchandiseunder investigation. The report states, ``The potential for an upstreamsubsidy exists only when a sector-specific benefit meeting all the othercriteria of being a subsidy is provided <T3>to the input producer</T3>.'' (emphasis added). H.R. Rep. No. 98-1156,98th Cong., 2nd Sess. 171 (1984). The report makes no mention of a sector-specificrequirement for the downstream purchaser of the input product.Furthermore, the Report indicates that the House Bill included a requirementthat the upstream subsidy result in a ``price for the intermediate productlower than the generally available price of that product in that country.* * *,'' but the Conferees agree to ``* * * substitute for generally availableprice determination a determination that the upstream subsidy in the judgmentof the administering authority bestows a competitive benefit on the merchandise* * *''. This clarifies that Congress considered and rejected the second-tierspecificity requirement.The upstream subsidy provision was intended to codify and strengthen existingpractice. See S. Rep. No. 98-485, 98th Cong. 2nd Sess. 33 (1984). Althoughwe found in the preliminary determination on <T3>Certain Steel Products from the Federal Republic of Germany </T3>thatsubsidies to the coal industry did not benefit the steel industry becausethe coal was not specifically provided to the steel industry, we abandonedthis analysis in our final determination (47 FR 39345, September 7, 1982).In the final determination, we found that there was no benefit not becausethe coal was not specifically provided, but because the price of Germancoal was higher than world market prices. This approach is very similarto the analysis we use to determine the existence of a competitive benefit.Thus, despite an early flirtation with the idea of a second-tier specificitytest, both Congress and the Department in the end rejected this approachin favor of the competitive benefit test.<T3>Comment 19:</T3> The GOB argues that, since wheel producers were ableto import steel at prices less than the prices paid to USIMINAS, they derivedno competitive benefit from any alleged upstream subsidy. Fumagalli providedinformation showing that hot-rolled coil was available in January 1989from the Republic of Korea for less than what the wheel producers paidfor steel in Brazil. Furthermore, since wheel producers can obtain fullreimbursement for any duties paid on imported steel through Brazil's dutydrawback system (provided for in Decree-Law NR 37/66 and Decree 68,904/71),the Department should take duty drawback into account when calculatingthe benchmark price.<T3>Department's Position:</T3> Fumagalli cites a price from 1989, andour period of investigation is 1987. We found that Korean prices were onaverage over 50 percent higher than USIMINAS' prices in 1987. Since theworld market benchmark price is higher than the Brazilian price, thus makingimportation economically impractical, the issue of using an import priceadjusted for duty drawback is moot.<T3>Comment 20:</T3> Fumagalli argues that the existence of price controlson domestically-sold Brazilian steel makes it impossible for a Braziliansteel producer to pass through the benefit of any subsidies it receivesto the downstream purchaser. In an environment where prices are determinedby an intervening and superseding cause, such as government price controls,prices will not vary, regardless of the level of subsidization of any individualproducer. There is no evidence that the government of Brazil sets pricesfor any reason other than to control inflation. Thus, absent a causal relationshipbetween the price of steel to wheel exporters and any subsidies receivedby steel producers, no competitive benefit can be bestowed.Petitioner contends that controls on the selling price of steel guaranteethe pass-through of any upstream subsidy to the downstream producer. Someof the difference between the controlled price of steel and the marketprice is accounted for by subsidies to the steel producer. Thus, governmentsubsidies offset differences between the two prices.<T3>Department's Position:</T3> We disagree that the existence of pricecontrols renders the pass-through of benefits impossible. Price controlsin and of themselves are not dispositive of whether the input was soldat a subsidized price. For example, if there were unsubsidized sellersof the input product subject to the same price controls as subsidized sellers,we would determine that there is no competitive benefits because the downstreamproducer could have bought the input at the same price from an unsubsidizedseller. Conversely, if all sellers of the input product are subsidizedand all are subject to the same price controls, we cannot determine whether,or to what extent, prices in the domestic market reflect the subsidiesreceived. In such cases, we resort to world market prices. If the worldmarket price is higher than the domestic price of the subsidized sellers,as in this case, we conclude that the subsidy is built into the price ofthe input product even if the price is controlled.<T3>Comment 21:</T3> Fumagalli contends that, in determining whether thecompetitive benefit has a significant effect on the merchandise, the Departmentshould calculate the cost of steel as a percentage of the U.S. sellingprice of the merchandise rather than as a percentage of the cost of productionof the merchandise. Fumagalli contends that this is the most accurate measureof the effect of an upstream subsidy on the competitiveness of the merchandisebecause it captures the degree of underselling of the merchandise in theU.S. market vis-a-vis merchandise sold by competing U.S. firms.<T3>Department's Position:</T3> We disagree. Section 771A(a)(3) of theAct clearly states that the Department must examine whether the subsidyon the input product has a significant effect on the ``cost of manufacturingor producing the merchandise.''<T3>Comment 22:</T3> Fumagalli contends that, for purposes of its upstreamsubsidy analysis, the Department should include general and administrativeexpenses in its calculation of the cost of manufacturing or producing themerchandise. According to the verification report, the Department calculatedthe cost of hot-rolled sheet and coil as a percentage of manufacturingcosts by erroneously applying its standard practice in antidumping proceedings,in which the cost of manufacture is interpreted as the cost of productionminus general and administrative expenses.<T3>Department's Position:</T3> There is no explicit direction in the statuteor the legislative history as to how to calculate the cost of manufacturingor producing the merchanise in an upstream subsidy investigation. In thiscase, we measured the significant effect of the upstream subsidy on thecost of the merchandise based on the cost of manufacture. We have appliedour standard practice used in antidumping proceedings of calculating thecost of manufacture by deducting general and administrative expenses fromthe cost of production. We note that using the cost of production, includinggeneral and administrative expenses, would not change the results of oursignificant effect analysis in this case.<ITAG tagnum="84">Verification</ITAG>In accordance with section 776(b) of the Act, we verified the informationused in making our final determination. We followed standard verificationprocedures, including meeting with government and company officials, inspectingdocuments and ledgers, tracing information in the response to source documents,accounting ledgers and financial statements, and collecting additionalinformation that we deemed necessary for making our final determination.<ITAG tagnum="84">Suspension of Liquidation</ITAG>In accordance with our preliminary affirmative countervailing duty determination,published on October 28, 1988, we directed the U.S. Customs Service tosuspend liquidation on the products under investigation and to requirea cash deposit or bond equal to the duty deposit rate. This final countervailingduty determination was extended, pursuant to section 703(h) of the Act,because of the upstream subsidy investigation. Under Article 5, paragraph3 of the Agreement on Interpretation and Application of Articles VI, XVI,and XXIII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (the SubsidiesCode), provisional measures cannot be imposed for more than 120 days withoutfinal affirmative determination of injury. Therefore, we instructed theU.S. Customs Service to discontinue the suspension of liquidation on thesubject merchandise entered on or after February 27, 1989, but to continuethe suspension of liquidation of all entries or withdrawals from warehouse,for consumption, of the subject merchanise entered between October 28,1989, and February 26, 1989. We will reinstate suspension of liquidationunder section 703(d) of the Act, if the ITC issues a final affirmativeinjury determination, and require duty deposits on all entries of the subjectmerchandise in the amounts indicated below:<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>3,L2,tp0,i1,s20,9,9 </C> <H1>Manufacturer/producer/exporter</H1><H1>Estimated net subsidy</H1><H1>Duty deposit rate</H1><ITAG tagnum="1">Borlem, S.A<D>1.82</D><D>1.82</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">All others<D>17.29</D><D>17.15</D></ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">ITC notification</ITAG>In accordance with section 705(d) of the Act, we will notify the ITC ofour determination. In addition, we are making available to the ITC allnonprivileged and nonprorietary information relating to this investigation.We will allow the ITC access to all privileged and business proprietaryinformation in our files, provided the ITC confirms that it will not disclosesuch information, either publicly or under an administrative protectiveorder, without the written consent of the Assistant Secretary for ImportAdministration.If the ITC determines that material injury, or the threat of material injury,does not exist, this proceeding will be terminated and all estimated dutiesdeposited or securities posted as a result of the suspension of liquidationwill be refunded or cancelled. If, however, the ITC determines that suchinjury does exist, we will issue a countervailing duty order, directingCustoms officers to assess countervailing duties on all entries of steelwheels from Brazil entered, or withdrawn from warehouse, for consumption,as described in the ``Suspension of Liquidation'' section of this notice.This determination is published pursuant to section 705(d) of the Act (19U.S.C. 1671d(d)).<ITAG tagnum="21">Date: April 7, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Timothy N. Bergan,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Assistant Secretary for Import Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-9189 Filed 4-17-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3510-DS-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>