<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89130-0011 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.1-30-89.f2.A1010</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Federal Highway Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">23 CFR Part 635</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[FHWA Docket No. 87-15]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="91">RIN 2125-AB87</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Construction and Maintenance; Contract Procedures; Standardized ContractClauses</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Federal Highway Administration (FHWA), DOT.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The FHWA is revising its regulations on contract proceduresto implement the provision mandated by section 111(c) of the Surface Transportationand Uniform Relocation Assistance Act (STURAA) of 1987 which became lawon April 2, 1987. Section 111(c) amends section 112 of Title 23, UnitedStates Code (23 U.S.C.), to direct the Secretary of Transportation to issueregulations establishing and requiring certain standardized contract clausesin all Federal-aid highway contracts unless otherwise provided for by Statelaw. The standardized contract clauses will provide for the equitable adjustmentof contract terms: (1) Where site conditions differ from those indicatedin the contract, (2) where work has been suspended by order of the contractingagency (other than a suspension of work caused by the fault of the contractoror by weather), and (3) where there are significant changes in the characterof the work specified in the contract.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>May 1, 1989. The provisions contained in thisfinal rule apply to all Federal-aid contracts authorized to proceed withthe construction stage on or after May 1, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Mr. William A. Weseman, Chief,Construction and Maintenance Division, (202) 366-0392 or Mrs. KathleenMarkman, Office of the Chief Counsel, (202) 366-0780. Office hours arefrom 7:45 a.m. to 4:15 p.m., ET, Monday through Friday, except for legalholidays.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>Under the Federal-aid highway program,federally assisted projects are generally constructed by private contractorsunder contract to the State highway agencies (SHAs) or local governmentalagencies. Payment to the contractors is based on the amount of work performedin accordance with the terms of the contract. The FHWA reimburses the statutoryFederal share of the costs to the SHAs as the projects are constructedand the costs are incurred. The plans, specifications, and estimates (PSandamp;E)are prepared by the SHAs or their representatives. Due to the nature ofsubsurface conditions, highway construction, and conditions under whichthe work is performed, the geotechnical engineer and the designer cannotalways accurately determine and describe in the contract documents allthe subsurface or latent conditions existing at project sites. Consequently,in some instances the subsurface conditions encountered during constructionmay be different from those described in the geotechnical reports or indicatedin the plans. These unanticipated conditions may cause a change in constructioncosts.There also may be situations which develop during construction requiringthe contracting agency (SHA or local governmental agency) to order thecontractor to slow down or stop the progress of construction through nofault of the contractor and not due to weather conditions. These situationsmay occur, for example, when a defect in the design is found and the contractingagency needs time to study the problem and correct the design or when athird party, not part of the Federal-aid contract, does not perform asoriginally anticipated. These slowdowns or stoppages in the work may causea change in construction costs.There also may be situations encountered during construction which requirethe contracting agency to make alterations in the design. When these occur,the contract quantities are normally changed to reflect the alteration,and the contract is modified accordingly. Some of these alterations couldsignificantly increase or decrease the contractor's production costs, inaddition to providing a change in the amount of work required by the contract.The unanticipated variations in contract costs caused by any of the abovementioned situations may in some instances add up to sizable amounts ofmoney and constitute an additional risk to either the contractor or contractingagency. In those States where the contracting agency shifts the responsibilityof such costs to the contractor, the contract documents normally do notprovide for a mechanism to allow the contracting agency to legally adjustthe contract to recover a savings due to a decrease in costs or to compensatethe contractor for an increase. Thus, the contracting agency does not normallyrecover for the decreases, and the contractor can only recover for theincreases by either anticipating such costs and increasing the amount bidby including a contingency amount in the bid or by submitting a claim.Claims and the possible resulting litigation process can be quite lengthyand costly and often yield unsatisfactory results for both parties. Onthe other hand, the contractor's contingency amount when included in thebid may exceed any actual additional costs, and may result in an unreasonablewindfall for the contractor, and may unnecessarily increase the constructioncosts to the public.Previous FHWA policy did not mandate any specific contract provisions toaddress resolution of these situations, but encouraged the adoption ofcontract language, such as clauses 104.02 and 108.07 of the 1984 AmericanAssociation of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) ``GuideSpecifications for Highway Construction'' (available from AASHTO, 444 NorthCapitol Street NW., Suite 225, Washington, DC 20001). These clauses providedfor an equitable adjustment of the contract terms in the event of unanticipatedvariations in contract costs. Section 111(c) of the STURAA of 1987, Pub.L. 100-17, 101 Stat. 132 and 147, however, made it a requirement for theSecretary of Transportation to develop and require to be included in Federal-aidcontracts, unless otherwise provided for by State law, a standardized contractclause addressing the equitable adjustment of the contract terms for differingsite conditions, material changes in the scope of work, and suspensionsof work ordered by the contracting agency other than those caused by thefault of the contractor or by weather.The requirements contained in section 111(c) of the STURAA of 1987 wereoriginally considered for adoption by the 99th Congress (H.R. 3129), buta bill was never enacted because the House and Senate Committees confereeswere unable to reach agreement. A similar bill, subsequently consideredand adopted by the 100th Congress, was accompanied by only an abbreviatedHouse Committee Report. Therefore, the 1986 House Committee Report (H.R.Rep. No. 665, 99th Congress, 2d Sess. 8-11(1986)) is the primary legislativehistory of section 111(c). The final rule takes into consideration thecongressional intent as shown in this House Committee Report, the commentsreceived by the FHWA on the Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM), and otheravailable published information. Section 111(c) of the STURAA of 1987 applies to all projects approved bythe FHWA under Section 106 of Title 23, United States Code (23 U.S.C. 106,Plans, Specifications, and Estimates). However, section 106 provides thatPSandamp;E's administered under section 117 of Title 23, United States Code(23 U.S.C. 117, Certification Acceptance) are exempted from the FHWA approvalrequirements. Therefore, the provisions of section 111(c) of STURAA of1987, do not apply to projects administered under an approved certificationacceptance plan.Highway contractor organizations have long voiced their support for standardizedchanged conditions clauses. They have felt that contractors should nothave to assume the risk for the possibility of differing site conditions,significant changes in the character of the work, or suspensions of workfor the convenience of the contracting agency. The 1986 House CommitteeReport articulated this same view in stating that contractors should beable to bid a project with the expectation of being compensated for allthe acceptable work which is performed in accordance with the terms ofthe contract. In addition, the report indicates that a standardized arrangementwould provide more uniformity among the States and eliminate much of thefrustration being experienced by contractors who deal with several Statesat the same time. An NPRM was published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>on December 1, 1987, at 52 FR 45645, in whichthe FHWA requested comments on the proposed regulation. Originally, commentswere to be received by February 1, 1988; however, pursuant to a requestreceived, the comment period was extended to March 1, 1988, by notice publishedin the <T4>Federal Register </T4>on February 10, 1988, at 53 FR 3897.<ITAG tagnum="84">Discussion of Comments</ITAG>GeneralThirty-one written comments were received in the docket. Of the 31 comments,5 were from private contractors and contractor organizations. The remaining26 comments were from SHAs. All the contractors and contractor organizationsfavored the proposed rule and recommended minor revisions. Ten of the SHAsindicated a strong objection to the rule.Several commenters revealed apprehension and concern that the proposedregulation will result in a constant flow of notifications from the contractorsin an attempt to convert unit price, competitively bid contracts into cost-pluscontracts. A comment was also made to the effect that the competitive biddingprocess will be deteriorated, reducing quality and increasing costs. TheFHWA knows of no factual information to support the statements made bythese commenters. On the contrary, there are a number of States which arepresently using similar specifications. These States have not reportedmajor problems in the administration of such provisions in their contracts.Several questions were raised in regard to the future administration ofthe projects containing the standardized contract clauses such as the typeof written notices to be used, allowable costs, etc. As with any otherspecification, SHA's are expected to handle the administration of the standardizedcontract clauses according to their standard administrative procedures,such as those contained in SHAs construction manuals and by other sectionsof the SHAs' standard specifications dealing with methods of payments,variations in the work, etc.Several commenters disagreed with the statement made in the preamble ofthe NPRM in regard to the possible economic impacts of the regulation.The preamble indicated that the regulation should have a positive economicimpact because it ``should: (1) Reduce the construction costs in generalby reducing the uncertainties which the contractor must price during thebidding process, (2) reduce the number of claims reaching litigation thusreducing the legal expenses of both the contractors and contracting agencies,and (3) promote a better working relationship between the contractors andcontracting agencies.'' The commenters indicated that, contrary to be preamble,the regulation will have an adverse economic impact and will most likelyincrease the construction costs of Federal-aid projects. Some commenterssuggested delaying the implementation of the final rule until the adverseeffects of the action are studied in greater detail. Another commenterindicated that the regulation will increase the number of claims that reachlitigation.The statement regarding the positive effects of the rule originated withthe House Public Works Committee Bill (H.R. 3129) Report. The FHWA doesnot have information which would support for rebut this statement. Nevertheless,the possible economic impacts of the regulation were considered and itwas concluded that, even if the number of claims increased, the resultantincrease in project costs would most likely not be sufficient to triggera full regulatory evaluation. A full regulatory evaluation recommendedby some commenters was, therefore, not considered warranted.Some commenters suggested amending the regulation to indicate that if thecontractor disagrees with the amount of the adjustment as determined bythe engineer, the contractor would be allowed to perform the work on aforce account basis. It is not intented that the regulation preempt forceaccount procedures provided by State specifications. Force account is aviable procedure to reimburse the contractor for contract adjustments,as appropriate. It is the FHWA policy, however, that the use of force accountbe keep to a minimum. Normally, force account is considered satisfactorywhen the extent of the work cannot be quantified with any degree of accuracyor an agreement cannot be reached with the contractor on appropriate unitproces for work to be performed.Several commenters suggested revising the term ``equitable adjustment''mainly because the term could be subject to several different interpretationsand could lead to litigation. It is agreed that the adjective ``equitable''does not add any substance to the regulation since any adjustments to thecontract proposed by the engineer should, in effect, be fair and representativeof the cost of the increased or decreased work. Therefore, the word ``equitable''has been deleted and only the term adjustment is used in the final rule.Several commenters requested assurances from the FHWA that Federal fundswill participate on all amounts paid to contractors under the proposedregulation. Standard Federal-aid policy does not provide for such blanketparticipation. Federal participation on adjustments made under the standardizedcontract clauses will be considered on its own merits as is normally donewith other proposed adjustments in Federal-aid highway projects.A comment was made to explicitly exclude any reimbursement for loss ofanticipated profits. The final rule includes language which clarifies thatno reimbursement will be made for loss of anticipated profits. This positionis consistent with longstanding FHWA policy to not participate in lossof anticipated profits.Some commenters expressed their opinions as to what should constitute thebasis for extra compensation and/or contract time. It is not the intentionof the regulation to specify the type of contract adjustment to be allowedin any one specific situation. Any contract adjustment should be justifiableand fair compensation for increases or decreases caused by the changedcontract conditions.One commenter expressed a concern regarding use of the standardized clausesin a contract with end-result specifications. The concern was that a contractorwho underestimates a project where differing site conditions are laterfound would be able to offset his/her misjudgment. There may be situationsin which a differing site condition found during construction could presenta contractor the opportunity to attempt recovery from bidding errors and/orwrong assumptions made during the bidding of the project. For this reason,it is incumbent upon the SHAs to assure a careful and detailed review ofall apparent low bids to detect any unbalancing and/or bidding errors.The use of good contract administration methods and engineering judgmentis essential for the successful administration of any project to assurethat contract adjustments, whether an increase or decrease, reflect onlythe changed condition and do not constitute an unwarranted monetary gainor loss to the contractor. One commenter suggested amending the regulation to make reference to theContract Disputes Act of 1978 (Pub. L. 95-563, 92 Stat. 2383) to allowthe contractors to carry any dispute beyond the engineer's decision. TheContract Disputes Act of 1978 is only applicable to Direct Federal procurementcontracts; thus, it does not apply to Federal-aid contracts which are administeredby the SHAs or the local governmental agencies. Further, the engineer isexpected to render a fair decision closely representing the differentialin costs caused by the changed contract condition. In the event of a subsequentdispute, since the engineer's decision is an administrative action, thecontractor may still resort to the judicial system. One commenter suggested making provision in the regulation to cover instanceswhere the SHA would consider it appropriate to provide for an allocationof risks in the contract. Upon consideration of the suggestion, and a reexaminationof the statutory authority of the Secretary, it was determined that theSecretary lacks the authority to waive the requirements of section 111(c)for any one project. The final rule must, therefore, be applicable to everyFederal-aid highway project approved under 23 U.S.C. 106. Several commenters suggested including permissive language in the finalrule which would permit the SHAs to make changes in the standardized contractclauses to accommodate the language in their respective standard specifications.Other commenters indicated that section 111(c) requires the Secretary toonly establish guidelines to be used by the States in the preparation ofthe clauses to be used in Federal-aid highway contracts. It is the clearintent of Congress, based on an objective reading of the statutes and theconference report, that standardized contract clauses be utilized by allStates, unless otherwise provided for by State statute. The States' optionto adopt a clause or clauses different from the one established by theSecretary or to not adopt a clause at all was clearly established by Congressin the Limitation of Applicability of section 111(c). Section 111(c) does not place any limitation on the timing of the enactmentof State statutes requiring or excluding the inclusion of the standardizedcontract clauses. Likewise, the final rule permits the States to enactand make effective such State statutes at any time. Thus, the standardizedcontract clauses, established under this rule, shall be inserted by theSHAs in Federal-aid contracts approved under 23 U.S.C. 106 until otherwiseprovided for by State statute.Nearly half of the SHAs have already adopted changed conditions clauses.Many of them use language similar to the 1984 AASHTO ``Guide Specificationsfor Highway Construction'' or to the Federal Acquisition Regulations (FAR).In order to provide as much continuity as possible, and in keeping withthe principles of federalism, the standardized contract clauses of thefinal rule have been developed following closely, where possible, the languageof both the AASHTO Guide Specifications and the FAR. (The FAR is containedin 48 CFR Parts 1 to 99, and may be purchased from the Superintendent ofDocuments, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402. The FARis mandatory only for contracts for which the Federal Government is thecontracting agency. This is not the situation in the Federal-aid highwayprogram; therefore, compliance with the FAR is not a requirement.)In 1988, AASHTO adopted and published new Guide Specifications which containlanguage that is very similar to that contained in the clauses of the finalrule. The differences between the final rule and the new AASHTO Guide Specificationsare in the area of impact costs (generally not recognized by AASHTO) andeditorial changes by AASHTO needed for conformance to the language in othersections of the Guide Specifications. (Impacts costs, also known as ``rippledamages,'' are increased costs attributable to the changed contract conditionsbut are not part of the changed work.) Section 635.131(a)(1) One commenter suggested deleting the words ``latent'' and ``unknown'' fromthe regulation. These words are used to mean hidden to the naked eye, notknown at the time of bidding, and as such have not been deleted. Several commenters suggested not recognizing impact costs. Section 635.131(a)(1),as published in the NPRM, provided for impact costs. Upon a re-examinationof the committee report, it is agreed that the congressional purpose ``totake at least some of the gamble on subsurface conditions out of the bidding''can be accomplished with the least amount of federalism impact if impactcosts are not recognized as a mandatory contract adjustment item. In addition,the congressional mandate is to produce and require a clause addressingthe differing site conditions in an equitable manner. It is felt this mandatecan be accomplished without mandating the inclusion of impact costs. Forthese reasons, the final rule contains a new optional paragraph, andSection;635.131(a)(1)(iv) which excludes impact costs from consideration. Sinceseveral of the SHAs presently recognize impact costs in their assessmentof differing site conditions and in keeping with the principle of ExecutiveOrder 12612 on ``Federalism,'' it is the intention that this final rulenot preclude the continuation of such practice. These SHAs, therefore,have the option to continue to recognize impact costs as provided for intheir standard specifications and contract procedures by deleting paragraph635.131(a)(1)(iv).The language of andSection; 635.131(a)(1), as contained in the final rule,clarifies that either party to the contract is entitled to request an adjustmentdue to a differing site condition. The adjustment may be to fairly compensatethe contractor or benefit the State; however, no adjustment in favor ofthe contractor will be allowed unless the contractor notifies the contractingagency in writing prior to performance of the affected work or disturbingthe alleged differing site conditions. The language of andSection; 635.131(a)(1)as contained in the NPRM was also revised to clarify that the contractorwill be notified of the engineer's determination. Several editorial changeswere made as well.Section 635.131(a)(2)Several commenters suggested that impact costs not be recognized. Unlikethe differing site conditions clause in this instance, the FHWA believesthat it must provide for the impact costs and effects of State-mandatedsuspensions or delays of work in order to accomplish the congressionalintent. Therefore, the clause was not changed as suggested by the commenters.Several commenters suggested that andSection; 635.131(a)(2) be clarifiedto indicate that it only applies to written suspensions of work and/ordelays. The clause has been amended to clarify that the suspensions anddelays affected by the clause are those in writing.Conversely, other commenters recommended adding a provision for constructivesuspensions and delays (where the contracting agency causes a suspensionor delay due to action or inaction, without issuing a written suspensionorder). As discussed in the NPRM, it is not the intention of the regulationto expand this clause to include such suspensions and delays. However,some of the SHAs presently recognize constructive suspensions and delaysas well as those in writing. For this reason, the final rule does not precludethe continuation of such practice and SHAs, thus, have the option to recognizeconstructive suspensions and delays as they may choose in their standardspecifications and contract administration procedures. Such coverage would,of course, be in addition to that provided by the written suspensions anddelays provisions of this section.One commenter suggested amending the regulation to clarify that the suspensionsof work clause applies only if the suspension affects the controlling operationand is not caused by the contractor or a third party. It was also suggestedthat no additional compensation be provided for any suspensions or delaysduring a reasonable period of time necessary to evaluate and respond toany ``differing site conditions'' found. The regulation has been writtenon the basis that the effects of any suspension or delay ordered in writingby the contracting agency will be evaluated in accordance with recognizedand accepted methods. Such methods normally make use of the contractor'splanned construction schedule and take into consideration any effects onthe controlling operation(s). It is not intended that the regulation excludesuspensions or delays caused by third parties if these are the result ofa written instruction by the contracting agency. The delays caused by thirdparties or a differing site condition are to be considered and evaluatedon their own merits on a case-by-case basis.With a few exceptions, the suspensions of work clause in the 1988 AASHTOGuide Specifications is similar to the FAR. The main difference is thatAASHTO does not recognize ``constructive suspensions.'' The FAR does. Thesuspensions of work clause of the final rule, as previously discussed,follows the AASHTO approach and does not recognize constructive suspensions.The clause is consistent with both AASHTO and the FAR in not allowing therecovery of profit on any additional costs caused by the suspension ordelay, and requiring that suspensions must be for unreasonable periods.Thus, recognized suspension periods would not include brief customary suspensionsinherent to highway construction for reasons such as the collection ofmaterial samples, testing of materials, approvals of shop drawings andmaterial sources, etc., and other reasonable and customary suspensionsnecessary for the orderly supervision of construction by the contractingagency.As previously noted, the language of andSection; 635.131(a)(2) as containedin the NPRM has been revised in the final rule to clarify that suspensionswill be in writing. Also to clarify that the contractor will be notifiedof the engineer's determination, to delete the engineer's reasons to suspendwork because this is normally addressed by SHAs in other portions of theirstandard specifications, and to make general editorial changes.Section 635.131(a)(3)Many commenters indicated that the regulation contained several undefinedterms which may result in controversy and litigation. Others recommendedthat andSection; 635.131(a)(3) be modified to specify the threshold increaseor decrease that would justify a request for an adjustment to the contractbased on changed production costs. The majority of these commenters suggesteda threshold of 20 to 25 percent change in the quantity of a major itemof work. The AASHTO Guide Specifications defines a major item of work asan item whose total original contract cost exceeds 10 percent of the totaloriginal contract amount.)The NPRM explained that a threshold amount had not been included in theregulation because this is normally defined in the contracting agencies'standard specifications. However, upon further consideration and in viewof the comments received, the final rule now includes a definition forthe term ``significant change'' which incorporates threshold amounts.Although the 1988 AASHTO Guide Specifications do not contain a writtendefinition for ``significant change'' they do contain a recommendationthat a threshold amount of 25 percent change in the quantity of a majoritem of work be used to denote such changes. It also sets a cap of 25 percentmaximum change in the contract unit prices. The FAR, on the other handdoes not establish a cap amount on unit prices and specifies the thresholdamounts at 15 percent of the quantity of any item of work.The approach used in the final rule is similar to AASHTO in that a thresholdamount of 25 percent change in the quantity of a major item of work isspecified. However as in the FAR, a cap on the amount of change in theunit price has not been established. In addition, the final rule clarifiesthat the term ``significant change'' also applies to situations when thecharacter of the changed work differs materially in kind or nature fromthe work as originally proposed.Section 635.131(a)(3) as published in the NPRM provided for impact coststo the extent that the impacted work is part of the contract. This is inaccordance with the congressional intent in the Conference Report and isnot changed in the final rule.The NPRM noted that the standardized clause in andSection; 635.131(a)(3)was not intended to cover constructive change orders. (A constructive changeorder occurs when the contracting agency causes a change but does not issuea written order.) Several commenters agreed that the clause should notprovide for constructive changes, but at least one commenter suggestedadding such a provision. The clause has been amended in the final ruleto clarify that the changes affected by the standardized clause are onlythose in writing. However, several SHAs presently recognize constructivechanges as well as those in writing. The final rule does not preclude thecontinuation of such a practice. Those SHAs may continue to recognize constructivechanges as provided for in their standard specifications and contract administrationprocedures in addition to the written changes of work as provided for inandSection; 635.131(a)(3).Additional changes to andSection; 635.131(a)(3) as it appeared in the NPRMinclude deletion of the terms ``material'' and ``scope'' and the substitutionin their place of the terms ``significant'' and ``character.'' The term``material'' was changed to clarify the title of the clause. The work ``scope''was changed to read ``character'' to avoid conflict with the States' standardspecifications.In addition, andSection; 635.131(a)(3) was amended to clarify the exclusionof reimbursement for loss of anticipated profits. Several other changes,editorial in nature, were also made for clarification.Section 635.131(b)Some commenters interpreted section 111(c) of the STURRA of 1987 to allowthe SHAs to adopt, by State statute, language of their choice for any ofthe three clauses without a determination by the Division Administratorthat the State clauses are comparable to the clauses contained in the finalrule and took exception to the requirement as it was presented in the NPRM.Upon further consideration and reexamination of the committee report andthe provisions of section 111(c) of the STURRA of 1987, the commenters'interpretation that the Division Administrator's determination of comparabilityis not necessary was found to have merit. The final rule reflects thisdetermination. States may adopt any language for the standardized contractclauses or prohibit any one or more of the clauses as long as it is doneunder the mandate of a specific State statute concerning changed contractconditions. Such clause or clauses, however, must be in conformance with23 U.S.C., 23 CFR, and other Federal statutes and regulations as appropriateand will be subject to the Division Administrator's approval as part ofthe PSandamp;E.The FHWA has determined that this document does not contain a major ruleunder Executive Order 12291 or a significant regulation under the regulatorypolicies and procedures of the Department of Transportation. This rulemakingaction has been prepared in order to implement a statutory mandate. Thatmandate requires the imposition of new requirements on State and localgovernments with the inclusion of standardized contract clauses in allFederal-aid highway contracts unless the State has developed and implemented,by statute, language of its choice for any of the clauses or adopts orhas adopted a statute which does not permit inclusion of such clause orclauses. A full regulatory evaluation is not required because of the ministerialnature of this action. However, potential regulatory impacts have beenaddressed, as appropriate, in the development of this final rule.Under the criteria of the Regulatory Flexibility Act (Pub. L. 96-354),the FHWA hereby certifies that this final rule will not have a significanteconomic impact on a substantial number of small entities.A regulatory information number (RIN) is assigned to each regulatory actionlisted in the Unified Agenda of Federal Regulations. The Regulatory InformationService Center publishes the Unified Agenda in April and October of eachyear. The RIN contained in the heading of this document can be used tocross-reference this action with the Unified Agenda.This action has been analyzed in accordance with the principles and criteriacontained in Executive Order 12612, and it has been determined that thefinal rule does not have sufficient federalism implications to warrantthe preparation of a federalism assessment.In consideration of the foregoing, the FHWA hereby amends Part 635, SubpartA of Chapter I of Title 23, Code of Federal Regulations, as set forth below.<ITAG tagnum="20">(Catalog of Federal Domestic Assistance Program Number 20.205, HighwayPlanning and Construction. The regulations implementing Executive Order12372 regarding intergovernmental consultation on Federal programs andactivities apply to this program)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 23 CFR Part 635</ITAG>Government contracts, Grant programs-transportation, Highway and roads.<ITAG tagnum="21">Issued on January 23, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Robert E. Farris,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Federal Highway Administrator.</ITAG>The FHWA hereby amends 23 CFR Part 635, Subpart A, as follows: <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 635_CONSTRUCTION AND MAINTENANCE</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart A_Contract Procedures</ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 635 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>23 U.S.C. 112, 113, 114, 117, 128, and 315; 31 U.S.C.6506; 42 U.S.C. 3334, 4601 <T3>et seq.;</T3> 49 CFR 1.48(b).</ITAG>2. Part 635, Subpart A is amended by adding a new andSection; 635.131 toread as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 635.131</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Differing site conditions, suspensions of work and significant changesin the character of work. </ITAG>(a) Except as provided in paragraph (b) of this section, the followingcontract clauses shall be made part of, and incorporated in, each highwayconstruction project approved under 23 U.S.C. 106: (1) <T3>Differing site conditions. </T3>(i) During the progress of the work,if subsurface or latent physical conditions are encountered at the sitediffering materially from those indicated in the contract or if unknownphysical conditions of an unusual nature, differing materially from thoseordinarily encountered and generally recognized as inherent in the workprovided for in the contract, are encountered at the site, the party discoveringsuch conditions shall promptly notify the other party in writing of thespecific differing conditions before they are disturbed and before theaffected work is performed. (ii) Upon written notification, the engineer will investigate the conditions,and if he/she determines that the conditions materially differ and causean increase or decrease in the cost or time required for the performanceof any work under the contract, an adjustment, excluding loss of anticipatedprofits, will be made and the contract modified in writing accordingly.The engineer will notify the contractor of his/her determination whetheror not an adjustment of the contract is warranted. (iii) No contract adjustment which results in a benefit to the contractorwill be allowed unless the contractor has provided the required writtennotice. (iv) No contract adjustment will be allowed under this clause for any effectscaused on unchanged work. (This provision may be omitted by the SHAs attheir option.) (2) <T3>Suspensions of work ordered by the engineer. </T3>(i) If the performanceof all or any portion of the work is suspended or delayed by the engineerin writing for an unreasonable period of time (not originally anticipated,customary, or inherent to the construction industry) and the contractorbelieves that additional compensation and/or contract time is due as aresult of such suspension or delay, the contractor shall submit to theengineer in writing a request for adjustment within 7 calendar days ofreceipt of the notice to resume work. The request shall set forth the reasonsand support for such adjustment. (ii) Upon receipt, the engineer will evaluate the contractor's request.If the engineer agrees that the cost and/or time required for the performanceof the contract has increased as a result of such suspension and the suspensionwas caused by conditions beyond the control of and not the fault of thecontractor, its suppliers, or subcontractors at any approved tier, andnot caused by weather, the engineer will make an adjustment (excludingprofit) and modify the contract in writing accordingly. The engineer willnotify the contractor of his/her determination whether or not an adjustmentof the contract is warranted. (iii) No contract adjustment will be allowed unless the contractor hassubmitted the request for adjustment within the time prescribed. (iv) No contract adjustment will be allowed under this clause to the extentthat performance would have been suspended or delayed by any other cause,or for which an adjustment is provided for or excluded under any otherterm or condition of this contract. (3) <T3>Significant changes in the character of work. </T3>(i) The engineerreserves the right to make, in writing, at any time during the work, suchchanges in quantities and such alterations in the work as are necessaryto satisfactorily complete the project. Such changes in quantities andalterations shall not invalidate the contract nor release the surety, andthe contractor agrees to perform the work as altered. (ii) If the alterations or changes in quantities significantly change thecharacter of the work under the contract, whether or not changed by anysuch different quantities or alterations, an adjustment, excluding lossof anticipated profits, will be made to the contract. The basis for theadjustment shall be agreed upon prior to the performance of the work. Ifa basis cannot be agreed upon, then an adjustment will be made either foror against the contractor in such amount as the engineer may determineto be fair and equitable. (iii) If the alterations or changes in quantities do not significantlychange the character of the work to be performed under the contract, thealtered work will be paid for as provided elsewhere in the contract.(iv) The term ``significant change'' shall be construed to apply only tothe following circumstances: (A) When the character of the work as altered differs materially in kindor nature from that involved or included in the original proposed constructionor (B) When a major item of work, as defined elsewhere in the contract, isincreased in excess of 125 percent or decreased below 75 percent of theoriginal contract quantity. Any allowance for an increase in quantity shallapply only to that portion in excess of 125 percent of original contractitem quantity, or in case of a decrease below 75 percent, to the actualamount of work performed. (b) The provisions of this section shall be governed by the following:(1) Where State statute does not permit one or more of the contract clausesincluded in paragraph (a) of this section, the State statute shall prevailand such clause or clauses need not be made applicable to Federal-aid highwaycontracts. (2) Where the State highway agency has developed and implemented one ormore of the contract clauses included in paragraph (a) of this section,such clause or clauses, as developed by the State highway agency may beincluded in Federal-aid highway contracts in lieu of the correspondingclause or clauses in paragraph (a) of this section. The State's actionmust be pursuant to a specific State statute requiring differing contractconditions clauses.<ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-2039 Filed 1-27-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-22-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>