<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89602-0012 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.6-02-89.f2.A1011</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">40 CFR Part 52</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[FRL-3571-2]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Connecticut and Rhode Island Ozone Attainment Plans; Control of GasolineVolatility</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Environmental Protection Agency.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>EPA is approving State Implementation Plan (SIP) revisionssubmitted by the State of Connecticut and the State of Rhode Island. Theserevisions will reduce emissions of volatile organic compounds from gasolineby limiting the Reid Vapor Pressure (RVP) of gasoline sold between June30 and September 15 in 1989 and between May 1 and September 15 of eachyear thereafter to 9 pounds per square inch. EPA is also finding that theConnecticut and Rhode Island RVP regulations are ``necessary to achieve''the national ambient air quality standard (NAAQS) for ozone and are thereforeexcepted from preemption under section 211 of the Clean Air Act. The intendedeffect of this action is to make necessary progress towards attainmentof the ozone standard as expeditiously as practicable as required underthe Clean Air Act.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>June 30, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>Copies of the submittal are available for public inspectionat U.S. EPA, Room 2311, JFK Federal Building, Boston, MA 02203; the ConnecticutDepartment of Environmental Protection, State Office Building, 165 CapitolAve., Hartford, CT 06115; and the Rhode Island Department of EnvironmentalManagement, 291 Promenade St., Providence, RI 02908-5767.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Peter X. Hagerty, (617) 565-3224;(FTS) 835-3224 or Jennifer York, (617) 565-3220; (FTS) 835-3220.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Introduction</ITAG>This <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice describes EPA's decision to approve revisionsto both the Connecticut and Rhode Island SIPs which limit the volatilityof gasoline from June 30 to September 15 in 1989 and from May 1 to September15 every year thereafter. Since the Connecticut and Rhode Island regulationsare very similar and the public comments received in response to EPA'sNotices of Proposed Rulemaking were nearly identical, the two revisionswill be discussed together in this notice. Any differences between thestates in the regulations, public comments or EPA responses will be clearlyidentified.The remainder of this preamble is divided into four sections. The firstprovides the background for this action, with respect to both chronologyand the broad issues involved. The second section presents today's actionand EPA's rationale. The third section summarizes the comments receivedon the proposed action and EPA's responses to them. The final section discussesRhode Island's revision to the test methods section of the regulationsto cure a deficiency identified and discussed in EPA's proposed rulemakingnotice.<ITAG tagnum="84">Background</ITAG>On November 12, 1987, the Commissioners of the Northeast States for CoordinatedAir Use Management (NESCAUM) signed a Memorandum of Understanding expressingtheir intention to reduce the Reid Vapor Pressure (RVP) of gasoline to10 pounds per square inch (psi) starting in the summer of 1988 and to 9psi in the summer of 1989 and continuing every ozone season thereafter.Since there were delays in adopting necessary regulations, the 1988 limitof 10 psi was eliminated, and Connecticut and Rhode Island passed regulationslimiting the RVP of gasoline to 9 psi from May 1 to September 15 startingin 1989 and continuing each year thereafter. On November 10, 1988, RhodeIsland submitted a SIP revision to EPA for approval to implement this provision.Connecticut submitted its SIP revision on January 30, 1989.On March 16, 1989, EPA published <T4>Federal Register</T4> notices proposing approval of the Connecticutand Rhode Island SIP revisions (54 FR 11016 and 11018). EPA also proposedto find that these revisions were ``necessary'' to achieve the nationalambient air quality standards (NAAQS) for ozone within the meaning of section211(c)(4)(C) of the Clean Air Act (the Act), in the event that EPA subsequentlytook final action on federal RVP regulations.Section 211(c)(4)(A) of the Act states that a state may not, for purposesof motor vehicle emissions control, prescribe or attempt to enforce anycontrol or prohibition respecting use of a fuel or fuel additive in a motorvehicle engine_``(i) if the Administrator has found that no control orprohibition under paragraph (1) is necessary and has published his findingin the <T4>Federal Register</T4>, or (ii) if the Administrator has prescribedunder paragraph (1) a control prohibition applicable to such fuel or fueladditive, unless [the] state prohibition or control is identical to theprohibition or control prescribed by the Administrator.'' At the time ofEPA'a proposal on the Connecticut and Rhode Island revisions, EPA had proposed,but not taken final action, on federal RVP control regulations.On March 22, 1989 EPA published a <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice (54 FR 11868) taking final action on nationalregulation of RVP, to take effect this summer. The maximum allowed summertimeRVP in Connecticut and Rhode Island under the federal regulation is 10.5psi. Under section 211(c)(4)(A) of the Act, EPA's final action preemptedinconsistent state control of RVP for the purpose of motor vehicle emissioncontrol, except in California. In its final action, EPA noted that statescould be exempted from preemption only if EPA finds it is ``necessary''to achieve the NAAQS as provided in section 211(c)(4)(C) of the Act. EPAmade specific note of the conditions for EPA approval of state RVP regulations.<ITAG tagnum="84">Description of Today's Action</ITAG>EPA today approves revisions to the Connecticut and Rhode Island SIPs whichlimit gasoline volatility to 9 psi between June 30 and September 15 in1989 and between May 1 and September 15 in each year thereafter. The Connecticutand Rhode Island programs include authority for the state to issue waiversto individual suppliers if necessary to avoid supply dislocations. EPAis approving the programs as a whole, including any waivers the statesmight issue under this authority. This aspect of EPA's approval is discussedin full under section 9 of the next portion of this notice describing EPA'sresponse to comments.EPA is also explicitly finding that the Connecticut and Rhode Island revisionsare ``necessary to achieve'' the NAAQS within the meaning of section 211(c)(4)(C)of the Act. This means that the Connecticut and Rhode Island RVP regulationsare not preempted by the federal RVP regulations promulgated on March 22,1989.EPA's rationale for this action and its effective date are presented below.In this context many issues raised by commenters on the proposal will beaddressed. The remaining comments will be discussed in the next portionof this notice.In approving the Connecticut and Rhode Island RVP SIP revisions, EPA mustconsider requirements imposed by two different sections of the Clean AirAct. As with all SIP revisions, section 110 provides the requirements forapproval into the SIP. In this case, since EPA has promulgated FederalRVP regulations, section 211(c)(4)(A) preempts inconsistent state control.However, section 211(c)(4)(C) provides that the Administrator may excepta state RVP control program from preemption if he finds it is ``necessary''to achieve the NAAQS. Thus, the Connecticut and Rhode Island revisionsmust satisfy both section 110 and section 211 requirements to gain approval.EPA has concluded the the Connecticut and Rhode Island RVP regulationsare ``necessary'' to achieve the ozone NAAQS. In reaching this conclusionEPA has followed the test first articulated in approving the Maricopa CountryArizona SIP (53 FR 17413 (May 18, 1988) and 53 FR 30228 (August 10, 1988))and later presented in the proposed approval of the Connecticut and RhodeIsland revisions. EPA stated that if, after accounting for the possiblereductions from all other reasonable control measures, Connecticut andRhode Island could demonstrate that RVP controls are still required toachieve the standard, then RVP controls are necessary within the meaningof section 211(c)(4)(C). EPA will not interpret that provision to requirea state to impose more drastic measures such as driving prohibitions orsource shutdowns before it can adopt its own fuel control program.As discussed in the notice of proposed rulemaking, the record indicatesthat Connecticut needs VOC emission reductions on the order of at least37% from 1987 inventory levels to acheive the standard. Connecticut reviewedapproximately 15 measures suggested by EPA as reasonable in addition toRVP control to 9 psi and found that they could together potentially achievea 24% reduction from 1987 levels. Enhancements to the state's vehicle inspectionand maintenance (I/M) program could produce an additional 2% reduction.Similarly, the record indicates that Rhode Island needs VOC reductionson the order of at least 28% from 1986 inventory levels to achieve thestandard. Rhode Island reviewed other reasonable measures in addition toRVP control, including an enhanced state vehicle I/M program, and foundthat they could together potentially achieve a 10% reduction from 1986levels.As indicated in both the Connecticut and Rhode Island proposals, whileEPA's regulation of gasoline to 10.5 psi reduces the emission reductionattributable to the state regulation, it does not affect the bottom line_ashortfall will still exist. EPA's technical review of the data presentedin the states' submissions and by the commenters affirms the conclusionthat a shortfall will exist even with the implementation of all other reasonablestate and federal measures.EPA continues to believe that the fact that the state RVP regulation mightnot by itself fill the shortfall and hence by itself achieve the standarddoes not mean the rule is not ``necessary to achieve'' the NAAQS. It issimple logic that ``necessary'' is not the same as ``sufficient.'' EPAbelieves that the ``necessary to achieve'' standard must be interpretedto apply to measures which are needed to reduce ambient levels when noother measures that EPA or the state has found reasonable are availableto achieve this reduction. Beyond such identified ``reasonable'' measures,EPA need look at other measures before RVP control, only if it has clearevidence that RVP control would have greater adverse impacts than thosealternatives. EPA has no such evidence here. Therefore, EPA can defer toConnecticut's and Rhode Island's apparent views that RVP control is thenext less costly (or is itself a reasonable) measure. Thus, EPA concludesthat the Connecticut and Rhode Island RVP regulations are ``necessary''to achieve the NAAQS.<ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of Public Comments and EPA's Responses</ITAG>The major issues discussed in the comments are: (1) What constitutes afinding of ``necessary to achieve'' the standard under section 211(c)(4)(C);(2) whether there has been an adequate technical demonstration that controllingRVP to 9 psi is ``necessary'' (i.e. whether the threshold for exemptionfrom preemption has been crossed); (3) the scope of EPA's discretion assuminga finding that state RVP controls are necessary to achieve the standard;(4) what effect the 9 RVP limit in Connecticut and Rhode Island will haveon the cost and supply of gasoline in those states and the Northeast generally;(5) driveability and safety concerns; (6) whether there is an ozone problemin Connecticut and Rhode Island; (7) whether the states have adequate enforcementprograms; (8) whether the states provided ``reasonable opportunity'' forpublic comment; (9) what exemptions or waivers from the state regulationsshould be allowed; (10) the appropriate timing for making the state regulationeffective; and (11) whether EPA should withdraw or repropose these actionsor reopen the public comment period in light of EPA's recent promulgationof federal RVP regulations and other alleged deficiencies in EPA's proposedactions. Each issue is explored in detail below.1. What Constitutes a Finding of ``Necessary To Achieve'' the StandardUnder Section 211(c)(4)(C) of the Clean Air Act?a. Making the ``Necessary'' Finding Without a Demonstration of Attainment<T3>Comments.</T3> One group of comments questioned EPA's ability to makea finding that the Connecticut and Rhode Island RVP regulations are necessaryto attain the ozone standard without going through the complete planninginvolved in approving a state's response to EPA's finding that the currentSIP is substantially inadequate to achieve the standard (the ``SIP call'').Several comments stated that EPA cannot approve these states' RVP regulationsas SIP revisions without finding that the SIPs as a whole achieve attainmentof the NAAQS for ozone. Related comments questioned EPA's ability to determinewhether these states' RVP controls are necessary without a new updatedinventory of VOC sources which EPA will require from the states with ozonenonattainment areas as part of their response to the SIP calls. Finally,one comment asked how much time EPA will give states to achieve the ozonestandard and how EPA can determine what is necessary to achieve the standardwithout knowing when the states must achieve attainment.<T3>Response.</T3> Through its SIP calls, EPA has imposed on states likeConnecticut and Rhode Island an obligation to revise their ozone SIPs anddemonstrate attainment of the standard. The thrust of these comments isthat EPA cannot make a finding of necessity without the states' first havinggone through the new planning process and developing a new demonstrationof attainment. EPA does not interpret section 211(c)(4)(C) to require acomplete demonstration of attainment in order to approve a measure whichwill contribute to attainment.Forcing a state to demonstrate attainment before allowing it to adopt stricterfuel controls would yield perverse results. Areas with the worst ozonenonattainment problems, which have the most difficulty assembling a demonstrationof attainment, would be disabled for perhaps several years from adoptingclearly necessary RVP controls stricter than the national controls. Onecomment noted that Connecticut and Rhode Island so far have not been ableto identify any combination of control measures which would bring the statesinto attainment, because the size of the VOC emission reduction necessaryto do so is so large. It is precisely in areas like Connecticut and RhodeIsland, with especially difficult nonattainment problems where the expeditiousimplementation of new controls, and hence the finding of necessity undersection 211(c)(4)(C), is most appropriate.Beyond that, it is reasonable for EPA to use the best information it nowhas available to determine whether these states' RVP programs will be necessaryto achieve the standard without having to wait for Connecticut and RhodeIsland to complete their planning response to the SIP call, including theirupdated inventories. As explained below, the VOC inventory and reductionfigures Connecticut and Rhode Island submitted to EPA were based on reasonablyreliable models EPA has used in the past. Such figures are always capableof refinement, but in the Agency's judgment the expenditure of time requiredto do so is not worth the marginally improved accuracy. See <T3>Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power</T3> v. <T3>N.R.D.C.,</T3> 435 U.S. 519, 554-555 (1978).EPA has not yet set a date certain by which Connecticut and Rhode Islandmust attain the ozone standard. Congress may address the widespread nonattainmentproblem in the amendments to the Act now being considered. In the meantimeEPA has also proposed its own policy for how to deal with SIP planningfor nonattainment areas in the post-1987 period. 52 FR 45104 (November24, 1987). The air quality analyses Connecticut and Rhode Island submittedmade it clear that RVP control beyond the federal requirements will benecessary to any attainment plan, whether the attainment date that Congressor EPA selects is imminent or long-term. Moreover, there is widespreadagreement among EPA and the states in the Northeast that major VOC reductions,probably exceeding the 28 to 37% estimated by EPA in this case, will berequired to get close to attaining the ozone standard. Nothing in the airquality data from the summer of 1988, which have become available in quality-assuredform since publication of the proposal, indicates that the reduction requirementprojected by the Connecticut and Rhode Island analyses overstate the reductionnecessary to achieve the standard. Beyond that, the history of ozone planningover the last decade makes it clear that reduction targets are seldom overestimated.Furthermore, EPA's approval of this proposal now is consistent with section110(a)(2)(A) of the Act, which requires attainment ``as expeditiously aspracticable.'' Interpreting section 211(c)(4)(C) to require a completeattainment demonstration before EPA can approve (and a state can implement)a fuel control that the state has determined to be practicable and thatwould advance the attainment date would effectively put section 211(c)(4)(C)in conflict with section 110(a)(2)(A). It is doubtful that Congress intendedEPA to choose an interpretation that would create such a conflict.b. The Standard EPA Has Applied to Determine Whether Fuel Controls AreNecessary Compared with Other Controls<T3>Comments. </T3>Several commenters maintained that EPA had not adequatelyanalyzed whether there are other control strategies reasonably availablewhich Connecticut and Rhode Island should implement before resorting toRVP controls inconsistent with the federal regulation. EPA will addressthese comments in section 2d below. Other comments concerned the standardthat EPA should use to determine whether RVP controls are necessary comparedto other controls. Finally, one comment suggested that EPA's approach tocomparing alternative control strategies is so vague that it is necessarilyarbitrary.<T3>Response. </T3>In the proposals for this action, EPA used the approachit first announced when approving the Maricopa County Arizona SIP (53 FR17413 (May 18, 1988); 53 FR 30228 (August 10, 1988)) to determine whetherRVP controls beyond the federal program are necessary to attain the ozonestandard in Connecticut and Rhode Island. Under that approach, if afteraccounting for the possible reductions from all other reasonable controlmeasures, the states could demonstrate that RVP controls are still requiredto achieve the standard, then RVP controls are necessary within the meaningof section 211(c)(4)(C). For the reasons stated in the Arizona action andthe Connecticut and Rhode Island proposals, EPA will not interpret section211(c)(4)(C) to require a state to impose more drastic measures such asdriving prohibitions or source shutdowns before it can adopt its own fuelcontrol program.One comment suggested that EPA could clarify the method by which it determineswhether fuel controls are necessary by ranking all possible control measuresaccording to their cost per ton of VOC reduced each year, and approvingadditional fuel controls only when the state has first exhausted all controlswhich cost less per ton than fuel controls. EPA and the states have notdeveloped cost figures for all the alternative controls which the agenciesconsidered before resorting to state fuel controls. Connecticut and RhodeIsland have, however, demonstrated to EPA that implementing all the controlmeasures which EPA now believes to be reasonably available to them forVOC control (including measures that the states have already adopted andare now beginning to implement) would not achieve compliance with the ozonestandard. The roster of control measures Connecticut and Rhode Island examinedgenerally corresponds to the list of controls EPA has identified for statesto implement in response to the ozone SIP calls, and represents EPA's bestjudgment as to the controls which could now be reasonably implemented.See EPA's proposed post-1987 ozone policy, 52 FR 45104, Appendix C (November24, 1987). After examining all controls EPA has determined to be reasonable,a state is free to make its own determination as to what control measuresshould next be employed.Moreover, nothing in the language or purposes of section 211(c)(4)(C) suggeststhat EPA must buttress this judgment as to reasonable controls, a judgmentwhich is based on the states' thoughtful analyses and EPA's expertise regardingalternative measures, with a rigorous cost-effectiveness analysis. In anyevent, the shortfall in available emission reductions from reasonable measuresis so substantial that it is highly unlikely that a rigorous cost-effectivenesscomparison would show that there are enough measures whose cost-per-ton-reducedis below that of RVP controls to make such controls unnecessary.One comment maintained that EPA's method for determining what is necessaryis too vague because it would allow EPA to approve state fuel controls``simply because alternative measures are more inconvenient, unpopular,or costly.'' As discussed in section 2d below, EPA examined reasonablealternative controls which Connecticut and Rhode Island could implementand determined that they would not achieve enough reductions to achievethe standard. EPA also has determined that remaining controls such as gasrationing, driving reductions, and source shutdowns are so drastic thata state may resort to fuel controls first. This judgment concerning whatis too drastic is a complicated policy determination requiring the Administratorto weigh precisely those factors which the commentor would exclude fromhis consideration_whether the remaining alternatives are costly or unpopular.In <T3>Amoco Oil Co.</T3> v. <T3> Environmental Protection Agency</T3>, 501 F.2d 722, 740-741 (D.C.Cir. 1974) the court distinguished between the factual foundation whichEPA must provide in its administrative decisions and policy judgments whichare an integral part of the findings Congress requires the Administratorto make under the Act:<ITAG tagnum="21">Where by contrast, the regulations turn on choices of policy, on anassessment of risks, or on predictions dealing with matters on the frontiersof scientific knowledge, we will demand adequate reasons and explanations,but not ``findings'' of the sort familiar from the world of adjudication.</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T3>Id.</T3> at 741. EPA's and the states' analyses of reasonably availablecontrols is based on a factual record supported by the best analyticaltools the agencies had available to them at the time. EPA's judgment thatstate fuel regulation is a less drastic course than gas rationing and otherunpopular controls so far not implemented in any SIP is clearly a matteron the frontier of air pollution control planning, and therefore cannot(and need not) be supported by the same technical record as, for example,EPA's determination that Connecticut needs at least 37 percent reductionfrom its 1987 inventory or Rhode Island needs at least a 28 percent reductionfrom its 1986 inventory to attain the standard.2. Have Connecticut, Rhode Island and EPA Made an Adequate Technical DemonstrationThat Controlling RVP to 9 psi is ``Necessary'' to Attain the NAAQS?a. Adequacy of Emission Inventory.<T3>Comments. </T3>Three petroleum industry commenters argued that theemission inventories used in the technical demonstration are inadequate.They pointed out that EPA has already requested that Connecticut and RhodeIsland prepare a new inventory as part of their response to the SIP call.Therefore it is argued that the states's reliance on the old inventoriesis inappropriate.<T3>Response.</T3> As described in EPA's Technical Support Document (TSD)for each proposal, the emission inventories used by Connecticut and RhodeIsland and reviewed by EPA are based on EPA's ``Compilation of Air PollutantEmission Factors,'' known by its document number ``AP-42.'' This documentand its updates are EPA's longstanding guidance for determining emissionsfor inventory purposes and has served as the basis for ozone SIP inventoriessince the mid-1970s. Mobile source emissions were estimated using the thencurrent version of EPA's mobile source emissions model, MOBILE3, consistentwith standard EPA guidance. While EPA has called for many states, includingConnecticut and Rhode Island, to update their inventories for post-1987SIP planning purposes, the Agency has continued to use existing inventoriesin evaluating current control proposals. EPA expects the new Connecticutand Rhode Island inventories, not due until late 1989, to show higher emissionsthan the current inventory since they are expected to include more sourcesand improved quality assurance. Thus, if the current inventories are lacking,they understate current emissions and err such that the likely percentagereduction needed to attain the standard is also understated. As stated in the proposals for this action, EPA believes that if thereis an error in quantifying the emission reductions resulting from controlto 9 psi, those reductions are understated. If the newly released mobilesource emission model, MOBILE4, which includes the effects of running losses,were used, one would expect the reduction in tons of VOCs to increase significantly.Furthermore, contrary to the commenters' belief, the estimated emissionreductions are based on reductions achieved during only the four and one-halfmonths each year the regulations are effective. This approach may understatethe reduction since 9 psi fuel may be in the distribution system up totwo additional months on each end of the regulatory season. Also contrary to the commenters' claim, EPA's TSDs do contain an estimateof the emission reduction achieved by going from EPA's 10.5 psi limit tothe states' 9 psi limit. EPA estimated a 4% reduction from the 1987 inventoryin Connecticut and a 1.2% reduction from the 1986 inventory in Rhode Island.This estimate does account for nonlinearity in emission reductions withdecreasing RVP limits. b. Appropriateness of the Modeling Demonstration <T3>Comments.</T3> While some commenters agreed that modeling was necessaryto evaluate the air quality benefit of the RVP reduction, they objectedto EPA's reliance on the Regional Oxidant Model (ROM). The commenters alsoraised concerns about the appropriate hydrocarbon-to-nitrogen-oxides (NO<T2>x</T2>) ratios to be used in such modeling. A third modeling issueconcerns the states' and EPA's inability to associate a quantified incrementof improved air quality with the control of RVP to 9 psi. <T3>Response.</T3> The claim that the ROM does not provide the spatialresolution needed for accurate prediction in individual urban areas losessight of the fact that we are evaluating statewide programs. The UrbanAirshed Model suggested by the commenters is appropriate for large urbanareas but would have to be stretched to its limit to cover all of Connecticut.Given Rhode Island's small size, Airshed could be used for evaluating theRhode Island program. However, having decided that the ROM is an appropriatetool to use in evaluating the Massachusetts program, consistency also favoredits used in evaluating the programs in the neighboring states. Finally,the ROM is much better equipped to evaluate the longer range transportof ozone which plagues the Northeast. Caught between the two availablemodel scales, it is EPA's technical judgment that the ROM is an appropriatetool to use in evaluating future reductions needed for Connecticut andRhode Island. EPA understands the concern that past strategies have focused almost exclusivelyon controlling VOCs instead of NO<T2>x</T2>. As indicated in EPA's post-1987 ozone strategy, future controlscenarios are likely to include NO<T2>x</T2>. However, it is highly unlikely that NO<T2>x</T2> control alone will suffice. The best technical information availableto EPA at this time concerning the Northeast ozone problem points to theneed for substantial VOC reductions and at least modest NO<T2>x</T2> reductions in the future to attain the ozone standard. The last modeling issue concerned the states' and EPA's inability to associatea quantified increment of improved air quality with the control of RVPto 9 psi. While such a modeling exercise would be ideal, it is unlikelythat one would have much confidence in the outcome of such a sensitivitytest. The atmosphere's response to emission reductions of ozone precursorsis highly nonlinear such that small increments of reduction may show littleor no effect on their own. However, when the reductions from the states'many strategies are aggregated, the total impact becomes quantifiable.Thus, even though Connecticut, Rhode Island and EPA cannot pinpoint wherethe air quality will improve by what amount on what day, we are confidentthat there will be a net improvement in ozone levels if Connecticut andRhode Island were to decrease VOC emissions by 4% and 1.2% respectively.c. Whether the Connecticut and Rhode Island RVP Programs Will Help Attainthe Ozone Standard at All <T3>Comments.</T3> API claimed that analyses by both Connecticut and RhodeIsland suggest that the states would virtually be in attainment exceptfor the transport of ozone and its precursors from other areas and that,because of the transport problem, VOC reductions from sources in the stateswill have little or no effect on ozone attainment there. Under these circumstances,API claimed that EPA cannot reasonably conclude that Connecticut or RhodeIsland's program is necessary, or even helpful, to attainment of the ozonestandard in that state. <T3>Response.</T3> API's concern is flawed because it acknowledges transportinto the state but ignores transport out. It may be true that measurestaken in Connecticut or Rhode Island will have little measurable impactwithin that state's borders. This is largely because these states are comparativelysmall. EPA has, however, consistently designed nonattainment area ozoneSIPs to account for the impact an upwind area has on ozone levels in downwindareas. See Clean Air Act section 110(a)(2)(E), 42 U.S.C. section 7410(a)(2)(E).Courts have upheld EPA's interpretation on the nonattainment area controlsin Part D of the Act to allow the inclusion of upwind areas which contributeto ozone violations downwind. See <T3>State of Ohio </T3>versus <T3>Ruckelshaus,</T3> 776 F.2d 1333 (6th Cir. 1985), cert. den. sub. nom.<T3>Ohio</T3> versus <T3>Thomas,</T3> 106 S.Ct 2889 (1986), and cases cited therein at 1340.In fact, many states in the Northeast designed their 1982 ozone plans basedon design values in neighboring states. On most high ozone days in theNortheast, Connecticut's emissions photochemcially react into ozone somewhereover Massachusetts or Rhode Island. Similarly, Rhode Island's emissionsare contributing to unhealthy ozone levels in Massachusetts or southernNew Hamsphire. This cross-boundary transport is precisely why EPA has turnedto regional scale models to evaluate the need for control measures. d. Consideration of Other Alternatives <T3>Comments.</T3> Commenters expressed concern that Connecticut, RhodeIsland and EPA have failed to consider other significant alternative controlmeasures that could lead to attainment. They referenced source categoriesin Appendix C of EPA's proposed post-1987 ozone policy including stationarysource controls and transportation control measures. <T3>Response. </T3>EPA believes that sufficient alternatives were considered.In the Connecticut submission EPA found consideration of the emission reductionpotential of 13 different point and area source categories. Some of thesecategories correspond to those suggested by EPA in its proposed post-1987ozone policy. Not surprisingly, some of the source categories are not relevantbecause there are no major sources in those categories in Connecticut.Connecticut also included measures not on EPA's recommended list. In mostof the relevant categories the potential reductions are a very small portion(less than 1%) of the existing inventory.API noted that some of the categories recommended by EPA were not evaluatedby Connecticut but are part of the state's emission inventory. They particularlynote the dry cleaning and wood furniture coating categories. EPA notesthat these categories account for 0.2% and 0.1% respectively, of the Connecticutinventory. API further nominated degreasing and pharmaceutical manufacturingfor consideration. Totally eliminating emissions in both these categories,which is obviously unachievable, would yield a 3.5% emission reduction.However, accommodating all of API's recommendations would produce lessthan an additional 4%, still far short of the 11% shortfall indenifiedin the proposal. See Addendum to Technical Support Document dated May 5,1989.In the Rhode Island submission EPA found consideration of four major controlmeasures in addition to RVP control. As discussed in the proposal, RhodeIsland anticipates that enhanced plus basic I/M, Stage II, architecturalcoatings and consumer solvent controls could reduce emissions by about7.5%. EPA has examined Rhode Island's 1982 SIP and believes that furtherreductions, not documented in its RVP SIP submission, could be achieved.These reductions would come from lowering the source size cutoff in categoriescurrently regulated by Rhode Island (e.g. paper and fabric coating, graphicarts and other surface coating) and regulating other categories not currentlycovered (e.g. adhesives, miscellaneous metal coating, automobile refinishingand cutback asphalt). If Rhode Island were to achieve 70% control of thesesources, EPA estimates that a 6% reduction from 1986 inventory levels couldbe realized. See Addendum to Technical Support Document dated May 5, 1989.EPA's review indicates that the measures identified in the post-1987 ozonepolicy and suggested by some commenters are not likely to produce any morereductions in Rhode Island than we found in neighboring Connecticut orMassachusetts. In the best case this might reach 4% of the current inventory.Thus it is possible that Rhode Island could achieve up to a 10% reductionin emissions beyond that discussed in the NPR. This additional 10%, whilehelpful in moving toward attainment, falls far short of filling the 18%shortfall described above. See Addendum to Technical Support Document datedMay 5, 1989.With respect to transportation control measures, the commenters failedto take account of the fact that the existing Connecticut SIP already containssome of the measures suggested by EPA in its proposed post-1987 ozone strategy.The existing SIP (40 CFR 52.370 (c)(32)) includes incentives for reductionin single-passenger commuter vehicle use through carpooling, vanpoolingbrokerage, extensive fringe park-and-ride facilities, express bus programs,and one of the few indirect source review programs in the country (40 CFR52.370 (c)(6) and (c)(9)).Rhode Island has not implemented the same kinds of transportation controlmeasures already in place in Massachusetts and Connecticut. Based on EPA'sexperience with the Massachusetts and Connecticut programs, however, weexpect that Rhode Island might be able to achieve an additional 2% reductionby adopting similar strategies. However, this additional reduction wouldstill not eliminate the estimated shortfall.While EPA recognizes that other transportation measures may be needed inConnecticut and Rhode Island, the remainder are difficult to quantify,yield small reductions individually, and, as evidenced by the public reactionto the EPA-promulgated implementation plans containing such measures inthe 1970s (see H.R. Rep. No. 95-294, 95 Cong. 1st Sess., reprinted in 4Legislative History of the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1977, at 2748-55(1978)), generally can be expected to have more significant adverse effectson the public as a whole than RVP controls would. To be sure, if therewere sufficient evidence for EPA to conclude that the states' RVP controlswould result in significantly more severe impacts than other measures thatneither EPA nor the states have yet identified as ``reasonable'' for thestate to implement, then it might well be appropriate for the Agency toaccount for the emission reductions that those other measures would achievebefore determining the shortfall against which to judge the RVP controls.The Agency does not believe, however, that the states' RVP controls, giventhe lead-time provided by today's approval, would produce significantlymore severe effects than such alternatives (e.g., than a trip reductionordinance of the type that Arizona found reasonable for application inPhoenix and Tucson).In sum, Connecticut, Rhode Island and EPA have indeed examined a broadrange of potential emission reduction strategies and have still identifieda significant shortfall in the level of emission reductions likely to beneeded to achieve the ozone standard.3. What is the Scope of EPA's Discretion Assuming a Finding That StateRVP Controls Are Necessary To Achieve the Standard?a. Permissible Bases for EPA's Decision to Approve State RVP Controls<T3>Comments. </T3>Several comments asserted that even where EPA has determinedthat state fuel controls are necessary to achieve the standard, EPA maynevertheless disapprove those controls if EPA determines that the economicor fuel supply impacts of the state's regulation are unreasonable. Thesecommenters suggested that EPA may give significant consideration to costsbecause section 211(c)(4)(C) provides that the Administrator ``may'' approvea SIP revision imposing state fuel controls once he makes the finding ofnecessity. Conversely, other commenters maintained that EPA may not disapprovethe Connecticut and Rhode Island SIP revisions based on economic grounds,once EPA has made the finding of necessity.<T3>Response. </T3>EPA believes that it must consider cost to some limitedextent whenever the Administrator decides whether to make a finding undersection 211(c)(4)(C) that a fuel measure is ``necessary'' for attainment.As discussed above, to determine whether state fuel controls are necessary,EPA must look first at whether other measures that it determines are reasonable(and, perhaps, other measures the state has adopted) will by themselvesachieve timely attainment. Arguably, an alternative measure is ``reasonable''only if its effects are less drastic than the effects of the fuel controls.Clearly the cost and supply impact of the state fuel controls will be afactor in any such judgment.EPA does not interpret the use of ``may'' in section 211(c)(4)(C) to givethe Administrator unfettered discretion to disapprove the SIP revisionon economic grounds once he has made the finding that state fuel controlsare necessary to achieve the standard. Section 211(c)(4)(C) must be readin the context of the preemption created in section 211(c)(4)(A), whichprohibits states from adopting inconsistent fuel controls in their SIPs,or anywhere else, for air pollution control purposes. In the face of thisprohibition, the sole effect of the ``may'' in section 211(c)(4)(C) isto authorize the Administrator to overcome a provision (section 211(c)(4)(A))that would otherwise bar him from approving the SIP revision. The use of``may'' in section 211(c)(4)(C) does not eliminate the obligation thatsection 110(a)(3)(A) places on the Administrator to approve the SIP revision,provided it meets the requirements of section 110(a)(2). See <T3>Train </T3>v. <T3>Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc., </T3>421 U.S. 60, 98 (1975).Section 110(a)(2) requires the Administrator to approve a SIP revisionif, among other things, it may be necessary to insure attainment and maintenanceof the standard. Section 110(a)(2)(B). EPA may not consider the economicimpact of a necessary SIP revision under section 110(a)(2); under thatprovision, it is for the state to determine what economic costs are appropriateto achieve the standards. <T3>Union Electric Co. </T3>v. <T3>E.P.A., </T3>427 U.S. 246, 256-258 (1976). Beyond that, it would beincongruous for Congress to give EPA more discretion to reject a SIP revisionfor reasons unrelated to the goal of achieving the standard as quicklyas possible precisely where EPA has determined that a SIP revision is necessaryto achieve the standard. Therefore, once EPA makes the finding that statefuel controls are necessary to achieve the standard, a finding which includesa determination that such fuel controls are more reasonable than otheravailable measures, EPA may not reject a state's SIP proposal simply foreconomic reasons. One commenter cited <T3>Motor Vehicle Manufacturers Association </T3>v. <T3>E.P.A., </T3>768 F.2d 385, 389-390 (D.C. Cir. 1985), for the propositionthat the use of ``may'' under section 211 commits the decision to the discretionof the Administrator. In <T3>MVMA </T3>the court was examining EPA's decision to grant a waiverunder section 211(f)(4) of the Act for the use of fuel additives not substantiallysimilar to those in the fuel EPA uses to certify the emissions from automobiles.The court was not examining section 211(c)(4)(C), which allows EPA, uponmaking a particular finding not mentioned in section 211(f)(4), to acton a SIP revision submitted by a state after full hearing at the statelevel and subject to the requirements of sections 110(a) (2) and (3)(A).b. Intent of Federal Preemption Under section 211<T3>Comments. </T3>Several comments insisted that EPA should disapprovethe Connecticut and Rhode Island RVP controls because Congress intendedto avoid a patchwork of different state fuel controls in favor of a uniformlyregulated national market for fuels. These commenters expressed concernthat the exception in section 211(c)(4)(C) to the rule of preemption undersection 211(c)(4)(A) would eventually swallow the rule. Several commentsurged EPA not to act inconsistently with its decision not to limit gasolineto 9 psi in 1989 in the federal RVP control program.On the other hand, several comments urged EPA to support the regional approachto RVP control that the NESCAUM states are undertaking. One commenter pointedout that where Congress has not acted to address the ozone nonattainmentproblem, it is reasonable to let the states do all they can to attain.<T3>Response</T3>. It is clear that section 211(c)(4)(A) indicates thatCongress desired to maintain a nationally regulated market for fuels. Itis equally clear that section 211(c)(4)(C) indicates Congress recognizedthat there will be states where the air quality problem is so severe thatthe interest in a nationally regulated market must bow to the need foradditional state controls on fuel content. EPA has not been able to findany legislative history which illuminates with any detail beyond the languageof the Act how EPA should strike this balance.It is reasonable to infer that Congress was aware that the air qualityneeds of particular states might create varying fuel content requirements,and that Congress accepted that risk in favor of protecting the publichealth. Several commenters cited <T3>Exxon Corp. </T3>v. <T3>City of New York, </T3>548 F.2d 1088 (2d Cir. 1977), as precedent thata uniformly regulated fuel market is the overriding purpose behind section211(c)(4). In <T3>Exxon </T3>the court, however, was not faced with a claim for an exceptionto preemption under section 211(c)(4)(C), and specifically left it to EPAto determine whether such an exception is appropriate:<ITAG tagnum="21">The Act sensibly provides for an exception from its comprehensivepreemption of local regulation of motor vehicle fuels only when such regulationis a provision in a state implementation plan approved by the Administratorwho has the competence to make the needed professional engineering andenergy conservation decisions.</ITAG><T3>Id. </T3>at 1096. Once EPA has made a finding of necessity under section211(c)(4)(C), it is reasonable for EPA to interpret the Act to place paramountimportance on protecting public health and achieving the standard.EPA believes that the oil industry's concern that the exception will swallowthe rule is overstated. As described above, EPA will approve inconsistentstate fuel controls only where the state can demonstrate that exhaustingall other reasonable alternatives will not achieve the standard, takingcosts into account in determining reasonableness. This demonstration isnot a trivial hurdle, and it is highly unlikely that every state with anozone nonattainment area could make such a showing. Furthermore, a stateis unlikely to burden its citizens with the potentially higher cost oflower RVP fuel unless the air quality needs are compelling. Finally, regionalinitiatives such as NESCAUM's help avoid a wide variety of state controls.In this case, the Connecticut and Rhode Island programs are virtually identicalto the Massachusetts program and thus provide consistent supply requirementsover a group of contiguous states.EPA also believes that its decision not to impose a limit of 9 psi by 1989in EPA's RVP control program does not preclude EPA from approving the Connecticutand Rhode Island SIP proposals. When developing its federal RVP controlprogram, EPA imposed controls across the nation, and had to determine thelevel of RVP control which supply sources for the entire continental UnitedStates could reasonably meet. Further, although EPA was able to make thisdetermination as to particular regions within the country, EPA did notintend to account for the particular air quality needs of each state.4. What Effect Will the 9 RVP Limit in Connecticut and Rhode Island Haveon the Cost and Supply of Gasoline?<T3>Comments. </T3>Several of the oil company commenters, (API, BP, Mobil)stated that if the 9 psi standard took effect in 1989 the distributionsystem would be strained and that there could be some significant supplydislocation and cost increases. Several other commenters were worried aboutpossible supply problems. Several stated that even if refiners had capacityto produce 9 psi gasoline, there would be logistical problems such as theneed for additional tankage for storage associated with its distribution.Also, one commenter stated that it could not ensure that imports at 9 psiwould be available. Most of the oil company commenters (API, Mobil, Sun)stated that there will be some need for capital improvements at refineriesto meet the 9 psi standard. Several (API, Mobil), stated that there willlikely be a cost impact to the Connecticut and Rhode Island standard andother commenters stated that they were worried about the increased cost.API stated that the estimates of increased cost do not reflect the extracost increase that could accompany a significant supply distribution. Proponents cited two studies as support for the position that supply isnot a problem.  <T3>Response. </T3>The potential supply problems arise out of two factors.First, decreasing the volatility of gasoline requires increased refinerycapacity. It is certain that implementation of 9 psi volatility in theNESCAUM states will create a refining capacity reduction in the amountof gasoline capable of being produced at each refinery. This is true ofboth domestic and foreign suppliers. Second, the problem may be furtherexacerbated by the expected increased demand in gasoline in the summermonths.  Various studies have been conducted to determine how much refining capacitywill be lost from implementation of 9 psi volatility in the NESCAUM states,how much demand for gasoline is likely to increase in the summer of 1989,and what effect these factors will have on gasoline supply capabilities.The two studies done for NESCAUM and the one done for EPA are inconclusive.There appear to be numerous factors which make precise prediction of theseeffects impossible. However, under the EPA Study (Sobotka study), estimatesindicate that the volatility standard may be feasible without serious supplyproblems.  The Sobotka study cites the Department of Energy (DOE) as predicting thatdemand for gasoline should increase only in the range of 1 to 1.5 percentthis summer. This estimate is also supported by other studies, includingone reported at a National Petroleum Refiners Association conference. Thestudy also estimates that approximately a 5 percent refining capacity shortfallwill occur at domestic refineries because of the NESCAUM volatility regulations.The study estimates that with a 1.2 percent increase in demand for gasolinein the summer, U.S. refineries would be able to make up for a 5 percentdomestic shortfall, and a 10 percent import shortfall, without constuctionof new facilities or installation of additional equipment. Although variousfactors make it impossible to accurately predict the refining shortfallof imported gasoline, there is no strong evidence indicating that it willexceed 10 percent. Thus, the Sobotka study suggests that it is likely thatthe resulting refinery capacity shortfalls from a 9 psi standard in 1989should not result in supply shortfalls.  In the unlikely event of unforeseen supply disruptions, Connecticut andRhode Island have each assured EPA that they have the authority to takeimmediate steps to provide needed waivers or exceptions to the program.The States have committed to carefully monitor the supply situation thisyear and take appropriate action, as may be necessary, to ensure that supplyproblems do not occur as a result of its state RVP control program. Seealso the response to section 9 later in this notice for more discussionof state waivers or exceptions.  <T3>5. What Effect Will 9 RVP Gasoline Have on Driveability in Cold Weatherand on Vehicle Safety?  </T3><T3>Comments. </T3>Commenters representing petroleum interests expressedconcern that the 9 RVP fuel could cause hard starting, hesitation, andstalling in the early spring and late fall. Gasoline will have to enterthe distribution system in March and will not be out until October in orderto comply with the regulation. Temperatures can be at or near freezingduring this time of year. One commenter stated that cars that are poorlytuned and have weak batteries are more susceptible to low RVP fuel problems.They also stated that California should not be used for comparison becausethey have a shorter supply time since its fuel comes from refineries withinthe state.  Other commenters supported the use of 9 RVP fuel, claiming that driveabilityis not a problem because the weather in nothern California is similar tothe weather in New England. They also referred to the Motor Vehicle ManufacturersAssociation statement on the New Jersey RVP regulations, dated August 18,1988, which stated that 9 RVP fuel would cause no driveability problems.Another commenter representing a group of automobile manufacturers indicatedthere should be no adverse effect from the use of 9 RVP fuel.  Two commenters stated that although fuel used now is safe because the vaporsare too rich in hydrocarbons to be ignited, the reduction to 9 RVP fuelwill make the vapors potentially explosive below 15 degrees Fahrenheit.Another commenter's report showed that reduction of RVP to 9 reduced firesand problems of overpressurization, vapor lock, fuel spurting, and fuelfoaming.      <T3>Response. </T3>We believe that the nature of the gasoline distributionsystem makes it very unlikely that 9 RVP fuel will be available to consumersin March or early April, even if the blending-down process by that timehas begun to reduce RVP. Continued availability of low-RVP fuel is evenless likely by late October because the blending-up process will occurrapidly at the close of the control period. Nevertheless, the experienceof California, which has required 9 RVP fuel for many years, appears todemonstrate that widespread driveability or fuel safety problems will notoccur in New England. We know of no evidence of extensive problems in California,despite significant operation at cool temperatures and high elevations.As further evidence of this conclusion, one can compare the true vaporpressure (TVP) experienced in fuel tanks at different times during theyear. For example, when corrected for elevation, gasoline in Billings,Montana at its January 1988 average RVP of 13.6 psi and at the historiclow January temperature of ^30 degrees Fahrenheit would result in a truevapor pressure of 1.0 psi. For Boston, the analogous RVP and temperatureof 10.0 psi and ^12 degrees would also result in a TVP of 1.0 psi. In contrast,8.5 psi fuel at an analogous Boston April temperature of 18 degrees wouldresult in a TVP of 1.8 psi, 80 percent higher than the winter figure. Whilesimilar analyses are not available for Hartford and Providence, winterRVP and temperature in these cities are very similar to Boston and it isreasonable to expect to find similar results. We conclude from this thatif low volatility fuel were to reach consumers during very low temperatureweather, any degradation in driveability or fuel safety would be no greater(and would likely be less) than that experienced currently during the winter.Conversely, low volatility fuel should improve vehicle driveability invery hot weather by reducing the occurrence of such conditions as vaporlock and fuel foaming. 6. Is There Really a Severe Ozone Problem in Connecticut and Rhode Islandor the Northeast?<T3>Comments. </T3>A number of industry commenters, in urging EPA to disapprovethe SIP revision, claimed that the air is really becoming cleaner and cleanerover time and that the ozone standard is being met more than 99% of theyear. Environmental groups countered these claims with data from 1987 and1988 which show a worsening of the ozone problem since 1986. They notedthat 1988 was one of the worst ozone seasons on record across the Northeast.<T3>Response. </T3>EPA is firmly convinced that there is a serious ozoneproblem in the Northeast. EPA's conviction was evidenced by last year'sSIP calls to Connecticut, Rhode Island and most other Northeast states.This SIP call was based on 1985-1987 ozone monitoring data which rankedsouthern New England among the worst ozone nonattainment areas in the country.EPA's concern is further heightened by the 1988 ozone season. The ozonestandard was exceeded more frequently, at more sites, and at higher levelsin 1988 than in 1987. In fact, as one commenter noted, a 1988 EPA RegionI study comparing public health risk from environmental problems in NewEngland ranked ozone in the highest risk category (``Unfinished Businessin New England: A Comparative Assessment of Environmental Problems'', December1988). 7. Have Connecticut and Rhode Island Demonstrated That They Have AdequateEnforcement Programs as Required by Section 110 of the Clean Air Act?<T3>Comments. </T3>API correctly noted that section 110 of the Act requiresthat the state provide a program for enforcement of the emission limitationsas well as necessary assurances that it has adequate resources to implementthe plan. API noted that Connecticut and Rhode Island intend to enforcetheir problems through sampling at terminals, bulk plants and other primarydistribution points but not at retailers. API pointed out that EPA's RVPenforcement program covers these points and also reaches all the way toretailers, and claimed that this establishes a minimum standard for effectiveenforcement of RVP limits that Connecticut and Rhode Island fail to meet.API further claimed that the states' regulations do not satisfy EPA's guidelinesfor enforceability and legal sufficiency because they currently containno RVP recordkeeping requirements for affected gasoline storage facilities.<T3>Response.</T3> EPA does not agree with API's enforcement concerns.EPA's decision to extend its RVP enforcement program down to the retaillevel reflects concern that nationally there may be the opportunity toincrease the RVP of gasoline that has already left the refinery or bulkterminal by blending the gasoline with a higher RVP fuel before it reachesthe retailer. This is a reasonable concern for the national RVP program,which allows for three different RVP fuels, depending on defined geographicareas. Opportunities to blend the differing RVP gasoline en route to theretailer to yield a noncomplying fuel would exist. EPA concluded in itsnational rulemaking that testing at all points in the distribution systemwould provide the ``best safeguard'' against distribution of noncompliantgasoline and would result in the ``greatest likelihood'' of achieving environmentalresults. However, EPA did not conclude that its program represented a minimumstandard or that anything short of this enforcement scheme would be inadequateunder section 110(a)(2). EPA does not believe that the Connecticut and Rhode Island enforcementprograms must mirror the federal program. First, if the states successfullyensure that all the gasoline in bulk plants and terminals within the stateare below 9 psi, the opportunities for RVP enhancement within the statewill be small. Retail distributors would have to truck higher RVP gasolineinto Connecticut and Rhode Island and splash blend the gasoline to accomplishthis, an unlikely scenario. Second, retail outlets in Connecticut and RhodeIsland will be subject to EPA's national enforcement program. If gasolinethat does not comply with the states' 9 psi limit is found at retailersin the state by EPA, we will surely share such evidence with the states.Thus, while the EPA and Connecticut and Rhode Island RVP enforcement programsdo not match, they do have significant overlap, provide for some inspectionof retailers, and contain sufficient flexibility to adequately provideenforcement of the regulation. EPA also disagrees with API's view that an absence of recordkeeping provisionsfatally flaws the states' enforcement programs. While EPA's general enforcementguidance for all programs recommends recordkeeping provisions, EPA is notrigidly bound by such guidance. It is particularly true in this case whereEPA's own RVP enforcement program does not require recordkeeping. As APInoted, EPA discussed this issue in the TSD for the Connecticut proposaland concluded that it was not problematic. Moreover, EPA notes that in the comparable arena of enforcement throughDelayed Compliance Orders (DCOs), courts have held that EPA may not secondguess the state's choice of enforcement mechanisms so long as the chosensystem is a reasonable one. <T3>Bethlehem Steel Corp. </T3>v. <T3>U.S. E.P.A.,</T3> 638 F.d 994, 1005-1006 (7th Cir. 1980); appealed,<T3>Bethlehem Steel</T3> v. <T3>Gorsuch,</T3> 726 F.2d 356 (7th Cir. 1984), reh. den., en banc, vacatedon reh., 732 F.2d 97 (7th Cir. 1984), withdrawn and appealed, 742 F.2d1028 (7th Cir. 1984).Furthermore, even if Connecticut's and Rhode Island's enforcement schemeswere inadequate to support a finding, ultimately, that the state's eventuallycomplete ozone SIP update meets all of the requirements in section 110(a)(2),EPA could still approve the rule under section 110(a)(3). That is because,even with an inadequate enforcement program, the rule would still strengthenthe pre-existing SIP and hence, under the rationale in <T3>Michigan</T3> v. <T3>Thomas,</T3> 805 F.2d 176, 186 (6th Cir. 1986), be approvable for thatlimited purpose.8. Have Connecticut and Rhode Island Satisfied the Act's Public Noticeand Hearing Requirements?<T3>Comments.</T3> API claimed that EPA failed to address the questionof whether the Connecticut and Rhode Island SIP revisions were adoptedafter ``reasonable notice and public hearing.'' While acknowledging thatpublic hearings were held, they alleged that the decision to limit RVPto 9 psi was actually made by NESCAUM some time before public hearingson the Connecticut and Rhode Island RVP regulations, and that thereforeany hearings nominally provided are substantively inadequate. On the otherhand, NESCAUM commented that ozone pollution problems, especially in theNorthwest, are clearly regional problems and must therefore be dealt withthrough consistent regulations.API also questioned whether notice and hearing was provided on the SIPrevision or just a state regulation. They believe it was unclear from thepublic notices and materials available before the hearings that the RVPrule was actually intended to be submitted as a revision to the SIP.<T3>Response.</T3> As to the first claim, EPA's <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice actually provides the dates of the hearingsand the TSD contains an itemization of the dates the public notices werepublished, including an identification of the newspaper the notice waspublished in. Although there is no summary statement that the public participationrequirements for hearing and notice were met, the record does speak tothat effect.EPA finds API's concerns that the public hearings were largely meaninglessand thus not ``reasonable'' to be misplaced. API infers that Connecticut,Rhode Island and the other NESCAUM states had predetermined the outcomeof the hearings before and without regard to the hearings held in thosestates. EPA is not at all convinced that the process was predetermined.If API were aggrieved on this matter, we would have expected it to challengethe states' proceedings under state law, as API has in fact done in NewYork. However, no party challenged Connecticut's or Rhode Island's proceedings,including API, who was a participant.EPA acknowledges that Connecticut and Rhode Island did initiate rulemakingon RVP control pursuant to an agreement on RVP control with the other northeaststates. However, having initiated the rulemaking on that basis, the statethen proceeded to promulgate the regulations through its full administrativeprocess, giving adequate notice and opportunity for public hearing on theproposed regulations.As a policy matter EPA agrees that the ozone problem in the Northeast isa problem of regional magnitude and has held several meetings with topEPA and State environmental officials in EPA Regions I, II, and III todetermine what concerted efforts the states could take on their own todeal with issues of regional, but not necessarily national, scope. ThereforeEPA believes that it is appropriate for the northeastern states to regulateozone precursors in a consistent fashion. However, each state must providefor adequate public participation in the promulgation of individual regulations,including assessing and responding to all submitted comments, as Connecticutand Rhode Island have done in connection with their RVP regulations. Asdiscussed more fully below, EPA reviewed the states' public participationprocedures and determined that the states provided adequate opportunityfor public input in connection with development of the RVP rules.API argued specifically that the states' hearing procedures were not adequateto comply with section 110 of the Act or EPA's hearing regulations of 40CFR section 51.102. The operative language in both the statute and theregulation is ``reasonable notice and public hearing.'' API asserts thatConnecticut and Rhode Island had predetermined its final decision on RVPregulation and thus the hearing provided was not reasonable.However, EPA interprets the language of both the statute and the implementingregulations as requiring the state to provide, first, reasonable noticeof public hearing, and second, a public hearing. EPA does not believe thatthe law requires the Agency to review the hearing record and determinewhether the hearing provided was itself ``reasonable.''EPA's interpretation of the hearing requirement is clearly reflected inthe regulations at 40 CFR 51.102. The regulations go into substantial detailon the manner in which states must provide notice of a hearing in orderfor that notice to be considered reasonable. See 40 CFR 51.102(d); seealso 40 CFR 51.102(g)(2). However, the regulations make absolutely no mentionof specific requirements for conduct of public hearings. The state needonly certify that it in fact held a public hearing, which Connecticut andRhode Island clearly did, and need not provide any detailed informationon the conduct of the hearing.This is appropriate because the reasonableness of public notice can beassessed objectively by reviewing the amount and variety of notice methodsused. Assessing the reasonableness of a hearing on the other hand wouldbe a highly subjective determination done retrospectively that would unnecessarilyinfringe on the state's discretion in conducting its hearings. Of course,if EPA received concrete evidence that the hearing did not provide adequateopportunity for public participation, it could find that the hearing didnot meet the intent of EPA's regulation. EPA has, however, received nosuch evidence.API further claimed that a state must specifically identify a proposedregulation as a future SIP revision prior to scheduling a public hearingon the regulation. However, neither the statute nor EPA's regulations containany such explicit requirement. The purpose of a public hearing is to receivepublic input on the substance of proposed regulations, not on whether thestate may or may not submit the regulations as a SIP revision. For yearsEPA has approved SIP revisions with no analysis of whether the state hadpublicly announced its intent to eventually submit a proposed regulationas a SIP revision at the state public hearing stage.Generally it should be totally irrelevant to public commenters whethera regulation with which they will be required to comply as a matter ofstate law might also become an aspect of federal law. At the time Connecticutand Rhode Island held their public hearings on the RVP rules, prior tofederal preemption, commenters should similarly have had no concern asto whether the proposed state rules would eventually become federal lawas well. Only where a state regulation would otherwise be preempted byexisting federal law and therefore unenforceable would the public havea need to know that the state intended to seek federal approval of theregulation for purposes of preemption waiver in preparing comments at thestate hearing level. This was not the case at the time of the state hearingon the Connecticut and Rhode Island RVP rules. Moreover, given EPA's thenoutstanding proposal to regulate RVP and thus preempt state RVP regulation,it should have been apparent to commenters at the time of the public hearingthat Connecticut and Rhode Island would submit the rule as a SIP revisionto insure enforceability in the event of EPA final RVP regulation and preemption.9. Should Waivers or Exemptions from the State Regulations be Granted toSuppliers Who Cannot Provide 9 RVP Gasoline?<T3>Comments. </T3>Two commenters (BP Oil and Sun) expressed concern withpotential inequities resulting from supplier-specific requests for waivers.They indicated that the use of supplier-specific waiver provisions coulddiminish the calculated benefits of the rule by allowing higher RVP gasolineinto the system, and financially disadvantage those companies which areable to comply. They also expressed concern that the use of waivers andexemptions introduces uncertainties about whether the volatility regulationswill be applied fairly and equitably to all gasoline suppliers, becausethe Connecticut and Rhode Island regulations do not include explicit provisionsfor the states to follow in considering applications for waivers or exemptionsfrom individual suppliers.The commenters concluded that if waivers or exemptions are to be used,they must apply to all suppliers and significant penalties should be attached.In addition, one commenter noted that EPA has to consider how it will respondto supplier-specific waiver requests; and EPA ``is urged to adopt a policyon waivers which is consistent with its own RVP regulatory program.''<T3>Response.</T3> EPA is aware that Connecticut and Rhode Island intendto grant waivers to individual suppliers if necessary to avoid serioussupply dislocations during the initial stages of their RVP programs. AlthoughEPA did not focus on this aspect of the program in its notice of proposedrulemaking, commenters were also aware of the states' intentions and theissue was fully aired in the public comments. EPA is approving the Connecticutand Rhode Island RVP programs as a whole, which includes the ability ofthe states to issue waivers as appropriate. EPA is in essence pre-approvingany waivers that Connecticut or Rhode Island might grant as part of theoverall RVP program being approved into the Connecticut and Rhode IslandSIPs today. Connecticut and Rhode Island will not be required to submiteach waiver to EPA as a SIP revision before it may take effect.EPA is currently able to pre-approve any waivers that Connecticut or RhodeIsland may grant because the RVP program is a discretionary program thatthe states' have submitted to generate additional emission reductions andmove the state closer to attainment of the ozone NAAQS. EPA is not pre-approvingwaivers from a federally required program or a program to which EPA hasalready assigned specific emission reduction credits as part of an overallattainment demonstration. EPA could not pre-approve waivers in such situationsbecause they would constitute SIP relaxations. Here, whatever emissionreductions Connecticut and Rhode Island obtain from the RVP program, evenafter any waivers have been granted, will tighten the existing SIP andimprove air quality.EPA notes that its pre-approval of any waivers Connecticut or Rhode Islandmay grant under the RVP program differs dramatically from approval of ageneric permitting program such as a new source review or bubble program.In those cases, EPA authorizes states to approve relaxations of SIP requirementsprovided that the state follows approved procedures calculated to insurethat all such waivers are accounted for in the SIP attainment demonstrationand are issued using replicable evaluation techniques. Here, since EPAis not currently relying on the Connecticut and Rhode Island RVP programsfor any defined emission reduction credit toward an approved attainmentdemonstration, EPA need not now analyze the criteria by which Connecticutor Rhode Island will issue any waivers. Connecticut and Rhode Island arefree to issue waivers on the basis of their own state criteria, consistentwith any requirements of their state administrative procedures acts.When Connecticut and Rhode Island do submit their completed post-1987 attainmentdemonstration, EPA will assign specific emission reduction credits to theRVP programs, taking account of any supplier-specific waivers the statesmay have issued by that time. Once EPA has approved the Connecticut's andRhode Island post-1987 SIPs, it will take whatever rulemaking action isnecessary to ensure that any further waivers under the RVP program, whichat that point would be considered SIP relaxations, would be submitted toEPA for approval as individual SIP revisions.Finally, EPA notes that any suppliers who receive waivers from Connecticutor Rhode Island must still comply with the federal RVP limit of 10.5 psi.10. How Soon After the Date of Final Approval of the Connecticut and RhodeIsland Revisions Should the RVP Regulations Be Made Effective?<T3>Comments. </T3>Many commenters were concerned with the timing of EPA'sfinal action. Those favoring EPA approval of the SIP revision generallyfavored EPA acting quickly to make the regulations effective by their May1 starting date or as close to that as possible. These commenters notethat the Colonial Pipeline, which supplies 20% of the Northeast's gasoline,has been shipping 9 RVP fuel to the Northeast since March 1, 1989. Theyalso pointed out that those suppliers who have made a good faith effortto comply with the May 1st date would be at a competitive disadvantagerelative to those with cheaper, higher volatility gasoline if the dateis extended. Those opposing EPA approval of the SIP revision generally asked that ifwe did approve it we must provide the petroleum industry with realisticand sufficient lead-time to enable 9 psi gasoline to be distributed throughoutthe distribution system. These commenters cited EPA's allowing 70 and 100days for the recently promulgated national regulations to become effectiveat the terminal and retail level respectively as precedent for such a decision.A third path, suggested by API, would be for EPA to make its final approvalconditional on the state's deferral of the compliance date for its regulation.<T3>Response. </T3>The timing issue is one of the most difficult ones posedby this action. Since EPA has had control of the timing of the final federalRVP action, the decision on the Massachusetts RVP SIP, and the decisionon the Connecticut and Rhode Island RVP revisions, it is important thatwe ensure that both the federal and state programs start with a maximumlikelihood of success and a minimum possibility of supply disruption. EPA must consider several issues in deciding when to make the rule effective.The first issue is when the industry was put on notice that it would haveto supply 9 psi gasoline to Connecticut and Rhode Island. As the states'rules were passed in 1988, the industry was on notice since then of thestates' intention to control RVP to 9 psi. However, the Connecticut andRhode Island rules were preempted on March 22, 1989 by the promulgationof the federal volatility requirements. Another issue to consider is the lead-time that would be necessary to enable9 psi gasoline to get through the distribution system. The record indicatesthat the industry thought that it would take from 60 to 70 days to achievecompliance at the terminals in Connecticut and Rhode Island. The recordalso indicates that the Colonial Pipeline, which supplies at least 20%of the gasoline in the Northeast, has been shipping 9 psi gasoline sinceMarch 1, 1989. The final issue involves the air quality consequences of delaying the effectivedate. EPA should not delay action on a SIP revision in such a manner aswould thwart the states' intent in requesting the SIP revision. Connecticut'sand Rhode Island's submissions of the RVP SIP revision last winter wereclearly aimed at getting their regulatory programs in place for the 1989ozone season. Thus, it is important to have the effective date as earlyas possible in order to maximize the air quality benefits of the programsin 1989.In deciding to make this action effective on June 30, 1989, EPA has attemptedto balance these competing interests. EPA believes that this effectivedate will both minimize possible difficulties the industry might encounterwith a shorter lead-time and provide citizens in the Northeast as muchrelief as is practical during most of the 1989 ozone season. Although somesuppliers may have a good faith effort to comply with the May 1 effectivedate specified in the Connecticut and Rhode Island proposals, they wereunder no obligation to do so once EPA preempted the states' requirementby promulgating Federal RVP controls on March 22, 1989. The Agency cannot,therefore, select an earlier effective date for all suppliers based onthe voluntary action of a few, especially considering that the time betweenthe March 22 federal rulemaking and today's publication is critical tothe refiner/supplier planning and implementation process regarding fueldelivery for the coming summer. However, because refiners have alreadybegun to prepare for the sale of 9 RVP fuel as a result of EPA's approvalof the Massachusetts RVP SIP (published on May 4, 1989; 54 FR 19173), andin light of the fact that the three states share many links in the gasolinedistribution network, the Agency does not believe that an additional 60to 70 days lead-time is warranted. This starting date in Connecticult andRhode Island mirrors the starting date of the Massachusetts program. 11. Should EPA Reopen the Comment Period or Withdraw and Repropose ThisSIP Revision in Light of EPA's Final Action on the National RVP Regulationand other Alleged Defects in the March Proposals?<T3>Comments. </T3>EPA received divergent comments on the appropriate processfor and timing of a final action on the Connecticut and Rhode Island SIPrevisions. Rhode Island argued that EPA should take final action as soonas possible. On the other hand, the American Petroleum Institute (API)felt that because of numerous allegedly unresolved issues raised in theirsubstantive comments EPA should at a minimum repropose action on the revisionto deal with these issues before proceeding to final action. <T3>Response. </T3>EPA concludes that given its interpretation of the relevantlaw and the seasonal nature of the Connecticut and Rhode Island revisions,the Agency should proceed expeditiously to final action based on the recordcurrently before it. EPA is unpersuaded by API's claim that circumstanceshave so changed since the proposed approvals of the Connecticut and RhodeIsland revisions that we should reopen the comment period or withdraw andrepropose this action. EPA's proposed Federal Register notices for theConnecticut and Rhode Island RVP programs explicitly discussed the possibilitythat EPA would take final action on the national RVP program prior to finalaction on the state programs. EPA clearly presented the path EPA proposedto follow and the conclusions we proposed to reach in the event that theFederal RVP regulations were finally promulgated. Furthermore, in the finalFederal Register notice on the national RVP program, EPA exp-licitly discussedconsideration of different state RVP control programs. In this case EPA concludes that it is not necessary to issue a reproposalprior to taking final action. EPA believes that it has adequately respondedto all of the substantive comments raised by commenters in the substantivediscussions presented above. Obviously, additional analysis on such technicalissues could always be conducted. However, administrative agencies generallyhave the discretion to determine when issues have been aired sufficientlyand to close the record and proceed to final action, consistent of coursewith the need to act in a reasoned, non-arbitrary fashion. <T3>Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power </T3>v. <T3>N.R.D.C., </T3>435 U.S. 519, 554-555 (1978). Further, EPA should not delay action on a SIP revision in such a mannerthat would thwart the state's intent in requesting the SIP revision. Inthis case, Connecticut and Rhode Island have submitted a seasonal requirementthat since currently preempted must be approved in a timely fashion inorder to effectuate the states' intent that the regulations provide emissionreduction benefits in the upcoming summer ozone season. Therefore, EPAshould make best efforts to act on the information available to it nowto the extent that it is adequate or else the agency would thwart the states'intent with regard to the 1989 ozone season. Since EPA has concluded thatthe existing record is sufficient, EPA can proceed to final action at thistime based on that record.<ITAG tagnum="84">Enforcement</ITAG>In EPA's proposal on the Rhode Island SIP revision we indicated that therewas a problem with the test method section of Regulation Number 11. Theregulation allowed alternative test methods ``* * * approved by the Director.''EPA stated that such methods must also be approved by EPA or else the alternativemethods must be eliminated. EPA's proposal was made with the understandingthat this defect would be cured prior to final EPA action.On April 24, 1989 Rhode Island submitted its revision to Regulation Number11. The revision adds the words ``and EPA'' to the end of the relevantsentence. It also changes the specific designation (D323-82) of the ASTMtest method for the determination of RVP to a more general designation(D323). This gives the state the flexibility to use the 1982 version ofthe test or the 1958 version. Both versions will result in accurate measurementsof the RVP of gasoline. EPA finds that its prior concerns were addressedin exactly the manner EPA had suggested at proposal and that the test methodssection is approvable as revised since it is now fully enforceable.<ITAG tagnum="84">Final Action</ITAG>EPA is approving this revision to the Connecticut and Rhode Island OzoneState Implementation Plans to control gasoline volatility, including anywaivers Connecticut and Rhode Island may grant under the program. EPA hasalso made the finding that the Connecticut and Rhode Island SIP revisionsmeet the requirements of section 211(c)(4)(C) of the Act for an exceptionto federal preemption.The Administrator has determined that there is good cause, within the meaningof 5 U.S.C. section 553(d)(3), to make this action effective less than30 days after publication. The industry has been on notice since the Administratorapproved the Massachusetts RVP SIP (54 FR 19173; May 3, 1989) that theAdministrator was inclined to approve inconsistant state RVP rules to theextent necessary to provide for attainment. Making this action effectiveon the same date as the Massachusetts RVP rule provides the industry witha uniform effective date for two contiguous states that both have ruleslimiting RVP to 9.0 psi.Under section 307(b)(1) of the Act, petitions for judicial review of thisaction must be filed in the United States Court of Appeals for the appropriatecircuit by (60 days from date of publication). This action may not be challengedlater in proceedings to enforce its requirements (see 307(b)(2)).The Office of Management and Budget has exempted this rule from the requirementsof Section 3 of Executive Order 12291.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 40 CFR Part 52</ITAG>Air pollution control, Hydrocarbons, Ozone, Incorporation by reference.<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note: </T4>Incorporation by reference of the State Implementation Plansfor the State of Connecticut and the State of Rhode Island was approvedby the Director of the Federal Register on July 1, 1982.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>42 U.S.C. 7401-7642</ITAG>EPA is today approving the Connecticut and Rhode Island SIP revisions pertainingto their state gasoline volatility programs.<ITAG tagnum="21">Date: May 10, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">William K. Reilly,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator.</ITAG>For the reasons set forth in the preamble. Part 52 of Chapter I, Title40 of the Code of Federal Regulations is amended as follows:<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 52_[AMENDED]</ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 52 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>42 U.S.C. 7401-7642</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart H_Connecticut</ITAG>2. Section 52.370 is amended by adding paragraph (c)(50) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.370 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Identification of plan</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(c) * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">(50) Revisions to federally approved section 22a-174-20(a) of theRegulations of Connecticut State Agencies, submitted on January 27, 1989by the Department of Environmental Protection, limiting the volatilityof gasoline from May 1 through September 15, beginning 1989 and continuingevery year thereafter, including any waivers to such limitations that Connecticutmay grant. In 1989, the control period will begin on June 30.(i) Incorporation by reference.(A) Amendments to subsection 22a-174-20(a) of the Regulations of ConnecticutState Agencies, entitled ``Storage of `volatile organic compounds' andrestrictions for the Reid Vapor Pressure of gasoline,'' effective in theState of Connecticut on December 30, 1988.<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart 00_Rhode Island</ITAG>3. Section 52.2070 is amended by adding paragraph (c)(33) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.2070</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Identification of plan.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(c) * * *(33) Revisions to federally approved Air Pollution Control Regulation Number11 submitted on November 7, 1988 and April 24, 1989 by the Rhode IslandDepartment of Environmental Management, limiting the volatility of gasolinefrom May 1 through September 15, beginning 1989 and continuing every yearthereafter, including any waivers to such limits Rhode Island may grant.In 1989, the control period will begin on June 30.(i) Incorporation by reference.(A) Amendments to Rhode Island Air Pollution Control Regulation No. 11,effective July 5, 1979, entitled, ``Petroleum Liquids Marketing and Storage,''sections 11.7.1 filed with the Secretary of State of Rhode Island on August11, 1988, and effective in the State of Rhode Island on August 31, 1988.(B) Amendments to Rhode Island Air Pollution Control Regulation No. 11,effective July 5, 1979, entitled, ``Petroleum Liquids Marketing and Storage,''amendmends to section 11.7.2 filed with the Secretary of State of RhodeIsland on April 27, 1989, and effective in the State of Rhode Island onMay 17, 1989.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.801</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">[Amended]</ITAG>4. The table in andSection; 52.2081 is amended by adding a new entry to ``No.11'' to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="110"><C>7,L1,i1,xls32,xls32,xs72,r48,r32,r28,r160</C><T4>Table </T4>52.2081._<T4>EPA Approved Rules and Regulations</T4><H1>State Citation</H1><H1>Title/Subject</H1><H1>Date Submitted by State</H1><H1>Date Approved by EPA</H1><H1>FR Citation</H1><H1>52.2070</H1><H1>Comments/Unapproved sections</H1><ITAG tagnum="22"> </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="28">*                  *                  *                  *                 *                  *                  * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">No. 11<D>* * *</D><D/>* * *<D/>* * *<D/>* * *<D/>* * *<D/>* * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="22"> </ITAG><D/><D>11/07/88, 04/24/89</D><D>Publication June 2, 1989</D><D>54 FR</D><D>(c)(33)</D><D>Approves a limitation on volatility of gasoline from June 30 to Sept.15, 1989, and May 1 to Sept. 15 in subsequent years at Subsections 11.7.1and 11.7.2.</D><ITAG tagnum="22"> </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="28">*                  *                  *                  *                 *                  *                  *</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-12984 Filed 6-1-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6560-50-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>