<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89405-0017 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.4-05-89.f2.A1016</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="52">40 CFR Part 52</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[FRL-3565-2]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Approval and Promulgation of Implementation Plans; Massachusetts OzoneAttainment Plan; Control of Gasoline Volatility</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Environmental Protection Agency.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>EPA is approving State Implementation Plan (SIP) revisionssubmitted by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts. These revisions will reduceemissions of volatile organic compounds from gasoline by limiting the ReidVapor Pressure (RVP) of gasoline sold betweeen June 30 and September 15in 1989 and between May 1 and September 15 of each year thereafter to 9pounds per square inch. EPA is also finding that the Massachusetts RVPregulations are ``necessary to achieve'' the national ambient air qualitystandard (NAAQS) for ozone and are therefore excepted from preemption undersection 211 of the Clean Air Act. The intended effect of this action isto make necessary progress towards attainment of the ozone standard asexpeditiously as practicable as required under the Clean Air Act.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>June 30, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>Copies of the submittal are available for public inspectionat U.S. EPA, Room 2311, JFK Federal Building, Boston, MA 02203; and theDepartment of Environmental Quality Engineering, 1 Winter Street, Boston,MA 02108.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Peter X. Hagerty, (617) 565-3224or (FTS) 835-3224.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Introduction </ITAG>This <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice describes EPA's decision to approve revisionsto the Massachusetts SIP which limit the volatility of gasoline from June30 to September 15 in 1989 and from May 1 to September 15 every year thereafter.The remainder of this preamble is divided into four sections. The firstprovides the background for this action, with respect to both chronologyand the broad issues involved. The second section presents today's actionand EPA's rationale. The third section summarizes the comments receivedon the proposed action and EPA's responses to them. The final section discussesMassachusetts' revision to the test methods section of the regulationsto cure a deficiency identified and discussed in EPA's proposed rulemakingnotice.<ITAG tagnum="84">Background</ITAG>On November 12, 1987, the Commissioners of the Northeast States for CoordinatedAir Use Management (NESCAUM) signed a Memorandum of Understanding expressingtheir intention to reduce the Reid Vapor Pressure (RVP) of gasoline to10 pounds per square inch (psi) starting in the summer of 1988 and to 9psi in the summer of 1989 and continuing every ozone season thereafter.Since there were delays in adopting necessary regulations, the 1988 limitof 10 psi was eliminated and Massachusets passed a regulation limitingthe RVP of gasoline to 9 psi from May 1 to September 15 starting in 1989and continuing each year thereafter. On July 13, 1988, Massachusetts submitteda SIP revision to EPA for approval to implement this provision.On February 23, 1989, EPA published a <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice (54 FR 7794) proposing approval of theMassachusetts SIP revision. EPA also proposed to find that these revisionswere ``necessary'' to achieve the national ambient air quality standards(NAAQS) for ozone within the meaning of section 211(c)(4)(C) of the CleanAir Act (the Act), in the event that EPA subsequently took final actionon federal RVP regulations.Section 211(c)(4)(A) of the Act states that a state may not, for purposesof motor vehicle emissions control, prescribe or attempt to enforce anycontrol or prohibition respecting use of a fuel or fuel additive in a motorvehicle engine_``(i) if the Administrator has found that no control orprohibition under paragraph (1) is necessary and has published his findingin the <T4>Federal Register</T4>, or (ii) if the Administrator has prescribedunder paragraph (1) a control prohibition applicable to such fuel or fueladditive, unless [the] state prohibition or control is identical to theprohibition or control prescribed by the Administrator.'' At the time ofEPA's proposal on the Massachusetts revisions, EPA had proposed, but nottaken final action, on federal RVP control regulations.On March 22, 1989, EPA published a <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice (54 FR 11868) taking final action on nationalregulation of RVP, to take effect this summer. The maximum allowed summertimeRVP in Massachusetts under the federal regulation is 10.5 psi. Under section211(c)(4)(A) of the Clean Air Act, EPA's final action preempted inconsistentstate control of RVP, except in California. In its final action, EPA notedthat states could be exempted from preemption only if EPA finds it is ``necessary''to achieve the NAAQS as provided in section 211(c)(4)(C) of the Act. EPAmade specific note of the Massachusetts proposal and the conditions forEPA approval of state RVP regulations.<ITAG tagnum="84">Description of Today's Action</ITAG>EPA today approves revisions to the Massachusetts SIP which limit gasolinevolatility to 9 psi between June 30 and September 15 in 1989 and betweenMay 1 and September 15 in each year thereafter. The Massachusetts programincludes authority for the state to issue waivers to individual suppliersif necessary to avoid supply dislocations. EPA is approving the programas a whole, including any waivers the state might issue under this authority.This aspect of EPA's approval is discussed in full under section 9 of thenext portion of this notice describing EPA's response to comments.EPA is also explicitly finding that the Massachusetts revisions are ``necessaryto achieve'' the NAAQS within the meaning of section 211(c)(4)(C) of theAct. This means that Massachusetts' RVP regulations are not preempted bythe federal RVP regulations promulgated on March 22, 1989. EPA's rationale for this action and its effective date are presented below.In this context many issues raised by commenters on the proposal will beaddressed. The remaining comments will be discussed in the next portionof this notice. In approving the Massachussetts RVP SIP revisions, EPA must consider requirementsimposed by two different sections of the Clean Air Act. As with all SIPrevisions, section 110 provides the requirements for approval into theSIP. In this case, since EPA has promulgated federal RVP regulations, section211(c)(4)(A) preempts inconsistent state control. However, section 211(c)(4)(C)provides that the Administrator may except a state RVP control programfrom preemption if he finds it is ``necessary'' to achieve the NAAQS. Thus,the Massachusetts revisions must satify both section 110 and section 211requirements to gain approval. EPA has concluded that the Massachusetts RVP regulations are ``necessary''to achieve the ozone NAAQS. In reaching this conclusion EPA has followedthe test first articulated in approving the Maricopa County Arizona SIP(53 FR 17413 (May 18, 1988) and 53 FR 30228 (August 10, 1988)) and laterpresented in the proposed approval of the Massachusetts revisions. EPAstated that if, after accounting for the possible reductions from all otherreasonable control measures, Massachusetts could demonstrate that RVP controlsare still required to achieve the standard, then RVP controls are necessarywithin the meaning of section 211(c)(4)(C). EPA will not interpret thatprovision to require a state to impose more drastic measures such as drivingprohibitions or source shutdowns before it can adopt its own fuel controlprogram. As discussed in the notice of proposed rulemaking (NPR), the record indicatesthat Massachusetts needs VOC emission reductions on the order of at least28% from 1987 inventory levels to achieve the standard. The state reviewedapproximately 30 measures suggested by EPA as reasonable in addition toRVP control to 9 psi and found they could together potentially achievea 20% reduction from 1987 levels. Enhancements to the state's vehicle inspectionand maintenance (I/M) program could produce an additional 2% reduction.As indicated at proposal, while EPA's regulation of gasoline to 10.5 psireduces the emission reduction attributable to the state regulation, itdoes not affect the bottom line_a shortfall will still exist. EPA's technicalreview of the data presented in the state submission and by the commentersaffirms the conclusion that a shortfall will exist even with all reasonablestate and federal measures. EPA continues to believe that the fact that the state RVP regulation mightnot by itself fill the shortfall and hence by itself achieve the standarddoes not mean the rule is not ``necessary to achieve'' the NAAQS. It issimple logic that ``necessary'' is not the same as ``sufficient''. EPAbelieves that the ``necessary to achieve'' standard must be interpretedto apply to measures which are needed to reduce ambient levels when noother measures that EPA or the state has found reasonable are availableto achieve this reduction. Beyond such identified ``reasonable'' measures,EPA need look at other measures before RVP control, only if it has clearevidence that RVP control would have greater adverse impacts than thosealternatives. EPA has no such evidence here. Therefore, EPA can defer toMassachusetts' apparent view that RVP control is the next less costly (oris itself a reasonable) measure. Thus, EPA concludes that Massachusetts'RVP regulations are ``necessary'' to achieve the NAAQS. <ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of Public Comments and EPA's Responses </ITAG>The major issues discussed in the comments are: (1) what constitutes afinding of ``necessary to achieve'' the standard under section 211(c)(4)(C);(2) whether there has been an adequate technical demonstration that controllingRVP to 9 psi is ``necessary'' (i.e. whether the threshold for exemptionfrom preemption has been crossed); (3) the scope of EPA's discretion assuminga finding that state RVP controls are necessary to achieve the standard;(4) what effect the 9 RVP limit in Massachusetts will have on the costand supply of gasoline in the state and the Northeast; (5) driveabilityand safety concerns; (6) whether there is an ozone problem in Massachusetts;(7) whether the state has an adequate enforcement program or sufficientresources to implement the state regulations; (8) whether the state provided``reasonable opportunity'' for public comment; (9) what exemptions or waiversfrom the state regulations should be allowed; (10) the appropriate timingfor making the state regulation effective; and (11) whether EPA shouldwithdraw or repropose this action or reopen the public comment period inlight of EPA's recent promulgation of federal RVP regulations and otheralleged deficiencies in EPA's proposed action. Each issue is explored indetail below. 1. What constitutes a finding of ``necessary to achieve'' the standardunder section 211(c)(4)(C) of the Clean Air Act?a. Making the ``Necessary'' Finding Without a Demonstration of Attainment<T3>Comments: </T3>One group of comments questioned EPA's ability to makea finding that Massachusetts' RVP regulation is necessary to attain theozone standard without going through the complete planning process involvedin approving a state's response to EPA's finding that the current SIP issubstantially inadequate to achieve the standard (the ``SIP call''). Severalcomments stated that EPA cannot approve Massachusetts' RVP regulation asa SIP revision without finding that the SIP as a whole achieves attainmentof the NAAQS for ozone. Related comments questioned EPA's ability to determinewhether Massachusetts' RVP controls are necessary without a new updatedinventory of VOC sources which EPA will require from the states with ozonenonattainment areas as part of their response to the SIP calls. Finally,one comment asked how much time EPA will give states to achieve the ozonestandard and how EPA can determine what is necessary to achieve the standardwithout knowing when the states must achieve attainment.<T3>Response: </T3>Through its SIP calls, EPA has imposed on states likeMassachusetts an obligation to revise their ozone SIPs and demonstrateattainment of the standard. The thrust of these comments is that EPA cannotmake a finding of necessity without the states' first having gone throughthe new planning process and developing a new demonstration of attainment.EPA does not interpret section 211(c)(4)(C) to require a complete demonstrationof attainment in order to approve a measure which will contribute to attainment.Forcing a state to demonstrate attainment before allowing it to adopt stricterfuel controls would yield perverse results. Areas with the worst ozonenonattainment problems, which have the most difficulty assembling a demonstrationof attainment, would be disabled for perhaps several years from adoptingclearly necessary RVP controls stricter than the national controls. Onecomment noted that Massachusetts so far has not been able to identify anycombination of control measures which would bring the Commonwealth intoattainment, because the size of the VOC emission reduction necessary isso large. It is precisely in areas like Massachusetts, with an especiallydifficult nonattainment problem, where the expeditious implementation ofnew controls, and hence the finding of necessity under section 211(c)(4)(C),is most appropriate.Beyond that, it is reasonable for EPA to use the best information it nowhas available to determine whether Massachusetts' RVP program will be necessaryto achieve the standard without having to wait for Massachusetts to completeits planning response to the SIP call, including its updated inventory.As explained below, the VOC inventory and reduction figures Massachusettssubmitted to EPA were based on reasonably reliable models EPA has usedin the past. Such figures are always capable of refinement, but in theAgency's judgment the expenditure of time required to do so is not worththe marginally improved accuracy. <T3>See Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power </T3>v. <T3>N.R.D.C.</T3>, 435 U.S. 519, 554-555 (1978).EPA has not yet set a date certain by which Massachusetts must attain theozone standard. Congress may address the widespread nonattainment problemin the amendments to the Act now being considered. In the meantime EPAhas also proposed its own policy for how to deal with SIP planning fornonattainment areas in the post-1987 period. 52 FR 45104 (Nov. 24, 1987).The air quality analysis Massachusetts submitted made it clear that RVPcontrol beyond the federal requirements will be necessary to any attainmentplan, whether the attainment date that Congress or EPA selects is imminentor long-term. Moreover, there is widespread agreement among EPA and thestates in the Northeast that major VOC reductions, probably exceeding the28% estimated by EPA in this case, will be required to get close to attainingthe ozone standard. Nothing in the air quality data from the summer of1988, which have become available in quality-assured form since publicationof the proposal, indicates that the reduction requirement projected bythe Massachusetts analysis overstates the reduction necessary to achievethe standard. Beyond that, the history of ozone planning over the lastdecade makes it clear that reduction targets are seldom overestimated.Furthermore, EPA's approval of this proposal now is consistent with section110(a)(2)(A) of the Act, which requires attainment ``as expeditiously aspracticable.'' Interpreting section 211(c)(4)(C) to require a completeattainment demonstration before EPA can approve (and a state can implement)a fuel control that the state has determined to be practicable and thatwould advance the attainment date would effectively put section 211(c)(4)(C)in conflict with section 110(a)(2)(A). It is doubtful that Congress intendedEPA to choose an interpretation that would create such a conflict.b. The Standard EPA Has Applied to Determine Whether Fuel Controls AreNecessary Compared with Other Controls<T3>Comments: </T3>Several commenters maintained that EPA had not adequatelyanalyzed whether there are other control strategies reasonably availablewhich Massachusetts should implement before resorting to RVP controls inconsistentwith the federal regulation. EPA will address these comments in section2c, below. Other comments concerned the standard that EPA should use todetermine whether RVP controls are necessary compared to other controls.Finally, one comment suggested that EPA's approach to comparing alternativecontrol strategies is so vague that it is necessarily arbitrary.<T3>Response: </T3>In the proposal for this action, EPA used the approachit first announced when approving the Maricopa County Arizona SIP (53 FR17413 (May 18, 1988); 53 FR 30228 (August 10, 1988)) to determine whetherRVP controls beyond the federal program are necessary to attain the ozonestandard in Massachusetts. Under that approach, if after accounting forthe possible reductions from all other reasonable control measures, Massachusettscould demonstrate that RVP controls are still required to achieve the standard,then RVP controls are necessary within the meaning of section 211(c)(4)(C).For the reasons stated in the Arizona action and the Massachusetts proposal,EPA will not interpret section 211(c)(4)(C) to require a state to imposemore drastic measures such as driving prohibitions or source shutdownsbefore it can adopt its own fuel control program.One comment suggested that this threshold for a determination of necessityis too strict, and that fuel control may be necessary even where all otherreasonable control measures have not been exhausted. The commenter cited<T3>Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc. v. Thomas, </T3>838 F.2d 1224,1236-1237 (D.C. Cir. 1988) where the court held that EPA's stack heightregulations need not require a source to employ all available methods ofcontrol before determining that a stack above good engineering practiceheight is necessary under section 123 of the Act. This case, however, doesnot address the question EPA faces under section 211, where EPA must balancethe competing interests of a nationally uniform market for and adequatesupply of motor fuel and a state's air quality needs. Under section 211it is appropriate that EPA set a more strict threshold for a finding ofnecessity to account for Congress' express intent to preempt fuel regulationunless air quality protection requires additional state regulation.Another comment suggested that EPA could clarify the method by which itdetermines whether fuel controls are necessary by ranking all possiblecontrol measures according to their cost per ton of VOC reduced each year,and approving additional fuel controls only when the state has first exhaustedall controls which cost less per ton than fuel controls. EPA and Massachusettshave not developed cost figures for all the alternative controls whichthe agencies considered before resorting to state fuel controls. Massachusettshas, however, demonstrated to EPA that implementing all the control measureswhich EPA now believes to be reasonably available to Massachusetts forVOC control (including measures that the state has already adopted andis now beginning to implement) would not achieve compliance with the ozonestandard. The roster of control measures Massachusetts examined correspondsto the list of controls EPA has identified for states to implement in responseto the ozone SIP calls, and represents EPA's best judgment as to the controlswhich could now be reasonably implemented. See EPA's proposed Post-1987Ozone Policy, 52 FR 45104, Appendix C (Nov. 24, 1987). After examiningall controls EPA has determined to be reasonable, a state is free to makeits own determination as to what control measures should next be employed.Moreover, nothing in the language or purposes of section 211(c)(4)(C) suggeststhat EPA must buttress this judgment as to reasonable controls, a judgmentwhich is based on the state's thoughtful analysis and EPA's expertise regardingalternative measures, with a rigorous cost-effectiveness analysis. In anyevent, the shortfall in available emission reductions from reasonable measuresis so substantial that it is highly unlikely that a rigorous cost-effectivenesscomparison would show that there are enough measures whose cost-per-ton-reducedis below that of RVP controls to make such controls unnecessary.One comment maintained that EPA's method for determining what is necessaryis too vague because it would allow EPA to approve state fuel controls``simply because alternative measures are more inconvenient, unpopular,or costly.'' As discussed in section 2c below, EPA examined reasonablealternative controls which Massachusetts could implement and determinedthey would not achieve enough reduction to achieve the standard. EPA alsohas determined that remaining controls such as gas rationing, driving reductions,and source shutdowns are so drastic that the state may resort to fuel controlsfirst. This judgment concerning what is too drastic is a complicated policydetermination requiring the Administrator to weigh precisely those factorswhich the commenter would exclude from his consideration_whether the remainingalternatives are costly or unpopular. In <T3>Amoco Oil Co. v. Environmental Protection Agency, </T3>501 F.2d 722,740-741 the court distinguished between the factual foundation which EPAmust provide in its administrative decisions and policy judgments whichare an integral part of the findings Congress requires the Administratorto make under the Act:<ITAG tagnum="21">Where by contrast, the regulations turn on choices of policy, on anassessment of risks, or on predictions dealing with matters on the frontiersof scientific knowledge, we will demand adequate reasons and explanations,but not `findings' of the sort familiar from the world of adjudication.</ITAG>Id. at 741. EPA's and Massachusetts' analysis of reasonably available controlsis based on a factual record supported by the best analytical tools theagencies had available to them at the time. EPA's judgment that state fuelregulation is a less drastic course than gas rationing and other unpopularcontrols so far not implemented in any SIP is clearly a matter on the frontierof air pollution control planning, and therefore cannot (and need not)be supported by the same technical record as, for example, EPA's determinationthat Massachusetts needs at least a 28 percent reduction from its 1987inventory to attain the standard.2. Have Massachusetts and EPA made an adequate technical demonstrationthat controlling RVP to 9.0 psi is ``necessary'' to attain the NAAQS?a. Adequacy of Emission Inventory<T3>Comments:</T3> Three petroleum industry commenters argue that the emissioninventory used in the technical demonstration is inadequate. They pointout that EPA has already requested that Massachusetts prepare a new inventoryas part of its response to the SIP call. Therefore it is argued that Massachusetts'reliance on the old inventory is inappropriate.<T3>Response:</T3> As described in EPA's Technical Support Document, theemission inventory used by Massachusetts and reviewed by EPA is based onEPA's ``Compilation of Air Pollutant Emission Factors'', known by its documentnumber ``AP-42.'' This document and its updates are EPA's longstandingguidance for determining emissions for inventory purposes and has servedas the basis for ozone SIP inventories since the mid-1970s. Mobile sourceemissions were estimated using the then current version of EPA's mobilesource emissions model, MOBILE3, consistent with standard EPA guidance.While EPA has called for many states, including Massachusetts, to updatetheir inventories for post-1987 SIP planning purposes, the Agency has continuedto use existing inventories in evaluating current control proposals. EPAexpects the new Massachusetts inventory, not due until late 1989, to showhigher emissions than the current inventory since it is expected to includemore sources and improved quality assurance. Thus, if the current inventoryis lacking, it understates current emissions and errs such that the likelypercentage reduction needed to attain the standard is also understated.As stated in the NPR, EPA believes that if there is an error in quantifyingthe emission reductions resulting from control to 9 psi, those reductionsare understated. If the newly released mobile source emission model, MOBILE4,which includes the effects of running losses, were used, one would expectthe reduction in tons of VOCs to increase significantly. Furthermore, contraryto the commenters' belief, the estimated emission reduction is based onreductions achieved during only the four and one-half months each yearthe regulation is effective. This approach may understate the reductionsince 9 psi fuel will be in the distribution system up to two additionalmonths on each end of the regulatory season.Also contrary to the commenters' claim, EPA's TSD does contain an estimateof the emission reduction achieved by going from EPA's 10.5 psi limit toMassachusetts' 9.0 psi limit. EPA estimated a 2.5% reduction from the 1987inventory. This estimate does account for nonlinearity in emission reductionswith decreasing RVP limits.There was also some confusion about whether percent reductions were calculatedbased on the 1987 inventory, as shown in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> and TSD, or the 1986 inventory, as containedin the state submission. The reference to the 1987 inventory in the EPAdocuments is correct. EPA made use of the 1987 inventory contained in Massachusetts'1987 Ozone Reasonable Further Progress (RFP) Report to update the statesubmission. The calculated tons per year reductions from the various measuresidentified in the state submission were divided by the total VOC inventoryfound in the RFP report to obtain the percent reduction from 1987 levels.b. Appropriateness of the Modeling Demonstration<T3>Comments:</T3> While some commenters agreed that modeling was necessaryto evaluate the air quality benefit of the RVP reduction, they objectedto EPA's reliance on the Regional Oxidant Model (ROM). The commenters alsoraised concerns about the appropriate hydrocarbon-to-nitrogen-oxides (NOx)ratios to be used in such modeling. A third modeling issue concerns Massachusetts'and EPA's inability to associate a quantified increment of improved airquality with the control of RVP to 9 psi.<T3>Response:</T3> The claim that the ROM does not provide the spatialresolution needed for accurate prediction in individual urban areas losessight of the fact that we are evaluating a statewide program. The UrbanAirshed Model suggested by the commenters is appropriate for large urbanareas but would have to be run over at least two different geographic domainsto cover the entire state. Caught between the two available model scales,it is EPA's technical judgment that the ROM is an appropriate tool to usein evaluating future reductions needed for Massachusetts.EPA understands concern that past strategies have focused almost exclusivelyon controlling VOCs instead of NOx. As indicated in EPA's post-1987 ozonestrategy, future control scenarios are likely to include NOx. However,it is highly unlikely that NOx control alone will suffice. The best technicalinformation available to EPA at this time concerning the Northeast ozoneproblem points to the need for substantial VOC reductions and at leastmodest NOx reductions in the future to attain the ozone standard.The last modeling issue concerned Massachusetts' and EPA's inability toassociate a quantified increment of improved air quality with the controlof RVP to 9 psi. While such a modeling exercise would be ideal it is unlikelythat one would have much confidence in the outcome of such a sensitivitytest. The atmosphere's response to emission reductions of zone precursorsis highly nonlinear such that small increments of reduction may show littleor no effect on their own. However, when the reductions from the state'smany strategies are aggregated, the total impact becomes quantifiable.Thus, even though Massachusetts and EPA cannot pinpoint where the air qualitywill improve by what amount on what day, we are confident that there willbe a net improvement in ozone levels if Massachusetts were to decreaseVOC emissions by 2.5%c. Consideration of Other Alternatives<T3>Comments:</T3> Commenters expressed concern that Massachusetts andEPA have failed to consider other significant alternative control measuresthat could lead to attainment. They nominated source categories that includedwood furniture coating, drycleaning, and a host of transportation controlmeasures.<T3>Response:</T3> EPA believes sufficient alternatives were considered.In the Massachusetts submission EPA found consideration of the emissionreduction potential of 28 different point and area source categories, includingthe wood furniture category mentioned above. These categories correspondto those suggested by EPA in its proposed post-1987 ozone policy (52 FR45104, Appendix C, November 24, 1987). Not surprisingly, some of the sourcecategories are not relevant because there are no major sources in thosecategories in Massachusetts. In most of the relevant categories the potentialreductions are a very small portion (less than 1%) of the existing inventory.Excepting Stage II vapor recovery (regulations for which have already beenformally proposed by Massachusetts), architectural coatings and consumer/commercialsolvents, these other categories total no more than 4% of the 1987 inventory.As noted in the proposal, reductions from all of these measures produceonly about one-half of the reductions needed for attainment. With respect to transportation control measures, the commenters failedto take account of the fact that the existing Massachusetts SIP containsmany of the measures suggested by EPA in its proposed post-1987 ozone strategy.The existing SIP includes incentives for reduction in single-passengercommuter vehicle use (40 CFR 52.1161), regulations for bicycle use (40CFR 52.1162), and parking management regulations which include one of theonly commercial parking freeze programs in the country (40 CFR 52.1134-1135).Since 1982 there has also been an impressive expansion in rapid transitand commuter rail service in the metropolitan Boston area. While EPA recognizesthat other transportation measures may be needed in Massachusetts, theremainder are difficult to quantify, yield small reductions individually,and, as evidenced by the public reaction to the EPA-promulgated implementationplans containing such measures in the 1970's (see H.R. Rep. No. 95-294,95 Cong. 1st Sess, reprinted in 4 Legislative History of the Clean AirAct Amendments of 1977, at 2748-55 (1978)), generally can be expected tohave more significant adverse effects on the public as a whole than RVPcontrols would. To be sure, if there were sufficient evidence for EPA toconclude that the state's RVP controls would result in significantly moresevere impacts than other measures that neither EPA nor the state has yetidentified as ``reasonable'' for the state to implement, then it mightwell be appropriate for the Agency to account for the emission reductionsthat those other measures would achieve before determining the shortfallagainst which to judge the RVP controls. The Agency does not believe, however,that the state's RVP control, given the lead-time provided by today's approval,would produce significantly more severe effects than such alternatives(e.g., than a trip reduction ordinance of the type that Arizona found reasonablefor application in Phoenix and Tucson). In sum, Massachusetts and EPA have indeed examined a broad range of potentialemission reduction strategies and have still identified a significant shortfallin the level of emission reductions likely to be needed to achieve theozone standard. 3. What is the scope of EPA's discretion assuming a finding that stateRVP controls are necessary to achieve the standard? a. Permissible Bases for EPA's Decision to Approve State RVP Controls <T3>Comments:</T3> Several comments asserted that even where EPA has determinedthat state fuel controls are necessary to achieve the standard, EPA maynevertheless disapprove those controls if EPA determines that the economicor fuel supply impacts of the state's regulation are unreasonable. Thesecommenters suggested that EPA may give significant consideration to costsbecause section 211(c)(40)(C) provides that the Administrator ``may'' approvea SIP revision imposing state fuel controls once he makes the finding ofnecessity. Conversely, other commenters maintained that EPA may not disapproveMassachusetts SIP revision based on economic grounds, once EPA has madethe finding of necessity. <T3>Response:</T3> EPA believes that it must consider cost to some limitedextent whenever the Administrator decides whether to make a finding undersection 211(c)(4)(C) that a fuel measure is ``necessary'' for attainment.As discussed above, to determine whether state fuel controls are necessary,EPA must look first at whether other measures that it determines are reasonable(and, perhaps, other measures the state has adopted) will by themselvesachieve timely attainment. Arguably, an alternative measure is ``reasonable''only if its effects are less drastic than the effects of the fuel controls.Clearly the cost and supply impact of the state fuel controls will be afactor in any such judgment. EPA does not interpret the use of ``may'' in section 211(c)(4)(C) to givethe Administrator unfettered discretion to disapprove the SIP revisionon economic grounds once he has made the finding that state fuel controlsare necessary to achieve the standard. Section 211(c)(4)(C) must be readin the context of the preemption created in section 211(c)(4)(A), whichprohibits states from adopting inconsistent fuel controls in their SIPs,or anywhere else, for air pollution control purposes. In the face of thisprohibition, the sole effect of the ``may'' in section 211(c)(4)(C) isto authorize the Administrator to overcome a provision (section 211(c)(4)(A))that would otherwise bar him from approving the SIP revision. The use of``may'' in section 211(c)(4)(C) does not eliminate the obligation thatsection 110(a)(3)(A) places on the Administrator to approve the SIP revision,provided it meets the requirements of section 110(a)(2). See <T3>Train</T3> v. <T3>Natural Resources Defense Council, Inc.</T3>, 421 U.S. 60, 98 (1975).Section 110(a)(2) requires the Administrator to approve a SIP revisionif, among other things, it may be necessary to insure attainment and maintenanceof the standard. Section 110(a)(2)(B). EPA may not consider the economicimpact of a necessary SIP revision under section 110(a)(2); under thatprovision, it is for the state to determine what economic costs are appropriateto achieve the standards. <T3>Union Electric Co. </T3>v.<T3> E.P.A.</T3>, 427 U.S. 246, 256-258 (1976). Beyond that, it would beincongruous for Congress to give EPA more discretion to reject a SIP revisionfor reasons unrelated to the goal of achieving the standard as quicklyas possible precisely where EPA has determined that a SIP revision is necessaryto achieve the standard. Therefore, once EPA makes the finding that statefuel controls are necessary to achieve the standard, a finding which includesa determination that such fuel controls are more reasonable than otheravailable measures, EPA may not reject a state's SIP proposal simply foreconomic reasons. One commenter cited <T3>Motor Vehicle Manufacturers Association v. E.P.A., </T3>768 F.2d 385,389-390 (D.C. Cir. 1985), for the proposition that the use of ``may'' undersection 211 commits the decision to the discretion of the Administrator.The <T3>MVMA</T3> court was examining EPA's decision to grant a waiver undersection 211(f)(4) of the Act for the use of fuel additives not substantiallysimilar to those in the fuel EPA uses to certify the emissions from automobiles.The court was not examining section 211(c)(4)(C), which allows EPA, uponmaking a particular finding not mentioned in section 211(f)(4), to acton a SIP revision submitted by a state after full hearing at the statelevel and subject to the requirements of sections 110(a)(2) and (3)(A).b. Intent of Federal Preemption Under 211 <T3>Comments: </T3>Several comments insisted that EPA should disapproveMassachusetts' RVP controls because Congress intended to avoid a patchworkof different state fuel controls in favor of a uniformly regulated nationalmarket for fuels. These commenters expressed concern that the exceptionin section 211(c)(4)(C) to the rule of preemption under section 211(c)(4)(A)would eventually swallow the rule. Several comments urged EPA not to actinconsistently with its decision not to limit gasoline to 9 psi in 1989in the federal RVP control program.On the other hand, several comments urged EPA to support the regional approachto RVP control that the NESCAUM states are undertaking. One commenter pointedout that where Congress has not acted to address the ozone nonattainmentproblem, it is reasonable to let the states do all they can to attain.<T3>Response: </T3>It is clear that section 211(c)(4)(A) indicates thatCongress desired to maintain a nationally regulated market for fuels. Itis equally clear that section 211(c)(4)(C) indicates Congress recognizedthat there will be states where the air quality problem is so severe thatthe interest in a nationally regulated market must bow to the need foradditional state controls on fuel content. EPA has not been able to findany legislative history which illuminates with any detail beyond the languageof the Act how EPA should strike this balance.It is reasonable to infer that Congress was aware that the air qualityneeds of particular states might create varying fuel content requirements,and that Congress accepted that risk in favor of protecting the publichealth. Several commenters cited <T3>Exxon Corp. v. City of New York,</T3> 548 F.2d 1088 (2d Cir. 1977),as precedent that a uniformly regulated fuel market is the overriding purposebehind section 211(c)(4). The Exxon court, however, was not faced witha claim for an exception to preemption under section 211(c)(4)(C), andspecifically left it to EPA to determine whether such an exception is appropriate:<ITAG tagnum="21">The Act sensibly provides for an exception from its comprehensivepreemption of local regulation of motor vehicle fuels only when such regulationis a provision in a state implementation plan approved by the Administratorwho has the competence to make the needed professional engineering andenergy conservation decisions.</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T3>Id</T3>. at 1096. Once EPA has made a finding of necessity under section211(c)(4)(C), it is reasonable for EPA to interpret the Act to place paramountimportance on protecting public health and achieving the standard.EPA believes that the oil industry's concern that the exception will swallowthe rule is overstated. As described above, EPA will approve inconsistentstate fuel controls only where the state can demonstrate that exhaustingall other reasonable alternatives will not achieve the standard, takingcosts into account in determining reasonableness. This demonstration isnot a trivial hurdle, and it is highly unlikely that every state with anozone nonattainment area could make such a showing. Furthermore, a stateis unlikely to burden its citizens with the potentially higher cost oflower RVP fuel unless the air quality needs are compelling. Finally, regionalinitiatives such as NESCAUM's help avoid a wide variety of state controls.EPA also believes that its decision not to impose a limit of 9 psi by 1989in EPA's RVP control program does not preclude EPA from approving Massachusetts'SIP proposal. When developing its federal RVP control program, EPA imposedcontrols across the nation, and had to determine the level of RVP controlwhich supply sources for the entire continental United States could reasonablymeet. Further, although EPA was able to make this determination as to particularregions within the country, EPA did not intend to account for the particularair quality needs of each state.4. What effect will the 9 RVP limit in Massachusetts have on the cost andsupply of gasoline?<T3>Comments:</T3> Several of the oil company commenters, (API, BP, Mobil,Phillips, APIP) stated that if the 9 psi standard took effect in 1989 thedistribution system would be strained and that there could be some significantsupply dislocation and cost increases. Seven other commenters were worriedabout possible supply problems. APIP stated that the petroleum industrywould not guarantee that they would be able to meet the 9 psi standardin the Northeast. Several (Mobil, APIP, Phillips) stated that even if refinershad capacity to produce 9 psi gasoline, there would be logistical problemssuch as the need for additional tankage for storage associated with itsdistribution. Also, several (Sun, APIP) stated that they could not ensurethat imports at 9 psi would be available. Most of the oil company commentors(API, APIP, NPRA, Mobil, Marathon, Sun) stated that there will be someneed for capital improvements at refineries to meet the 9 psi standard.Several (API, Mobil, Marathon) stated that there will likely be a costimpact to the Massachusetts 9 standard and eight other commenters statedthat they were worried about the increased cost. API stated that the estimatesof increased cost do not reflect the extra cost increase that could accompanya significant supply disruption.Massachusetts cites its two studies as support for the position that supplyis not a problem and stated that it continues to believe that the costwill be a 2 to 3 cents per gallon increase in price.<T3>Response:</T3> The potential supply problems arise out of two factors:First, decreasing the volatility of gasoline requires increased refinerycapacity. It is certain that implementation of 9 psi volatility in theNESCAUM states will create a refining capacity reduction in the amountof gasoline capable of being produced at each refinery. This is true ofboth domestic and foreign suppliers. Second, the problem may be furtherexacerbated by the expected increased demand in gasoline in the summermonths.Various studies have been conducted to determine how much refining capacitywill be lost from implementation of 9 psi volatility in the NESCAUM states,how much demand for gasoline is likely to increase in the summer of 1989,and what effect these factors will have on gasoline supply capabilities.The two studies done for NESCAUM and the one done for EPA are inconclusive.There appear to be numerous factors which make precise prediction of theseeffects impossible. However, under the EPA Study (Sobotka study), estimatesindicate that the volatility standard may be feasible without serious supplyproblems.The Sobotka study cites the Department of Energy (DOE) as predicting thatdemand for gasoline should increase only in the range of 1 to 1.5 percentthis summer. This estimate is also supported by other studies includingone reported at a National Petroleum Refiners Association conference. Thestudy also estimates that approximately a 5 percent refining capacity shortfallwill occur at domestic refineries because of the NESCAUM volatility laws.The study estimates that with a 1.2 percent increase in demand for gasolinein the summer, U.S. refineries would be able to make up for a 5 percentdomestic shortfall, and a 10 percent import shortfall, without constructionof new facilities or installation of additional equipment. Although variousfactors make it impossible to accurately predict the refining shortfallof imported gasoline, there is no strong evidence indicating that it willexceed 10 percent. Thus, the Sobotka study suggests that it is likely thatthe resulting refinery capacity shortfalls from a 9 standard in 1989 shouldnot result in supply shortfalls. In the unlikely even of unforeseen supplydisruptions, the State of Massachusetts has assured EPA that it has theauthority to take immediate steps to provide needed waivers or exceptionsto the program. The State has committed to carefully monitor the supplysituation this year and take appropriate action, as may be necessary, toensure that supply problems do not occur as a result of its state RVP controlprogram. See also the response to section 9 later in this notice for morediscussion of state waivers or exceptions.5. What effect will 9 RVP gasoline have on driveability in cold weatherand vehicle safety? <T3>Comments: </T3>Seven commenters from Vermont and Maine expressed concernthat gasoline from Massachusetts having an RVP of 9 would be shipped intotheir states and cause starting and driveability problems in the springand fall. They were also concerned that the approval of the MassachusettsSIP would lead to approval of 9 RVP fuel in all New England states. Threecommenters representing petroleum interests expressed concern that the9 RVP fuel would cause hard starting, hesitation, and stalling in the earlyspring and late fall. Gasoline will have to enter the distribution systemin March and will not be out until October in order to comply with theregulation. Temperatures can be at or near freezing during this time ofyear. One commenter stated that cars that are poorly tuned and have weakbatteries are more susceptible to low RVP fuel problems. They also statedthat California should not be used for comparison because they have a shortersupply time since its fuel comes from refineries within the state. Threecommenters supported the use of 9 RVP fuel, claiming that driveabilityis not a problem because the weather in northern California is similarto the weather in New England. They also referred to the Motor Vehicle Manufacturers Association statementon the New Jersey RVP regulations, dated August 18, 1988, which statedthat 9 RVP fuel would cause no driveability problems. Another commenterrepresenting a group of automobile manufacturers indicated there shouldbe no adverse effect from the use of 9 RVP fuel. Two commenters stated that although fuel used now is safe because the vaporsare too rich in hydrocarbons to be ignited, the reduction to 9 RVP fuelwill make the vapors potentially explosive below 15 degrees fahrenheit.Another commenter's report showed that reduction of RVP to 9 reduced firesand problems of overpressurization, vapor lock, fuel spurting, and fuelfoaming. <T3>Response: </T3>We believe that the nature of the gasoline distributionsystem makes it very unlikely that 9 RVP fuel will be available to consumersin March or early April, even if the blending-down process by that timehas begun to reduce RVP. Continued availability of low-RVP fuel is evenless likely by late October because the blending-up period will occur rapidlyat the close of the control period. Nevertheless, the experience of California,which has required 9 RVP fuel for many years, appears to demonstrate thatwidespread driveability or fuel safety problems will not occur in New England.We know of no evidence of extensive problems in California, despite significantoperation at cool temperatures and high elevations. As further evidence of this conclusion, one can compare the true vaporpressure (TVP) experienced in fuel tanks at different times during theyear. For example, when corrected for elevation, gasoline in Billings,Montana at its January 1988 average RVP of 13.6 and at the historic lowJanuary temperature of ^30 degrees Fahrenheit would result in a true vaporpressure of 1.0 psi. Similarly, for Boston, the analogous RVP and temperatureof 10.0 RVP and ^12 degrees would also result in a TVP of 1.0. In contrast,8.5 RVP fuel at an analogous Boston April temperature of 18 degrees wouldresult in a TVP of 1.8 psi, 80 percent higher than the winter figure. Weconclude from this that if low-volatility fuel were to reach consumersduring very low temperature weather, any degradation in driveability orfuel safety would be no greater (and would likely be less) than that experiencedcurrently during the winter. Conversely, low volatility fuel should improve vehicle driveability invery hot weather by reducing the occurrence of such conditions as vaporlock and fuel foaming. 6. Is there really a severe ozone problem in Massachusetts or the Northeast?<T3>Comments: </T3>A number of industry commenters, in urging EPA to disapprovethe SIP revision, claimed that the air is really becoming cleaner and cleanerover time and that the ozone standard is being met more than 99% of theyear. Environmental groups countered these claims with data from 1987 and1988 which show a worsening of the ozone problem since 1986. They notedthat 1988 was one of the worst ozone seasons on record across the Northeast.<T3>Response: </T3>EPA is firmly convinced that there is a serious ozoneproblem in the Northeast. EPA's conviction was evidenced by last year'sSIP calls to Massachusetts and most other Northeast states. This SIP callwas based on 1985-1987 ozone monitoring data which ranked southern NewEngland among the worst ozone nonattainment areas in the country. EPA'sconcern is further heightened by the 1988 ozone season. The ozone standardwas exceeded more frequently, at more sites, and at higher levels in 1988than in 1987. In fact, as one commenter noted, a 1988 EPA Region I studycomparing public health risk from environmental problems in New Englandranked ozone in the highest risk category (``Unfinished Business in NewEngland: A Comparative Assessment of Environmental Problems'', December1988).7. Has Massachusetts demonstrated that it has an adequate enforcement programor adequate resources to implement the RVP regulation, as required by section110 of the Clean Air Act? <T3>Comments: </T3>API correctly notes that section 110 of the Act requiresthat the state provide a program for enforcement of the emission limitationsas well as necessary assurances that it has adequate resources to implementthe plan. API notes that Massachusetts intends to enforce its program throughsampling at terminals, bulk plants and other primary distribution pointsbut not at retailers. They point out that EPA's RVP enforcement programcovers these points and also reaches all the way to retailers and claimthat this establishes a minimum standard for effective enforcement of RVPlimits that Massachusetts fails to meet. They further claim that Massachusetts'stated intention to assign five additional personnel to implement the RVPprogram is inadequate. <T3>Response: </T3>EPA does not agree with API's enforcement concerns.EPA's decision to extend its RVP enforcement program down to the retaillevel reflects concern that nationally there may be the opportunity toincrease the RVP of gasoline that has already left the refinery or bulkterminal by blending the gasoline with a higher RVP fuel before it reachesthe retailer. This is a reasonable concern for the national RVP program,which allows for three different RVP fuels, depending on defined geographicareas. Opportunites to blend the differing RVP gasoline en route to theretailer to yield a noncomplying fuel would exist. EPA concluded in itsnational rulemaking that testing at all points in the distribution systemwould provide the ``best safeguard'' against distribution of noncompliantgasoline and would result in the ``greatest likelihood'' of achieving environmentalresults. However, EPA did not conclude that its program represented a minimumstandard or that anything short of this enforcement scheme would be inadequateunder section 110(a)(2). EPA does not believe the Massachusetts enforcement program must mirrorthe federal program. First, if Massachusetts successfully ensures thatall the gasoline in bulk plants and terminals within the state are below9 psi, the opportunities for RVP enhancement within the state will be small.Retail distributors would have to truck higher RVP gasoline into Massachusettsand splash blend the gasoline to accomplish this, an unlikely scenario.Second, retail outlets in Massachusetts will be subject to EPA's nationalenforcement program. If gasoline that does not comply with Massachusetts'9 limit is found at retailers in the state by EPA, we will surely sharesuch evidence with the state. Thus, while the EPA and Massachusetts RVPenforcement programs do not match, they do have significant overlap, providefor some inspection of retailers, and contain sufficient flexibility toadequately provide enforcement of the regulation. Moreover, EPA notes thatin the comparable arena of enforcement through Delayed Compliance Orders(DCOs), courts have held that EPA may not second guess the state's choiceof enforcement mechanisms so long as the chosen system is a reasonableone. <T3>Bethlehem Steel Corp. </T3>v <T3>U.S. E.P.A.</T3>, 638 F.2d 994, 1005-1006 (7th Cir. 1980); appealed,Bethlehem Steel v. Gorsuch, 726 F.2d 356 (7th Cir. 1984), reh. den., enbanc, vacated on reh., 732 F.2d 97 (7th Cir. 1984), withdrawn and appealed,742 F.2nd 1028 (7th Cir. 1984). EPA disagress with API's concerns that Massachusetts' resource commitmentis insufficient to enforce the RVP regulations. The state submittal clearlyindicates that five additional persons will be assigned to implement theRVP program. Given that Massachusetts will be testing only at the primarydistribution level and will be relying to some extent on examination ofdistributor records, EPA believes that Massachusetts' commitment of fiveadditional persons will be sufficient to provide assurance of adequatepersonnel to carry out the RVP program as required by section 110(a)(2)(F).EPA doubts that it could commit any more of its federal resources to enforcethe national program in Massachusetts in the absence of the state program.Moreover, even if the Massachusetts rule's enforcement scheme were inadequateto support a finding, ultimately, that the states' eventually completeozone SIP update meets all of the requirements in section 110(a)(2), EPAcould still approve the rule under section 110(a)(3). That is because,even with an inadequate enforcement program, the rule would still strengthenthe pre-existing SIP and hence, under the rationale in <T3>Michigan </T3>v. <T3>Thomas</T3>, 805 F.2d 176, 186 (6th Cir. 1986), be approvable for thatlimited purpose.8. Has Massachusetts satisfied the Act's public notice and hearing requirements? <T3>Comments:</T3> API claims that EPA failed to address the question ofwhether the Massachusetts SIP revision was adopted after ``reasonable noticeand public hearing.'' While acknowledging that public hearings were held,they allege that the decision to limit RVP to 9 psi was actually made byNESCAUM some time before public hearings on the Massachusetts RVP regulation,and that therefore any hearing nominally provided was substantively inadequate.On the other hand, NESCAUM commented that ozone pollution problems, especiallyin the Northeast, are clearly regional problems and must therefore be dealtwith through consistent regulations.  API also questions whether notice and hearing was provided on the SIP revisionor just a state regulation. They believe it was unclear from the publicnotices and materials available before the hearing that the RVP rule wasactually intended to be submitted as a revision to the SIP. Finally, APIquestions whether 40 CFR 51.104(d), which requires certain SIP revisionsto be submitted to EPA within 60 days after their adoption, is applicableto this revision. They claim the Massachusetts revision was not submitteduntil over 80 days after the RVP rule was adopted.  <T3>Response:</T3> As to the first claim, EPA's <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice actually provides the dates of the hearingsand the TSD contains an itemization of the dates the public notices werepublished, including an identification of the newspaper the notice waspublished in. Although there is no summary statement that the public participationrequirements for hearing and notice were met, the record does speak tothat effect.  EPA finds API's concerns that the public hearings were largely meaninglessand thus not ``reasonable'' to be misplaced. API infers, from selectedquotations, that Massachusetts and the other NESCAUM states had predeterminedthe outcome of the hearings before and without regard to the hearings heldin January 1988. EPA is not at all convinced that the process was predetermined.If API were aggrieved on this matter we would have expected it to challengethe state's proceedings under state law, as API has in fact done in NewYork. However, no party challenged Massachusetts' proceedings, includingAPI, who was a participant.  EPA acknowledges that Massachusetts did initiate rulemaking on RVP controlpursuant to an agreement with the other northeast states. However, havinginitiated the rulemaking on that basis, the state then proceeded to promulgatethe regulations through its full administrative process, giving adequatenotice and opportunity for public hearing on the proposed regulations. As a policy matter EPA agrees that the ozone problem in the Northeast isa problem of regional magnitude and has held several meetings with topEPA and State environmental officials in EPA Regions I, II, and III todetermine what concerted efforts the States could take on their own todeal with issues of regional, but not necessarily national scope. ThereforeEPA believes that it is appropriate for the northeastern states to regulateozone precursors in a consistent fashion. However, each state must providefor adequate public participation in the promulgation of individual regulations,including assessing and responding to all submitted comments, as Massachusettshas done in connection with its RVP regulations. As discussed more fullybelow, EPA reviewed Massachusetts' public participation procedure and determinedthat the state provided adequate opportunity for public input in connectionwith development of the RVP rule.  API argues specifically that Massachusetts' hearing procedure was not adequateto comply with section 110 of the Act or EPA's hearing regulations at 40CFR 51.102. The operative language in both the statute and the regulationis ``reasonable notice and public hearing.'' API asserts that Massachusettshad predetermined its final decision on RVP regulation and thus the hearingprovided was not reasonable.However, EPA interprets the language of both the statute and the implementingregulations as requiring the state to provide, first, reasonable noticeof a public hearing, and second, an opportunity for public hearing. EPAdoes not believe that the law requires the Agency to review the hearingrecord and determine whether the hearing provided was itself ``reasonable.''EPA's interpretation of the hearing requirement is clearly reflected inthe regulations at 40 CFR 51.102. The regulations go into substantial detailon the manner in which states must provide notice of a hearing in orderfor that notice to be considered reasonable. See 40 CFR 51.102(d); seealso 40 CFR 51.102(g)(2). However, the regulations make absolutely no mentionof specific requirements for conduct of public hearings. The state needonly certify that it in fact held a public hearing, which Massachusettsclearly did, and need not provide any detailed information on the conductof the hearing.This is appropriate because the reasonableness of public notice can beassessed objectively by reviewing the amount and variety of notice methodsused. Assessing the reasonableness of a hearing on the other hand wouldbe a highly subjective determination done retrospectively that would unnecessarilyinfringe on the state's discretion in conducting its hearings. Of course,if EPA received concrete evidence that the hearing did not provide adequateopportunity for public participation, it could find that the hearing didnot meet the intent of EPA's regulation. EPA has, however, received nosuch evidence.API further claims that a state must specifically identify a proposed regulationas a future SIP revision prior to scheduling a public hearing on the regulation.However, neither the statute nor EPA's regulations contain any such explicitrequirement. The purpose of a public hearing is to receive public inputon the substance of proposed regulations, not on whether the state mayor may not submit the regulations as a SIP revision. For years EPA hasapproved SIP revisions with no analysis of whether the state had publiclyannounced its intent to eventually submit a proposed regulation as a SIPrevision at the state public hearing stage.Generally it should be totally irrelevant to public commenters whethera regulation with which they will be required to comply as a matter ofstate law might also become an aspect of federal law. At the time Massachusettsheld its public hearing on the RVP rule, prior to federal preemption, commentersshould similarly have had no concern as to whether the proposed state rulewould eventually become federal law as well. Only where a state regulationwould otherwise be preempted by existing federal law and therefore unenforceablewould the public have a need to know that the state intended to seek federalapproval of the regulation for purposes of preemption waiver in preparingcomments at the state hearing level. This was not the case at the timeof the state hearing on Massachusetts' RVP rule. Moreover, given EPA'sthen outstanding proposal to regulate RVP and thus preempt state RVP regulation,it should have been apparent to commenters at the time of the public hearingthat Massachusetts would submit the rule as a SIP revision to insure enforceabilityin the event of EPA final RVP regulation and preemption.API's concern that the Massachusetts revision was not submitted within60 days of adoption is also misplaced. The RVP regulation was publishedin the Massachusetts Register on May 13, 1988 and became effective on thesame day. The Massachusetts SIP revision was submitted to EPA on July 8,1988, 56 days later. Thus the requirement at 40 CFR 51.104(d) was satisfied.9. Should waivers or exemptions from the state regulations be granted tosuppliers who cannot provide 9 RVP gasoline, and for alcohol blends ofgasoline?<T3>Comments:</T3> Two commenters (BP Oil and Sun) are concerned with potentialinequities resulting from supplier-specific requests for waivers. Theyfeel that the use of supplier-specific waiver provisions could diminishthe calculated benefits of the rule by allowing higher RVP gasoline intothe system, and financially disadvantage those companies which are ableto comply. They feel that the use of waivers and exemptions introducesuncertainties about whether the volatility regulations will be appliedfairly and equitably to all gasoline suppliers, whether in reference tosupplier-specific exemptions or to exemptions for alcohol fuels, becauseMassachusetts' regulation does not include explicit provisions for DEQEto follow in considering applications for waivers or exemptions from individualsuppliers.With specific regard to alcohol fuel exemptions, one commenter sees theinconsistency between Massachusetts' and EPA's volatility programs as ``counterproductive.''DEQE's regulation would permit the production and sale of fuels of anyRVP level when produced through alcohol blending upstream of the pointof sale or supply from a terminal or bulk plant. The commenter believesthat such waivers are counterproductive because, for example, ethanol blendingincreases volatility and therefore evaporative emissions increase. Thecommenter notes that in EPA's Notice of Proposed Rulemaking for a nationalRVP regulation (52 FR 31293, August 19, 1987), EPA concluded that gasoholusage results in a greater contribution to ozone formation than the gasolinewhich it replaces.The commenters conclude that if waivers or exemptions are to be used, theymust apply to all suppliers and significant penalties should be attached.In addition, one commenter noted that EPA has to consider how it will respondto supplier-specific waiver requests (in reviewing requests to the statefor waivers); and EPA ``is urged to adopt a policy on waivers which isconsistent with its own RVP regulatory program.'' <T3>Response: </T3>EPA is aware that Massachusetts intends to grant waiversto individual suppliers if necessary to avoid serious supply dislocationsduring the initial stages of its RVP program. Although EPA did not focuson this aspect of the program in its notice of proposed rulemaking, commenterswere also aware of Massachusetts' intentions and the issue was fully airedin the public comments. EPA is approving the Massachusetts RVP programas a whole, which includes the ability of the state to issue waivers asappropriate. EPA is in essence pre-approving any waivers that Massachusettsmight grant as part of the overall RVP program being approved into theMassachusetts SIP today. Massachusetts will not be required to submit eachwaiver to EPA as a SIP revision at this stage before it may take effect.EPA is currently able to pre-approve any waivers that Massachusetts maygrant because the RVP program is a discretionary program that Massachusettshas submitted to generate additional emission reductions and move the statecloser to attainment of the ozone NAAQS. EPA is not pre-approving waiversfrom a federally required program or a program to which EPA has alreadyassigned specific emission reduction credits as part of an overall attainmentdemonstration. EPA could not pre-approve waivers in such situations becausethey would constitute SIP relaxations. Here, whatever emission reductionsMassachusetts obtains from the RVP program, even after any waivers havebeen granted, will tighten the existing SIP and improve air quality. EPA notes that its pre-approval of any waivers Massachusetts may grantunder the RVP program differs dramatically from approval of a generic permittingprogram such as a new source review or bubble program. In those cases,EPA authorizes states to approve relaxations of SIP requirements providedthat the state follows approved procedures calculated to insure that allsuch waivers are accounted for in the SIP attainment demonstration andare issued using replicable evaluation techniques. Here, since EPA is notcurrently relying on the Massachusetts RVP program for any defined emissionreduction credit toward an approved attainment demonstration, EPA neednot now analyze the criteria by which Massachusetts will issue any waivers.Massachusetts is free to issue waivers on the basis of its own state criteria,consistent with any requirements of its state administrative proceduresact.When Massachusetts does submit its completed post-1987 attainment demonstration,EPA will assign specific emission reduction credits to the RVP program,taking account of any supplier specific waivers Massachusetts may haveissued by that time. Once EPA has approved Massachusetts' post-1987 SIP,it will take whatever rulemaking action is necessary to ensure that anyfurther waivers under the RVP program, which at that point, would be consideredSIP relaxations, would have to be submitted to EPA for approval as individualSIP revisions.Finally, EPA notes that any suppliers who receive waivers from Massachusettsmust still comply with the federal RVP limit of 10.5 psi.In its fuel volatility regulation, Massachusetts excludes blends of gasolinecontaining 10% or more simple alcohol because: (1) Alcohol blends representa small fraction of its fuels market; (2) such an exclusion would avoidany impediments to the development of alternative fuels; and (3) any controlsput on alcohol blends would be handled under the state's alternative fuelsprogram. Those alcohol blends are not, however, excluded from complyingwith the requirements for alcohol blends of gasoline set forth by EPA inits <T4>Federal Register</T4> Notice on March 22, 1989 (54 FR 11868) limitingthe RVP of gasoline during the summer months to 10.5 psi (beginning 1989).The federal rule requires that methanol blends meet the same RVP requirementsof gasoline and that ethanol blends meet a RVP not more than 1 psi abovethe allowable RVP for gasoline. Thus there will be no loss in emissionreductions relative to the federal program, which is the only alternativeto the Massachusetts program. EPA has not authority to dissapprove thestate's rule just because the additional ``necessary'' emission reductionsthat it would achieve are not as large as those that might be achievedthrough a rule tailored differently. Furthermore, as detailed in the Addendumto the Technical Support Document for this action, EPA believes concernsabout alcohol blends in New England may be of little practical importancebecause field testing of gasoline by EPA throughout the summer of 1988found virtually no alcohol in gasoline.10. How soon after the date of final approval of the Massachusetts revisionsshould the RVP relationships be made effective?<T3>Comments:</T3> Of 35 commenters on EPA's proposal, 19 commented onthe timing of EPA's final action. Those favoring EPA approval of the SIPrevision generally favored EPA acting quickly to make the regulations effectiveby their May 1 starting date or as close to that as possible. These commentersnote that the Colonial Pipeline, which supplies 20% of the Northeast'sgasoline has been shipping 9 RVP fuel to the Northeast since March 1, 1989.They also pointed out that those suppliers who have made a good faith effortto comply with the May 1st date would be at a competitive disadvantagerelative to those with cheaper, higher, volatility gasoline if the dateis extended. Those opposing EPA approval of the SIP revision generally asked that ifwe did approve it we must provide the petroleum industry with realisticand sufficient lead-time to enable 9 psi gasoline to be distributed throughoutthe distribution system. These commenters cited EPA's allowing 70 and 100days for the recently promulgated national regulations to become effectiveat the terminal and retail level respectively as precedent for such a decision.A third path, suggested by API, would be for EPA to make its final approvalconditional on the state's deferral of the compliance date for its regulation.<T3>Response:</T3> The timing issue is one of the most difficult ones posedby this action. Since EPA has had control of the timing of both the finalfederal RVP action and the decision on the Massachusetts RVP revision itis important that we insure that both the federal and state programs startwith a maximum likelihood of success and a minimum possibility of supplydisruption.EPA must consider several issues in deciding when to make the rule effective.The first issue is when did the industry have notice that it would haveto supply a 9 psi gasoline to Massachusetts. Since the Massachusetts rulewas passed in 1988, the industry was on notice since then of the state'sintention to control RVP to 9 psi. However, the Massachusetts rule waspreempted on March 22, 1989 by the promulgation of the federal volatilityrequirements.Another issue to consider is the lead-time that would be necessary to enable9 psi gasoline to get through the distribution system. The record indicatesthat the industry thought that it would take from 60 to 70 days to achievecompliance at the terminals in Massachusetts. The record also indicatesthat the Colonial Pipeline, which supplies at least 20% of the gasolinein the Northeast, has been shipping 9 psi gasoline since March 1, 1989.The final issue involves the air quality consequences of delaying the effectivedate. EPA should not delay action on a SIP revision in such a manner aswould thwart the state's intent in requesting the SIP revision. Massachusetts'submission of the RVP SIP revision last July was clearly aimed at gettingits regulatory program in place for the 1989 ozone season. Thus, it isimportant to have the effective date as early as possible in order to maximizethe air quality benefits of the program in 1989.In deciding to make this action effective on June 30, 1989, EPA has attemptedto balance these competing interests. In establishing that date EPA hasdecided to give considerable weight to the industry's estimate of the needfor a 60-70 day lead-time. This will both minimize possible difficultiesthe industry might encounter with a shorter lead-time and provide citizensin the Northeast as much relief as is practical during most of the 1989ozone season. Although some suppliers may have made a good faith effortto comply with the May 1 effective date specified in the Massachusettsproposal, they were under no obligation to do so once EPA preempted theMassachusetts requirement by promulgating Federal RVP controls on March22, 1989. The Agency cannot, therefore, select an earlier effective datefor all suppliers based on the voluntary action of a few, especially consideringthat the time between the March 22 federal rulemaking and today's publicationis critical to the refiner/supplier planning and implementation processregarding fuel delivery for the coming summer. This amount of lead-timeis also appropriate in Massachusetts since this is the first state volatilityprogram EPA has approved.11. Should EPA reopen the comment period or withdraw and repropose thisSIP revision in light of EPA's final action on the national RVP regulationand other alleged defects in the February proposal?<T3>Comments:</T3> EPA received divergent comments on the appropriate processfor and timing of a final action on Massachusetts' SIP revision. The MassachusettsAttorney General's office argued that EPA should take final action as soonas possible since, in its opinion, section 110(a)(3) of the Clean Air Actrequires EPA to take final action on a SIP revision within four monthsof submittal. On the other hand, the American Petroleum Institute (API)felt that because of numerous allegedly unresolved issues raised in theirsubstantive comments EPA should at a minimum repropose action on the revisionto deal with these issues before proceeding to final action.<T3>Response:</T3> EPA concludes that given its interpretation of the relevantlaw and the seasonal nature of Massachusetts' revision, the Agency shouldproceed expeditiously to final action based on the record currently beforeit. EPA does not read section 110(a)(3) to require the agency to take finalaction on a SIP revision within four months, or any other specific timeperiod. Although section 110(a)(2) does require the Administrator to takefinal action on initial SIP submittals within four months of submissionafter EPA's promulgation or revision of NAAQS, Congress did not includeany explicit time period for EPA action on SIP revisions in section 110(a)(3).EPA believes therefore that the agency should generally proceed to finalaction on SIP revisions in a timely manner consistent with developing adequatesupport for agency actions.EPA is unpersuaded by API's claim that circumstances have so changed sincethe proposed approval of the Massachusetts revision that we should reopenthe comment period or withdraw and repropose this action. EPA's proposed<T4>Federal Register</T4> notice for the Massachusetts RVP program explicitlydiscussed the possibility that EPA would take final action on the nationalRVP program prior to final action on the Massachusetts program. EPA clearlypresented the path EPA proposed to follow and the conclusions we proposedto reach in the event that the federal RVP regulations were finally promulgated.Furthermore, in the final <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice on the national RVP program, EPA explicitlydiscussed the Massachusetts proposal.In this case EPA concludes that it is not necessary to issue a reproposalprior to taking final action. EPA believes that it has adequately respondedto all of the substantive comments raised by commenters in the substantivediscussions presented above. Obviously, additional analysis on such technicalissues could always be conducted. However, administrative agencies generallyhave the discretion to determine when issues have been aired sufficientlyand to close the record and proceed to final action, consistent of coursewith the need to act in a reasoned, non-arbitrary fashion. <T3>Vermont Yankee Nuclear Power</T3> v. <T3>N.R.D.C.</T3>, 435 U.S. 519, 554-555 (1978).Further, EPA should not delay action on a SIP revision in such a mannerthat would thwart the state's intent in requesting the SIP revision. Inthis case, Massachusetts has submitted a seasonal requirement that sincecurrently preempted must be approved in a timely fashion in order to effectuatethe state's intent that the regulation provide emission reduction benefitsin the upcoming summer ozone season. Therefore, EPA should make best effortsto act on the information available to it now to the extent that it isadequate or else the agency would thwart the state's intent with regardto the 1989 ozone season. Since EPA has concluded that the existing recordis sufficient, EPA can proceed to final action at this time based on thatrecord.<ITAG tagnum="84">Enforcement</ITAG>In EPA's proposal we indicated that there was a problem with the test methodsection, 310 CMR 7.02(12)(e)(2)(b). The regulation allowed alternativetest methods ``* * * approved by the Department.'' EPA stated that suchmethods must also be approved by EPA or else the alternative methods mustbe eliminated. EPA's proposal was made with the understanding that thisdefect would be cured prior to final EPA action.On April 12, 1989, Massachusetts submitted its revision to 310 CMR 7.02(12)(e)(2)(b).The revision adds the words ``and EPA'' to the end of the relevant sentence.EPA finds that its prior concerns were addressed in exactly the mannerEPA had suggested at proposal and that the test methods section is approvableas revised since it is now fully enforceable and approvable.<ITAG tagnum="84">Final Action</ITAG>EPA is approving this revision to the Massachusetts Ozone State ImplementationPlan to control gasoline volatility, including any waivers Massachusettsmay grant under the program. EPA has also made the finding that the MassachusettsSIP revision meets the requirements of section 211(c)(4)(C) of the Actfor an exception to federal preemption.Under section 307(b)(1) of the Act, petitions for judicial review of thisaction must be filed in the United States Court of Appeals for the appropriatecircuit by (60 days from date of publication). This action may not be challengedlater in proceedings to enforce its requirements (see 307(b)(2)).The Office of Management and Budget has exempted this rule from the requirementsof section 3 of Executive Order 12291.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 40 CFR Part 52</ITAG>Air pollution control, Hydrocarbons, Ozone, Incorporation by reference.<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note: </T4>Incorporation by reference of the State Implementation Planfor the Commonwealth of Massachusetts was approved by the Director of theFederal Register on July 1, 1982.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>42 U.S.C. 7401-7642.</ITAG>EPA is today approving the Massachusetts SIP revision pertaining to itsstate gasoline volatility program.<ITAG tagnum="21">Date: April 21, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">William K. Reilly,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator.</ITAG>For the reasons set forth in the preamble, Part 52 of Chapter I, Title40 of the Code of Federal Regulations is amended as follows:<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 52_[AMENDED]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart W_Massachusetts</ITAG>1. The authority citation for Part 52 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>42 U.S.C. 7401-7642.</ITAG>2. Section 52.1120 is revised by adding paragraph (c)(78) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 52.1120 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Identification of plan.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(c) * * *(78) Revisions to federally approved regulation 310 CMR 7.02(12) submittedon July 13, 1988, September 15, 1988, and April 12, 1989, by the Departmentof Environmental Quality Engineering, limiting the volatility of gasolinefrom May 1 through September 15, beginning 1989 and continuing every yearthereafter, including any waivers to such limitations that Massachusettsmay grant. In 1989, the control period will begin on June 30.(i) Incorporation by reference:(A) Massachusetts Regulation 310 CMR 7.02(12)(e), entitled, ``gasolineReid Vapor Pressure (RVP),'' and amendments to 310 CMR 7.00, ``Definitions,''effective in the Commonwealth of Massachusetts on May 11, 1988.(B) Massachusetts Emergency Regulation Amendment to 310 CMR 7.02(12)(e)2.b entitled ``gasoline Reid Vapor Pressure'' effective in the Commonwealthof Massachusetts on April 11, 1989, with excerpt from the Manual for PromulgatingRegulations, Office of the Secretary of State.3. The table in andSection; 52.1167 is amended by adding a new entry to ``310CMR 7.00'' and adding ``310 CMR 7.02(12)(e)'' to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="110"><C/><T4>Table 52.1167_EPA-Approved Rules and Regulations</T4><H1>State citation</H1><H1>Title/subject</H1><H1>Date submitted by State</H1><H1>Date approved by EPA</H1><H1/><T4>Federal Register</T4> citation<H1>52.1120(c)</H1><H1>Comments/Unapproved sections</H1><ITAG tagnum="28">*                  *                  *                  *                 *                  *                  *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">310 CMR 7.00<D>Definitions</D><D>07/18/88</D><D>[Date of Publication]</D><D>[FR citation from published date]</D><D>78</D><D>Includes bulk plant and terminal, gasoline market.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="28">*                  *                  *                  *                 *                  *                  *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="1">310 CMR 7.02(12)(e)<D>Gasoline Volatility</D><D>07/18/88, 09/15/88, 04/12/89</D><D>[Date of Publication]</D><D>[FR citation from published date]</D><D>78</D><D>Approves a limitation on volatility of gasoline from June 30 for Sept.15, 1989, and May 1 to Sept. 15 in subsequent years.</D></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="28">*                  *                  *                  *                 *                  *                  *</ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-10470 Filed 5-3-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6560-50-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>