<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89410-0101 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.4-10-89.f2.A1100</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="56">Virginia Electric and Power Co.; Consideration of Issuance of AmendmentsTo Facility Operating Licenses and Proposed No Significant Hazards ConsiderationDetermination and Opportunity For Hearing </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket Nos. 50-280 and 50-281]</ITAG>The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is consideringissuance of amendments to Facility Operating License Nos. DPR-32 and DPR-37issued to Virginia Electric and Power Company (the licensee) for operationof the Surry Power Station, Units 1 and 2 located in Surry County, Virginia.The proposed Technical Specifications (TSP) changes will revise Sections3.7 and 3.14, and Tables 3.7-2, 3.7-4, 4.1-1 and 4.1-2A by imposing additionaloperating restictions. The proposed changes would: (1) Raise the minimumcirculating and service water intake canal level from 18 feet to 23 feet,(2) increase the requirement from two to three emergency service waterpumps to be operable with two units at power, with provisions for limitedduration maintenance outages, and (3) provide operability and surveillancerequirements for a new safety-related canal level actuation system whichtrips both units' and closes non-essential Circulating and Service Watervalves should the canal level fall below 23andmin16;-6andmin16;andmin16;. By letter dated October 19, 1988, and during an October 26, 1988 meeting,the licensee identified several items which required appropriate correctiveactions. Based on further studies, the licensee, by submittal dated March27, 1989, concluded that the proposed TS revisions, together with otherphysical plant modifications and procedural changes, are required to ensureconsistency between the operating requirements and the reconstituted plantdesign basis in the area of intake canal inventory management and componentcooling heat exchanger operability. The plant modifications included (1)installation of new vacuum breakers to prevent reverse siphoning at thehigher canal level, (2) installation of a vacuum breaker valve in the dischargetunnel to break prime and thus conserve canal inventory, and (3) the installationof flow instrumentation in the service water piping to the component coolingwater heat exchanger to allow throttling during accident conditions. New periodic tests will be performed to verify the operability of the safety-relatedcanal level actuation system and the component cooling water heat exchangers,and to verify the circulating and service water valve leakage flow rates.Moreover, changes have been made to the emergency operating proceduresto require operator actions, during accident conditions, to confirm: (a)The closure of certain valves in the circulating and service water systemsto limit canal inventory depletion during accident conditions, (2) theemergency service water pumps are started when required, (3) the dischargetunnel vacuum breakers are opened, (4) the service water supply to thecomponent cooling water heat exchangers (CCHX) is throttled, and (5) theResidual Heat Removal System is placed in service. Before issuance of the proposed license amendments, the Commission willhave made findings required by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended(the Act) and the Commission's regulations. The Commission has made a proposed determination that the request for amendmentinvolves no significant hazards considerations. Under the Commission'sregulation in 10 CFR 50.92, this means that operation of the facility inaccordance with the proposed amendments would not: (1) Involve a significantincrease in the probability or consequences of an accident previously evaluated;or (2) create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident fromany accident previously evaluated; or (3) involve a significant reductionin a margin of safety. The licensee has determined and the NRC staff agrees that the proposedamendments do not constitute a significant hazards consideration in thatthe proposed amendments will not:<ITAG tagnum="21">1. Involve a significant increase in the probability of occurrenceor consequences of an accident or malfunction of equipment which is importantto safety and which has been previously evaluated in the [Updated FinalSafety Analysis Report (UFSAR)]. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">These Technical Specification changes are accompanied by changes tothe physical plant which will include new vacuum breakers to prevent reversesiphoning at the new, higher canal level, addition of a safety-relatedcanal low level actuation system, repowering the Circulating Water valvesto assure isolation in the event of an Emergency Diesel Generator failure,installation of manual vacuum breaker valves on the Discharge Tunnel tobreak prime and hence conserve inventory, and installation of ComponentCooling heat exchanger Service Water flow instrumentation to allow throttlingduring a Design Basis Accident. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Changes to the Emergency Operating procedures have also been developedwhich will require operator actions to verify specific Circulating andService Water valves are closed to limit canal inventory depletion duringaccident conditions, the Emergency Service Water pumps are started whenrequired, the discharge tunnel vacuum breakers are opened, the CCHX's arethrottled and the Residual Heat Removal System is placed in service. NewPeriodic Tests will ensure the operability of the safety-related canallevel actuation system, verify Component Cooling Water heat exchanger operability,and verify Circulating and Service Water valve leakage flow rates. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Changes to the Technical Specifications will raise canal level toprovide more working inventory, require additional Emergency Service Waterpumping capacity during a Design Basis Accident and impose surveillencerequirements on the new canal low level actuation system. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">A review has been made of the containment analysis, Main SteamlineBreak, large break LOCA analysis and other UFSAR Chapter 14 accidents.These changes do not affect the probability of any accident. The effectof the changes will be to improve the reliability of and to ensure EmergencyService Water supply under abnormal and accident conditions. The currentUFSAR accident analysis results and conclusions, therefore, are not affectedby the proposed changes. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">2. Create the possibility of a new or different type of accident fromthose previously evaluated in the safety analysis report. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">The enhancements to the reliability and performance of the ServiceWater supply system have no impact on the range of initiating events previouslyassessed. These proposed changes address and will eliminate or reduce theprobability of several of the potential safety system failure modes identifiedin the Service Water design basis review.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">3. Involve a significant reduction in a margin of safety. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Although operational requirements and plant systems have been modifiedto conform to the reconstituted design basis and assumptions, the ServiceWater system function is maintained, thereby ensuring the present safetyanalysis remains bounding. Specifically, increasing the canal inventory,requiring additional Emergency Service Water pumping capacity, addressingComponent Cooling Water heat exchanger Service Water flow, providing timefor operators to isolate specific Circulating and Service Water valvesand limiting leakage flows ensures that the system function to provideadequate Service Water is being maintained. Since the system function isbeing maintained, the results of the UFSAR accident analyses remain bounding,and therefore, the safety margins are not impacted. </ITAG>Therefore, based on the above considerations, the Commission has made aproposed determination that the amendment request involves no significanthazards considerations. The Commission is seeking public comments on this proposed determination.Any comments received within 30 days after the date of publication of thisnotice will be considered in making any final determination. The Commissionwill not normally make a final determination unless it receives a requestfor a hearing. Written comments may be submitted by mail to the Regulatory PublicationsBranch, Division of Freedom of Information and Publications Services, Officeof Administration and Resources Management, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, and should cite the publication date and page numberof this <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice. Written comments may also be deliveredto Room P-216, Phillips Building, 7920 Norfolk Avenue, Bethesda, Marylandfrom 7:30 a.m. to 4:15 p.m. Copies of written comments received may beexamined at the NRC Public Document Room, the Gelman Building, 2120 L Street,NW., Washington, DC. The filing of requests for hearing and petitions forleave to intervene are discussed below. By May 10, 1989, the licensee may file a request for a hearing with respectto issuance of the amendments to the subject facility operating licensesand any person whose interest may be affected by this proceeding and whowishes to participate as a party in the proceeding must file a writtenpetition for leave to intervene. Request for a hearing and petitions forleave to intervene shall be filed in accordance with the Commission's ``Rulesof Practice for Domestic Licensing Proceedings'' in 10 CFR Part 2. If arequest for a hearing or petition for leave to intervene is filed by theabove date, the Commission or an Atomic Safety and Licensing Board, designatedby the Commission or by the Chairman of the Atomic Safety and LicensingBoard Panel, will rule on the request and/or petition and the Secretaryor the designated Atomic Safety and Licensing Board will issue a noticeof hearing or an appropriate order. As required by 10 CFR 2.714, a petition for leave to intervene shall setforth with particularity the interest of the petitioner in the proceeding,and how that interest may be affected by the results of the proceeding.The petition should specifically explain the reasons why intervention shouldbe permitted with particular reference to the following factors: (1) Thenature of the petitioner's right under the Act to be made party to theproceeding; (2) the nature and extent of the petitioner's property, financial,or other interest in the proceeding; and (3) the possible effect of anyorder which may be entered in the proceeding on the petitioner's interest.The petition should also identify the specific aspect(s) of the subjectmatter of the proceeding as to which petitioner wishes to intervene. Anyperson who has filed a petition for leave to intervene or who has beenadmitted as a party may amend the petition without requesting leave ofthe Board up to fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, but such an amended petition must satisfythe specificity requirements described above. Not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, a petitioner shall file a supplement to thepetition to intervene which must include a list of the contentions whichare sought to be litigated in the matter, and the bases for each contentionset forth with reasonable specificity. Contentions shall be limited tomatters within the scope of the amendments under consideration. A petitionerwho fails to file such a supplement which satisfies these requirementswith respect to at least one contention will not be permitted to participateas a party. Those permitted to intervene become parties to the proceeding, subjectto any limitations in the order granting leave to intervene, and have theopportunity to participate fully in the conduct of the hearing, includingthe opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. If a hearing is requested, the Commission will make a final determinationon the issue of no significant hazards considerations. The final determinationwill serve to decide when the hearing is held. If the final determination is that the request for amendment involves nosignificant hazards considerations, the Commission may issue the amendmentsand make them effective, notwithstanding the request for a hearing. Anyhearing held would take place after issuance of the amendments.If a final determination is that the amendments involve significant hazardsconsiderations, any hearing held would take place before the issuance ofany amendment.Normally, the Commission will not issue the amendments until the expirationof the 30-day notice period. However, should circumstances change duringthe notice period such that failure to act in a timely way would result,for example, in derating or shutdown of the facility, the Commission mayissue the license amendments before the expiration of the 30-day noticeperiod, provided that its final determination is that the amendments involveno significant hazards considerations. The final determination will considerall public and State comments received. Should the Commission take thisaction, it will publish a notice of issuance and provide for opportunityfor a hearing after issuance. The Commission expects that the need to takethis action will occur very infrequently.A request for a hearing or a petition for leave to intervene must be filedwith the Secretary of the Commission, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, Attention: Docketing and Service Branch, or may bedelivered to the Commission's Public Document Room, the Gelman Building,2120 L Street, NW., Washington, DC, by the above date. Where petitionsare filed during the last ten (10) days of the notice period, it is requestedthat the petitioner promptly so inform the Commission by a toll-free telephonecall to Western Union at 1-(800) 325-6000 (in Missouri 1-(800) 342-6700).The Western Union operator should be given Datagram Identification Number3737 and the following message addressed to Herbert N. Berkow: (petitioners'sname and telephone number), (date petition was mailed), (plant name), and(publication date and page number of this <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice). A copy of the petition should also besent to the Office of the General Counsel, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, and to Michael W. Maupin, Esq., Hunton and Williams,Post Office Box 1535, Richmond, Virginia 23213, attorney for the licensee.Nontimely filings of petitions for leave to intervene, amended petitions,supplemental petitions and/or requests for hearing will not be entertainedabsent a determination by the Commission, the presiding officer or theAtomic Safety and Licensing Board designated to rule on the petition and/orrequest, that the petitioner has made a substantial showing of good causefor the granting of a late petition and/or request. That determinationwill be based upon a balancing of the factors specified in 10 CFR 2.714(a)(1)(i)-(v)and 2.714(d).For further details with respect to this action, see the application foramendment dated March 27, 1989, which is available for public inspectionat the Commission's Public Document Room, the Gelman Building, 2120 L Street,NW., Washington, DC and at the Local Public Document Room located at TheSwem Library, College of William and Mary, Williamsburg, Virginia 23185.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 3rd day of April 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Bart C. Buckley,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Senior Project Manager, Project Directorate II-2, Division of ReactorProjects_I/II, Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-8382 Filed 4-7-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>