<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89512-0141 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.5-12-89.f2.A1140</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register </T4> / Vol. 54, No. 91 / Friday, May 12, 1989 / Notices<ITAG tagnum="52">DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Forest Service</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Deferral of Payments on High-Priced Timber Sales</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Forest Service, USDA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice; adoption of final policy.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Forest Service hereby gives notice of adoption ofa final policy on the modification of payment procedures for certain high-pricedtimber sales. Under this policy, the terms of payment on a qualifying timbersale may be modified to allow the purchaser to defer payments in an amountequal to the difference between the average current contract value andthe value of sales at current average bid rates on that Forest at timeof modification plus $50 per thousand board feet (MBF). The deferred amountwill be paid with interest over a 5-year period under the terms of a fullysecured promissory note. The procedure is authorized only for high-pricedsales bid prior to January 1, 1982. The 5-year deferral period will allowpurchasers an opportunity to improve their cash flow by deferring largeimmediate payment obligations and to mix a portion of their high-pricedsales with lower-priced sales in their portfolios and, thus, obtain a moreeconomical operating base. The intended effect is to encourage purchasersto perform high-priced sales rather than to default them.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>This policy is effective May 12, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Questions about this policy shouldbe addressed to Allan B. McCombie, Timber Management Staff, Forest Service,USDA, P.O. Box 96090, Washington, DC. 20090-6090, telephone (202) 447-6862.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Background and Need for Policy</ITAG>On August 22, 1988 (53 FR 31962) the Forest Service published an interimpolicy to allow holders of certain high-priced timber sales to defer paymentsto avoid sale defaults. Public comment was invited prior to adoption ofthe final policy on deferred payments. During the late 1970's, a combinationof strong demand for timber, predicted price trends based on levels ofinflation at that time, and predictions of a softwood timber supply shortageresulted in unprecedented prices for federal timber sales particularlyin California, Oregon, and Washington. Before this timber could be harvested,lumber prices fell dramatically in response to a collapse in the housingmarket precipitated by a general economic recession.The Government took a number of actions to alleviate the impact of thehigh-priced pre-1982 sales. Contract extension provided by the Forest Servicefrom 1980 thru 1983, statutory relief provided by the Federal Timber ContractPayment Modification Act of 1984, and substantially improved forest productsmarkets have all eased the financial burden of many timber purchasers andlessened the risk of default on remaining high-priced contracts.However, some purchasers particularly in Forest Service Regions 5 (California)and 6 (Oregon and Washington) still hold substantial numbers of high-pricedsales bid prior to 1982. As of November 1988 there was about 1.5 billionboard feet of high-priced timber under contract in 256 sales. This volumeremains under contract primarily because the amounts held by purchasersat the time of buy-out application exceeded the volume entitlement underthe Federal Timber Contract Payment Modification Act. Purchasers have entendedthese sales under the Multi-Sale Extension Program and other extensionauthorizations. These sales are now scheduled to terminate between April1, 1989, and December 31, 1992. The majority of the high-priced volumeis contained in sales that are scheduled to terminate in 1989, and 1990.The Federal government's exposure to default on these sales will increasesubstantially if market conditions deteriorate. Forty percent of the high-pricedsale value is held by purchasers considered to be in a high-risk situation.The Government could lose $70 million if the high-priced sales in theseportfolios are defaulted.It is important that the agency have procedures in place to try to avoidsignificant default, because default-delayed harvest results in many adverseeconomic, resource management, and environmental effects. The economiesof many communities particularly in the West are heavily dependent uponthe employment generated by the harvest and manufacture of timber fromthe National Forests. Timber sale defaults interrupt the flow of timberand, thereby, interrupt employment. Employment impacts of default affectnot only loggers and mill workers, but also affect others dependent uponthe income of timber workers. Defaults also reduce receipts to the FederalTreasury and, thus, the revenue sharing payments to local counties whichare based on those receipts. County funding of roads and schools in theFar West is heavily dependent on these payments.The liability for damages due the Government arising from default couldresult in a number of timber firms seeking bankruptcy. Under bankruptcyprocedures, the United States would become an unsecured creditor. Usuallylittle or no assets are available for payment after all the secured creditorsare satisfied in the proceedings. Even if the firms do not declare bankruptcy,default collection activities are expensive and often result in small dollarreturns compared to the amount of damage payments due the Government. Inshort, contract performance of these high-priced sales provides the besteconomic return and protection to Federal, State, and local governmentsas well as to timber dependent communities. Accordingly, the Forest Serviceis implementing a procedure to encourage holders of high-priced pre-1982volume to perform contracts rather than to default them.An interim policy to allow deferral of payments on these high-priced saleswas published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> on August 22, 1988; the policy was to be implementedon September 1, 1988. However, the modification of contracts was stayeduntil the comment period was completed on October 21, 1988. After reviewand analysis of the comments, the interim policy was fully implementedon November 10, 1988.<ITAG tagnum="84">Response to Public Comments</ITAG>The Forest Service received comments on the interim policy from 20 individualsand entities. Comments came from individual timber sale purchasers, consultingforesters, timber sale purchaser associations, attorneys, and local citizensof communities affected by the policy. Most of the responses came fromthe Pacific Northwest. Forty-five percent of the respondents supportedthe policy either in its entirety or with suggested modifications. Fifty-fivepercent of the respondents were not in favor of the policy. Most of thoseagainst the policy provided additional suggestions for consideration shouldthe policy be finally adopted. Most of the comments against the policyrejected the idea that the Government should provide additional relieffor purchasers who have not performed on the high-priced contracts.The following summarizes the major comments and suggestions received andthe agency's response to these in the final policy. The final policy reflectsfull consideration of all comments received.General CommentsA major issue raised by many respondents was whether the proposal providedadditional contract relief. Those holding sales and in need of additionaltime to amortize the high values were in support of the procedures. Othersfelt that the relief afforded to purchasers from the 1984 buy-out legislationand the agency's 5-year extension program was sufficient and that holdersof the remaining high-priced contracts should be required to complete themfully in the current contract term or default them and suffer the consequences.Many respondents felt that any change in contract terms at this date wouldnot be fair to purchasers who did perform their high-priced contracts andwould reward irresponsible bidding practices and erode the concept thatcontracts must be performed as specified under the terms and conditionsprescribed in their making.The Forest Service has given much consideration to whether this deferredpayment policy rewards poor bidding practices or erodes the fundamentaltenets of contracting. The agency is confident that the deferred paymentpolicy does neither. Experience clearly demonstrates that default of salesleads to losses by the Government and economic disruption; avoiding defaultis clearly in the public interest. In the last 7 years, the Governmenthas experienced default on approximately 2,000 contracts with default damagesof $284 million. Collection efforts to date on the defaulted sales haveresulted in deposits of only $20 million, less than 10 percent on the totalclaimed amount. Most of the funds have been collected from sureties orfrom cash deposited on the sales. The Government has lost approximately$50 million in default damages as a result of bankruptcy actions. Manycases are now before the courts and the Government expects lengthy delaysand costly litigation before resolution. In summary, the Forest Servicehas decided that performance of the remaining high-priced sales providesthe greatest benefit to the public. The policy requires purchasers to performcontracts removing the entire volume and paying the full contract price.There is no relief from payments due the United States granted under thepolicy. The policy changes only the schedule of when full payment willbe received, requiring interest for any period the payment is delayed,and a fully secured promissory note.Comments on Specific Features of the Policy<T3>Promissory Note Procedures. </T3>The interim policy stated the deferredpayment modification was to be authorized only after receipt of a properlyprepared and executed promissory note, on a form provided by the ForestService, for the total amount of the deferred stumpage value. The notemust be fully secured by a form of security acceptable to the Forest Serviceand allow for unconditioned payment upon demand by the Forest Service.The note requires quarterly payments to amortize the amount of the note.Interest is assessed against the accrued amount of deferral or the remainingnote balance whichever is less. The interest rate is equal to the averagemarket yield of outstanding Treasury obligations with remaining years tomaturity of 5 years. The note period is generally for 5 years.The provision for selection of the Treasury rate of interest received themost comments of any feature of the interim policy. Most respondents indicatedthat the rate was too low and, thereby, was a subsidy to qualifying purchasers.This was stated to be particularly unfair to purchasers who had performedcontracts and to competitors who must pay the commercial rate of interestto borrow current working funds. Eight respondents indicated that sucha subsidy was not warranted and that rates for the program should be atthe corporate borrowing rate, prime rate, or higher. The Forest Servicehas analyzed this issue and concurs that the interest rate should be increased.It was not the agency's intent to provide a low-cost borrowing alternativefor firms that are capable of securing funds from commercial sources. TheForest Service surveyed banks in the Northwest and had discussions withFederal Reserve Bank representatives. Based on inputs received, the finalpolicy raises the rate of interest charged under the promissory note tothe prime rate of interest as determined by the Federal Reserve.The prime rate of interest listed in the Federal Reserve Statistical ReleaseH.15, Selected Interest Rates, Instrument, Bank Prime Loan will be used.The Selected Interest Rates (H.15) release for February, May, August, andNovember will be used as the basis for the promissory note quarterly interestcharges. The rate used from the Selected Interest Rates sheet will be theaverage monthly rate listed respectively for the months of January, April,July, and October. This revised rate basis is determined to be at leastequal to commercial bank rates for a fully secured loan. The prime raterequirement will be required as of the effective date of the final policy.Six respondents indicated that the 10-year term for the promissory notewas too long, that firms should be capable of amortizing the deferred amountin 5 years. There was further comment that the criteria for granting theadditional term which was to be based on ``compelling need'' were not adequatelyspecified. One respondent indicated that compelling need decisions forthe additional note term could open the Regional Forester to charges of``cronyism.'' The Forest Service has established explicit criteria forthe determination of compelling need. These criteria have been used sinceimplementation of the interim policy and are being incorporated in thefinal policy. The following information is needed to support the granting of additionalpromissory note term beyond 5 years: Purchaser must provide a financialprojection for the deferral period beyond 5 years. The projection mustbe examined by an independent Certified Public Accountant (CPA), with anaccompanying report in accordance with the agency's financial analysisstandards and guidelines. The CPA's examination and report must complywith professional pronouncements issued by the AICPA-Auditing StandardsBoard ``Statement On Standards For Accountants' Services On ProspectiveFinancial Information''_specifically the 1985 pronouncement entitled ``FinancialForecasts and Projections'' and the related ``Forecast/Projections Guide''and ``Forecast/Projection Statement.'' The CPA will produce all reportsreferred to in the pronouncement including the Statement of Financial Position,Results of Operations, Statement of Cash Flows (in accordance with FASB95 the Projected Financial Statements will include a ``Statement of CashFlows'' (direct method) in place of the Statement of Changes In FinancialPosition'') and Summaries of Significant Assumptions and Accounting Policies.This projection must disclose projected cash flow and working capital balancesfor the period requested. The deferral period beyond 5 years can only extendto the point where either the cumulative cash flow or working capital becomepositive, taking into account the deferral payments. Two respondents indicated that the Forest Service should allow use onlyof corporate sureties, irrevocable letters of credit, or securities ofthe United States as security for bonding on the promissory note. The respondentsfelt the use of assets as security for the note could leave the Governmentwith an asset that is subject to depreciation or a loss in value due toa change in market. One of the respondents indicated that the Forest Servicewould not be able politically to foreclose due to community employmentconsideration. The agency does not agree that forms of security should be limited. Accordingly,the final policy allows consideration of other security for the note. However,new forms of security would have to be approved by the Chief of the ForestService after full analysis of their value and determination of collectionpotential. The Forest Service is not going to accept ``at risk'' security,but believes it reasonable to retain the capability to consider alternativeforms of security, if such forms meet the test of securing the government'sinterests. One respondent was concerned that the Forest Service was requiring thepurchasers to maintain the sale performance bond until final payment ofthe promissory note. The Forest Service has not changed the performancebond requirements; the bond will be returned as currently prescribed inthe contract. One respondent wanted the Forest Service to require the use of the performancebond for the payment obligation under the promissory note. The Forest Servicedoes not have the authority to unilaterally change the terms of the bondingobligation of the performance bond to cover the promissory note arrangement.The agency needs a clean statement of obligation for the payment obligationsassumed by the note guarantor. This requires a separate bond and suretyagreement. <T3>Sales Eligible for Modification. </T3>Under the interim policy to beeligible for payment deferral, timber sales must meet the following criteria:(1) The bid date must be prior to January 1, 1982; (2) the remaining stumpagemust have an average value per MBF that exceeds the average bid value forthe previous 6-calender months on the National Forest where the sale islocated by at least $50; and the contract must have sufficient contractperiod remaining to allow for removal of remaining timber prior to expirationof the contract. Many of the respondents objected to the procedure of allowing sales tobe deferred on a categorical basis. They agreed that the pre-1982 saleswere uneconomic to harvest but disagreed that all purchasers holding pre-1982inventories should be granted a modification for deferred payments. Onerespondent indicated that purchasers who recently acquired sales throughthird party agreements were aware of the potential losses resulting fromthe high-priced sales. The respondent stated that allowing a purchaserto defer payment on sales that were recently acquired would not be necessarybecause the liability of the high-priced timber was considered in the businesstransaction and compensated for in the price for the assumption of thecontracts. Two respondents indicated that purchaser need, as well as salescriteria, should be considered in granting the deferral. These reviewersfelt that only purchasers that had a financial necessity for the deferralshould be allowed to defer payment. It was suggested that a case-by-caseapproach that looks at the total financial condition of the applicant wouldbe fairer and more equitable to the responsible firms of the industry thathave completed their high-priced sales. One respondent suggested that animpartial review board make the determination of need for the deferralprocedure. All of the programs to resolve the economic problems created by the high-pricedbidding expectations of the late 1970's and early 1980's were categorical.The various extension procedures and the legislative initiative, the FederalTimber Contract Payment Modification Act were applied to selected sales;sales bid prior to January 1, 1982. All purchasers holding sales were allowedto participate. The Forest Service will continue to apply selection criteriain the same manner established for previous initiatives for resolving thehigh-priced sale situation. The primary reason the respondents requestedadditional purchaser selection criteria was to eliminate the perceivedfinancial advantage afforded by the low cost borrowing rate in the interimpolicy. The decision to use the prime rate of interest in the promissorynote for the final policy eliminates any financial advantage associatedwith borrowing funds at the lower Treasury obligations rate of interest.Therefore, there is no need for additional screening criteria for applicants.The final policy will continue to use only the categorical sales selectioncriteria. A number of respondents suggested that the determination of high-pricedsales using the average forest bid value plus $50 established a floor ratethat was too low. There was concern that the prices currently paid forlow value salvage material would produce an average bid value that wastoo low and allow sales that were not actually high-priced to qualify fordeferral. Review of the pre-1982 sales data indicates that the averagebid value floor rate is not significant in terms of sale qualification.Most of the remaining pre-1982 sales are very high priced. The averagebid values are well in excess of the floor rates established under theinterim policy. However, the average bid value determination is significantin establishing the amount that can be deferred on a qualifying sale. Inresponse to this comment, the final policy provides that, in computingthe 6-months average bid rate, the Forest Service will select sales thatreflect regular sale program offerings, such as green sawlog sales. Salesconsisting primarily of low value salvage material will not be includedin the computation of the forest floor rates. Two respondents requested that an additional criterion be established toallow no more than 50 percent of the bid value to be deferred. Adoptionof the procedure to utilize only regular sale offerings in establishingthe forest average bid values will increase the floor rates sufficientlyto develop deferred amount totals that are less than 50 percent of theaverage bid value for most sales qualifying under the policy. Therefore,the final policy does not need to establish an additional requirement ofa deferral ceiling of 50 percent of bid value.A number of respondents indicated that purchasers should not be allowedto select individual sales for deferral but rather should be required tosubmit their entire high-priced portfolios for deferral. This suggestionwas made to ensure that a purchaser did not elect for deferral on the moreprofitable sales and be allowed to default on the less profitable offerings.The Forest Service feels that the individual sale selection process shouldbe allowed as indicated in the interim policy. Due to changing market demands,a purchaser has no way of determining whether sales can be logged in futuremarkets. The decision to defer payment is market driven and is dependenton dollar margins resulting from prices received for lumber. It would beextremely difficult for a purchaser to make an aggregate decision affectingsales that will be logged in future years. Moreover, exposing suretiesand banks to a purchaser's total liability for the entire high-priced salesportfolio would make it virtually impossible for a firm to get the neededsecurity for the program.<T3>Modification of Payments. </T3>Under the interim policy payment specificationsfor timber stumpage removed under the contract can be modified to allowpayment deferral. The deferred payment rate per MBF is determined at thetime of modification. The deferred value will be the difference betweenthe average current contract value in MBF and the current average bid valueof the Forest sales plus $50. The Contracting Officer determines the Forestsales average value using sales sold in the 6-calendar months immediatelyprior to the request for modification. Modification of the contract iscontingent on the prior execution of a promissory note for the estimatedamount of payment to be deferred.The comments from respondents on the procedures for modification of paymentssuggested the Forest Service should consider a species pricing criterionfor determining high-priced sales rather than average tract value. TheForest Service intends to use the average remaining value in MBF and averagebid value in MBF as criteria for determining both qualifying sales andthe amount of the deferral. The actual deferral is accomplished on an individualspecies basis for those species groups that have rates per MBF above theforest floor rate. Species bids on individual sales result from a varietyof purchaser bidding strategies; a wide range in values makes it very difficultto meaningfully determine an average species price. The Forest Servicefeels that an average tract value determination is more representativefor the high-priced value determination and computation of the deferralamount.One respondent suggested that rather than being $50 per MBF in all cases,the additional value to be added to the Forest average bid value shouldbe determined on a percentage basis. The majority of the remaining pre-1982sales are in northern California, western Oregon and western Washington.Review of the 6-month average bid rates for Region 6 indicates that a 10percent add-on would produce a floor rate of $202 per MBF. The floor ratecalculated with the $50 increment gives an average of $233 per MBF. Thehigh-priced sale definition used by the agency for Region 6 sales has consistentlybeen sales values in excess of $225 per MBF. This analysis indicates thatthe $50 add-on gives the better approximation of high-priced sales. Accordingly,the final policy retains the $50 add-on.<T3>Modification of Payment Guarantee Requirements of the Contract. </T3>Nocomments were received from respondents on this section. However, the ForestService has added a statement to the final policy to clarify that the advancedeposit requirements remain in effect until the time of removal when thepayment obligation is established.<T3>Limitation on Application of Deferred Payment Modifications. </T3>Underthe interim policy, retroactive payment deferral is not allowed for previouslyharvested volumes. Moreover, the performance bond cannot be reduced underthe deferred payment procedures.The use of the term ``harvested'' in the interim policy prompted one respondentto suggest that the Forest Service should consider that all timber cutbut not yet removed should be eligible for inclusion in the payment deferralprogram. The respondent indicated that inclusion in the deferral programof as much eligible timber as possible can serve only to further the goalof encouraging contract performance. The final policy now specifies thatpayments cannot be retroactively modified for volumes harvested and removedfrom the sale area. The deferred rates will be effective for all applicablevolume removed during the initial payment period. All volume reported onthe timber sale statement of account for the month the modification becomeseffective will be charged for under the deferred rate procedures.<T3>Breach.</T3> No comments were receive on this section. Therefore, theseprovisions of the interim policy are adopted in the final without change.Further CommentsFour respondents provided suggestions that the Forest Service provide relieffor high-priced timber sales contracts by adopting a ``test case'' proposaloffered by one of the lumber firms in southwest Oregon. The Secretary ofAgriculture reviewed this proposal and decided that it should not be authorized.The proposal was declined on the basis of equity to those purchasers thathave met their contractual obligations and the fair expectation of theGovernment to performance of valid contractual obligations.<ITAG tagnum="84">Key Features of the Final Policy</ITAG>Having considered the comments received, the Forest Service is adoptinga final policy on modification of timber sale contracts to allow paymentdeferral on high-priced sales with the changes noted in the foregoing discussionof comments. The key features of the final policy are listed below.<T3>Sales eligible for modification.</T3> To be eligible for payment deferralmodifications, timber sale contracts must meet the following criteria:1. The bid date must be prior to January 1, 1982;2. The remaining stumpage must have an average value per MBF that exceeds,by $50 per MBF, the average bid value for the previous 6-calendar monthson the National Forest where the sale is located. 3. The contract must have sufficient contract period remaining to allowfor removal of the remaining timber prior to expiration of the contract.To make a payment deferral modification, the Contracting Officer must findthat such a modification to unexecuted portions of the contract will notbe injurious to the United States.The January 1, 1982, cutoff date was selected because, in the Federal TimberContract Payment Modification Act, Congress has identified the period immediatelyprior to this date as a bidding period when cumulative market effects resultedin excessive bidding for Federal timber.High-priced sales are defined as sales with an average current contractvalue per MBF, that exceeds the average bid value for sales sold in theprevious 6-calendar months on the National Forest where the qualifyingsale is located, plus $50 per MBF. The average bid value for the individualforest was selected because it reflects values for the market area wherethe sale is located.Authorized officials of current holders of qualifying contracts must requestpayment deferral in writing. The current holder is the firm currently recognizedby the Forest Service as being legally responsible for contract performance.Deferred payment is not limited to companies who bid the sales.Requests for modification of a qualifying contract will be accepted atanytime during the sale period.<T3>Modification of Payments.</T3> Under the final policy, the paymentsfor stumpage will be reduced by a deferred amount covered by a promissorynote. The deferred payment rate per MBF will be determined at the timeof modification. The deferred value will be the difference between thecurrent average bid value of the forest sales, plus $50 per MBF and theaverage current contract value in MBF. The average bid value of Forestsales, plus $50 per MBF is the floor rate for the procedure. In computingthe 6-months average bid rate, the Forest Service will select sales thatreflect regular sale program offerings, such as green sawlog sales. Salesconsisting primarily of low value salvage material will not be includedin calculating the forest floor rate. The Contracting Officer will usethe average for the 6-calendar months immediately prior to the requestfor modification in determining the amount of the payment deferred. Onlythe species rates above the average bid rate plus $50 per MBF (the floorrate) would be subject to payment deferral. The amount of deferral of anindividual species rate above the average bid value per MBF plus $50 willbe weighted proportionally, using the ratio between the remaining valueof the species and the total remaining value of all species with ratesabove the average bid rate plus $50 per MBF. The weighting of species valueabove the floor rate to determine the amount of payment deferral by specieswill develop a payment rate that reflects original bid values. The determinationof the amount subject to deferral will be calculated using advertised volumesat the time the sale was offered adjusted by any subsequent contract modification.Modification of the contract will be contingent on the prior executionof a promissory note on a form provided by the Forest Service for the amountof the payment estimated by the Forest Service as being deferred. Morethan one note per sale, executed annually, may be considered for individualsales. The amount of harvest volume included in the note will be in accordancewith the Forest Service approved plan of operation. The average currentcontract value for the combined total estimated volume to be removed willbe used to determine the amount of payment deferral for the multiple notes.The multiple note procedure will allow the note and interest amount toreflect estimated seasonal removal volumes. This will preclude having tocharge for the principal on large volumes that have to be scheduled forlogging in successive years. The multiple notes may be consolidated forbilling and payment purposes.These modifications will not change current contract rates which are usedfor determining Removal Schedule Payments established pursuant to the Multi-SiteExtension Policy of 1983. Purchaser credit effectiveness will be calculatedusing current contract rates under the terms of the contract.<T3>Modification of the payment guarantee requirements of the contract.</T3>The requirements of the contract related to advance deposits and paymentguarantees in lieu of deposits will remain unchanged until title passespursuant to contract standard provision B8.11. After removal, depositswill be satisfied by deposits equal to the revised current payment amountsas established under the formula for calculating deferred payments. TheGovernment is protected as to the amount of the deferred payment by thefully secured promissory note. In the event of an overcut, an advance cashdeposit or payment guarantee in lieu of deposit must equal the total stumpagevalue for cut timber that is not covered by the promissory note. This requirementwill ensure that the value of the volume harvested above the estimatedvolumes is covered by payment guarantee. Full payment or revision of thepromissory note must be made for the deferred value associated with theovercut.<T3>Limitation on application of deferred payment modifications. </T3>Retroactivepayment deferrals will not be allowed for volumes previously harvestedand removed from the sale area. All applicable volume reported on the timbersale statement of account for the month the modification becomes effectivewill be charged for using the deferred rate procedures. The performancebond amount will not be reduced under the deferred payment procedures.<T3>Breach. </T3>Failure to make a note payment will result in suspensionof operations and breach of the provision for deferred payment. A defaultednote could result in contract termination. <T3>Promissory Note Procedures. </T3>The promissory note will be for theamount of the payment deferred, as estimated by the Forest Service. Thecontract holder may select the promissory note term, generally up to 5years. Regional Forester authorization will be required for note periodsin excess of 5 years. The maximum note period is 10 years. Authorizationfor the additional period will be based on a determination that the purchaserhas a compelling need. Purchasers must provide Regional Foresters a financialprojection to support the need for a promissory note term beyond 5 years.The projection must be examined by an independent CPA, with an accompanyingreport in accordance with the Agency's financial analysis standards andguidelines. The CPA examination and report must comply with professional pronouncementsissued by the AICPA- Auditing Standards Board ``Statement On StandardsFor Accountants' Services On Prospective Financial Information''_specificallythe 1985 pronouncement entitled ``Financial Forecasts and Projections''and the related ``Forecast/Projections Guide'' and ``Forecast/ProjectionStatement''. A CPA must produce all reports referred to in the pronouncementincluding the Statement of Financial Position, Results of Operations, Statementof Cash Flows (in accordance with FASB 95 the Projected Financial Statementswill include a ``Statement of Cash Flows'' (direct method) in place ofthe Statement of Changes In Financial Position'') and Summaries of SignificantAssumptions and Accounting Policies. This projection must disclose projectedcash flow and working capital balances for the period requested. The deferralperiod beyond 5 years can only extend to the point where either the cumulativecash flow or working capital become positive, taking into account the deferralpayments. The Regional Forester will coordinate the granting of the additional noteterm with the State Director of the Bureau of Land Management if the purchaserhas BLM sales that meet qualifications for deferral under the BLM policyfor deferred payments. The note principal amount will be due in equal quarterly payments. Theinitial principal payment will be due on January 1 of the year followingthe date of note execution. The remaining payments will be due April 1,July 1, October 1, and January 1. Interest will begin to accrue on theamount of deferral at the time stumpage payment for deferred timber isdue. Interest will be calculated on the accrued amount of the deferralor the outstanding remainder of the note, whichever is less. Interest willbe billed quarterly. The note must be executed and presented to the ForestService prior to modification of contract terms. The interest rate willbe adjusted at each payment and will be equal to the prime rate of interestlisted in the Federal Reserve Statistical Release H. 15, Selected InterestRates, Instrument, Bank Prime Loan. The Selected Interest Rates (H. 15)release for February, May, August, and November will be used as the basisfor the promissory note interest charges. The rate used from the SelectedInterest Rates sheet will be the average monthly rate listed respectivelyfor the months of January, April, July, and October. Payment of the note must be secured by an acceptable form of security asspecified in the Forest Service Finance and Accounting Handbook (FSH 6509.11k,Chapter 80), available at all Forest Supervisor Offices. Examples of acceptableforms of security include bonds by an acceptable surety, irrevocable lettersof credit, or securities of the United States. Additional forms of securitymay be utilized if after analysis they are deemed acceptable by the Chiefof the Forest Service. The security amount must be sufficient to coverthe entire amount of the note. The contract holder or surety, where applicable,may make pre-payment of all or a portion of the outstanding remainder ofthe note on the date of any quarterly payment. The amount of the deferred payment value used for the note will be initiallycalculated using the original advertised contract volumes as adjusted byany subsequent contract modification. The actual principal amount willbe recalculated at the completion of harvest of the volume covered by thenote, when the exact amount of the deferred value is known. The note willbe revised to reflect actual obligations. Actual Forest Service scaledor payment unit volume will be used to determine the note value. The amount of the bond security may be reduced to reflect the current amountof the promissory note obligation during the note period. The note payments may be assumed by the surety if the principal is unableto make the quarterly payments. If contract term adjustment for 30 days or more is granted, after the contractmodification, the note obligation will be revised to reflect adjusted harvestvolumes resulting from approved delays. <T3>Implementation of Final Policy. </T3>The key change between the interimand final policy is the use of the prime rate of interest for the promissorynote interest requirement. To effect the transition between the interimpolicy and the final policy on interest rate requirements for promissorynotes, the date of postmark of the purchaser's request for modificationof a sale will be used to determine the interest rate basis to be usedin the promissory note. Requests postmarked on or after the effective dateof the final policy will be subject to promissory note charges at the primerate of interest as provided in the final policy. Sales modifications requestedunder the interim policy will be subject to promissory note charges equalto the average market yield of outstanding Treasury obligations with remainingyears to maturity of 5 years. However, to receive notes with the interest rate provided in the interimpolicy, purchasers must execute the modifications requested under the interimpolicy and applicable promissory notes prior to December 31, 1989. Allpromissory notes executed after December 31, 1989, will require note interestcharges at the prime rate of interest. These limitations are necessaryto avoid negating the higher interest requirements of the final policy.This policy is being issued as an Interim Directive to Forest Service Handbook2409.15 Chapter 30. <ITAG tagnum="84">Regulatory Impact</ITAG>This action has been reviewed under U.S. Department of Agriculture policyand procedures as well as submitted to the Office of Management and Budgetfor review pursuant to Executive Order (E.O.) 12291. It has been determinedthat this policy does not have the effects of a major rule as defined inE.O. 12291. The procedure implemented by this policy will not have an annualeffect on the economy of $100 million or more will not result in majorincreases in costs for consumers, individual industries, Federal, State,or local government agencies or geographic regions, and will not have significantadverse effects on the ability of United States-based industries to competewith foreign-based enterprises in domestic or export markets. It does notchange the amount a purchaser contracted to pay for National Forest timber,although it will affect the timing of when a purchaser will have to paythe full price for stumpage under a Forest Service contract. The deferredpayment will be made under the terms of a fully secured promissory note.The note will require interest charges as consideration for payment deferral.The timing of payments to the Government will be delayed but the note interestwill compensate for the deferral. The risk of nonpayment will be avoidedby requiring a fully secured promissory note. Counties who in the areaswith high-priced sales who share in revenues generated from Federal timbersales will experience a short-term deferral in receipts. However, the short-termeffects are likely to have far less adverse impact than if these saleswere defaulted. Since purchasers will eventually pay the full contractvalue, the long term receipts to affected counties will be far greaterthan would be received if the sales were defaulted and resold. The procedureswill contribute to the economic well-being of timber-dependent communities,the orderly flow of timber to market and receipts to Treasury, strengthenthe orderly accomplishment of resource management objectives, and reduceadministrative costs associated with collection of claims against defaultingpurchasers. It has also been determined that this policy will not have significanteconomic impact on a substantial number of small entities. The policy worksto preserve the long range revenues to affected counties and to maintainemployment in the area and, thus, reduces the certain adverse economicimpacts these entities would experience in the event of default and bankruptcyof purchasers of these high-priced sales. Based on both experience and environmental analysis, this policy will haveno significant effect on the human environment, individually or cumulatively.Therefore, it is categorically excluded from documentation in an environmentalassessment or an environmental impact statement (40 CFR 1508.4). Furthermore,utilization of this policy is at a qualifying purchase's discretion anda written request is not required in any specified format. The policy wouldnot result in additional procedures or paperwork as defined in the PaperworkReduction Act and 5 CFR Part 1320.<ITAG tagnum="21">Date: April 19, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">George M. Leonard,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Associate Chief.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-11403 Filed 5-11-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3410-11-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>