<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89214-0004 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.2-14-89.f2.A1003</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">CONSUMER PRODUCT SAFETY COMMISSION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">16 CFR Parts 1031 and 1032</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Commission Participation and Commission Employee Involvement in VoluntaryStandards</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY:</T2> Consumer Product Safety Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION:</T2> Final rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY:</T2> The Consumer Product Safety Commission is revising itsregulations governing the Commission's participation in voluntary standardsactivities. The revised regulations reflect the policies set forth by Congressin the Consumer Product Safety Amendments of 1981, Pub. L. 97-35, and makeseveral changes in the agency's policies on employee participation in voluntarystandards development activities. Also, the revised regulations combineformer Part 1031, Employee Membership and Participation in Voluntary StandardsOrganizations, and Part 1032, Commission Involvement in Voluntary StandardsActivities, into a new Part 1031, Commission Participation and CommissionEmployee Involvement in Voluntary Standards Activities.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE:</T2> March 16, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2> Colin Church, Voluntary StandardsCoordinator, Consumer Product Safety Commission, Washington, DC 20207,telephone: (301) 492-6550.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:</T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Background</ITAG>Congress enacted the Consumer Product Safety Act in 1972, codified at 15U.S.C. 2051, et. seq., to protect consumers against unreasonable risksof injury associated with consumer products. In furtherance of that goal,Congress established the Consumer Product Safety Commission as an independentregulatory agency, and granted it broad authority to promulgate mandatorysafety standards for consumer products as a necessary alternative to industryself-regulation. 15 U.S.C. 2056(a)(1)(A). The Commission was also giventhe authority to require manufacturers to provide consumer label warningsor instructions about their products, 15 U.S.C. 2056(a)(2), and to promulgatestandards for products falling under the purview of the Refrigerator SafetyAct, 15 U.S.C. 1211-1214, the Poison Prevention Packaging Act of 1970,15 U.S.C. 1471-1476, the Flammable Fabrics Act, 15 U.S.C. 1191-1204, andthe Federal Hazardous Substances Act, 15 U.S.C. 1261-1276. As originallyenacted, neither the Consumer Product Safety Act nor the other statutesadministered by the Commission contained any language referring to voluntarystandards.In 1978, the Commission issued regulations describing the extent and formof Commission involvement in the development of voluntary standards, 43FR 19216, 16 CFR Part 1032_Commission Involvement in Voluntary StandardsActivities. In the Background section, the Commission acknowledged thecontribution which voluntary standards had made to reducing hazards associatedwith consumer products, and stated that it supported an effective voluntarystandards program. Nonetheless, the Commission asserted that ``While theremight be circumstances in which a particular voluntary standard can substitutefor a mandatory standard, the Commission generally views voluntary standardsas complementary to and not a substitute for mandatory standards''. Itstated, also, its belief that a proper combination of voluntary and mandatorystandards can have a higher ``payoff'' in increased product safety thaneither mandatory or voluntary activities alone could have.In 1981, Congress amended the Consumer Product Safety Act, the FederalHazardous Substances Act, and the Flammable Fabrics Act, to mandate thatthe Commission give preference to voluntary standards over promulgatingmandatory standards, if it determines that a voluntary standard will eliminateor adequately reduce an injury risk, and that there will be a likelihoodof substantial compliance with the standard. 15 U.S.C. 2056(b), 15 U.S.C.1262(g)(2), 15 U.S.C. 1193(h)(2). The amendments also require the Commissionto provide administrative and technical assistance to organizations engagedin voluntary standards development. 15 U.S.C. 2054(a) (3) and (4).Thereafter, the Commission conducted its activities in accordance withthe policies of the 1981 Amendments by deferring to voluntary standardsin those cases where a voluntary standard would adequately reduce an unreasonablerisk of injury and there was a reasonable likelihood of substantial compliancewith the standard. However, the Commission's policy statement in 16 CFRPart 1032 is inconsistent with the policy stated in the 1981 Amendments.The Commission proposed, at 53 FR 44892, November 7, 1988, a new part 1031to conform the Commission's policy with the 1981 Amendments. The proposednew Part 1031 also incorporated, with changes, the provisions of current16 CFR Part 1031, the Commission's regulations governing employee membershipand participation in voluntary standards organizations, which were initiallypromulgated on June 20, 1975, 40 FR 26023. The part specified which Commissionofficers and employees can be members of voluntary standards bodies orcan participate in voluntary standards development activities. The commentsreceived, and the Commission's responses, are discussed later. The substantivechanges made by this final regulation are discussed below.<ITAG tagnum="84">Explanation of Changes and Additions in Part 1031</ITAG>Subpart A, General Policies, is a revision of current 16 CFR Part 1032,Commission Involvement in Voluntary Standards Activities. Subpart A issubstantially the same as existing Part 1032, except as described below.Section 1031.1(b) has been added to define ``voluntary standards bodies''and ``voluntary standards development bodies''. The definitions are similarto those in OMB Circular A-119 and reflect the language Congress employedin section 5(a) (3) and (4) of the Consumer Product Safety Act as to whichorganizations the Commission should assist in voluntary standards activities,i.e., ``public and private organizations or groups of manufacturers.''The definitions are stated in broad terms so as to encompass any organizationthat has the capability of developing a voluntary standard.Section 1031.2, Background, a complete revision of current andSection; 1032.1,explains the policy of the Commission regarding voluntary standards. Section1031.2(b) explains the statutory requirements of the 1981 Amendments regardingvoluntary standards. Section 1031.2(c) describes the policies set forthin office of Management and Budget Circular No. A-119 pertaining to federalparticipation in the development and use of voluntary standards. The Circularencourages government participation in the standards-related activitiesof voluntary standards bodies and standards-developing groups when suchparticipation is in the public interest and is compatible with the agencies,missions, authorities, priorities, and budget resources.Section 1031.3, Consumer Product Safety Act Amendments, incorporates thetext of several sections from the Act, as amended in 1981, which pertainto the Commission's participation in the development and use of voluntarystandards. The provisions are provided in the text of the regulation forthe reader's convenience.Section 1031.4(a)(2) modifies current andSection; 1032.6(a)(2), so that oneof the criteria for the Commission's determination that a voluntary standardis adequate to eliminate or reduce a risk of injury associated with a consumerproduct is changed from the language that ``there is a sufficiently highdegree of conformance to the voluntary standard'' to language ``it is likelythat there will be substantial and timely compliance with the voluntarystandard.'' The new language reflects provisions in the 1981 Amendmentsthat allows the Commission to defer to proposed voluntary standards underappropriate circumstances.Section 1032.6(b) in the current regulations is deleted since it is inconsistentwith the 1981 Amendments.Section 1031.4(b) is a new provision that provides for the Commission toinitiate a proceeding for the development of a mandatory standard in theevent it determines there is no voluntary standard that will eliminateor adequately reduce a risk of injury.Section 1031.4(c) revises the language in current 16 CFR 1032.6(d), whichrequires the Commission to consider the provisions of a voluntary standardwhen it initiates a development proceeding under ``section 7 of the ConsumerProduct Safety Act.'' As originally enacted, section 7, referred to asthe ``offeror process'', provided that the Commission could solicit ``offers''from private sector organizations to develop a mandatory standard. However,section 7 was revised by the 1981 Amendments to abolish the ``offeror process'';thus, reference to that section is inappropriate. The proposed andSection;1031.4(c)references, instead, the provisions of the Consumer Product Safety Act,the Federal Hazardous Substances Act, and the Flammable Fabrics Act whichprescribe the process for issuing a mandatory consumer product safety rule.Section 1031.5 sets forth the criteria for Commission participation involuntary standards activities. They are substantially the same criteriaset forth in the former 16 CFR 1032.5, except that two new criteria (subsections(a) and (b)) have been added to conform to criteria prescribed by the 1981Amendments and their legislative history.Section 1031.5(f) provides criteria superseding the criterion set forthin former 16 CFR 1032.5(e) for Commission consideration to determine whetherto participate in the development of a voluntary standard. The former provisionmerely required that the Commission consider the degree and ascertainabilityof industry conformance with a voluntary standard once it is issued. Thenew section requires the Commission to consider any reasonable industryarrangements for achieving substantial industry compliance with a voluntarystandard once it is issued and the means of ascertaining such compliancebased on overall market share of product production. The latter requirementreflects the Congressional direction that, in most instances, complianceshould be measured in terms of complying consumer products rather thanin terms of the number of complying industry members. See the ConferenceReport to accompany H.R. 3982, H. R. Rep. NO. 97-208, 97th Cong., lst Sess.,871 (1981).Section 1031.5(i) revises former 16 CFR 1032.5(a) to state that participantsin a voluntary standard development have ``knowledge or expertise in thearea under consideration,'' rather than ``technical expertise,'' so asto encourage broader participation by those affected by the standard. Seethe discussion of this section in ``Comments received and Commission responses''below.Section 1031.6(c)(2) replaces and revises former 16 CFR 1032.2(b)(2), whichdescribed examples of Commission participation in voluntary standards activities,by adding language allowing the Commission to provide administrative assistance(e.g., travel costs, hosting meetings, and performing secretarial functions)in support of the development and implementation of voluntary standards.This provision is derived from section 5 of the Consumer Product SafetyAct, as amended in 1981.Section 1031.6(d) is added to conform to the policy set forth in OMB CircularA-119. that, normally, agencies should not provide greater support to avoluntary standards activity than that of all the non-federal participants.Section 1031.7(a)(7) replaces and revises 16 CFR 1032.4(b)(7) by addinga clause that indicates that the Commission's support of voluntary standardsactivities may include encouraging states and local governments to participatein government or industrial model code development activities so as todevelop uniformity and to minimize conflicting state and local regulations,as provided by section 2(b)(3) of the Consumer Product Safety Act.Section 1031.7(a)(8) provides a new example of the type of support theCommission may use in assisting voluntary standards development, i.e.,monitoring the number and market share of products conforming to a voluntarysafety standard. This will enable the Commission to ascertain industrycompliance with a voluntary standard by market share.16 CFR 1032.4(b)(9) has been deleted.Section 1031.7(a)(9) is a new provision. It acknowledges that one formof Commission support for voluntary standards development is providingfor the involvement of agency personnel in voluntary standards activitiesas described in Subpart B of this part.Sections 1031.7(a) (10) and (11) are new provisions. They indicate thatthe Commission may provide administrative and financial support to a voluntarystandards development activity, as authorized by the 1981 Amendments.Section 1031.8 is a new provision. It describes the functions of the VoluntaryStandards Coordinator, a Commission employee responsible for coordinatingagency participation in voluntary standards activities and managing thevoluntary standards program.Subpart B, Employee Involvement in Voluntary Standards Activities, supersedesthe former 16 CFR Part 1031. The subpart has the same general effect asthe former Part 1031 except for the changes noted below.Section 1031.9(c)(1) revises former andSection;1031.1(a) to state that theCommission's participation in voluntary standards programs is consistentwith the federal policy set forth in OMB Circular No. A-119, as well asthe Consumer Product Safety Act and other statutes administered by theCommission.Section 1031.9(c)(4) is a new provision. It states that Commission employeeparticipation in voluntary standards activities should take into accountCommission resources and priorities. This provision conforms to languagein the legislative history of the 1981 Amendments directing the Commissionto consider its resources and priorities when determining what assistanceit will provide to voluntary standards development. Conference Report toH.R. 3982, p. 884.Section 1031.10 is a new section. It defines, for the purpose of SubpartB on employee involvement in voluntary standards activities, the termsmembership, participation, monitoring, observation, and communication.Section 1031.11(b) is a new provision which requires employees, who participatein the development of a voluntary standard and then later advise the Commissionregarding that standard, to advise the Commission on the extent of theirinvolvement. Also, the provision requires that evaluations and recommendationsby such employees should strive to be as objective as possible and shouldbe reviewed by higher level Commission officials prior to submission tothe Commission.Section 1031.12(a) lists those Commission officials who may not becomemembers of a voluntary standards group because they have the responsibilityfor making final decisions, or objectively advising those who make finaldecisions, on whether to rely on a voluntary standard, promulgate a consumerproduct safety standard, or to take other action to prevent or reduce anunreasonable risk of injury associated with a product. The list is thesame as that in former andSection;1031.4, except that Program Managers inthe Office of Program Management and Budget have been deleted because theirwork and recommendations are reviewed by supervisory officials before beinggiven to the Commission. It has also been revised to reflect the Commission'sfunctions regarding voluntary standards which emanate from the 1981 Amendments,i.e., to determine whether a voluntary standard will adequately addressa problem involving an unreasonable risk. The predecessor provision referredto the Commission's functions relating to the ``offeror process'' which,as noted above, was abolished by the 1981 Amendments.Section 1031.12(c) is a new provision. It requires employees who have obtainedapproval from the Executive Director to accept membership in a voluntarystandards organization to so inform the General Counsel and the VoluntaryStandards Coordinator prior to their acceptance. This will allow the GeneralCounsel and the Voluntary Standards Coordinator to be aware of the membershipand an opportunity for them to provide any necessary guidance to the employee.Section 1031.12(d) is a new provision that requires employees who seekmembership in a voluntary standards organization in their individual capacityto seek approval from the Commission's Ethics Official in accordance withthe Commission's Employee Standards of Conduct, 16 CFR Part 1030. Section 1031.13(a), like its predecessor provision andSection; 1031.5(d),provides that Commission employees, except for those who are specificallylisted, may participate in or monitor voluntary standards development.The proposed provision differs from its predecessor in that it requiresapproval for employee participation or monitoring by the employee's supervisorand any other person required to do so by internal agency management procedures,whereas approval under the former regulations is required to be given bythe Executive Director alone. Section 1031.14, Observation criteria, supersedes the last sentence informer andSection; 1031.5(d). The new provision requires employees who wishto attend voluntary standards meetings for the sole purpose of observationto obtain approval from their supervisor and any other person requiredto approve pursuant to internal agency management procedures. Under theformer provision, approval had to be provided by the Executive Director.The new provision also requires the employee to notify the Voluntary StandardsCoordinator prior to observing a voluntary standard meeting. Section 1031.15, Communication criteria, is a new provision providing theconditions for officials and employees to communicate with voluntary standardsgroups and representatives. Commission officials and employees, who are authorized to be members ofa voluntary standards group in their official capacity under section 1031.12(b),may communicate with a voluntary standard group or representative incidentalto their membership. Likewise, those officials or employees, who are approvedto participate in or monitor a voluntary standard development under andSection;1031.13 (a) and (b), may communicate with the voluntary standard body orits representatives as part of their approved participation in, or monitoringof, a standard under development. Agency employees and officials who do not fall within either of the abovecategories, and are not prohibited from membership in a voluntary standardsorganization by virtue of andSection; 1031.12(a), may be authorized to communicatewith a voluntary standards group, representative, or other committee memberon substantive matters, as defined in andSection; 1031.15(a)(1). Approvalmust be given by the person to whom an employee would apply to obtain approvalfor participation or monitoring pursuant to andSection; 1031.13. Those sameemployees and officials may communicate with a voluntary standards group,representative, or other committee member on non-substantive matters withinthe scope of their duties without specific authorization. Substantive matters are defined in andSection; 1031.15(a)(1) as those mattersthat pertain to the formulation of the technical aspects of a specificvoluntary standard or the course of conduct for developing a voluntarystandard. Nonsubstantive matters would include those relating to schedulingmeetings, obtaining status reports, and other administrative matters. Section 1031.15(b) is a new provision. It requires that employees communicatewith voluntary standards organizations in accordance with any internalagency procedures. Section 1031.15(c) is a new provision. It provides that the Commissionerscan engage in written communications with voluntary standards bodies orrepresentatives on voluntary standards matters providing they state thatany substantive views expressed are only their individual views, and notnecessarily those of the Commission acting in its collegial capacity. Thisprovision changes the former regulation in andSection; 1031.5_self-imposedby the Commission in 1978_that precluded the Commissioners from personallycommunicating with voluntary standards organizations concerning the developmentof voluntary standards. The new provision permits the Commissioners toactively encourage and support the development and use of voluntary standardsto alleviate product hazards. The disclaimer is intended to preclude anymisunderstanding on the part of a recipient of a letter as to whether theviews expressed therein are those of the individual Commissioner or thoseof the Commission. Of course, the Commission may always communicate withparties on voluntary standards matters upon which they agree in their officialcollegial capacity. Section 1031.15(d) is a new provision. It requires that Commission officialsand employees furnish a copy of each written communication of a substantivenature, and a report of each substantive oral conversation with voluntarystandards groups or individuals, to the Voluntary Standards Coordinator.This requirement will enable the Coordinator to monitor all the voluntarystandards activities the Commission and its employees are engaged in. <ITAG tagnum="84">Comments Received and Commission Responses </ITAG>In response to the notice at 53 FR 44892, November 7, 1988, the Commissionreceived comments from the Alliance of American Insurers, the AmericanGas Association Laboratories, the American Petroleum Institute, the AmericanSociety for Testing and Materials, the Consumer Federation of America,the Department of Defense, the Council of American Building Officials,the National Institute of Standards and Technology, the Whirlpool Corporation,the Underwriters Laboratories, and the ANSI Z21 Accredited Standards Committee.Several Commission staff members also made additional comments. The issuesraised by these comments and the Commission's resolution of those issuesare discussed below. Section 1031.1(b) The Consumer Federation of America recommended that andSection; 1031.1(b)be amended to indicate the Commission's preference and support for standardsdevelopment organizations that utilize a consensus process and other dueprocess considerations. CFA cites the Conference Report on the 1981 Amendmentsthat states that voluntary standards that the Commission rely on shouldhave been adopted in accordance with reasonable procedures such as thoseutilized by groups that develop national consensus standards. The Commission agrees with CFA's comment that preference be given to thosevoluntary standards that have been developed by a consensus process. Thispreference is expressed in andSection; 1031.5(f) as a factor the Commissionwill consider in deciding whether to participate in the the developmentof a voluntary standard. That section requires standards development groupsto establish procedures that ``provide for meaningful participation'' bythe participants, including consumers and small business. However, theremay be situations where an existing voluntary standard that was not developedby consensus procedures will, nevertheless, eliminate or adequately reducethe risk of injury presented by a hazard. Thus, the Commission has decidednot to impose a consensus procedure as a mandatory requirement for Commissiondeferral to a standard but, instead, continue to encourage the use of consensusprocedures by standards bodies.The Alliance of American Insurers (AAI) recommends that the sentence inandSection; 1031.1(b) that defines voluntary standards development bodiesbe revised to require that subgroups within the definition be ``accreditedsubgroups'' to encompass those committees whose procedures are accreditedin the ANSI system of standards development. The Commission decided not to accept this recommendation for the reasonthat it may be unnecessarily restrictive. The Conference Report for the1981 Amendments indicated that Congress contemplated that voluntary standardsshould be developed and adopted ``in accordance with reasonable procedures,such as those utilized by groups that develop national consensus standards''.As stated above, the procedures that a voluntary development group willemploy will be a factor in the Commission's determination whether to participatein a standard development. However, the Commission chooses not to mandatethe development procedures. Likewise, it does not believe that accreditationshould be a prerequisite to Commission participation in a development effortor reliance on a voluntary standard developed by a non-accredited group.Section 1031.4(a)(2) CFA recommends that andSection; 1031.4(a)(2) be amended to allow deferralto a voluntary standard only where there will be compliance with the standardin a timely fashion, as was stated in the Conference Report to the 1981Amendments. The Commission agrees with this comment and, accordingly, has revised thesubsection to require that industry compliance with a voluntary standardbe ``timely'' as well as ``substantial''. As CFA noted, the ConferenceReport to the 1981 Amendments stated ``In evaluating whether there willbe substantial compliance with a voluntary standard, the Commission shoulddetermine whether or not there will be sufficient compliance to eliminateor adequately reduce an unreasonable risk of injury in a timely fashion.''Conference Report, H.R. Rep. No. 97-208, July 29, 1981, at 871, 874. Thetimeliness language was also added to andSection; 1031.5(f), the criterionconcerning industry arrangements for achieving substantial industry complianceonce a voluntary standard is issued. Section 1031.4(a)(3) Whirlpool Corporation commented on the language in this section that indicatedthe allocation of Commission staff involvement in evaluating voluntarystandards as it would a mandatory standard. Whirlpool questions whetherCommission involvement in voluntary standards setting is necessary or appropriateand whether Commission resources could be utilized in a better manner.The Commission is, of course, concerned with the allocation of staff timeand resources. However, the criteria for the Commission relying on a voluntarystandard instead of a mandatory standard is set forth in sections 7 and9 of the Consumer Product Safety Act, i.e., the voluntary standard musteliminate or adequately reduce the risk of injury addressed, and it islikely that there will be substantial compliance with such voluntary standard.Thus, the Commission is obligated to expend adequate staff time and resourcesto be able to determine whether the criteria in sections 7 and 9 is met.Section 1031.4(a)(4) AAI suggests that the language in the first sentence be revised to substitutethe word ``few'' instead of ``one or two'' areas where a voluntary standardis considered by the Commission to be inadequate. The comment is that thewords ``one or two'' are unnecessarily restrictive and forces the Commissionto make a judgment based on numbers rather than a broader considerationof issues involved in deciding to defer to a voluntary standard modification.The Commission agrees with the commentor and has revised the language assuggested. In the same first sentence AAI suggests that the words ``or its accreditedsubgroup operator'' appear immediately after the words ``voluntary standardsgroups''. The Commission does not accept this suggestion for the reason that thedefinitions of voluntary standards bodies or voluntary standards developmentbodies encompass their subgroups. Also, as stated above, the Commissionchooses not to mandate that organizations or subgroups be accredited asa prerequisite to their developing or modifying a voluntary standard. CFA stated its belief that andSection; 1031.4(a)(4), a provision which allowsthe Commission to extend the deferral period, contradicts the requirementthat a voluntary standard be promulgated in a timely fashion. It recommendsthat the section be revised to say that if a voluntary standard is notdeveloped or modified in an expeditious manner, then the Commission willimmediately commence to develop a mandatory standard. The Commission agrees that the development or modification of a voluntarystandard to address a product hazard should always be done as expeditiouslyas possible and that is a consideration in its decision whether to deferto the voluntary standard development or to commence a mandatory rulemakingimmediately. However, the Commission does not believe that the languageof this section has to be changed since it is implicit in the Commission'sdecision whether to defer mandatory standards development or to commenceit immediately. The Commission will consider whether the initial deferralperiod was adequate or whether additional time is reasonable under thecircumstances. Section 1031.5(f) As CFA commented on andSection; 1031.4(a)(2), discussed above, it suggeststhe language in this section be revised to require that substantial compliancebe reached in a ``timely'' fashion.The Commission agrees with the commentor and has revised the language torevise the criteria for Commission participation to require Commissionconsideration of ``timely,'' as well as ``substantial'' compliance.Section 1031.5(g)AAI suggests that this section be made more specific as to what types ofmarking requirements should be included in a voluntary standard to permitCommission investigation of such products at a later time. The commentorsuggested several examples.Although the examples given by the commentor would be appropriate, theCommission does not cite specific examples since they may not be appropriateto every voluntary standard. Accordingly, the Commission prefers to statethe marking requirement in broad terms.Section 1031.5(i)CFA expressed its concern that the last sentence in andSection; 1031.5(i)could be interpreted to mean that representatives of consumers and smallbusiness in a voluntary standard development have technical expertise inthe areas under consideration.The Commission agrees that the sentence could be misread and thus has revisedit to make it clear that technical expertise, as that term is commonlyused, should not be a prerequisite for consumer and small business participationin a voluntary standard development process. There may be situations wherethe voluntary standard development group would want non-technical inputfrom consumer and small business representatives, e.g., on frequency ofuse of a product, consumer awareness of the meaning of proposed labels,etc. Likewise, as CFA suggests, these representatives can play an importantrole in questioning the rationale for a standard without having technicalexpertise. Accordingly, the Commission has replaced the expression ``technicalexpertise'' with the expression ``knowledge or expertise.''Whirlpool inquired whether the listing of the representatives in this sectionmeans that, unless all the groups are included in each voluntary standardsproceeding, the Commission will expand its involvement. The commentor suggeststhat participation by so many groups could be counterproductive and couldimpede the voluntary standards setting process.The purpose of this provision is to encourage voluntary standards groupsto conduct their activities openly and to include in their developmentactivities those parties who will be affected by the voluntary standardunder development.The Commission does not expect that each and every entityleavethe section unchanged.Section 1031.7(a)(6)AAI suggests that the phrase ``including labels/markings'' be added atthe end of the sentence to permit the Commission staff to not only evaluatethe technical adequacy of a standard in reducing injuries, but also toevaluate the labels and markings that must be included in the standardas part of the safety strategy.The Commission believes that this addition is unnecessary because it isunderstood that the staff will evaluate all relevant aspects of a standard,including labels and markings. Thus, the Commission decided to leave thissection unchanged.Section 1031.7(a)(9)Representatives of the Commission staff recommended that this section (formerly16 CFR 1032.4(b)(9)) be deleted since the Commission will not approve thepreparation of a listing of voluntary standards that adequately addressspecific hazards in view of a previous Commission decision regarding therecognition of voluntary standards. See Minutes of Commission Action datedJanuary 16, 1985. The Commission agrees with the staff's recommendationand, therefore, has deleted this section. Accordingly, proposed listedin this provision be represented on every voluntary standard developmentgroup; the composition of each development group will necessarily dependon the nature of the subject matter.Whirlpool also suggested that some groups may not have the technical expertiseto participate in voluntary standards development.The Commission does not believe that participation is appropriate onlyfor persons or groups with purely technical expertise. In accordance withits discussion of CFA's comments on andSection; 1031.5(i), it has broadenedthe definition of ``openness'' by calling for participation of partieshaving ``knowledge or expertise.''Section 1031.7(a)(4)AAI recommended that the term ``technical support'' be broadened by includingthe words ``engineering support such as innovative product design'', andthe words ``safety and'' immediately before the words ``health sciencedata.''The Commission believes that the section, as written, adequately describesthe type of assistance the Commission may provide to support a voluntarystandard development activity. Also, the Commission's use of the term ``healthscience data'' includes safety data. Thus, it prefers to andSection;andSection;1031.7(a)(10) through 1031.7(a)(13) have been renumbered as andSection;andSection;1031.7(a)(9) through 1031.7(a)(12).Section 1031.10(a)AAI suggests that the language in the last sentence, stating that membershipincludes all oral and written communications ``which are incidental tosuch membership'' may not be sufficiently clear, and recommends that thelast sentence in subparagraph (b) be substituted in (a).The Commission believes the language in this section is sufficiently clearthat the definition of ``membership'' encompasses communications relatingto a membership. Also, the suggested substitute language from subparagraph(b) would be inappropriate since it pertains to communications relatingto active participation in a voluntary standard activity. Membership, asused in this section, could be passive membership. Thus, the Commissionhas decided to leave this section unchanged. Section 1031.11(d) Several commentors criticized the Commission policy in this section whichprohibits Commission employees from voting or otherwise formally indicatingapproval or disapproval of a voluntary standard during its developmentand adoption. They suggested that the no-voting policy is inconsistentwith active participation of Commission employees in standards developmentactivities. Also, several commentors pointed out that the OMB CircularA-119 encourages agencies to actively participate in the development ofvoluntary standards, including voting on issues in the course of the developmentprocess. On the other hand, several other commentors applauded the Commissionpolicy. The Commission's no-voting policy is premised on the Commission's statusas a regulatory agency and on the role of the Commission staff in ultimatelyrecommending whether the Commission should defer setting a mandatory standardbecause a voluntary standard addresses the hazard in question. Additionally,the Commission is able to provide technical and administrative assistanceto those organizations and groups developing standards. The Commission,through its employees, have been able to provide that assistance to manyvoluntary standard development activities over the course of years withoutformally voting. Also, the no-voting policy is intended to preclude anyappearance that the Commission, through its representative, is endorsinga particular standard or is committing it to supporting that standard tothe exclusion of alternative regulatory actions. Although the OMB Circularencourages active participation and voting by agency representatives, itrecognizes that agencies may prohibit such voting. See Circular, section7.b.(5). For the reasons stated, the Commission continues to believe theno-voting policy is a prudent and well-considered one. Thus, the Commissionhas decided to leave this section unchanged. Section 1032.12(b) The Associate Director for Industry and Standards, National Institute ofStandards and Technology, commented that the no-voting policy should applyto employees serving on voluntary standards development groups or committees,but not to employees serving on standards advisory groups that are notresponsible for the development and approval of standards. The AssociateDirector suggested several such groups. Although the advisory groups referred to in this section may not directlyengage in the development of voluntary standards, they frequently establishpolicies that could impact on voluntary standard activities of the particularorganization. As with voluntary standards development groups, the Commissiondoes not want its employees formally participating in the policy decisionsof a voluntary standards board or advisory group for the reason that anemployee's formal vote may give the appearance of Commission action orthe Commission's position on the matter. The policy also precludes a possibleconflict of interest situation where an employee who voted on a matteris later required to address the same matter in his or her capacity asa Commission employee. Further, the Commission believes it can provideinformation and assistance to these policy committees without having tovote on particular issues or policy matters. In this regard, the Commissionersand Commission staff may freely communicate with voluntary standards groupsor representative in accordance with andSection; 1032.15. For these reasons,the Commission has decided not to change this section. Sections 1031.13(a) and 1031.15(b) A staff member commented that the last sentence in these two paragraphscould be understood that an employee who is participating in or monitoringa voluntary standard development would have to obtain consensus reviewand approval of Commission officials at every stage of the developmentprocess, and that voluntary standards groups would be reluctant to havea Commission employee as a member on that basis. The Commission did not intend to imply that staff review and consensusof an employee's participation or monitoring is required at each and everystage of a voluntary standard development process. Instead, the statementwas intended to state an employee's participation or monitoring shall bein accordance with any internal Commission procedures that the Commissionor Commission management may have established. However, to avoid any misunderstanding,the last sentence in both these paragraphs have been revised to deletethe phrase ``designed to assure staff review and consensus''.Section 1031.13(c) CFA commented that andSection; 1031.13(c), which allows Commission employeesto participate in closed meetings of voluntary standards development groupsunder extraordinary circumstances, be amended to require that meeting logsfrom such closed meeting be made available to the public upon request.In fact, the Commission's regulations setting forth its meetings policy(16 CFR Part 1012) already requires employees to prepare and submit a meetingsummary to the Office of the Secretary within twenty calendar days aftera meeting for which a summary is required to be made. These summaries areavailable to the public as permitted by law. The Commission agrees thatthe section should be revised to reference the meeting summary requirement.CFA recommends that the last sentence in andSection; 1031.13(c), requiringCommission employees to provide notice of their attendance at a voluntarystandard development meeting in the public calendar, also be included inandSection; 1031.11, the section setting forth the procedural safeguardsto assure employee objectivity and for avoiding conflict of interest situations.The Commission agrees that the meetings policy requirements are proceduralsafeguards that permit public monitoring of Commission involvement of voluntarystandards activities. Thus, a new subsection, similar to the last sentencein andSection; 1031.13(c), has been added as andSection; 1031.11(f) to referencethe Commission's meetings policy requirement. Section 1031.15(a) AAI commented that this section may be unclear as to whether the term ``representative''is restricted to an official of the voluntary standard organization orwhether it could pertain to another member of a voluntary standard developmentgroup who is not an official of the sponsoring voluntary standard organization.The Commission agrees that the paragraph, as written, could be read asrestricting communications to representatives of the sponsoring voluntarystandard organization. The Commission did not intend to restrict communicationsbetween its employees and other members who may both be serving togetheron a voluntary standard committee. Thus, the language in this section isrevised to add ``or other committee member'' immediately after the phrase``voluntary standard group or representative''. Section 1031.15(a)(2) AAI states that it cannot understand the need for communication which isnonsubstantive in nature and requests a clarification. The Commission distinguishes between substantive and nonsubstantive communicationsbecause substantive communications require supervisory approval whereasnonsubstantive communications do not. Nonsubstantive communications wouldcover administrative matters such as the date and place of the next meetingof the voluntary standard group, travel arrangements, etc. With these examples,and the definition of substantive matters in andSection; 1032.15(a)(1) as``matters that pertain to the formulation of the technical aspects of avoluntary standard or the course of conduct for developing a standard'',the meaning of anything else, i.e., ``non-substantive'' matters, is sufficientlyclear. Thus, the Commission decided not to revise the section. <ITAG tagnum="85">Certification of No Significant Economic Impact on Small Entities</ITAG>The Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601, et seq.) requires that whenevera federal agency publishes a proposal under the Administrative ProcedureAct (5 U.S.C. 553), it must give particular consideration to small businesses,small non-profit organizations, and small local governments (collectivelycalled ``small entities''). The proposed regulations are only for the informationof the public and industry. They will not have the force of law, and willnot impose any substantive obligation or duty on any person or firm, includingany small firm. Therefore, in accordance with section 605(b) of the RegulatoryFlexibility Act, the Commission certifies that the proposed regulationswill not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number ofsmall entities. <ITAG tagnum="84">Environmental Considerations </ITAG>The proposal published below will have little or no potential for affectingthe human environment. For this reason, neither an environmental assessmentnor an environmental impact statement is required. <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects </ITAG>16 CFR Part 1031 Business and industry, Conflict of interest, Consumer protection, Voluntarystandards. 16 CFR Part 1032 Business and industry, Consumer protection, Voluntary standards.For the reasons set out in the preamble, Title 16, Chapter II of the Codeof Federal Regulations is amended as follows: <ITAG tagnum="52">PART 1032_[REMOVED] </ITAG>1. Part 1032 is removed. 2. Part 1031 is revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="56">PART 1031_COMMISSION PARTICIPATION AND COMMISSION EMPLOYEE INVOLVEMENTIN VOLUNTARY STANDARDS ACTIVITIES </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart A_General Policies</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="70">Sec. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1031.1 Purpose and scope. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1031.2 Background. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1031.3 Consumer Product Safety Act Amendments. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1031.4 Effect of voluntary standards activities on Commission activities.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1031.5 Criteria for Commission participation in voluntary standardsactivities. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1031.6 Extent and form of Commission involvement in the developmentof voluntary standards. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1031.7 Commission support of voluntary standards activities. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1031.8 Voluntary Standards Coordinator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="72">Subpart B_Employee Involvement </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1031.9 Purpose and scope. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1031.10 Definitions. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1031.11 Procedural safeguards. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1031.12 Membership criteria. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1031.13 Participation and monitoring criteria. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1031.14 Observation criteria. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1031.15 Communication criteria.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority:</T4> 15 U.S.C. 2051-2083, 15 U.S.C. 1261-1276, 15 U.S.C.1191-1204.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart A_General Policies</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1031.1</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Purpose and scope.</ITAG>(a) This Part 1031 sets forth the Consumer Product Safety Commission'sguidelines and requirements on participating in the activities of voluntarystandards bodies. Subpart A sets forth general policies on Commission participation,and Subpart B sets forth policies and guidelines on employee involvementin voluntary standards activities.(b) For purposes of both Subpart A and Subpart B of this Part 1031, voluntarystandards bodies are private sector domestic or multinational organizationsor groups, or combinations thereof, such as, but not limited to, all non-profitorganizations, industry associations, professional and technical societies,institutes, and test laboratories, that are involved in the planning, development,establishment, revision, review or coordination of voluntary standards.Voluntary standards development bodies are voluntary standards bodies,or their sub-groups, that are devoted to developing or establishing voluntarystandards.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1031.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Background.</ITAG>(a) Congress enacted the Consumer Product Safety Act in 1972 to protectconsumers against unreasonable risks of injury associated with consumerproducts. In order to achieve that goal, Congress established the ConsumerProduct Safety Commission as an independent regulatory agency and grantedit broad authority to promulgate mandatory safety standards for consumerproducts as a necessary alternative to industry self regulation.(b) In 1981, the Congress amended the Consumer Product Safety Act, TheFederal Hazardous Substances Act, and the Flammable Fabrics Act, to requirethe Commission to rely on voluntary standards rather than promulgate amandatory standard when voluntary standards would eliminate or adequatelyreduce the risk of injury addressed and it is likely that there will besubstantial compliance with the voluntary standards. (15 U.S.C. 2056(b),15 U.S.C. 1262(g)(2), 15 U.S.C. 1193(h)(2)). The 1981 Amendments also requirethe Commission, after any notice or advance notice of proposed rulemaking,to provide technical and administrative assistance to persons or groupswho propose to develop or modify an appropriate voluntary standard. (15U.S.C. 2054(a)(3)). Additionally, the amendments encourage the Commissionto provide technical and administrative assistance to groups developingproduct safety standards and test methods, taking into account Commissionresources and priorities (15 U.S.C. 2054(a)(4)). Although the Commissionis required to provide assistance to such groups, it may determine thelevel of assistance in accordance with the level of its own administrativeand technical resources and in accordance with its assessment of the likelihoodthat the groups being assisted will successfully develop a voluntary standardthat will preclude the need for a mandatory standard.(c) In 1982, the Office of Management and Budget revised Circular No. A-119,Federal Participation in the Development and Use of Voluntary Standards.The Circular establishes the policy to be followed by executive agencies,including the Commission, in working with voluntary standards bodies andin adopting and using voluntary standards. The Circular encourages governmentparticipation in the standards-related activities of voluntary standardsbodies and standards-developing groups when such participation is in thepublic interest and is compatible with the agencies, missions, authorities,priorities, and budget resources. The Circular recognizes, however, thatvoluntary standards activities, if improperly conducted, can suppress freeand fair competition, impede innovation and technical progress, excludesafer and less expensive products, or otherwise adversely affect trade,commerce, health, or safety. Thus, agencies are urged to take full accountof the impact on the economy, applicable Federal laws, policies and nationalobjectives, including, for example, laws and regulations relating to antitrust,national security, small business, product safety, environment, technologicaldevelopment, and conflicts of interest.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1031.3</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Consumer Product Safety Act Amendments.</ITAG>The Consumer Product Safety Act, as amended, contains several sectionspertaining to the Commission's participation in the development and useof voluntary standards.(a) Section 7(b) provides that the Commission shall rely on voluntary consumerproduct safety standards prescribing requirements described in subsection(a) whenever compliance with such voluntary standards would eliminate oradequately reduce the risk of injury addressed and it is likely that therewill be substantial compliance with such voluntary standards. (15 U.S.C.2056(b)).(b) Section 5(a)(3) provides that the Commission shall, following publicationof an advance notice of proposed rulemaking or a notice of proposed rulemakingfor a product safety rule under any rulemaking authority administered bythe Commission, assist public and private organizations or groups of manufacturers,administratively and technically, in the development of safety standardsaddressing the risk of injury identified in such notice. (15 U.S.C. 2054(a)(3)).(c) Section 5(a)(4) provides that the Commission shall, to the extent practicableand appropriate (taking into account the resources and priorities of theCommission), assist public and private organizations or groups of manufacturers,administratively and technically, in the development of product safetystandards and test methods. (15 U.S.C. 2054(a)(4)).<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1031.4</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Effect of voluntary standards activities on Commission activities.</ITAG>(a)(1) The Commission, in determining whether to begin proceedings to developmandatory standards under the acts it administers, considers whether mandatoryregulation is necessary or whether there is an existing voluntary standardthat adequately addresses the problem and the extent to which that voluntarystandard is complied with by the affected industry.(2) The Commission acknowledges that there are situations in which adequatevoluntary standards, in combination with appropriate certification programs,may be appropriate to support a conclusion that a mandatory standard isnot necessary. The Commission may find that a mandatory standard is notnecessary where compliance with an existing voluntary standard would eliminateor adequately reduce the risk of injury associated with the product, containsrequirements and test methods that have been evaluated and found acceptableby the Commission, and it is likely that there will be substantial andtimely compliance with the voluntary standard. Under such circumstances,the Commission may agree to encourage industry compliance with the voluntarystandard and subsequently evaluate the effectiveness of the standard interms of accident and injury reduction for products produced in compliancewith the standard. (3) In evaluating voluntary standards, the Commission will relate the requirementsof the standard to the identified risks of injury and evaluate the requirementsin terms of their effectiveness in eliminating or reducing the risks ofinjury. The evaluation of voluntary standards will be conducted by Commissionstaff members, including representatives of legal, economics, engineering,epidemiological, health sciences, human factors, other appropriate interests,and the Voluntary Standards Coordinator. The staff evaluation will be conductedin a manner similar to evaluations of standards being considered for promulgationas mandatory standards. (4) In the event that the Commission has evaluated an existing voluntarystandard and found it to be adequate in all but a few areas, the Commissionmay defer the initiation of a mandatory rulemaking proceeding and requestthe voluntary standards organization to revise the standard to addressthe identified inadequacies expeditiously. In such cases, the Commissionmay monitor or participate in the development of these revisions. (b) In the event the Commission determines that there is no existing voluntarystandard that will eliminate or adequately reduce a risk of injury theCommission may commence a proceeding for the development of a consumerproduct safety rule or a regulation in accordance with section 9 of theConsumer Product Safety Act, 15 U.S.C. 2058, section 3(f) of the FederalHazardous Substances Act, 15 U.S.C. 1262(f), or section 4(a) of the FlammableFabrics Act, 15 U.S.C. 1193(g), as may be applicable. In commencing sucha proceeding, the Commission will publish an advance notice of proposedrulemaking which shall, among other things, invite any person to submitto the Commission an existing standard or portion of an existing standard,or to submit a statement of intention to modify or develop, within a reasonableperiod of time, a voluntary standard to address the risk of injury. (c) The Commission will consider those provisions of a voluntary standardthat have been reviewed, evaluated, and deemed to be adequate in addressingthe specified risks of injury when initiating a mandatory consumer productsafety rule or regulation under the Consumer Product Safety Act, the FederalHazardous Substances Act, or the Flammable Fabrics Act, as may be applicable.Comments will be requested in the advance notice of proposed rulemakingon the adequacy of such voluntary standard provisions. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1031.5 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Criteria for Commission participation in voluntary standards activities.</ITAG>The Commission will consider the extent to which the following criteriaare met in considering Commission participation in the development of voluntarysafety standards for consumer products: (a) The likelihood the voluntary standard will eliminate or adequatelyreduce the risk of injury addressed and that there will be substantialand timely compliance with the voluntary standard. (b) The likelihood that the voluntary standard will be developed withina reasonable period of time. (c) Exclusion, to the maximum extent possible, from the voluntary standardbeing developed, of requirements which will create anticompetitive effectsor promote restraint of trade. (d) Provisions for periodic and timely review of the standard, includingreview for anticompetitive effects, and revision or amendment as the needarises. (e) Performance-oriented and not design-restrictive requirements, to themaximum practical extent, in any standard developed. (f) Industry arrangements for achieving substantial and timely industrycompliance with the voluntary standard once it is issued, and the meansof ascertaining such compliance based on overall market share of productproduction. (g) Provisions in the standard for marking products conforming to the standardso that future Commission investigation can indicate the involvement ofsuch products in accidents and patterns of injury. (h) Provisions for insuring that products identified as conforming to suchstandards will be subjected to a testing and certification (including self-certification)procedure, which will provide assurance that the products comply with thestandard. (i) The openness to all interested parties, and the establishment of procedureswhich will provide for meaningful participation in the development of suchstandards by representatives of producers, suppliers, distributors, retailers,consumers, small business, public interests and other individuals havingknowledge or expertise in the areas under consideration, and proceduresfor affording other due process considerations. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1031.6 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Extent and form of Commission involvement in the development of voluntarystandards. </ITAG>(a) The Commission shall approve agency ``participation'', as defined below,in the development and support of voluntary safety standards for consumerproducts. The Executive Director shall approve Commission activities thatare defined below as ``monitoring.'' The extent of Commission involvementwill be dependent upon the Commission's interest in the particular standardsdevelopment activity and the commission's priorities and resources. (b) The Commission's interest in a specific voluntary standards activitywill be based in part on the frequency and severity of injuries associatedwith the product, the involvement of the product in accidents, the susceptibilityof the hazard to correction through standards, and the overall resourcesand priorities of the Commission. Commission involvement in voluntary standardsactivities generally will also be guided by the Commission's operatingplan and budget.(c) There are two levels of Commission involvement in voluntary standardsactivities, each of which reflects a different level of Commission involvementas set forth below:(1)<T3> Monitoring.</T3> Monitoring involves maintaining an awareness of thevoluntary standards development process through oral or written inquiries,receiving and reviewing minutes of meetings and copies of draft standards,or attending meetings for the purpose of observing and commenting duringthe standards development process in accordance with Subpart B of thispart. For example, monitoring may involve responding to requests from voluntarystandards organizations, standards development committees, trade associationsand consumer organizations; by providing information concerning the risksof injury associated with particular products, NEISS data, summaries andanalyses of in-depth investigation reports; discussing Commission goalsand objectives with regard to voluntary standards and improved consumerproduct safety; responding to requests for information concerning Commissionprograms; and initiating contacts with voluntary standards organizationsto discuss cooperative voluntary standards activities.(2) <T3>Participating. </T3>Participating involves regularly attending meetingsof a standard development committee or group and taking an active partin the discussions of the committee and in developing the standard, inaccordance with Subpart B of this part. Under certain conditions, the Commissionwill contribute to the deliberations of the committee by expending resourcesto provide technical assistance (e.g., research, engineering support, andinformation and education programs) and administrative assistance (e.g.,travel costs, hosting meetings, and secretarial functions) which wouldsupport the development and implementation of voluntary standards. Participatingmay also include Commission support of voluntary standards activities asdescribed in andSection; 1031.7.(d) Normally, the total amount of Commission support given to a voluntarystandards activity shall be no greater than that of all non-Federal participantsin that activity, except where it is in the public interest to do so.(e) In the event of duplication of effort by two or more groups (eitherinside or outside the Commission) in developing a voluntary standard forthe same product or class of products, the Commission shall encourage theseveral groups to cooperate in the development of a single voluntary standard.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1031.7</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Commission support of voluntary standards activities.</ITAG>(a) The Commission's support of voluntary safety standards developmentactivities may include any one or a combination of the following actions:(1) Providing epidemiological and health science information and explanationsof hazards for consumer products.(2) Encouraging the initiation of the development of voluntary standardsfor specific consumer products.(3) Identifying specific risks of injury to be addressed in a voluntarystandard.(4) Performing or subsidizing technical assistance, including research,health science data, and engineering support, in the development of a voluntarystandard activity in which the Commission is participating.(5) Providing assistance on methods of disseminating information and educationabout the voluntary standard or its use.(6) Performing a staff evaluation of a voluntary standard to determineits adequacy and efficacy in reducing the risks of injury that have beenidentified by the Commission as being associated with the use of the product.(7) Encouraging state and local governments to reference or incorporatethe provisions of a voluntary standard in their regulations or ordinancesand to participate in government or industrial model code development activities,so as to develop uniformity and minimize conflicting State and local regulations.(8) Monitoring the number and market share of products conforming to avoluntary safety standard.(9) Providing for the involvement of agency personnel in voluntary standardsactivities as described in Subpart B of this Part.(10) Providing administrative assistance, such as hosting meetings andsecretarial assistance.(11) Providing funding support for voluntary standards development, aspermitted by the agency budget.(12) Taking other actions that the Commission believes appropriate in aparticular situation.(b) [Reserved.]<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1031.8</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Voluntary Standards Coordinator.</ITAG>(a) The Executive Director shall appoint a Voluntary Standards Coordinatorto coordinate agency participation in voluntary standards bodies so that:(1) The most effective use is made of agency personnel and resources, and(2) The views expressed by such personnel are in the public interest and,at a minimum, do not conflict with the interests and established viewsof the agency.(b) The Voluntary Standards Coordinator is responsible for managing theCommission's voluntary standards program, as well as preparing and submittingto the Commission a semiannual summary of its voluntary standards activities.The summary shall set forth, among other things, the goals of each voluntarystandard under development, the extent of CPSC activity (monitoring orparticipation; the current status of standards development and implementation)and, if any, recommendations for additional Commission action. The VoluntaryStandards Coordinator shall also compile information on the Commission'svoluntary standards activities for the Commission's annual report.<ITAG tagnum="52">Subpart B_Employee Involvement</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1031.9</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Purpose and scope.</ITAG>(a) This subpart sets forth the Consumer Product Safety Commission's criteriaand requirements governing membership and involvement by Commission officialsand employees in the activities of voluntary standards development bodies.(b) The Commission realizes there are advantages and benefits affordedby greater involvement of Commission personnel in the standards activitiesof domestic and international voluntary standards organizations. However,such involvement might present an appearance or possibility of the Commissiongiving preferential treatment to an organization or group or of the Commissionlosing its independence or impartiality. Also, such participation may presentreal or apparent conflict of interest situations.(c) The purpose of this subpart is to further the objectives and programsof the Commission and to do so in a manner that ensures that such membershipand participation:(1) Is consistent with the intent of the Consumer Product Safety Act andthe other acts administered by the Commission, as well as with federalpolicy as set forth in the current version of OMB Circular No. A-119, FederalParticipation in the Development and Use of Voluntary Standards;(2) Is not contrary to the public interest;(3) Presents no real or apparent conflict of interest, and does not resultin or create the appearance of the Commission giving preferential treatmentto an organization or group or the Commission compromising its independenceor impartiality; and(4) Takes into account Commission resources and priorities. (d) In general, Commission employees must obtain approval from their supervisorand appropriate agency management to be involved in voluntary standardsactivities. They should also strive to apprise the Voluntary StandardsCoordinator, where practicable, as to their involvement in voluntary standardsactivities. (e) All Commission employees involved in voluntary standards activitiesare subject to any restrictions for avoiding conflicts of interest andfor avoiding situations that would present an appearance of bias. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1031.10 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions. </ITAG>For purposes of describing the level of involvement in voluntary standardsactivities for which Commission employees may be authorized, the followingdefinitions apply: (a) <T3>Membership. </T3>Membership is the status of an employee who joinsa voluntary standards development or advisory organization or subgroupand is listed as a member. It includes all oral and written communicationswhich are incidental to such membership. (b) <T3>Participation. </T3>Participation is the active, ongoing involvementof an official or employee in the development of a new or revised voluntarystandard pertaining to a particular consumer product or to a group of productsthat is the subject of a Commission hazard project. These projects shouldbe one of those that are approved by the Commission, either by virtue ofthe agency's annual budget or operating plan, or by other specific agencyauthorization or decision, and are in accord with Subpart A. Participationincludes regularly attending meetings of a standards development committeeor group, taking an active part in discussions and technical debates, registeringopinions and expending other resources in support of a voluntary standarddevelopment activity. It includes all oral and written communications whichare part of the participation process. (c) <T3>Monitoring. </T3>Monitoring is involvement by an official or employeein maintaining an awareness of the voluntary standards development processby attendance at meetings, receiving and reviewing minutes of standardsdevelopment meetings and copies of draft standards, and commenting duringthe standards development process. It involves all oral and written communicationswhich are part of the monitoring process. These monitoring activities mustbe related to general voluntary standards projects set forth in the agency'sannual budget or operating plan or otherwise approved by the agency. (d) <T3>Observation. </T3>Observation is the attendance by an official or employeeat a meeting of a voluntary standards development group for the purposeof observing and gathering information. (e) <T3>Communication. </T3>Communication is the oral or written contact byan official or employee with a representative or committee of a voluntarystandards organization or advisory group. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1031.11 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Procedural safeguards. </ITAG>(a) Subject to the provisions of this subpart and budgetary and time constraints,Commission employees may be involved in voluntary standards activitiesthat will further the objectives and programs of the Commission, are consistentwith ongoing and anticipated Commission regulatory programs as set forthin the agency's operating plan, and are in accord with the Commission'spolicy statement on participation in voluntary standards activities setforth in Subpart A of this part. (b) Commission employees who are involved in the development of a voluntarystandard and who later participate in an official evaluation of that standardfor the Commission shall describe in any information, oral or written,presented to the Commission, the extent of their involvement in the developmentof the standard. Any evaluation or recommendation for Commission actionsby such employee shall strive to be as objective as possible and be reviewedby higher-level Commission officials or employees prior to submission tothe Commission. (c) Involvement of a Commission official or employee in a voluntary standardscommittee shall be predicated on an understanding by the voluntary standardsgroup that participation by Commission officials and employees is on anon-voting basis. (d) In no case shall Commission employees or officials vote or otherwiseformally indicate approval or disapproval of a voluntary standard duringthe course of a voluntary standard development process. (e) Commission employees and officials who are involved in the developmentof voluntary standards may not accept voluntary standards committee leadershippositions, e.g., committee chairman or secretary. Subject to prior approvalby the Executive Director, a Commission employee or official may acceptother committee positions only if it appears to be clearly in the publicinterest for the employee to carry out the functions of that specific position.(f) Attendance of Commission personnel at voluntary standards meetingsshall be noted in the public calendar and meeting summaries shall be submittedto the Office of the Secretary as required by the Commission's meetingspolicy, 16 CFR Part 1012.<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1031.12 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Membership criteria. </ITAG>(a) The Commissioners, their special assistants, and Commission officialsand employees holding the positions listed below, may not become membersof a voluntary standards group because they either have the responsibilityfor making final decisions, or advise those who make final decisions, onwhether to rely on a voluntary standard, promulgate a consumer productsafety standard, or to take other action to prevent or reduce an unreasonablerisk of injury associated with a product. (1) The Commissioners; (2) The Commissioners' Special Assistants; (3) The General Counsel and General Counsel Staff; (4) The Executive Director, the Deputy Executive Director, and specialassistants to the Executive Director; (5) The Associate Executive Directors and Office Directors; (6) The Director of the Office of Program Management and Budget and anySpecial Assistants to the Director. (b) All other officials and employees not covered under andSection; 1031.12(a)may be advisory, non-voting members of voluntary standards developmentand advisory groups with the advance approval of the Executive Director.In particular, the Commission's Voluntary Standards Coordinator may acceptsuch membership. (c) Commission employees or officials who have the approval of the ExecutiveDirector to accept membership in a voluntary standards organization orgroup pursuant to paragraph (b) of this section shall apprise the GeneralCounsel and the Voluntary Standards Coordinator prior to their acceptance.(d) Commission officials or employees who desire to become a member ofa voluntary standards body or group in their individual capacity must obtainprior approval of the Commission's Ethics Counselor for an outside activitypursuant to the Commission's Employee Standards of Conduct, 16 CFR Part1030. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1031.13 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Participation and monitoring criteria. </ITAG>(a) Commission officials, other than those positions listed in andSection;1031.12(a), may participate in or monitor the development of voluntarysafety standards for consumer products, but only in their official capacityas employees of the Commission and if permitted to do so by their supervisorand any other person designated by agency management procedures. Such participationor monitoring shall be in accordance with Commission procedures. (b) Employees in positions listed in andSection; 1031.12(a) (4), (5), and(6) may, on a case-by-case basis, participate in or monitor the developmentof a voluntary standard provided that they have the specific advance approvalof the Commission. (c) Except in extraordinary circumstances and when approved in advanceby the Executive Director in accordance with the provisions of the Commission'smeetings policy, 16 CFR Part 1012, Commission personnel shall not becomeinvolved in meetings concerning the development of voluntary standardsthat are not open to the public for attendance and observation. Attendanceof Commission personnel at a voluntary standard meeting shall be notedin the public calendar and meeting logs filed with the Office of the Secretaryin accordance with the Commission's meetings policy. (d) Generally, Commission employees may become involved in the developmentof voluntary standards only if they are made available for comment by allinterested parties prior to their use or adoption. (e) Involvement by Commission officials and employees in voluntary standardsbodies or standards-developing groups does not, of itself, connote Commissionagreement with, or endorsement of, decisions reached, approved or publishedby such bodies or groups. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1031.14 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Observation criteria. </ITAG>A Commission official or employee may, on occasion, attend voluntary standardsmeetings for the sole purpose of observation, with the advance approvalof his or her supervisor and any other person designated by agency managementprocedures. Commission officials and employees shall notify the VoluntaryStandard Coordinator, for information purposes, prior to observing a voluntarystandards meeting. <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 1031.15 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Communication criteria. </ITAG>(a) Commission officials and employees, who are not in the positions listedin andSection; 1031.12(a), or who are not already authorized to communicatewith a voluntary standards group or representative incidental to theirapproved membership in a voluntary standard organization or group or aspart of their participation or monitoring of a voluntary standard, may:(1) Communicate, within the scope of their duties, with a voluntary standardgroup, representative, or other committee member, on voluntary standardsmatters which are substantive in nature, i.e., matters that pertain tothe formulation of the technical aspects of a specific voluntary standardor the course of conduct for developing the standard, only with the specificadvance approval from the person or persons to whom they apply to obtainapproval for participation or monitoring pursuant to andSection; 1031.13.The approval may indicate the duration of the approval and any other conditions.(2) Communicate, within the scope of their duties, with a voluntary standardgroup, representative, or other committee member, concerning voluntarystandards activities which are not substantive in nature. (b) Commission employees may communicate with voluntary standards organizationsonly in accordance with Commission procedures. (c) Commissioners can engage in substantive and non-substantive writtencommunications with voluntary standards bodies or representatives, provideda disclaimer in such communications indicates that any substantive viewsexpressed are only their individual views and are not necessarily thoseof the Commission. Where a previous official Commission vote has takenplace, that vote should also be noted in any such communication. Copiesof such communications shall thereafter be provided to the other Commissioners,the Office of the Secretary, and the Voluntary Standards Coordinator. (d) The Voluntary Standards Coordinator shall be furnished a copy of eachwritten communication of a substantive nature and a report of each oralcommunication of a substantive nature between a Commission official oremployee and a voluntary standards organization or representative whichpertains to a voluntary standards activity. The information shall be providedto the Voluntary Standards Coordinator as soon as practicable after thecommunication has taken place.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: February 8, 1989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Sadye E. Dunn, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary, Consumer Product Safety Commission. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-3342 Filed 2-13-89; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6335-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>