<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89731-0060 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.7-31-89.f2.A1059</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">Bureau of Reclamation</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Quarterly Status Tabulation of Water Service and Repayment ContractNegotiations </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY:</T2> Bureau of Reclamation. Department of the Interior.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION:</T2> Notice of proposed contractual actions pending throughSeptember 1989. Pursuant to 43 CFR 426.20, the Bureau of Reclamation will publish noticeof proposed or amendatory repayment contract actions or any contract forthe delivery of water for irrigation or other uses in newspapers of generalcirculation in the affected area at least 60 days prior to contract execution.The Bureau of Reclamation announcements of repayment and water servicecontract actions will be published in newspapers of general circulationin the areas determined by the Bureau of Reclamation to be affected bythe proposed action. Announcements may be in the form of news releases,legal notices, official letters, memorandums, or other forms of writtenmaterial. Meetings, workshops, and/or hearings may also be used, as appropriate,to provide local publicity. The public participation requirements do notapply to proposed contracts for the sale of surplus or interim irrigationwater for a term of 1 year or less. The Secretary of the Interior or thedistrict may invite the public to observe any contract proceedings. Allpublic participation procedures will be coordinated with those involvedin complying with the National Environmental Policy Act if the Bureau determinesthat the contract action may or will have ``significant'' environmentaleffects. Pursuant to the ``Final Revised Public Participation Procedures'' for waterservice and repayment contract negotiations, published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>dated February 22, 1982, Vol. 47, page 7763,a tabulation is provided below of all proposed contractual actions in eachof the five Reclamation regions. Each proposed action listed is, or isexpected to be, in some stage of the contract negotiation process duringJuly, August, or September of 1989. When contract negotiations are completed,and prior to execution, each proposed contract form must be approved bythe Secretary, or pursuant to delegated or redelegated authority, the Commissionerof Reclamation or one of the Regional Directors. In some instances, congressionalreview and approval of a report, water rate, or other terms and conditionsof the contract may be involved. The identity of the approving officer,and other information pertaining to a specific contract proposal, may beobtained by calling or writing the appropriate regional office at the addressand telephone number given for each region. This notice is one of a variety of means being used to inform the publicabout proposed contractual actions. Individual notices of intent to negotiate,and other appropriate announcements, are made in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>for those actions found to have widespread publicinterest. When this is the case, the date of publication is given. <ITAG tagnum="84">Acronym Definitions Used Herein </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">(FR) Federal Register </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">(ID) Irrigation District </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">(IDD) Irrigation and Drainage District </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">(Mandamp;I) Municipal and Industrial </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">(Dandamp;MC) Drainage and Minor Construction </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">(Randamp;B) Rehabilitation and Betterment </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">(Oandamp;M) Operation and Maintenance </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">(CAP) Central Arizona Project </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">(CUP) Central Utah Project </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">(CVP) Central Valley Project </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">(P-SMBP) Pick-Sloan Missouri Basin Program </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">(CRSP) Colorado River Storage Project </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">(SRPA) Small Reclamation Projects Act </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">(BCP) Boulder Canyon Project</ITAG><T3>Pacific Northwest Region: </T3>Bureau of Reclamation, 550 West FortStreet, Box 043, Boise, Idaho 83724-0043, telephone (208) 334-1894. 1. Cascade Reservoir water users, Boise Project, Idaho: Repayment contractsfor irrigation and Mandamp;I water; 29.221 acre-feet of stored water in CascadeReservoir. 2. Brewster Flat ID, Chief Joseph Dam Project, Washington: Amendatory repaymentcontract; land reclassification of approximately 360 acres to irrigable;repayment obligation to increase accordingly. 3. Individual irrigators, Mandamp;I, and miscellaneous water users, PacificNorthwest Region, Idaho, Oregon, and Washington: Temporary (interim) waterservice contracts for surplus project water for irrigation or Mandamp;I useto provide up to 10,000 acre-feet of water annually for terms up to 5 years;Long-term contracts for similar service for up to 1,000 acre-feet of waterannually. 4. Rogue River Basin water users, Rogue River Basin Project, Oregon: Waterservice contracts; $5 per acre-foot or $50 minimum per annum, terms upto 40 years. 5. Willamette Basin water users, Willamette Basin Project, Oregon: Waterservice contracts; $1.50 per acre-foot or $50 minimum per annum, termsup to 40 years. 6. Irrigation districts and similar water user entities: Amendatory repaymentand water service contracts; purpose is to conform to the Reclamation ReformAct of 1982 (Pub. L. 97-293). 7. Sixty Palisades Reservoir spaceholders. Minidoka Project, Idaho-Wyoming:Contract amendments to extend term for which contract water may be subleasedto other parties. 8. City of Cle Elum, Yakima Project, Washington: Amendatory or replacementMandamp;I water service contract; 2,200 acre-feet (1,350 gallons per minute)annually for a term of up to 40 years. 9. Three IDs, Flathead Indian Irrigation Project, Montana: Repayment ofcosts associated with rehabilitation of irrigation facilities. 10. Baker Valley ID, Baker Project, Oregon: Irrigation water service contracton a surplus interruptible basis to serve up to 13,000 acres; sale of excesscapacity in Mason Reservoir (Phillips Lake) for a term of up to 40 years.11. Individual irrigators and the North Unit ID, Crooked River Project,Oregon: Repayment or water service contracts for up to 25,000 acre-feetof storage space in Prineville Reservoir. 12. Various Projects, Pacific Northwest Region: Randamp;B contracts for replacementof needle valves at storage dams. 13. Palisades Water Users, Inc., Minidoka-Palisades Project, Idaho: Repaymentcontract for an additional 500 acre-feet of storage in Palisades Reservoir.14. Individual irrigators, Willow Creek Project, Oregon: Repayment or waterservice contracts for up to 3,500 acre-feet of storage space in WillowCreek Reservoir. 15. Roza ID, Yakima Project, Washington: Proposed supplementary defermentcontract. Defer l year (2 installments) of construction payments becauseof cost incurred by the district to obtain additional water supplies inanticipation of drought. 16. Vale Oregon ID, Vale Project, Oregon: Supplementary deferment contractto defer the 1988 construction installment under authority of the Act ofSeptember 21, 1959. The district has experienced a significant reductionin water supply for the 1988 season. 17. Five Project Spaceholders, Minidoka-Palisades Project, Idaho-Wyoming:Contract amendments to provide for rental of water to other parties. 18. Bridgeport ID, Chief Joseph Project, Washington: Interim and long-termWarren Act contracts for the use of an irrigation outlet in Chief JosephDam. 19. Five Irrigation Districts, Arrowrock Division, Boise Project, Idaho:Repayment contract for Safety-of-Dams repair to Deer Flat Dam. 20. State of Wyoming, Palisades Project, Idaho: Repayment contract forthe sale of 33,000 acre-feet of uncontracted space in Palisades Reservoir.21. Hermiston ID, Umatilla Project, Oregon: Repayment contract for Safety-of-Damsrepair to Cold Springs Dam. 22. Ochoco ID and various individual spaceholders, Crooked River Project,Oregon: Repayment contract for Safety-of-Dams repair to Arthur Bowman Dam.<T3>Mid-Pacific Region: </T3>Bureau of Reclamation, 2800 Cottage Way, Sacramento,California 95825-1898, telephone (916) 978-5030. 1. Tuolumne Regional Water District, CVP, California: Water service contract,up to 9,000 acre-feet from New Melones Reservoir. 2. Calaveras County Water District, CVP, California: Water service contract;2,000 acre-feet from New Melones Reservoir; FR notice published February5, 1982, Vol. 47, page 5473. 3. Individual irrigators, Mandamp;I, and miscellaneous water users, Mid.PacificRegion, California, Oregon, and Nevada: Temporary (interim) water servicecontracts for available project water for irrigation, Mandamp;I, or fishand wildlife purposes providing up to 10,000 acre-feet of water annuallyfor terms up to 5 years; Temporary Warren Act contracts for use of projectfacilities for terms up to 1 year; Long-term contracts for similar servicefor up to 1,000 acre-feet of water annually.<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Note:</T4> Copies of the standard form of temporary water service contractsfor the various types of service are available, upon written request, fromthe Regional Director at the address shown above.</ITAG>4. Friant Unit Contractors, CVP, California: Renewal of existing long-termwater service contracts with numerous contractors on the Friant-Kern Canalwhose contracts expire 1989-1995. Water quantities in existing contractsrange from 1,200 to 175,440 acre-feet. 5. San Luis Water District, CVP, California: Amendatory water service contractproviding for a change in point of delivery from Delta-Mendota Canal tothe San Luis Canal. 6. ID's and similar water user entities: Amendatory repayment and waterservice contracts; purpose is to conform to the Reclamation Reform Actof 1982 (Pub. L. 97-293). 7. State of California, CVP, California: Contract(s) for, (1) sale of interimwater to the Department of Water Resources for use by the State Water ProjectContractors, and (2) acquisition of conveyance capacity in the CaliforniaAqueduct for use by the CVP, as contemplated in the Coordinated OperationAgreement. 8. Madera ID, Madera Canal, CVP, California: Warren Act contract to conveyand/or store nonproject Soquel water through project facilities. 9. County of Tulare, CVP, California: Amendatory water service contract,to provide an additional 1,908 acre-feet and reallocate 400 acre-feet ofwater from the Ducor ID for a total increase of 2,308 acre-feet. 10. Shasta Dam Area Public Utilities District, CVP, California: Renewalof Mandamp;I water supply contract. Less than 6,000 acre-feet. 11. U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, CVP, California: Long-term contractfor water supply for Federal refuge in Grasslands area of California. 12. City of Redding, CVP, California: Amendatory Mandamp;I water supply contract.13. City of Dos Palos, CVP, California: Contract for the use of surpluscapacity in the San Luis Canal. The contract will allow the exchange ofwater with Central California ID and transportation to a new point of delivery.The result will be a significant improvement in quality of water made availableto the city's water users. 14. North Kern Water Storage District, Buena Vista Water Storage District,Tulare Lake Basin Water Storage District, and Hacienda Water District,Kern River Project, California: Amendatory contract to provide storagespace for Mandamp;I water. 15. Contra Costa Water District, CVP, California: Amendatory water servicecontract to add an additional point of delivery to accommodate the district'sproposed Los Vaqueros Project. Amendment will also conform contract tocurrent water ratesetting policies. 16. San Juan Suburban Water District, CVP, California: Amend Contract No.14-06-200-152A to provide for the current CVP water rates to conform thecontract with the provisions of sections 105 and 106 of Pub. L. 99-546.17. Centerville Community Services District, CVP, California: Water servicecontract for up to 1,560 acre-feet of Mandamp;I water annually. 18. Shasta County Water Agency, CVP, California: Amendatory water servicecontract to provide for reduction in annual entitlement. 19. Kern County Water Agency, CVP, California: Temporary agricultural watersupplies of up to 100,000 acre-feet for 1 year. 20. Central Valley Project, California: Amendatory contract to includethe provision of the Act of July 2, 1956 (70 Stat. 483) in existing waterservice contracts. 21. California Department of Corrections, CVP, California: Water servicefor up to 1,000 acre-feet of water annually to serve the Sierra ConservationCenter (a State prison) near Jamestown, California. 22. Beneficiaries of Link River Dam, Klamath Project, California/Oregon:Contract to provide for repayment of reimbursable costs associated withSafety of Dam expenditures. 23. Redwood Valley Water District, SRPA, California: Amendatory SRPA loanrepayment contract. 24. Placer County Water Agency, CVP, California: Amendatory contract toprovide for the current CVP water rates. <T3>Lower Colorado Region: </T3>Bureau of Reclamation, P.O. Box 427 (NevadaHighway and Park Street), Boulder City, Nevada 89005, telephone (702) 293-8536.1. Amendment to Contract No. 176r-696 between the Bureau of Reclamationand the Department of the Army to increase the maximum amount of waterdelivered to the Yuma Proving Grounds from 55 acre-feet to 975 acre-feet,pursuant to the recommendation of the Arizona Department of Water Resources.2. Agricultural and Mandamp;I water users, CAP, Arizona: Water service subcontracts;a certain percent of available supply for irrigation entities and up to640,000 acre-feet per year for Mandamp;I use. 3. Southern Arizona Water Rights Settlement Act: Sale of up to 28,200 acre-feet per year of municipal effluent to the city of Tucson, Arizona. 4. Contracts with five agricultural entities located near the ColoradoRiver, BCP, Arizona: Water service contracts for up to 1,920 acre-feetper year total. 5. Gila River Indian Community, CAP, Arizona: Water service contract fordelivery of up to 173,100 acre-feet per year. 6. ID's and similar water user entities: Amendatory repayment and waterservice contracts; purpose is to conform to the Reclamation Reform Actof 1982 (Pub. L. 97-293). 7. Indian and non-Indian agricultural and Mandamp;I water users, CAP, Arizona:Contracts for repayment of Federal expenditures for construction of distributionsystems. 8. State of Arizona, BCP, Arizona: Contract for an undetermined amountof Colorado River water for Mandamp;I use on State-owned land. 9. State of Arizona, BCP, Arizona: Contract for an undetermined amountof Colorado River water for agricultural use and related purposes on State-ownedland. 10. Contract with four individual holders of miscellaneous present perfectedrights to Colorado River water totalling 4.5 acre-feet, pursuant to theJanuary 9, 1979, Supplemental Decree of the United States Supreme Courtin <T3>Arizona </T3>v. <T3>California </T3>(439 U.S. 419).11. Contracts for delivery of surplus water from the Colorado River, whenavailable, with Emilio Soto and Sons, for 1,836 acre-feet per year; KennedyLivestock, for 480 acre-feet per year. 12. Imperial ID and/or the Coachella Valley Water District, BCP, California:Contract providing for exchange of up to 10,000 acre-feet of water peryear from a well field to be constructed adjacent to the All-American Canal(AAC) for an equivalent amount of Colorado River water and for Oandamp;Mof the well field, Lower Colorado Water Supply Project, California. 13. Lower Colorado Water Supply Project, California: Water service andrepayment contracts with nonagricultural users in California for consumptiveuse of up to 10,000 acre-feet of Colorado River water per year in exchangefor an equivalent amount of water to be pumped into the AAC from a wellfield to be constructed adjacent to the canal. 14. Hutchison present perfected rights contract amendment to reflect thetransfer of part of the right to Winterhaven, California, Supreme CourtDecree in <T3>Arizona </T3>v. <T3>California </T3>and BCP. 15. Winterhaven present perfected rights contract for a portion of HutchisonPresent Perfected Rights transfer to Winterhaven, Supreme Court Decreein <T3>Arizona </T3>v. <T3>California </T3>and BCP. 16. County of San Bernardino, SRPA, California: Repayment contract fora $28.6 million loan. 17. Wellton-Mohawk IDD and Gold Dome Mining Corporation (Corporation),Gila Project, Arizona: Contract for delivery of 6.14 acre-feet of waterper year to the Corporation through Wellton-Mohawk Division facilities.18. Wellton-Mohawk IDD, Gila Project, Arizona: Exchange agreement providingfor a reduction in Wellton-Mohawk IDD's contractual right to consumptivelyuse 22,000 acre-feet of Colorado River water per year, providing for dischargeof the IDD's repayment obligation and exemption from the full-cost pricingand acreage limitation provisions of Federal Reclamation law; Salt RiverPima-Maricopa Indian Community Water Rights Settlement Act of 1988. 19. Water delivery contracts with seven Phoenix area cities providing forthe delivery of up to 27,000 acre-feet per year through the CAP; Salt RiverPima-Maricopa Indian Community Water Rights Settlement Act of 1988. 20. Agreements with seven Phoenix area cities providing for the lease ofthe Salt River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community's CAP entitlement of 13,300acre-feet per year to the cities; Salt River Pima-Maricopa Indian CommunityWater Rights Settlement Act of 1988. 21. Salt River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community, CAP, Arizona: AmendatoryCAP water delivery contract providing for extension of the contract termand authorizing the Community to lease its CAP water to the Phoenix areacities; Salt River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community Water Rights SettlementAct of 1988. 22. Salt River Pima-Maricopa Indian Community, Salt River Project, Arizona:Amendatory agreement to increase the Community's allotment of BartlettDam water from the Salt River Project; Salt River Pima-Maricopa IndianCommunity Water Rights Settlement Act of 1988. 23. Roosevelt Water Conservation District, Salt River Project, Arizona:Agreement assigning a portion of the District's CAP agricultural waterto seven Phoenix area cities; Salt River Pima-Maricopa Indian CommunityWater Rights Settlement Act of 1988. 24. Roosevelt Water Conservation District, Salt River Project, Arizona:Agreement to extend the term of the District's water salvage contract;Salt River Pima-Maricopa Indian Water Rights Settlement Act of 1988. 25. Tohono O'odham Nation, SRPA, Tucson, Arizona: Repayment contract foran $8.2 million loan to the Schuk Toak District. 26. San Carlos IDD, San Carlos Project, Arizona: Repayment contract forDistrict's share of the Safety-of-Dams repair to Coolidge Dam. 27. Gila River Indian Community, San Carlos Project, Arizona: Repaymentcontract for Community's share of the Safety-of-Dams repair to CoolidgeDam. 28. Sturges Trust, Gila Project, Arizona: Contract for delivery of 8,500acre-feet of Colorado River water per year for agricultural use as recommendedby the State of Arizona and to recognize the present perfected right tothe use of Colorado River water. 29. Phoenix Area Cities, CAP, Arizona: Amendment to the CAP Plan 6 FundingAgreement to extend the deadline to demand the return of funds contributedfor the Cliff Dam alternative water supply. <T3>Upper Colorado Region: </T3>Bureau of Reclamation, P.O. Box 11568,125 South State Street, Salt Lake City, Utah 84147, telephone (801) 524-5435.1. Individual irrigators, Mandamp;I, and miscellaneous water users, Utah,Wyoming, Colorado, and New Mexico: Temporary (interim) water service contractsfor surplus project water to provide up to 10,000 acre-feet of water annuallyfor terms up to 5 years; long-term contracts for similar service for upto 1,000 acre-feet of water annually. (a) The Benevolent and Protective Order of the Elks, Lodge No. 1747, NavajoReservoir, CRSP, New Mexico: Water service contract; 20 acre-feet per yearfor municipal use; contract term for 40 years from execution. (b) Mt. Crested Butte Water and Sanitation District, Blue Mesa Reservoir,CRSP, Colorado: Water service contract; 25 acre-feet per year to supportpresent diversion rights for municipal use; contract term for 40 yearsfrom execution.2. La Plata Conservancy District, Animas-La Plata Project, New Mexico:Repayment contract; 9,900 acre-feet per year for irrigation, terms consistentwith binding cost-sharing agreement, dated June 30, 1986.3. San Juan Water Commission, Animas-La Plata Project, New Mexico: Repaymentcontract; 30,800 acre-feet per year for Mandamp;I, terms consistent withbinding cost-sharing agreement, dated June 30, 1986.4. Southern Ute Indian Tribe, Animas-La Plata Project, Colorado: Repaymentcontract for 26,500 acre-feet per year for Mandamp;I use and 2,600 acre-feetper year for irrigation use in Phase One and 3,300 acre-feet in Phase Two.Contract terms to be consistent with binding cost-sharing agreement andwater rights settlement agreement, in principle.5. Ute Mountain Ute Tribe, Animas-La Plata Project, Colorado and New Mexico:Repayment contract; 6,000 acre-feet per year for Mandamp;I use in Colorado;26,400 acre-feet per year for irrigation use in Colorado; and 900 acre-feetper year for irrigation use in New Mexico. Contract terms to be consistentwith binding cost-sharing agreement and water rights settlement agreement.6. Navajo Indian Tribe, Animas-La Plata Project, New Mexico: Repaymentcontract; 7,600 acre-feet per year for Mandamp;I use.7. State of Colorado, Animas-La Plata Project, Colorado: Escrow AccountAgreement.8. Uintah Water Conservancy District, Jensen Unit, CUP, Utah: Amendatoryrepayment contract to reduce Mandamp;I water supply and corresponding repaymentobligation.9. Vermejo Conservancy District, Vermejo Project, New Mexico: Amendatorycontract to relieve the district of further repayment obligation, presentlyexceeding $2 million, pursuant to Public Law 96-550.10. Conejos Water Conservancy District, San Luis Valley Project, Colorado:Amendatory contract to place operation, maintenance, and replacement costson a variable basis commensurate with the availability of project water.11. Weber Basin Water Conservancy District, Weber Basin Project, Utah:Repayment contract for Randamp;B of the A.V. Watkins Dike.12. Ogden River Water Users Association, Ogden River Project, Utah: Repaymentcontract for Randamp;B of portions of the Pineview Dam, Ogden Canyon Conduit,Ogden-Brigham Canal and South Ogden Highline Canal13. South Cache Water User's Association, Hyrum Project, Utah: Repaymentcontract for Randamp;B of portion of Hyrum Dam, Hyrum/Mendon Canal, HyrumFeeder Canal, Wellsville Canal, and other miscellaneous work.14. State of Colorado, San Luis Valley Project, Colorado: Cost-sharingcontract for Closed Basin Division.15. Miscellaneous Mandamp;I and irrigation water users in New Mexico, SanJuan- Chama Project, New Mexico-Colorado: Repayment contracts for remainingproject water allocated in 1975 or before. Contract amounts vary from 60to 3,000 acre-feet16. Individual irrigators, Mandamp;I users, and miscellaneous water users,Dallas Creek Project, Wayne N. Aspinall Unit, CRSP, Colorado: Drought reliefpursuant to Disaster Assistance Act of 1988 for temporary water servicecontracts for surplus project water up to 10,000 acre-feet through 1989.<T3>Great Plains Region:</T3> Bureau of Reclamation, P.O. Box 36900, FederalBuilding, 316 North 26th Street, Billings, Montana 59107-6900, telephone(406) 657-6413.1. Individual irrigators, Mandamp;I, and miscellaneous water users, GreatPlains Region, Montana, Wyoming, North Dakota, South Dakota, Colorado,Kansas, Nebraska, Oklahoma, and Texas: Temporary (interim) water servicecontracts for surplus project water for irrigation or Mandamp;I use to provideup to 10,000 acre-feet of water annually for terms up to 5 years; long-termcontracts for similar service for up to 1,000 acre-feet of water annually.2. Fort Shaw ID, Sun River Project, Montana: Randamp;B loan repayment contract;up to $1.5 million.3. ID's and similar water user entities: Amendatory repayment and waterservice contracts; purpose is to conform to the Reclamation Reform Actof 1982 (Pub. L. 97-293).4. Owl Creek ID, Owl Creek Unit, P-SMBP, Wyoming: Amendatory water servicecontract to reflect reduced water supply benefits being received from AnchorReservoir.5. Green Mountain Reservoir, Colorado-Big Thompson Project, Colorado: Waterservice contracts for the marketable yield to water users within the ColoradoRiver Basin of Western Colorado.6. Ruedi Reservoir, Fryingpan-Arkansas Project, Colorado: Second roundnegotiations of a water service contract for sale of the regulatory capacityof Ruedi Reservoir.7. East Slope Storage system, Pueblo Reservoir, Twin Lakes, and TurquoiseReservoir, Fryingpan-Arkansas Project, Colorado: Contract for temporaryand long-term storage and exchange contracts.8. Cedar Bluff ID No. 6, Cedar Bluff Unit, P-SMBP, Kansas: Amendatory repaymentcontract to relieve all contract obligations. The reservoir storage capacityhas been sold to the State of Kansas for fish, wildlife, recreation, andother purposes.9. Mirage Flats ID and the Nebraska Game and Parks Commission, Mirage FlatsProject, Nebraska: Agreement to retain storage in Box Butte Reservoir forfish, wildlife and recreation purposes. 10. Frenchman Valley Irrigation District, Frenchman Unit, P-SMBP, Nebraska:Pending passage of legislation, renegotiate District's existing contractto reduce payments based on payment ability and reduced water supply. 11. Northern Colorado Water Conservancy District and the Municipal Subdistrict,Colorado-Big Thompson Project, Colorado: Contract for storage and conveyanceof water for the Windy Gap Project; Amendatory contract to make administrativeand technical revisions to conform the contract terms and conditions tothe Windy Gap Project as actually constructed and operated. 12. Department of Natural Resources and Conservation, SRPA, Montana: Grantand loan contract for rehabilitation of Middle Creek Dam to meet requiredsafety criteria and to increase reservoir storage capacity by 1,917 acre-feetwhich will be utilized for irrigation and municipal purposes. 13. Garrison Diversion Unit, P-SMBP, North Dakota: Repayment contract;Renegotiation of the master repayment contract with Garrison DiversionConservancy District to bring the terms in line with the Garrison DiversionUnit Reformulation Act of 1986. Negotiation of repayment contracts withirrigators and Mandamp;I users. 14. Gray Goose ID, Gray Goose Unit, P-SMBP, South Dakota: Contract nego-tiations to integrate Gray Goose ID into the P-SMBP as authorized pursuantto section 1120 of the Water Resource Development Act of January 21, 1986(Pub. L. 99-662). 15. Hilltop ID, Hilltop Unit, P-SMBP, South Dakota: Contract negotiationsto integrate Hilltop ID into the P-SMBP as authorized pursuant to section1120 of the Water Resource Development Act of January 21, 1986 (Pub. L.99-662). 16. PacifiCorp, formerly Pacific Power and Light Company, Glendo Unit,P-SMBP, Wyoming: Contract negotiations for renewal of water storage contractfor 2,000 acre-feet of nonproject industrial water. 17. Corn Creek ID, Glendo Unit, P-SMBP, Wyoming: Repayment contract for10,350 acre-feet of supplemental irrigation water from Glendo Reservoir.18. Hidalgo County ID No. 1, Lower Rio Grande Valley, Texas: SupplementalSRPA loan contract for approximately $13,205,000. The contracting processis dependent upon final approval of the supplemental loan report. 19. Foss Reservoir Master Conservancy District, Washita Basin Project,Oklahoma: Amendatory repayment contract for remedial work. 20. Arbuckle Master Conservancy District, Arbuckle Project, Oklahoma: Contractfor the repayment of costs incurred by the United States for the constructionof the Sulphur, Oklahoma, pipeline and pumping plant. 21. Arbuckle Master Conservancy District, Arbuckle Project, Oklahoma: Amendatorycontract for revised repayment schedule to reflect credit for project landstransferred to National Park Service under Pub. L. 94-235 for the ChickasawNational Recreation Area. 22. Highland-Hanover ID, Boysen Unit, P-SMBP, Wyoming: Randamp;B loan repayment.23. Upper Bluff ID, Boysen Unit, P-SMBP, Wyoming: Randamp;B loan repayment.24. Board of Water Commissioners of the City and County of Denver, theColorado River Water Conservation District, and the Northern Colorado WaterConservancy District, Colorado-Big Thompson Project, Colorado: Operatingagreement for substitution of water in the proposed Muddy Creek or RockCreek Reservoir for Green Mountain Reservoir water. 25. City of Dickinson, Heart River Unit, P-SMBP, North Dakota: Renegotiatewater service contract number I79r-1412. Existing contract expires on September24, 1989. 26. Malta Irrigation District, Milk River Project, Montana: Randamp;B contractfor repayment of $5,600,000 loan. 27. Glasgow Irrigation District, Milk River Project, Montana: Randamp;B contractfor repayment of $2,050,000 loan. 28. Twin Loups ID, North Loup Project, P-SMBP, Nebraska: Amendatory Dandamp;MCcontract to increase ceiling from $500,000 to $2.5 million. Opportunity for public participation and receipt of comments on contractproposals will be facilitated by adherence to the following procedures:(1) Only persons authorized to act on behalf of the contracting entitiesmay negotiate the terms and conditions of a specific contract proposal.(2) Advance notice of meetings or hearings will be furnished to those partiesthat have made a timely written request for such notice to the appropriateregional or project office of the Bureau of Reclamation. (3) All written correspondence regarding proposed contracts will be madeavailable to the general public pursuant to the terms and procedures ofthe Freedom of Information Act (80 Stat. 383), as amended. (4) Written comments on proposed contract or contract action must be submittedto the appropriate Bureau of Reclamation officials at locations and withinthe time limits set forth in the advance public notices. (5) All written comments received and testimony presented at any publichearings will be reviewed and summarized by the appropriate regional officefor use by the contract approving authority. (6) Copies of specific proposed contracts may be obtained from the appropriateRegional Director or his designated public contact as they become availablefor review and comment. (7) In the event modifications are made in the form of a proposed contract,the appropriate Regional Director shall determine whether republicationof the notice and/or extension of the 60-day comment period is necessary.Factors which shall be considered in making such a determination shallinclude, but are not limited to: (i) The significance of the impact(s)of the modification, and (ii) the public interest which has been expressedover the course of the negotiations. As a minimum, the Regional Directorshall furnish revised contracts to all parties who requested the contractin response to the initial public notice.<ITAG tagnum="6">Joe D. Hall,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Acting Commissioner of Reclamation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Date: July 24, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-17728 Filed 7-28-89; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4310-09-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>