<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89420-0117 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.4-20-89.f2.A1116</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Application No. D-7673 et al.]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Proposed Exemptions; Local 705 International Brotherhood of TeamstersPension Fund et al.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice of proposed exemptions.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This document contains notices of pendency before theDepartment of Labor (the Department) of proposed exemptions from certainof the prohibited transaction restrictions of the Employee Retirement IncomeSecurity Act of 1974 (the Act) and/or the Internal Revenue Code of 1954(the Code).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2><T3>Written comments and hearing requests. </T3>All interested personsare invited to submit written comments or requests for a hearing on thepending exemptions, unless otherwise stated in the Notice of Pendency,on or before June 5, 1989. Comments and requests for a hearing should statethe reasons for the writer's interest in the pending exemption.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS: </T2>All written comments and requests for a hearing (at leastthree copies) should be sent to the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration,Office of Regulations and Interpretations, Room N-5671, U.S. Departmentof Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue NW., Washington, DC 20210. Attention:Application No. stated in each Notice of Pendency. The applications forexemption and the comments received will be available for public inspectionin the Public Documents Room of Pension and Welfare Benefit Programs, U.S.Department of Labor, Room N-5507, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington,DC 20210.<T3>Notice to interested persons</T3>. Notice of the proposed exemptionswill be provided to all interested persons in the manner agreed upon bythe applicant and the Department on or before May 5, 1989. Such noticeshall include a copy of the notice of pendency of the exemption as publishedin the <T4>Federal Register </T4>and shall inform interested persons of theirright to comment and to request a hearing (where appropriate).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>The proposed exemptions were requestedin applications filed pursuant to section 408(a) of the Act and/or section4975(c)(2) of the Code, and in accordance with procedures set forth inERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). Effective December31, 1978, section 102 of Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1978 (43 FR 47713,October 17, 1978) transferred the authority of the Secretary of the Treasuryto issue exemptions of the type requested to the Secretary of Labor. Therefore,these notices of pendency are issued solely by the Department.The applications contain representations with regard to the proposed exemptionswhich are summarized below. Interested persons are referred to the applicationson file with the Department for a complete statement of the facts and representations.<ITAG tagnum="85">Local 705 International Brotherhood of Teamsters Pension Fund (thePlan) Located in Chicago, Illinois</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-76773]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c) (2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a), 406(b)(1) and (b) (2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to the proposedpurchase by the Plan of certain real property (the Land) from the Local705 Building Corporation (the Corporation), a party in interest with respectto the Plan; provided that all terms of such transaction are at least asfavorable to the Plan as those which the Plan could obtain in an arm's-lengthtransaction with an unrelated party. Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan is a multi-employer defined benefit pension plan establishedunder section 302(c) of the Labor Management Relations Act of 1947, asamended, by collective bargaining between Local 705 of the Truck Drivers,Oil Drivers, Filling Station and Platform Workers Union, InternationalBrotherhood of Teamsters (the Union) and representatives of Chicago-areaemployers (the Employers) of members of the Union. The Plan had approximately14,000 participants and total assets of approximately $660,000,000 as ofJune 22, 1987. Investment decisions with respect to Plan assets are madeby the Plan's eight trustees, four of whom are designated by the Employersand four of whom are designated by the Union. The Corporation is a tax-exemptnon-profit corporation wholly owned by the Union for the exclusive purposeof holding and managing real property assets of the Union. 2. Among the assets of the Plan is a multi-tenant office building (theBuilding) located at 300 South Ashland Avenue in Chicago, Illinois. TheBuilding is owned and managed on behalf of the Plan by the West Side RealtyCorporation (West Side), a tax-exempt non-profit corporation which is whollyowned by the Plan for the exclusive purpose of holding and managing realproperty assets of the Plan. The Building is situated on the Land, a 2.815acre parcel owned by the Corporation. West Side has leased the Land (theLand Lease) from the Corporation since 1967, having constructed the Buildingthereon in 1968 for approximately $2,200,000 at a time when total Planassets were valued at approximately $38,000,000. As of February 19, 1987,the Land and Building had a fair market value of $3,950,000, accordingto an appraisal conducted by Seay and Thomas Appraisers, Inc. (Seay andThomas), professional real estate appraisers in Chicago, Illinois. Included among the tenants in the Building is the Union, which leases officespace therein (the Union Lease) from West Side. The Trustees representthat the Union's lease of office space from the Plan through West Sideunder the Union Lease constitutes a lease which satisfies the requirementsof prohibited transaction class exemptions 76-1 (PTE 76-1, 41 FR 12740,March 26, 1976) and 77-10 (PTE 77-10, 42 FR 33918, July 1, 1977) and thatsuch lease of space is exempt, therefore, from the prohibitions of section406 of the Act.\1\<NOTE/> <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ The Department expresses no opinion in this exemptionas to whether the Union's lease of office space under the Union Lease satisfiesthe requirements of PTE 76-1 and PTE 77-10.The Trustees also represent that West Side's lease of the Land from theCorporation under the Land Lease satisfied the requirements of section414(c)(2) of the Act and that such lease was exempt, therefore, until June30, 1984 from the prohibitions of section 406 of the Act.\2\<NOTE/> However, the Trustees acknowledge that the Land Lease hascontinued after June 30, 1984 without any exemption from the prohibitionsof 406 of the Act. In order to terminate the Land Lease as an ongoing prohibitedtransaction, the Trustees propose that West Side purchase the Land on behalfof the Plan from the Corporation. An exemption is requested to permit suchpurchase transaction under the terms and conditions described herein. <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ The Department expresses no opinion in this exemptionas to whether West Side's lease of the Land under the Land Lease satisfiedthe requirements of section 414(c) (2) of the Act. 3. West Side will pay the Corporation cash for the Land in the amount ofno more than the Land's fair market value as of the sale date, in no eventto exceed $800,000, the Land's fair market value as of February 19, 1987according to Seay and Thomas. As of December 27, 1988, the Land's fairmarket value was $920,000, according to an appraisal performed for WestSide by Urban Real Estate Research, Inc.) an independent real estate appraisalfirm in Chicago, Illinois. The Corporation will pay all costs and expensesrelated to the transaction and will deliver to West Side fee simple titleto the Land free and clear of all liens and encumbrances. The Department is not proposing herein any exemptive relief for any transactionrelated to the Land or Building except the Corporation's proposed saleof the Land to West Side. Accordingly, the Trustees represent that, within60 days of the final grant of the exemption proposed herein, if granted,the Corporation will pay any excise taxes which are applicable under section4975(a) of the Code by virtue of the continuation of the Land Lease afterJune 30, 1984, to the date of the proposed sale transaction. 4. The interests of the Plan in the proposed transaction are representedby Berger Financial Services Corporation (the Fiduciary), a real estateinvestment consulting firm which represents itself to have substantialfiduciary experience under the Act. The Fiduciary states that it has servedas sole real estate consultant to the Plan since 1981 and that it is independentof the Union and the Corporation. The Fiduciary represents that it hasreviewed and considered all material details of the proposed transactionto determine independently whether the proposal is in the best interestsof the participants and beneficiaries of the Plan. In so doing, the Fiduciaryrepresents that it has considered the alternatives available to the Planin dealing with the subject real property. As a result of its evalution,the Fiduciary represents that it finds of its evaluation, the Fiduciaryrepresents that it finds that the proposed transaction is in the best interestsof the Plan. The Fiduciary states that the proposed transaction will preserveand enhance the value of the Plan's interests in both the Building andthe Land. The Fiduciary further states that the proposed transaction willbe in accordance with governing provisions of the Plan documents and willleave the Plan assets appropriately diversified as required by the Act.According to the Fiduciary, the proposed purchase price for the Land isprudent and will constitute a purchase price not in excess of the Land'sfair market value. The Fiduciary represents that it also undertook to evaluate the rentalspaid to the Corporation by West Side under the Land Lease since June 30,1984 and that it finds that such rentals have not been in excess of theLand's fair market rental value. Finally, the Fiduciary has undertakento monitor and oversee the transaction on behalf of the Plan through thecompletion of the proposed sale. 5. In summary, the applicant maintains that the criteria of section 408(a)of the Act are satisfied in the proposed transaction for the followingreasons: (1) The proposed transaction will terminate an ongoing prohibitedtransaction between the parties; (2) The Plan, through West Side, willpay cash in the amount of no more than the fair market value of the Landas of the sale date, in no event to exceed $800,000; (3) The Corporationwill pay all costs and expenses related to the proposed sale transaction;and (4) The Plan's interests in the proposed transaction are representedby the Fiduciary, which has determined that the transaction will be inthe Plan's best interests, prudent, and enhancing of the Plan's interestsin the Building and Land. For Further Information Contact: Mr. Ronald Willett of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">John Deere Optional Life Insurance Plan for Salaried Employees (thePlan), Located in Moline, IL</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7680]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and in accordance with the procedures setforth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemptionis granted the restrictions of section 406 (a) and (b) of the Act shallnot apply to the reinsurance of risks and the receipt of premiums therefromby John Deere Life Insurance Company (JDLIC) from the insurance contractssold by Connecticut General Life Insurance Company (CG), or another lifeinsurance company unrelated to Deere andamp; Company (Deere), to providelife insurance benefits to participants of the Plan, provided the followingconditions are met:(a) JDLIC_(1) Is a party in interest with respect to the Plan by reason of a stockor partnership affiliation with Deere that is described in section 3(14)(E) or (G) of the Act,(2) Is licensed to sell insurance or conduct reinsurance operations inat least one of the United States or in the District of Columbia,(3) Has obtained a Certificate of Authority from the Department of Insuranceof its domiciliary state, Illinois, which has neither been revoked norsuspended, and(4)(A) Has undergone an examination by an independent certified publicaccountant for its last completed taxable year immediately prior to thetaxable year of the reinsurance transaction; or(B) Has undergone a financial examination (within the meaning of the lawof its domiciliary State, Illinois) by the Superintendent of Insurancefor the State of Illinois within 5 years prior to the end of the year precedingthe year in which the reinsurance transaction occurred.(b) The Plan pays no more than adequate consideration for the insurancecontracts;(c) No commissions are paid with respect to the direct sale of such contracts,or the reinsurance thereof; and(d) For each taxable year of JDLIC, the gross premiums and annuity considerationsreceived in that taxable year by JDLIC for life and health insurance orannuity contracts for all employee benefit plans (and their employers)with respect to which JDLIC is a party in interest by reason of a relationshipto such employer described in section 3(14) (E) or (G) of the Act doesnot exceed 50 percent of the gross premiums and annuity considerationsreceived for all lines of insurance (whether direct insurance or reinsurance)in that taxable year by JDLIC. For purposes of this condition (d):(1) the term ``gross premiums and annuity considerations received'' meansas to the numerator the total of premiums and annuity considerations received,both for the subject reinsurance transactions as well as for any directsale or other reinsurance of life insurance, health insurance or annuitycontracts to such plans (and their employers) by JDLIC. This total is tobe reduced (in both the numerator and denominator of the fraction) by experiencerefunds paid or credited in that taxable year by JDLIC.(2) all premium and annuity considerations written by JDLIC for plans whichit alone maintains are to be excluded from both the numerator and denominatorof the fraction.<T3>Effective Date:</T3> If this proposed exemption is granted, it willbe effective January 1, 1983. Preamble On August 7, 1979, the Department published a class exemption (ProhibitedTransaction Exemption 79-41 (PTE 79-41), 44 FR 46365) which permits insurancecompanies that have substantial stock or partnership affiliations withemployee benefit plans to make direct sales of life insurance, health insuranceor annuity contracts which fund such plans if certain conditions are satisfied.In PTE 79-41, the Department stated its views that if a plan purchasesan insurance contract from a company that is unrelated to the employerpursuant to an arrangement or understanding, written or oral, under whichit is expected that the unrelated company will subsequently reinsure allor part of the risk related to such insurance with an insurance companywhich is a party in interest with respect to the plan, the purchase ofthe insurance contract would be a prohibited transaction. The Department further stated that as of the date of publication of PTE79-41, it had received several applications for exemption under which aplan or its employer would contracted with an unrelated company for insurance,and the unrelated company would, pursuant to an arrangement or understanding,reinsure part or all of the risk with (and cede part or all of the premiumsto) an insurance company affiliated with the employer maintaining the plan.The Department felt that it would not be appropriate to cover the varioustypes of reinsurance transactions for which it had received applicationswithin the scope of the class exemption, but would instead consider suchapplications on the merits of each individual case. <ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of Facts and Representations</ITAG>1. Deere is incorporated under the laws of the State of Delaware and isone of the world's largest manufacturers of farm and industrial equipment.The Plan, which is maintained by Deere, provides life insurance on an electivebasis to active employees of Deere and its subsidiaries and to the dependentsof such employees through the purchase of group term life insurance. ThePlan had approximately 4,425 participants as of October 31, 1987.2. JDLIC is a wholly owned subsidiary of Deere and is currently licensedto do business in 44 states. JDLIC was incorporated in 1937 and was acquiredby Deere in 1982. JDLIC is primarily engaged in the business of sellinglife insurance and annuities to the general public and had annual premiumsand annuity considerations for its fiscal year ended December 31, 1986of approximately $38,400,000. As of that date, it had capital and surplusof approximately $26 million, and its total assets were approximately $186million. JDLIC also provides life insurance on a direct basis to otherwelfare plans of Deere and its subsidiaries, but the applicants representthat such sales of insurance meet the conditions of PTE 79-41. In 1986,the premiums for those plans totaled approximately $6,800,000.3. The life insurance benefit under the Plan is currently underwrittenby CG, an unaffiliated insurance carrier. The life insurance benefits underthe Plan are provided unconditionally by CG. On January 1, 1983, CG andJDLIC entered into a reinsurance agreement whereby JDLIC would receive75 percent of the premiums paid and would pay 75 percent of the claimsunder the CG policy. The Plan is not a party to the reinsurance agreement.The applicants have requested that this proposed exemption apply to anysuccessor company to CG that is also unrelated to Deere should Deere decideto insure this life insurance coverage with another carrier under the sametype of arrangement.4. The applicants represent that the subject reinsurance transaction hasmet and will continue to meet all of the conditions of PTE 79-41 coveringdirect insurance transactions:(a) JDLIC is a party in interest as described in Act section 3(14)(G) withrespect to the Plan by reason of stock affiliation with Deere, which maintainsthe Plan.(b) JDLIC is licensed to do business in 44 states.(c) JDLIC has been audited by the independent certified public accountingfirm of Deloitte, Haskins andamp; Sells for each of its fiscal years since1982.(d) JDLIC has received a Certificate of Compliance from its domiciliarystate, Illinois, annually since prior to its acquisition by Deere in 1982.(e) The Plan has paid and will pay no more than adequate considerationfor the insurance. The subject transaction has not and will not in anyway affect the cost to the Plan of the group life insurance contract.(f) No commissions have been or will be paid with respect to the directinsurance by CG or any successor thereto or the reinsurance agreement betweenCG or any successor thereto and JDLIC.(g) The gross premiums and annuity considerations received by JDLIC forgroup life and health insurance (both direct and reinsurance) or annuitycontracts for all employee benefit plans (and their employers) with respectto which JDLIC is a party in interest under section 3(14) (E) or (G) ofthe Act have not exceeded and will not exceed 50 percent of the gross premiumsand annuity considerations received by JDLIC for all lines of insurancein each taxable year, all of which, except for the subject reinsurancetransaction, is written on a direct basis. The premiums for the Plan insurancehave never exceeded 2.5 percent of JDLIC's total premiums, and, in 1986,were less than 1.5 percent. The total of premiums for all plans of Deere(direct and reinsured) received by JDLIC as a percentage of its total premiumsand annuity considerations for the years 1983 through 1986 has ranged froma high of approximately 32 percent in 1984 to a low of approximately 19percent in 1986.5. In summary, the applicants represent that the subject transaction hasmet and will continue to meet the criteria of section 408(a) of the Actbecause: (a) Plan participants and beneficiaries are afforded insuranceprotection by CG, one of the largest and most experienced group insurersin the United States, at competitive market rates arrived at through arm's-lengthnegotiations; (b) JDLIC is a sound, viable insurance company which doesa substantial amount of direct public business outside its affiliated groupof companies; and (c) each of the protections provided to the Plan andits participants and beneficiaries by PTE 79-41 has been and will continueto be met under the subject reinsurance transaction.For Further Information Contact: Gary H. Lefkowitz of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Empire Acceptance Company, Inc. Profit Sharing Plan (the Plan), Locatedin Greensboro, NC  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7683]  </ITAG>Proposed Exemption  The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 18, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsections 406(a) and 406(b) (1) and (2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply for a period offive years to the sale of certain mortgage notes to the Plan by EmpireAcceptance Company, Inc. (the Employer) and to the guarantee by the Employerto repurchase any mortgage notes which are in default and to the repurchaseby the Employer of such mortgage notes, provided that the terms of thetransactions are at least as favorable as those the Plan could obtain inan arm's-length transaction with an unrelated party.  Temporary Nature of Exemption  The proposed exemption is temporary and, if granted, will expire five yearsafter the date of grant. Should the Employer wish to continue to sell mortgagenotes to the Plan beyond the five-year period, the Employer may submitanother application for exemption. The Employer may repurchase mortgagenotes from the Plan after the five-year period so long as the mortgagenotes were purchased by the Plan during the five-year period.  Summary of Facts and Restrictions  1. The Plan had nine participants and total assets of approximately $405,000as of March 1, 1988. Approximately $315,000 of that amount are allocatedto the account of William Starr (Starr) who is the owner of the Employer.The investment decisions of the Plan are made by Starr who is also thePlan's trustee.  2. The Employer is a mortgage lender. When the Employer loans money toa customer, the customer generally will sign a note payable to the orderof the Employer. The note is usually secured by a deed of trust on theborrower's residence. In compiling its mortgage portfolio, the Employeruses the following criteria:  (a) The credit record of the borrower;  (b) Verification of the borrower's employment or source of income;  (c) Ratio of mortgage payments to borrower's income;  (d) Requiring that the borrower be a good credit risk; and  (e) Requiring that the property offered as security be especially attractivefrom the standpoint of value and continued marketability, or that the loanpresents a lower than usual loan to value ratio.  3. The Employer proposes to sell certain mortgage notes originated by theEmployer to the Plan. The purchase price will be mortgage notes' fair marketvalue at the time of the sale. The sale of each mortgage note will be forcash and the Plan will pay no transfer charges or other costs in relationto the transaction. The Employer will service the mortgage account foreach such note free of any charge to the Plan.  4. The total dollar value of mortgage notes sold to the Plan will not exceedat any one time 25 percent of the aggregate carrying value of the Plan'sassets, with no more than five percent of the Plan's assets in any onemortgage note or the notes of any one borrower. To the extent possible,the mortgage notes sold to the Plan will be geographically and demographicallydiversified within the area served by the Employer. In addition, the Employeragrees, in writing, to repurchase any mortgage note that is in defaultfor more than three months as well as to repurchase any mortgage note asneeded to provide liquidity for the Plan.  5. The selection of mortgage notes to be sold to the Plan will be madeby Robert Skenes of Greensboro, North Carolina, who will serve as an independentfiduciary (the Independent Fiduciary) in regard to the proposed transactions.The Independent Fiduciary states that he is unrelated to the Employer andthat he is educated, trained and experienced in mortgage matters. From1967 through 1977, the Independent Fiduciary was a vice-president and seniorcommercial loan officer with First Union National Bank in Greensboro. Heis now self-employed as a real estate financial consultant and developer.The Independent Fiduciary also states that he has been advised by legalcounsel as to the duties and responsibilities of a fiduciary under theAct and assumes those responsibilities in regard to the proposed transactions.The Independent Fiduciary will make the determination that each sale ofa mortgage note to the Plan is in the best interests of the Plan. The IndependentFiduciary will determine that each such transaction is on terms at leastas favorable as the Plan could receive in a comparable transaction withan unrelated party. In addition, the Independent Fiduciary will monitorall formerly purchased mortgage notes, including the servicing of the mortgages,and will take any steps necessary to enforce the Plan's rights in relationto the mortgage notes.  The Independent Fiduciary will ensure that each mortgage note selectedfor the Plan is purchased for an amount which is not greater than its fairmarket value. In determining the fair market value of a mortgage note,the Independent Fiduciary will look at the original cost and the tax valueof the property that is secured by the note and will add an appreciatefactor of four percent per year.  In determining which mortgage notes will be purchased by the Plan, theIndependent Fiduciary will use the following criteria:  (a) Only first mortgages will be sold to the Plan;     (b) The mortgage notes selected for purchase by the Plan will be at leastthree months old and have an established record of timely payment and besecured by a deed of trust; (c) The balance owed on the mortgage note sold to the Plan shall not exceed80 percent of the value of the secured property; (d) An enforceable hazard insurance policy covering the property in anamount at least equal to the current outstanding balance of the mortgagenote must be in existence; (e) The original loan application and record for any mortgage consideredwill be reviewed in detail to determine that there has been no substantialchange in the position of the borrower; (f) The interest rate on any mortgage note purchased by the Plan will equalor exceed the current market rate available for similar investments; and(g) The mortgage notes purchased by the Plan will be with full recourseagainst the Employer. In the event of default of a mortgage note, the Employerwill purchase that mortgage note from the Plan at a price which is equalto the higher of (i) the current fair market value of the mortgage noteor (ii) the total amount of the outstanding principal and accrued interestdue on the mortgage note. In the event that the Independent Fiduciary resigns, the Employer shallnotify the Department's Office of Regulations and Interpretations of thename and qualifications of a prospective successor fiduciary and the reasonsfor the change. Solely for purposes of continuing the effectiveness ofthis exemption, the appointment of a successor independent fiduciary shallnot be effective until the receipt by the Employer of the Department'sapproval. 6. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transactionswill satisfy the statutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because:(1) The selection of mortgage notes to be sold to the Plan will be madeby a Plan fiduciary who is independent of the Employer; (2) the Employerwill repurchase a mortgage note from the Plan in the event of default onthe note; (3) the Employer will service the mortgage account for each notefree of charge to the Plan; (4) no more than 25 percent of the Plan's assetswill be invested in the mortgage notes; and (5) the exemption will be atemporary exemption for a period of five years. For Further Information Contact: Paul Kelty of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8883. (This is not a toll-free number.) <ITAG tagnum="85">Proptech, Inc. Defined Benefit Pension Plan (the Plan), Located inSan Diego, CA </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7730] </ITAG>Proposed Exemption The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and in accordance with the proceduresset forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). If theexemption is granted the sanctions resulting from the application of section4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of theCode shall not apply to a proposed series of loans (the Loans) by the Planto Solana Beach Mini-Warehouse, Ltd. (the Partnership), a disqualifiedperson and a general partnership in which the sponsor of the Plan, PROPTECH,INC. (the Employer) is the majority general partner, provided that at anytime not more than twenty-five (25%) percent of the total assets of thePlan will be involved in such loans, and further provided that the termsof each of the Loans are not less favorable to the Plan than those obtainablein an arm's-length transaction with unrelated parties. Summary of Facts and Representations 1. The Plan is a defined benefit plan with total assets of $719,562.11,as of October 31, 1988. The Plan has two participants, George Hunt andCathleen Hunt, who are husband and wife.\3\<NOTE/> The trustee of the Plan is George Hunt and the administratorof the Plan is the Employer. George Hunt is the sole owner of the Employer,which is a Delaware corporation that is engaged in the business of owning,managing, and leasing self-storage facilities in San Diego, California.The Partnership is a general partnership consisting of two partners, theEmployer, which has a 75 percent majority interest in the Partnership,and Mr. Dale Marquardt, unrelated to the Plan, who has a minority interestof 25 percent in the Partnership. The primary purpose of the Partnershipis to maintain and develop the miniwarehouse business.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\ Since Mr. and Mrs. Hunt are the only participants in thePlan and the Employer is wholly owned by Mr. Hunt, there is no jurisdictionunder Title I of the Act pursuant to 29 CFR 2510.3-3(b). However, thereis jurisdiction under Title II of the Act pursuant to section 4975 of theCode.2. The Employer requests an exemption from the sanctions of section 4975of the Code to permit a series of loans by the Plan to the Partnership.The Loans will be used to reduce an outstanding loan for $800,000 madeto the Employer for which repayment is owed to the San Diego Trust andamp;Savings Bank of San Diego, California (the Bank). The Loans will be madeover a period of five-year beginning in 1989 in amounts not to exceed $120,000per year with a maximum of $600,000 for the entire five year period. Theaggregate value of all outstanding individual Loans by the Plan to thePartnership will never exceed 25 percent of the total assets of the Plan.At all times the value of the Loans will be evidenced by a promissory noteand will be secured by a second deed of trust on certain real property(the Property). Each time a new loan is made by the Plan to the Partnershipa new promissory note, secured by a second deed of trust on the Property,will be executed for the Partnership by each partner of the Partnershipand by Mr. Hunt, as an individual, to reflect the total debt outstandingof the Partnership under the Loans.3. The repayment of principal and interest of 11.5 percent per annum onthe Loans will be made in equal quarterly installments commencing in 1989.A total repayment of the Loans will be completed within fifteen years ofthe granting the initial loan with no penalty for prepayment of any sum.The Bank, which holds the first deed of trust on the Property, has givenits written approval for the proposed placements of second deeds of trustas the Loans are made by the Plan to the Partnership. The secured interestof the Plan in the Property will be properly recorded under the laws ofCalifornia and the improvements will be insured against fire and otherhazards for the entire period of the Loans, at no expense to the Plan,in an amount no less than the outstanding balance of the first and seconddeed of trusts on the Property under both the Loans and the outstandingloan to the Bank.4. The Property is located at 545 Stevens Avenue, Solama Beach, Californiaand has been improved by a miniwarehouse facility consisting of 1,152 unitmini storage facility totalling 83,887 square feet of net rentable area.Wood Associates of Redlands, California, an independent appraisal firmdetermined that the Property had a fair market value of $4,900,000, asof June 22, 1987, and Conland Appraisal Associates of San Diego, California,another independent appraisal firm concurred as of July 13, 1988, withthe appraised fair market value of $4,900,000 for the Property. The Propertyhas a value considerably greater than 200 percent of the outstanding balanceof the proposed Loans and the Bank loan, however if the Property shoulddecrease in value, the parties in the Partnership agree to provide additionalcollateral, if necessary, to ensure that the value of the total collateralis at all times equal to at least 200 percent of the outstanding balanceof the Loans and the Bank loan.5. The First Interstate Mortgage Company, San Diego, California, a financialinstitution, made an evaluation of the proposed Loans and concluded thattheir terms represent fair market value and that it would grant a secondloan under the terms as proposed. The participants of the Plan, Mr. andMrs. Hunt, both believe the proposed Loans to be in the best interest ofthe Plan and its participants and both believe that the Loans are adequatelysecured to protect their interests. The Employer has no employees otherthan the Hunts and none are anticipated during the period of the Loans.However, should another employee become eligible to participate in thePlan, another plan with provisions identical to the Plan will be establishedfor such employee or employees so that the only persons affected by theLoans will be the Hunts.6. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transactionswill satisfy the statutory criteria for an exemption under section 4975(c)(2)of the Code because: (a) The Loans are secured by real estate with an appraisedvalue that is and will remain substantially more than 200 percent of theoutstanding balance of the Loans and the Bank loan; (b) an evaluation ofthe Loans as proposed was made by a financial institution, which concludedthat the Loans were at fair market value and it would grant loans underthe proposed terms; (c) the Plan's secured interest under the Loans willbe protected by properly recording the deeds of trust under the laws ofCalifornia and the Property's improvements will be insured against fireand other hazards for the length of the Loans, at no cost to the Plan,in an amount no less than the outstanding balances of the first and seconddeeds of trust; (d) a policy of insurance on the Property will be obtainedfor fire and other hazards for the length of the Loans; and (e) the Hunts,the only participants affected by the transactions desire that the transactionsbe consummated.Notice to Interested Persons: Because the Hunts are the only participantsaffected by the proposed transactions, the Department has determined thatthere is no need to distribute notice to interested persons. Comments andrequests for a hearing are due 30 days from the date of publication ofthis notice in the <T4>Federal Register.</T4>For Further Information Contact: Mr. C. E. Beaver of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Southern California Floor Covering Pension Trust Fund (the Plan),Located in Pasadena, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7738]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsections 406(a) and 406(b)(1) and (2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1)(A) through (E) of the Code, shall not apply to the sale of aparcel of improved real property (the Property) by the Plan to Sanwa BankCalifornia (Sanwa), a party in interest with respect to the Plan, providedthe Plan receives the greater of $660,000 or the fair market value forthe Property at the time of sale.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan is a multiemployer, collectively bargained pension plan representingapproximately 70 contributing employers. The sponsoring union is ResilientFloor and Decorative Covering Local Union 1247 of the International Brotherhoodof Painters and Allied Traders. The Plan had total assets of approximately$59,300,000 of 1,474 participants as of October 31, 1988. Sanwa, a Californiabanking corporation, is a co-trustee of the Plan which has investment managementresponsibilities in regard to the Plan.2. The investment portfolio of the Plan includes the Property located inCerritos, California. The Property consists of a bank branch facility,situated on a 0.66 acre portion of a shopping center, which is currentlyleased to Sanwa. The Plan purchased the Property in June 1970 from FirstWestern Bank and Trust Co. (First Western), the predecessor bank to Sanwa.The cost to the Plan for the land and building on the land was $200,000.According to the applicant, the initial lease between the Plan and FirstWestern was approved by the California Superior Court because of the requirementsof California law. In order to overcome any problems with the CaliforniaCivil Code on prohibited transactions between an employee benefit planand related parties (prior to passage of the Act), an application was madeto the California Superior Court in the County of Los Angeles. The leasewas entered into in June 1970 for a period of 25 years and contains fiveoption periods for up to 25 additional years. The current annual rentalincome on the Property is $44,507.3. The Plan obtained an independent appraisal on the Property from CliftonWebb, Jr., and Jeffrey Sumida (Webb and Sumida) of Landauer Associates,Inc., a real estate consulting firm located in Santa Ana, California. Thebank branch facility consists of a concrete block freestanding buildingconstructed on 3,536 square feet of the Property. The improvements on the,Property also include professional landscaping and paved parking for 24automobiles. Webb and Sumida believe that the highest and best use of theProperty would be conversion of the bank building to retail use, with constructionof an additional 2,064 square feet of retail space on the excess land component.Utilizing the cost, income, and comparable sales approaches to value, Webband Sumida estimated that the fair market value of the Property, unencumberedby the current lease, was $660,000 as of June 24, 1988. Webb and Sumidaalso estimated that the fair market rent on the Property for the year endingin June 1988 was $51,343 (approximately $4,279 per month).4. The trustees of the Plan instructed Sanwa in September 1987 to sellthe Property to a third party. In March 1988, the Department in an investigationof the Plan notified the Plan that in its view the lease between the Planand Sanwa appeared to be a prohibited transaction.\4\<NOTE/> Sanwa proposes to pay to the Plan at least $37,711 as additionalrent (which is the difference between the rent paid by Sanwa and the fairrental value, as established in the appraisal from June 30, 1984 to thedate of the appraisal). As of the appraisal date, Sanwa will make monthlyrental payments of $4,279 to the Plan, the fair market rent establishedin the appraisal. Sanwa will continue to pay fair market rent to the Planuntil sale of the Property is completed.\5\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\4\ The applicant represents that the lease between the Planand Sanwa was entitled to relief from the provisions of section 406 ofthe Act by virtue of section 414(c)(2) of the Act. Section 414(c)(2) providesan exemption until June 30, 1984, for a lease or joint use of propertyinvolving a plan and a party in interest pursuant to a binding contractin effect on July 1, 1974, provided certain conditions are met. The Departmentexpresses no opinion as to whether the conditions of section 414(c)(2)and the regulations issued thereunder (29 CFR 2550.414c-2) were in factmet in regard to the situation described above.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\5\ The applicant recognizes that the lease between the Planand Sanwa may have constituted a prohibited transaction (at least afterJune 30, 1984) under section 406 of the Act and section 4975 of the Code.Accordingly, the applicant will pay the Internal Revenue Service all excisetaxes that are applicable under section 4975(a) of the Code within 90 daysof the publication in the Federal Register of the grant of this proposedexemption.Sanwa also proposes to purchase the Property from the Plan. The applicantnotes that the Property is suitable for bank purposes, without renovationsor modifications, and that the Plan might not be able to sell the Propertyto a third party for cash at fair market value. Sanwa will pay the greaterof $660,000 or fair market value for the Property at the time of sale,based on a updated independent appraisal. The sale will be entirely forcash, and the Plan will pay no fees or commissions in regard to the transaction.5. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transaction willsatisfy the statutory criteria of section 408(a) of the Act because: (1)Sanwa will pay no less than fair market value for the Property at the timeof sale; (2) the fair market value will be established by a current independentappraisal of the Property; (3) the transaction will allow the Plan to disengagefrom a lease between itself and a party in interest with respect to thePlan; and (4) the sale of the Property will be entirely for cash and thePlan will pay no fees or commissions in regard to the sale.<T3>For Further Information Contact:</T3> Paul Kelty of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8883. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Pillsbury, Madison andamp; Sutro Keogh Plan (the Keogh Plan), Locatedin San Francisco, CA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7741]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a), 406(b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code shall not apply to the proposedloan of up to $10 million by the Keogh Plan to Pillsbury, Madison andamp;Sutro (the Employer), provided that the terms of the transaction are notless favorable to the Keogh Plan than those obtainable in an arm's-lengthtransaction with an unrelated party. Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Pillsbury, Madison andamp; Sutro Retirement Plan is a co-mingled trustconsisting of three parts, which include a Keogh Plan, a Tax Saving Plan,and a Voluntary Contribution Plan. The proposed transaction will involveonly the assets of the Keogh Plan, whose total assets as of December 31,1988 equalled approximately $42 million. The trustees of the Plan are currentlyW.D. Berry, J.M. Canty, P. Hudner, A.R. Kemp, Jr., W.J. Martin, Jr., T.N.McNamara, and G.A. Sears, all of whom are partners in the Employer. TheEmployer was established as a California general partnership in 1875 andis one of the largest law firms in the United States. For the year endedDecember 31, 1987, the Employer's gross revenues were $116.8 million andits net income was in excess of $37 million.2. The Trustees of the Keogh Plan and the Employer have agreed to enterinto a loan arrangement in which the Employer will borrow up to $10 millionfrom the Keogh Plan. The arrangement contemplates two separate loan disbursements.The first, to be made as soon as the requested exemption is granted, willbe for $6 million. The second, to be disbursed by September 15, 1990, willbe for $4 million. The applicant represents that the total amount of theloans, including a prior loan approved by the Department, will not exceed25% of the Keogh Plan's assets on the date of disbursement of each amount.Funds for the loans will come from a group annuity contract issued by PrudentialInsurance Company of America.\6\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\6\ The applicant represents that the Keogh Plan will notincur any market value adjustment or other penalty as a result of the liquidationof this investment.3. The proceeds from the loans will be used by the Employer to pay forautomation equipment, software and related installation expenses for afully integrated, automated office system encompassing word processing,electronic mail data base management, calendar, and docket systems andto repay loans from financial institutions to finance such purchases.4. Each of the proposed loans will have a term of 5 years from the dateof its disbursement. Principal and interest shall be repaid in equal monthlyinstallments. Monthly interest payments on the remaining principal balanceof the loans will be at the annual rate of 5 percentage points over theFederal Reserve Bank of San Francisco discount rate, or, if higher, therate which provides the Keogh Plan with a return commensurate with theinterest rate charged by persons in the business of lending money for loansmade under similar circumstances, as determined by the Keogh Plan's independentfiduciary (See appointment of Union Bank, infra).5. The loan will be secured by letters of credit (or a single letter ofcredit covering both loans) issued by the Bank of America equal to thetotal amount of the outstanding loan balance plus approximately 60 daysaccrued interest. In addition, the trustees of the Keogh Plan will appointUnion Bank as independent fiduciary for the Keogh Plan to determine theprudence of each loan, to administer and enforce the terms of the loanagreement and, if necessary, to draw down on the letters of credit on behalfof the Keogh Plan. The letters of credit may be drawn down by Union Bankupon certification by it that the amount being drawn down is due and payableunder the loan agreement because of either the occurrence of an event ofdefault under the loan agreement,\7\<NOTE/> or the receipt of notice of termination of either letterof credit from Bank of America.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\7\ An event of default will occur if the Employer fails topay interest or principal on the loans within 10 days after the due date,upon proof of any false or misleading statements made by the Employer underthe representations and warranties or covenants of the agreement, the filingof bankruptcy, or a default under certain other loan agreements where thelender may accelerate payment. Upon the occurrence of an event of default,the obligation of the Keogh Plan to continue the loans is terminated, andat the option of the Keogh Plan all amounts of principal and interest underthe loan become due and payable.6. Under the letter of credit agreement, Bank of America will reserve theright to terminate the letter of credit upon 60 days written notice toUnion Bank. If such a notice is given and substitute letters of creditare not obtained or the Employer does not repay all amounts of principaland interest outstanding under the loan within 30 days prior to the expirationof the letters of credit, an event of default under the loan agreementwill occur. In such a case, Union Bank will demand full payment of allprincipal and interest owing under the loan agreement and will draw downon the letters of credit before they terminate so that interests of theKeogh Plan will be protected.7. The terms of the loan trust agreement provide that Union Bank will holdthe promissory notes evidencing the loans as trustee on behalf of the KeoghPlan, and will pay over to the trustees of the Keogh Plan any amounts ofprincipal and interest received from the Employer and any amounts drawndown under the Bank of America letters of credit. Union Bank is authorizedto enforce the provisions of the loan agreement and to collect the notesor the proceeds from the letters of credit as required to protect the interestsof the Keogh Plan and its participants and beneficiaries. The loan trustagreement will terminate upon the repayment of the loans or the paymentof the proceeds from the letters of credit. Union Bank will have controland authority only with respect to the Keogh Plan assets subject to theloan agreement.8. Union Bank represents that, as independent fiduciary, it has reviewedvarious documents relating to the proposed loan and to the financial conditionof the Employer. Those documents included, among others, the loan agreementand note, the loan trust agreement, the irrevocable letter of credit, andaudited financial statements of the Employer. In addition, Union Bank hasreviewed the documents establishing the Keogh Plan, current financial statementsof the Keogh Plan and the allocation of the Keogh Plan's assets betweenthe Prudential Group Annuity contract and other types of investments.Based upon Union Bank's review of the documents referred to above and otherinformation provided by the Keogh Plan, it has determined that the termsof the proposed loan are consistent with those customarily found in commercialloan arrangements and are no less favorable to the Keogh Plan than theKeogh Plan might obtain in a loan to an unrelated party. Union Bank hasalso determined that the proposed loan would be an appropriate investmentfor the Keogh Plan and in the interest of the Keogh Plan's participantsand beneficiaries. Union Bank will review these determinations prior tomaking each disbursement under the loan agreement and will not make suchdisbursements unless it finds them to be appropriate and in the interestof the Keogh Plan.9. The Employer represents that it does not control, is not controlledby, and is not under common control with Union Bank and is not otherwiseaffiliated with Union Bank. No partner in the Employer has any ownershipinterest in Union Bank, nor does any partner or relative of a partner holda position as a director or senior management official of Union Bank. Althoughthe Employer has no banking relationship with Union Bank, a few partnersin the Employer have checking or savings accounts, loans, or other consumerbanking relationships with Union Bank. The Employer has also provided legalservices for Union Bank from time to time. In 1987, Union Bank paid theEmployer $161,750 in legal fees, representing less than .2% of the firm'sgross income for that year. The applicant represents that the Employerwill neither advise nor counsel Union Bank with respect to any matter concerningthe proposed loan arrangement or the Bank of America letter of credit arrangement.Thus, the applicant represents that Union Bank will be totally independentof the Employer with respect to this matter, and the Employer will notbe in a position, by virtue of any past or existing business relationship,to influence the actions or decisions of Union Bank in connection withthe proposed loan arrangements. Union Bank is also totally independentof the Bank of America.10. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transactionmeets the statutory criteria for an exemption under section 408(a) of theAct because:(a) The loans' terms and conditions will be monitored by Union Bank;(b) The loans will be secured by letters of credit from the bank of America.Such letters will be called if the Bank of America notifies Union Bankof its intent not to renew, and substitute letters of credit are not obtained;and(c) Union Bank, as independent fiduciary to the Keogh Plan, has determinedthat the transaction is appropriate for the Keogh Plan and in the bestinterests of the Keogh Plan's participants and beneficiaries.For further information contact: Alan H. Levitas of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8194. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">Blackhawk, Inc. Employees' Retirement Plan and Trust (the Plan), Locatedin Phoenix, AZ</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7792]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and in accordance with the proceduresset forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). If theexemption is granted, the sanctions resulting from the application of section4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of theCode shall not apply to the proposed purchase of vacant land (the Land)by the Plan from Mr. Kenneth A. Wallace, a disqualified person with respectto the Plan, provided the purchase price does not exceed the Land's fairmarket value as of the date of the purchase and provided further that thepurchase does not cause the Plan to be disqualified in accordance withthe provisions of section 415 of the Code.\8\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\8\ Because Kenneth A. Wallace is the sole owner and employeeof Blackhawk, Inc., the Plan sponsor, and the sole participant in the Plan,there is no jurisdiction under Title II of the Act pursuant to 29 CFR 2510.3-3(b) and (c). However, there is jurisdiction under Title II of the Act undersection 4975 of the Code.<ITAG tagnum="84">Summary of Facts and Representations</ITAG>1. The Plan is a defined contribution plan covering only one participant,Mr. Kenneth A. Wallace (the Trustee), who is the trustee of the Plan, thesole owner of Blackhawk, Inc. (the Employer), the Plan sponsor, which hasno employees other than the Trustee. The Trustee represents that no furtheremployees of the Employer will participate in the Plan but will, when eligible,participate in a separate plan with identical provisions. As of October31, 1988, the Plan's totalled $726,637.052. The Land comprises approximately 14 acres of vacant land located inthe White Mountain area of Apache County, Arizona, described in said County'sNotice of Valuation as SEC 18 TION R25E, Lot 6. The Trustee, who presentlyowns the Land, wishes to purchase it for the Plan for its fair market valueas appraised by Mr. Jed B. Shapiro (the Realtor), of Coldwell Banker McCartyRealty.3. Although the Land has been valued by the Apache County Assessor (theAssessor) at $34,536 (full cash value) and at $33,182 (limited cash value)as of January 1, 1989, the Realtor, on September 30, 1988, suggested listingthe Land at a price of $19,950. The Realtor has inspected the Land andcalculated its net usable area as 11.84 acres. He notes that a portionof the Land appears to be a seasonal wetland and that a domestic waterwell would be required to improve the Land.4. The Trustee represents that the Realtor is totally independent of theEmployer and is, in fact, unknown to the Trustee except as a realtor recommendedas being the best in the area, so that there is no relationship betweenor among the Realtor, the Employer, or the Trustee. The Realtor statesthat he has actively pursued a full-time living marketing real estate inthe White Mountain area for two years and that he is: An Arizona licensedreal estate salesperson; a member of the Navajo County, Arizona, and NationalAssociation of Realtors; and a graduate of the Coldwell Banker Fast StartProgram. He states that he holds a bachelor's degree in business administrationand presently maintains a personal listing inventory in excess of $2.2million. 5. In regard to the Assessor's full cash valuation of the Land, the Realtorasserts that his research of actual sales demonstrates that the Assessoris consistently high and that the standard relationship between the freemarket sales price and the full cash valuation for property taxation istypically 60-85%. He asserts that the Assessor's full cash valuation isclearly unsupported by recent or historic sales, explaining that the numberof potential buyers is limited and that most of the property in the areaof the Land is undeveloped, owned by individuals who do not live in thearea, and affected by the depressed market conditions present in the WhiteMountains (and, in fact, in all of Arizona). He asserts that his observations,summarized above, are, to the best of his knowledge and professional competence,a factual representation of current conditions. The Trustee states thathe agrees with the Realtor's valuation of the Land and that he is appealingthe Assessor's valuation through the procedures established for such appeals.6. The Trustee represents that there will be no commission or other expenseinvolved in the transfer of the Land to the Plan, that the Plan will paythe purchase price in a cash lump sum on the date of the purchase, andthat said purchase price will not exceed the fair market value of the Landas of the purchase date as determined by the Realtor or another qualifiedappraiser who is unrelated to the Trustee and the Employer. The Trusteealso represents that if the difference between the Assessor's valuationand the price to be paid by the Plan to purchase the Land were deemed toconstitute a contribution or other addition to the Plan for purposes ofsection 415(c) of the Code, the limits provided by that section would notbe exceeded. The Trustee represents that the Plan stands to benefit fromselling the Land in the future at a higher price and/or terms which willbenefit the Plan and its sole participant. He also represents that theLand does not require management as it is vacant and that a future saleof the Land by the Plan can be completed with a minimum of effort. 7. In summary, the Trustee represents that the proposed purchase satisfiesthe exemption criteria set forth in section 4975(c)(2) of the Code because:(a) The proposed purchase price will not exceed the land's fair marketvalue as of the date of the purchase as determined by a qualified unrelatedappraiser; (b) no commissions or other purchase expenses will be chargedto the Plan; (c) the Trusee, who is the sole participant in the Plan, believesthe Plan stands to benefit from reselling the Land in the future; (d) theTrustee is the only Plan participant affected by the proposed purchase,which he wishes to effect; and (e) the contribution limits provided bysection 415 of the Code would not be exceeded if the difference betweenthe price to be paid by the Plan to acquire the Land and the Assessor'svaluation were deemed to be a contribution or other addition to the Planfor purposes of that Code section. Tax Consequences of Transaction The Department of the Treasury has determined that if a transaction betweena qualified employee benefit plan and its sponsoring employer (or affiliatethereof) results in the plan either paying less than or receiving morethan fair market value, such excess may be considered to be a contributionby the sponsoring Employer to the plan and therefore must be examined underapplicable provisions of the Code, including section 401(a)(4), 404, and415. Notice to Interested Persons Because the Trustee is the only participant in the Plan and the sole ownerof the employer, it has been determined that there is no need to distributethe notice of proposed exemption to interested persons. Comments and hearingrequests on the proposed exemption are due 30 days after the date of publicationof said notice in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. For further information contact: Mrs. Miriam Freund, of the Department,telephone (202) 523-8194. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="85">John R. Ciliberti, M.D., P.S. Pension Plan and Trust (the Plan), Locatedin Redmond, WA</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7924]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and in accordance with the proceduresset forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). If theexemption is granted the sanctions resulting from the application of section4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of theCode shall not apply to the proposed sale (the Sale) for cash of certainreal property (the Property) by the Plan to John R. Ciliberti, M.D., adisqualified person with respect to the Plan, provided that the sales pricefor the Property is the higher of the sum of $76,000 or the fair marketvalue of the Property on the date of the Sale.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The Plan is a defined benefit plan with total assets of $382,592.03,as of October 31, 1988. John R. Ciliberti, M.D. (the Applicant) is thetrustee of the Plan and its only participant as well as the sole shareholderof the sponsor of the Plan, John R. Ciliberti, M.D., P.S. (the Employer).\9\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\9\Since John R. Ciliberti, M.D. is the sole shareholder ofthe Employer and is the only participant in the Plan, there is no jurisdictionunder Title I of the Act pursuant to 29 CFR 2510.3-3(b). However, thereis jurisdiction under Title II of the Act under section 4975 of the Code.2. The Property is a parcel of unimproved real property consisting of approximately2.5 acres with 400 feet of waterfront located in the upper northern regionof Puget Sound on Stuart Island at the extreme northwesternly terminusof San Juan County, Washington. Lynne Mercer, a real estate broker withnine years experience in the area with Friday Harbor Realty, Inc., FridayHarbor, Washington, describes the Property as being remote, slow in salesactivities, and only reachable in good weather by private boat or airplane.It is designated as an ``outer island'', lacking public power, water, telephoneor ferry services. As of November 7, 1988, the Property was appraised byan independent appraiser, Donald G. Montgomery, MAI with Wm. T. Follis,Realtor, Bellingham, Washington. He determined that the fair market valueof the Property is $76,000.3. The Applicant determined shortly after the Plan purchased the Propertyfrom an unrelated party that the investment made by the Plan was a mistake.The discrenment of the erroneous investment arose when the Applicant comprehendedthat because of the condition and location of the Property, it would notappreciate in value as initially anticipated and would not generate incomefor the Plan. It became obvious to the Applicant that if the Plan continuedto hold title to the Property, the unsuitable investment would depleteassets of the Plan by the payments of property taxes and maintenance costs.The Applicant desires to remedy the poor investment quickly by his cashpurchase of the Property for the higher of the sum of $76,000 or the fairmarket value of the Property. By personally purchasing the Property, theApplicant intends for the Plan to avoid a delay in selling the Propertyto an unrelated party and the payment of real estate commissions and otherexpenses. All recording, escrow, excise or any other fees will be paidby the Applicant in the proposed Sale.4. In summary, the Applicant represents that the proposed transaction willsatisfy the statutory criteria for an exemption under section 4975(c)(2)of the Code because: (a) The proposed Sale will be a one-time transactionfor cash; (b) the Plan will receive the higher of the sum of $76,000 orthe fair market value on the date of the Sale as determined by an independent,qualified appraiser; (c) the Plan will pay no real estate commissions norany other fees or expenses in connection with the proposed Sale; and (d)the Applicant, the only participant affected by the proposed transaction,desires that the proposed transaction be consummated.Notice to Interested Persons: Since John R. Ciliberti, M.D., is the soleowner of the Employer and the only participant of the Plan, it has beendetermined that there is no need to distribute the notice of the proposedexemption to interested persons. Comments and requests for a hearing aredue 30 days after publication of this notice in the Federal Register.For Further Information Contact: Mr. C. E. Beaver of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)General InformationThe attention of interested persons is directed to the following:(1) The fact that a transaction is the subject of an exemption under section408(a) of the Act and/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code does not relievea fiduciary or other party in interest or disqualified person from certainother provisions of the Act and/or the Code, including any prohibited transactionprovisions to which the exemption does not apply and the general fiduciaryresponsibility provisions of section 404 of the Act, which among otherthings require a fiduciary to discharge his duties respecting the plansolely in the interest of the participants and beneficiaries of the planand in a prudent fashion in accordance with section 404(a)(1)(B) of theAct; nor does it affect the requirement of section 401(a) of the employeesof the employer maintaining the plan and their beneficiaries;(2) Before an exemption may be granted under section 408(a) of the Actand/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code, the Department must find that theexemption is administratively feasible, in the interests of the plan andof its participants and beneficiaries and protective of the rights of participantsand beneficiaries of the plan; and(3) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be supplemental to, and notin derogation of, any other provisions of the Act and/or the Code, includingstatutory or administrative exemptions and transitional rules. Furthermore,the fact that a transaction is subject to an administrative or statutoryexemption is not dispositive of whether the transaction is in fact a prohibitedtransaction.(4) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be subject to the expresscondition that the material facts and representations contained in eachapplication are true and complete, and that each application accuratelydescribes all material terms of the transaction which is the subject ofthe exemption.<ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, this 14th day of April 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Robert J. Doyle,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director of Regulations and Interpretations, Pension and Welfare BenefitsAdministration, U.S. Department of Labor</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-9483 Filed 4-19-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4510-29-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>