<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89217-0040 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.2-17-89.f2.A1039</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF COMMERCE</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Bureau of Export Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket Nos. 4656-04, 4656-05(1) 4656-06)2)]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Actions Affecting Export Privileges: William Carlton Dart, et al.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Summary</ITAG>Pursuant to the January 13, 1989 Recommended Decision and Order on Remandof the Administrative Law Judge, which Decision and Order is attached heretoand affirmed by me, the charges contained in the 1985 Charging Letter againstRespondent William Carlton Dart, individually and doing business as RespondentDisplay Systems, Inc. and Perpetuum, Inc. are dismissed, and the namesof all three Respondents shall be deleted from the Table of Denial Ordersin Supplement No. 1 to Part 788 of the Regulations.<ITAG tagnum="84">Discussion</ITAG>The procedural background of this case is fully set forth in the RecommendedDecision and Order of the Administrative Law Judge (ALJ) which is attachedhereto. Of particular importance is the decision of the Circuit Court ofAppeals for the District of Columbia in <T3>Dart </T3>v. <T3>U.S., </T3>848 F. 2nd 217 (DC. Cir. 1988). In that case, the Courtof Appeals ruled that the Under Secretary for Export Administration (thenAssistant Secretary for Trade Administration) does not have authority undersection 13(c)(1) of the Export Administration Act to reverse a RecommendedDecision and Order of the ALJ under language supposedly limiting his authorityto ``affirm, modify, or vacate'' such decisions. Until modified by eitherfurther judicial construction or statutory language, the Circuit Courtof Appeals decision undermines the authority of the Under Secretary forExport Administration, the Department of Commerce official charged withsafeguarding the national security of the United States through the enforcementof strategic export controls.In a case such as the one at bar, under the Circuit Court of Appeals reasoning,the Under Secretary of Export Administration is powerless to act contraryto the ALJ's Decision even in those cases the Under Secretary feels thatthe evidence has been so misconstrued by the ALJ that a reversal is required,whether in favor of or against the interests of a particular respondent.Carried to its logical conclusion, the <T3>Dart </T3>decision by the Court of Appeals renders the Under Secretarya mere rubber stamp for the Administrative Law Judge. It is doubtful thatthis was the intent of the drafters of the statute.The definition of ``reverse'' with respect to a legal decision is to ``revoke''or ``annul.'' To reverse also means, in the same vein, to change direction.For example, if an ALJ were to impose penalties on a particular respondentfor alleged violations of the Export Administration Act and the Under Secretary,feeling that there had been no violation, reversed the ALJ, the resultwould be a revocation or an annulment of the original decision. The reversalwould also constitute a change in outcome. The definition of the word ``vacate''is basically the same: ``to deprive of validity; to void; to annul.'' Itis logically inconsistent for the Court of Appeals to accord to the UnderSecretary the right to vacate without the right to reverse. Taken to itslogical conclusion, the result is absurd. An Under Secretary disagreeingwith an ALJ might vacate an order only to see the same order come back<T3>ad infinitum. </T3>Without the power to reverse, the Under Secretarylacks the authority to direct a different verdict from the ALJ within anyvacation order. If that were the result that the drafters of the legislationsought, it would have been easy enough to omit the word ``vacate'' fromthe statutory language. Rules of statutory construction demand that theword ``vacate'' be accorded reasonable meaning within the parameters ofthe law. The <T3>Dart </T3>decision, <T3>supra, </T3>fails in this respect.Notwithstanding the above, the District Court of Appeals decision at presentstands as the operative legal construction of the statute, and must befollowed even if the result is inconsistent with common sense and rulesof statutory construction. Therefore, although I am still convinced thata preponderance of the evidence in this case supports a finding that theRespondents violated the provision of the Act and the Regulations, I ampowerless to do other than to affirm the decision of the AdministrativeLaw Judge Order.<ITAG tagnum="84">Order</ITAG>On January 13, 1989, the ALJ entered his Recommended Decision and Orderon Remand in the captioned matter. That Decision and Order, a copy of whichis attached hereto and made a part hereof, has been referred to me forfinal action. In keeping with the discussion above, I hereby affirm theRecommended Decision and Order on Remand of the ALJ.This constitutes final agency action in this matter.<ITAG tagnum="21">Date: February 13, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Paul Freedenburg,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Under Secretary for Export Administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Decision and Order on Remand</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Docket No. 4656-04, 4656-05\1\</ITAG><NOTE/> and 4656-06\2\<NOTE/>]<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ This Docket Number was listed in the September 15, 1988Decision and Order of the Under Secretary for Export Administration as4656-06, and that number was repeated in subsequent orders and filingsin this proceeding. The correct number is 4656-05, as listed in the June3, 1986 Decision and Order of this Tribunal and orders issued prior thereto.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ This Docket Number was listed in the September 15, 1988Decision and Order of the Under Secretary for Export Administration as4656-07, and that number was repeated in subsequent orders and filingsin this proceeding. The correct number is 4656-06, as listed in the June3, 1986 Decision and Order of this Tribunal and orders issued prior thereto.<ITAG tagnum="21"><T3>Appearance for Respondents: </T3>John F. McKenzie, Esq., Baker andamp;McKenzie, Two Embarcadero Center, San Francisco, CA 94111; William D. Outman,II, Esq., Baker andamp; McKenzie, 815 Connecticut Avenue NW., Washington,DC 20006.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"><T3>Appearance for Agency: </T3>Thomas C. Barbour, Esq., Attorney-Adviser,Office of the Chief Counsel for Export Administration, U.S. Departmentof Commerce, Room H-3329, 14th andamp; Constitution Avenue NW., Washington,DC 20230.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Preliminary Statement</ITAG>This proceeding is conducted under the authority of the Export AdministrationAct of 1979, as amended (50 U.S.C.App. 2401-2420) (``the Act''), and theExport Administration Regulations (``the Regulations'').\3\<NOTE/> The proceeding focuses on a charge by the Office of ExportEnforcement (``the Agency''), Bureau of Export Administration,\4\<NOTE/> U.S. Department of Commerce that four individuals and fourcorporations tried in 1983-84 to export unlawfully from the United Statesto Czechoslovakia two used wafer polishers.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\ The Act was reauthorized and amended by the Export AdministrationAmendments Act of 1985, Pub. L. 99-64, 99 Stat. 120 (July 12, 1985), andamended by the Omnibus Trade and Competitive Act of 1988, Pub. L. 100-418,102 Stat. 1107 (Aug. 23, 1988).<ITAG tagnum="28">The Regulations, formerly codified at 15 CFR Parts 368-399, were redesignatedas 15 CFR Parts 768-799, effective October 1, 1988 (53 FR 37751, Sept.28, 1988).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\4\ When this proceeding began in 1984, the Office of ExportAdministratiton was part of an organization within the U.S. Departmentof Commerce titled ``International Trade Administration.'' As of October1, 1987 it became part of an organization within the Department now titled``Bureau of Export Administration.''Each of the four corporations was a small company through which one ormore of the four individuals did business, and all eight of these individualsand corporations became respondents in cases initiated by the Agency. Thepresent proceeding concerns the cases brought against individual RespondentWilliam Carlton Dart and two corporations through which he does business,Respondent Display Systems, Inc. and Respondent Perpetuum, Inc.Procedural BackgroundThis proceeding is presently before this Tribunal on remand from the Department'sUnder Secretary for Export Administration. The history of this proceedingis lengthy. It begins November 6, 1984 with the issuance <T3>ex parte, </T3>upon request of the Department's Office and GeneralCounsel, of a temporary denial order against the eight respondents to facilitateenforcement of the Act and the Regulations, 49 FR 45,468 (Nov. 16, 1984).This temporary denial order denied the respondents the privileges of participatingin the export or reexport of U.S.-origin commodities and technical data.On April 3, 1985 the Agency issued charging letters to each of the fourindividual respondents, charging each of them and the four respondent corporationsthrough which they did business with violations of the Regulations. Thetransaction underlying both these charging letters and the temporary denialorder was the respondents' 1983-84 effort, noted above, to export waferpolishers to Czechoslovakia. Respondent Dart, individually and doing businessas Respondent Display Systems, Inc. and Respondent Perpetuum, Inc., wascharged with attempt (andSection; 787.3(a) of the Regulations), conspiracy(andSection; 787.3(b)), and acting with knowledge of a violation (andSection;787.4).The temporary denial order was the subject of various motions by RespondentDart to vacate or to modify it. Three of the motions to modify deservemention. For the first, in which Respondent Dart joined with two of theother individual respondents, a hearing was held January 16, 1985 in Washington,DC; and the subsequent March 5, 1985 decision modified the temporary denialorder so as to permit certain exports by all eight respondents, 50 FR 9,473(March 8, 1985).For the second motion to modify, in which Respondent Dart joined with oneof the other individual respondents, a hearing was held April 4, 1985 inWashington, DC; and the subsequent May 24, 1985 decision declined the requestedmodification of the temporary denial order. For the third motion, RespondentDart and one of the other individual respondents agreed with the Agencythat these two individuals and two respondent corporations through whichthey did business, Respondent Display Systems, Inc. and Respondent Perpetuum,Inc., should be allowed to make certain exports; and a September 20, 1985order modified the temporary denial order to permit these exports, 50 FR39,159 (Sept. 27, 1985).For the charging letters, all of the individual respondents filed answersthat denied all of the charges against them and the respondent corporations.Ultimately a five-day hearing for all the respondents was held March 17-21,1986 in San Jose, California that addressed the issues raised by both thetemporary denial order and all the charging letters.On the basis of that hearing and the total record compiled in the casesinvolving the respondents, this Tribunal issued four decisions on June3, 1986, one for each of the four individual respondents. These decisionsdismissed all of the charges against the four individual respondents andagainst the four corporate respondents through which they did business.Pursuant to section 13(c)(1) of the Act, these four decisions were referredto the Department's Assistant Secretary for Trade Administration, to whomthe Secretary of Commerce had delegated the authority assigned the Secretaryby section 13(c)(1).The Assistant Secretary issued a single July 3, 1986 Order in which hestated that ``I affirm'' the June 3 decisions as to two of the individualrespondents (July 3, 1986 Decision 3) and that ``I hereby modify'' theJune 3 decisions as to the other two, including Respondent Dart (<T3>id. </T3>2). The Assistant Secretary's decision found Respondent Dart,individually and doing business as Respondent Display Systems, Inc. andas Respondent Perpetuum, Inc., to have violated the Regulations as charged,and imposed on all three a 15-year denial of export privileges and imposedon Respondent Dart a $150,000 civil penalty.Court Actions to PresentRespondent Dart sought relief from the courts. In the District Court forthe District of Columbia, he filed a suit raising statutory and constitutionalobjections to the Assistant Secretary's decision. The District Court, inOctober 1986, dismissed Respondent Dart's suit for lack of jurisdiction,based on the finality accorded the Assistant Secretary's decision by theAct (<T3>Dart </T3>v. <T3>United States, </T3>No. 86-2264, memorandum op. (D.D.C. Oct. 8, 1986)).On appeal of that dismissal to the Court of Appeals for the District ofColumbia Circuit, however, the dismissal was reversed in May 1988 (<T3>Dart </T3>v. <T3>United States, 848 F.2d 217 (D.C. Cir. 1988)). The Court of Appealsruled that the Assistant Secretary's decision exceeded the Secretary'sauthority under section 13(c)(1) of the Act, which is to ``affirm, modify,or vacate'' decisions of this Tribunal. According to the Court of Appeals,the Assistant Secretary's decision ``clearly reversed'' the decision ofthis Tribunal, and such authority to reverse is not given the Secretaryunder the Act (</T3><T3>id.</T3> 231). The Court of Appeals directed that the Assistant Secretary'sdecision be vacated, and remanded the case to the District Court.On August 16, 1988 the District Court accordingly vacated the AssistantSecretary's decision and remanded the case to the Secretary of this Departmentwith directions ``to affirm, modify or vacate'' this Tribunal's June 3,1986 decision regarding Respondent Dart. On September 15, 1988 the Department'sUnder Secretary for Export Administration, to whom the Secretary of theDepartment has now delegated his authority under the Act, issued a Decisionand Order vacating this Tribunal's June 3, 1986 decision and remandingthe case to this Tribunal for further consideration. Such consideration,per the Under Secretary's order, was to allow the parties to file briefs,could include further evidentiary hearings, and was to include the addressingof seven questions that are set forth in the Decision and Order.Respondent Dart and the Agency filed briefs and other submissions, includingadditional evidence, with this Tribunal since that September 15th remand.The last filing occurred January 6, 1989; and the record is now ready forthis Tribunal's Decision and Order on Remand. The seven questions set forthby the Under Secretary are addressed below immediately preceding the Conclusion.<ITAG tagnum="84">Facts</ITAG>The export transaction at the center of this proceeding lasted from June1983 to February 1984. In June 1983 one of the individual respondents,Josef Kubicek, purchased six used wafer polishers, which were of a modelknown as 320B. He intended to sell them to Czechoslovakia, but believedthat they needed to be upgraded to be like a more advanced model, known,as a 3700, in order to be thus saleable. For this upgrading, Kubicek contractedwith Research Machines, Inc. (``RMI''), a firm that was in the businessof rebuilding and upgrading polishing equipment employed in the semiconductorindustry.Although Kubicek retained the sole financial interest in these used waferpolishers and their export, he was assisted in the day-to-day dealingswith the upgrading firm by two of the other individual respondents: RespondentDart and a close business associate of Respondent Dart. Respondent Dartand his associate were then also engaging, jointly with Kubicek, in otherexport transactions in which they themselves did have a financial interest.The fourth individual respondent was hired by Kubicek to go to Czechoslovakiato assist in installation of the wafer polishers. Respondent Dart and theother respondents, except for the one who was to go Czechoslovakia forthe installation, were located in California, as was RMI.In November 1983, the president of RMI traveled to Washington, DC to checkwith the Commerce Department regarding the export licensing requirementsfor shipping the wafer polishers to Czechoslovakia. While he was at theDepartment, he was requested by the Agency to assist in an investigationof Respondent Dart and others of the respondents. Later in November 1983,a vice president of RMI was also requested by the Agency to provide suchassistance. This assistance, which the two RMI officers agreed to provide,took the form of their serving as, to use the Agency's terminology citizeninformants.After that November 1983 trip to Washington by its president, RMI pursuantto its contract with Kubicek, continued to upgrade two of the wafer polishersand to arrange for their export. Finally in February 1984 these two machines,having been upgraded, were seized by U.S. Customs at Los Angeles InternationalAirport as they were being prepared for shipment to Czechoslovakia. Thesemachines lacked the validated export license that was required for suchshipment.<ITAG tagnum="84">Procedural Issues</ITAG>Respondent Dart argued that this case should be dismissed both becauseof improper conduct by the Agency and also because of deficiencies in thecharging letter. The chief conduct alleged by Respondent Dart to have beenimproper was the failure to inform him of the export licensing requirementsfor the upgraded wafer polishers. This issue is addressed under Discussionbelow, with respect to estoppel. The argument regarding the charging letteris addressed here.Respondent Dart argued that the charging letter should be dismissed becauseit failed to satisfy the mandate of andSection;788.4(a) of the Regulationsthat it ``set forth the essential facts about the alleged violation * **.'' Respondent Dart attacked generally four statements or groups of statementsin the charging letter to support this argument. None of these statementsor groups of statements, however, provides a basis for dismissing the chargingletter.Respondent Dart cited prominently the charging letter's inaccurate statementof the licensing requirements for exporting the model of used wafer polisherthat the one respondent purchased (Respondents' Post-Hearing Brief, April28, 1986, at 6-10). The charging letter stated that that model could havebeen exported to Czechoslovakia under general license G-DEST. Pursuantto the Regulations, any export that qualifies for a general license doesnot need a validated license.At the March 1986 hearing, however, an official from the Department's exportlicensing unit, called by the Agency itself as an expert witness, testifiedthat this model did not qualify for a general license for export to Czechoslovakiaduring 1983-84, but needed a validated license (V Hearing Transcript, March17-21, 1986 (hereinafter ``Tr.'') 808). The Agency did not dispute thatthe charging letter was mistaken on this point (Agency Response, May 6,1986, at 3-4).The charging letter did accurately state that the advanced model of waferpolisher, toward which the two used models were upgraded, required a validatedlicense for export to Czechoslovakia. The charging letter further statedaccurately that the two machines that were seized also required a validatedlicense for such export.As for the misstatement cited by Respondent Dart, it is not a misstatementthat justifies dismissal of the charging letter. The heart of the violationsalleged by the charging letter is not the licensing status of the waferpolisher model that was purchased as a used machine. Rather, the core ofthe alleged violation is the effort to export wafer polishers that hadbeen upgraded and that, like that more advanced model, did require a validatedlicense for export to Czechoslovakia. The charging letter did accuratelystate the licensing requirements for both the upgraded machines and themore advanced model; and that accuracy is sufficient to sustain the chargingletter's compliance with the Regulations in terms of its setting forththe pertinent licensing requirements.Respondent Dart's second attack on the charging letter focused on a groupof statements reciting acts that he allegedly did as part of violatingthe Regulations (Respondents' Post-Hearing Brief, April 28, 1986, at 6-10).Respondent Dart cited, for example, the charging letter's statement thatin October and November 1983 Respondent Dart and another of the individualrespondents arranged for the upgrading of the used wafer polishers (<T3>id</T3>. 7). Respondent Dart criticized this statement and others inthe group he cited as being untrue.All of such Agency statements cited by Respondent Dart were, however, areasonable account of the Agency's version of the relevant 1983-84 events.At the March 1986 hearing, the Agency introduced evidence to prove thisversion. Respondent Dart challenged this version at the hearing with hisevidence tending to disapprove it. The challenge, if successful, wouldnot provide a basis for dismissing the charging letter as fatally defectivefor not ``set[ting] forth the essential facts about the alleged violation.''Rather, that challenge would supply a basis for dismissing the chargesthrough a decision on the merits that the record failed to sustain theAgency's charges.The third target of Respondent Dart's attack on the charging letter wasits one-sentence allegation of a conspiracy violation, without any citationof an agreement or of an overt act in furtherance of the conspiracy (<T3>id</T3>. 8-9). The sentence did refer to three paragraphs in whichthe letter described actions that Respondent Dart allegedly took, sometimestogether with other named respondents, to export the wafer polishers inviolation of the Regulations.Although the charging letter does lack any statement of a conspiratorialagreement and any specification of an overt act taken in furtherance ofa conspiracy, the reference to the three paragraphs of alleged actionsis sufficient to save the charging letter from dismissal. It is reasonablypossible to read the three paragraphs as charging that those acts thatRespondent Dart is stated to have done together with other individual respondentswere done pursuant to an agreement with them; and the acts, if proved,could have constituted a violation of the Regulations.Respondent Dart's fourth attack on the charging letter targeted its statementthat he knew the pertinent licensing requirements. Some of the Agency'sposthearing argumentation contended, according to Respondent Dart, thathe had reason to know these requirements, not that he actually knew them(Respondents' Opening Brief, Nov. 2, 1988, at 10-14).A fair portion of the Agency's argumentation, however, sought to provethat Respondent Dart actually knew the pertinent licensing requirements.Evidence adduced by the Agency to show that Respondent Dart was told somethingabout these requirements can legitimately be cited to argue both that heshould have known them, and also that he did know them (see generally AgencyReply, Nov. 21, 1988, at 5 n.4). Consequently, on this point as well, thecharging letter is not fatally defective.In sum as to the charging letter, its most serious shortcoming cited byRespondent was its inaccuracy regarding the licensing requirements forthe model of used wafer polisher that was purchased. But this inaccuracy,together with the other points cited by Respondent Dart, was not of a magnitudesuch that the letter deserves to be dismissed for failure to ``set forththe essential facts about the alleged violation.''<ITAG tagnum="84">Discussion</ITAG>Citizen InformantsA central element of the Agency's presentation was its use of the two citizeninformants. The record indicates that both of them undertook this roleat the risk of some possibly significant sacrifice of their own interests,and they are to be commended for their willingness to cooperate with theAgency.A prime issue for decision in this proceeding is what message the conductof these citizen informants communicated to Respondent Dart regarding thelicensing requirements for exporting the upgraded wafer polishers. Theorigin of this issue was a meeting held in California on or about November9, 1983.\5\<NOTE/> In attendance were, at minimum, Respondent Dart, Kubicek,and the president and vice president of RMI. This meeting occurred beforethe president and vice president had been recruited to become citizen informants.Those present at the meeting reviewed a proposal, prepared by RMI, forupgrading the used wafer polishers. Kubicek and RMI concluded a contractfor RMI to upgrade them.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\5\ Although some suggestion was made that this meeting mighthave occurred on a day in autumn 1983 other than November 9th, both partiesin their filings regularly used November 9th as the date for this meeting,and that date will be used in this Decision.At this November 9th meeting, RMI was requested also to become the exporterof record for the upgraded machines. RMI's president said that, beforethe firm accepted this additional responsibility, he wanted to check thepertinent export licensing requirements with the Commerce Department inWashington, DC (<T3>see, e.g., </T3>II Tr. 134-35, 180-83, 191-92, 207-08, 255, 258-59,316, 318-20; III Tr. 498; IV Tr. 639).\6\<NOTE/> Kubicek agreed to pay the cost of the RMI president's tripto Washington (II Tr. 135), and Kubicek was apparently billed a thousanddollars for the trip (II Tr. 181, 237).<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\6\ In this part of the Decision, citations are given particularlyfor those points that were placed in contention by the parties' repliesto Question 2 of the October 3, 1988 Order.RMI's president traveled to Washington in mid-November 1983 to talk inperson with officials of the Commerce Department. It was while then meetingwith the Department that he was requested to assist in an investigationof the respondents; and, later that month, he, and also RMI's vice presidentwho had attended the November 9th meeting in California mentioned above,both agreed to become citizen informants.As to the licensing requirements for exporting wafer polishers to Czechoslovakia,the citizen informants gave Respondent Dart an oral report of what RMI'spresident had learned in his Washington trip. They said that the modelrepresented by the used machines could be exported under general licenseG-DEST; but, they said further, the advanced model toward which the machineswere to be upgraded would need a validated license, because of two of itstechnical characteristics that they specified, and a request for such alicense would be denied (II Tr. 146-47, 327-28).The citizen informants did not tell Respondent Dart whether the wafer polishersas upgraded per the contract would need a validated license for exportto Czechoslovakia. But RMI did go ahead and perform its contract, whichprovided for the firm both to upgrade the used machines and to arrangetheir export. RMI arranged the export under general license G-DEST, anarrangement known to and intended by Respondent Dart and the other respondents.After agreeing to serve as citizen informants, RMI's president and vicepresident worked closely with the Agency. From late November 1983 to mid-February1984, at the direction of the Agency they first took notes on five conversationsthey had with the respondents, and then covertly recorded thirty such conversations.In addition, the citizen informants needed the Agency's help to completeRMI's contract to upgrade the wafer polishers. For the upgrading, theyrequired certain equipment from the manufacturer of the polishers, buthad trouble obtaining this equipment, partly because RMI owed an outstandingbalance to the manufacturer (II Tr. 131-32, 200). The Agency solved theproblem by itself obtaining the equipment from the manufacturer and givingit to the citizen informants (V Tr. 690-91, 716).EstoppelRespondent Dart claimed that the conduct of the citizen informants reasonablyled him to believe that the upgraded wafer polishers could be exportedto Czechoslovakia under general license. The president of RMI had saidthat the firm would not accept the exporting responsibility until he hadchecked the pertinent licensing requirements in person with the CommerceDepartment in Washington; he had traveled to Washington for this purpose;and after his return RMI continued to perform its contract for the upgradingand exporting. On this sequence of events, Respondent Dart based his claimto have believed reasonably in the legality of the intended general licenseexport.Because much of what the citizen informants did was done with the knowledgeof and at the direction of the Agency, the question arises as to whetherthe Agency should be estopped from pursuing its charges further againstRespondent Dart. Although estoppel is less available against the governmentthan against a private party, the government too may be estopped if thecircumstances warrant.Here one circumstance is that the Agency knew the true situation, <T3>viz., </T3>that the upgraded wafer polishers required a validated licesnefor export to Czechoslovakia. A second circumstance is that RespondentDart was ignorant_or at least he claimed to have been ignorant_of thistrue situation. Actually the Agency argued that Respondent Dart knew orshould have known of the validated licensing requirement for the upgradedmachines, and this Agency argument is considered in the following part.Anyhow Respondent Dart's claimed ignorance of this requirement_if his claimwithstands the Agency argument to the contrary_is a second relevant circumstancefor estoppel; and it would mean that, as to the first circumstance, theAgency alone knew the true situation.A third circumstance is that Respondent Dart relied to his detriment onthe representation by the citizen informants and their firm of the truelicensing situation, or again at least claimed to have so relied. The Agency'sargument, noted above, that Respondent Dart really knew or should haveknown of the validated license requirement would refute such reliance.But if Respondent Dart's claimed reliance withstands the contrary Agencyargument, then he clearly would have relied to his detriment on the citizeninformants and their firm, since his involvement in exporting the upgradedmachines under general license has made him a Respondent in this proceeding. A fourth circumstance that would be important for invoking estoppel isthat the Agency have intended that the pertinent conduct of its citizeninformants and their firm be relied on by Respondent Dart, or at leastthat Respondent Dart reasonably have thought that such conduct was so intended.The existence of this circumstance is less clear.  Certainly the Agency intended that Respondent Dart rely on the statementsand actions by the citizen informants regarding the contract to upgradeand export the wafer polishers. These actions obviously included theirfirm's continuing to perform the contract after the president had checkedthe licensing requirements in Washington. These statements clearly includedthe informants' telling Respondent Dart, after the Washington trip, thatthe used model of wafer polisher did not need a validated license, butthe advanced model did. The Agency reviewed with the citizen informantswhat they were to tell Respondent Dart about the Washington trip in advanceof their reporting to him on it (II Tr. 142-47, 185-87, 327-28).  What is unclear is whether the Agency intended that the citizen informantstell Respondent Dart nothing about the licensing status of the upgradedmachines, or even knew of that omission. Nonetheless, the Agency reasonablyshould have been aware of it. The Agency maintained a close connectionwith the citizen informants during the November 1983 through February 1984period, and their report to the respondents on the Washington trip wasa significant point to which the Agency had paid some attention in advance. Moreover, the Agency apparently knew that RMI's president had come to Washingtonto check the licensing requirements before agreeing to become the exporterof record, and that the export was to be sent under general license. (<T3>e.g., </T3>II Tr. 142). If he were to return to the respondents inCalifornia and report that such an export would be illegal, presumablythe matter would not simply end there. Presumably the president would theneither decline to become a party to the export, or, if he opted to continue,he would demand substantially more money to compensate for serving as theexporter of record for a shipment that he had just learned was to be illegal. The Agency knew that RMI was continuing to perform the contract. The Agencyalso probably knew that the citizen informants had not demanded more moneyfor performing the contract. In view of the relationship between the Agencyand the citizen informants, it is unlikely that they would make such ademand without authorization from the Agency; and, if they had made sucha demand on their own, the Agency would have expected to have been toldof the results. Consequently the Agency knew both that the citizen informants'firm was continuing to perform the contract, and that they probably hadnot demanded any additional money. The logical conclusion, had the Agencyreflected on the point, was that the citizen informants had failed to reportthat the upgraded machines could not be legally exported as planned.  In fact, the record does not indicate that the Agency during November 1983_February1984 thought through this issue to that extent. But the record does show,as outlined above, that the evidence available to the Agency indicatedthat the citizen informants had not reported the licensing status of theupgraded wafer polishers. More fundamentally, the citizen informants wereattentive to the directions they received from the Agency, and the relationshipbetween them and the Agency was close.  On the basis of that relationship, the Agency can reasonably be held responsiblefor the informants' not reporting the licensability of the upgraded machines,as well as their firm's continuing to perform the contract. Therefore,as a fourth circumstance relevant to estoppel, certainly Respondent Dartcould reasonably have believed that the citizen informants intended himto rely on their report of the Washington trip and their firm's continuedperformance of the contract; and the Agency can reasonably be held responsiblefor such report and continued performance.In sum, provided that Respondent Dart's claimed ignorance of the validatedlicensing requirement for the upgraded wafer polishers survives the Agency'schallenge, as discussed below, four circumstances exist that would justifyinvoking estoppel against the Agency. The Agency alone knew the true licensingsituation; Respondent Dart was ignorant of it; Respondent Dart relied,to his detriment, on the conduct of the Agency's citizen informants andtheir firm for his understanding of the licensing situation; and RespondentDart could reasonably have believed that he was intended to rely on suchconduct, and the Agency can reasonably be held responsible for that conduct.Respondent Dart's reliance in these circumstances was so reasonable thatit would be fair to invoke estoppel against the Agency to protect him fromthe consequences of that reliance. Indeed, the Agency was asked what conclusionsRespondent Dart could have reasonably drawn from the conduct of the citizeninformants described above (October 3, 1988 Order, Question 3). The Agencygenerally declined to answer, but instead cited evidence in the recordsuggesting that Respondent Dart actually knew or should have known thatthe upgraded machines needed a validated license (Agency Submission, Nov.2, 1988, at 14-18). That Agency argument is addressed in the followingpart.A final point regarding use of estoppel in this proceeding is that invokingit would not unduly injure the public's interest. The facts of this proceedingare sufficiently unusual that applying estoppel here should not significantlyimpede Agency enforcement efforts. And essential fairness requires thatthe Agency be held responsible for clear messages communicated by its citizeninformants to persons under investigation.Agency's ArgumentsThe Agency advanced two particular arguments to show that Respondent Dartactually knew or should have known that export of the upgraded wafer polishersto Czechoslovakia required a validated license. If supported by the record,these arguments would undercut the applicability of estoppel to protecthim. First and especially strongly asserted is evidence allegedly indicatingRespondent Dart's awareness of those technical characteristics of waferpolishers that entail a validated licensing requirement. Second and alsosignificant are conversations of Respondent Dart possibly suggesting hisawareness of participating in an unlawful transaction. Additionally, theAgency advanced several other arguments to sustain its charges.Technical Characteristics of Upgraded MachinesFirst, the Agency cited evidence indicating that Respondent Dart was awarethat those technical characteristics that the upgrading was to impart tothe used wafer polishers were characteristics that would require a validatedlicense for their export to Czechoslovakia. The Agency cited especially:His attendance at the November 9, 1983 meeting noted above; his November15, 1983 telephone call to an official of the manufacturer of these waferpolishers; his November 23, 1983 telephone conversation with the citizeninformants; his conversation in person with one of the citizen informantson about November 29, 1983; and his signing on that last occasion of amodification of the contract to upgrade the machines.At the November 9, 1983 meeting, Respondent Dart saw the document thatbecame the contract for the upgrading, and heard a discussion of what technicalupgrading was to be done to the used machines to make them more like theadvanced model. On November 15, 1983 Respondent Dart telephoned an officialof the company that makes these wafer polishers to ask about the licensabilityof both the model represented by the used machines and also the model towardwhich they were to be upgraded.On November 23, 1983 both of the citizen informants talked by telephonewith Respondent Dart and reported the results of the recently completedtrip to the Commerce Department in Washington by one of them. As recordedin the handwritten notes of that conversation by the other citizen informant:``We reitterated [sic] that as we suspected the * * * [model of the usedmachine] was classified G-Desk [sic], but that the * * * [advanced model]machine required a Designated [sic] License [sic]. Due to its waxless mountingdesign and capacity for larger wafers'' (March 17-21 Hearing, Agency Exhibit(hereinafter ``Agency Exh.'') 13; see also II Tr. 328).On or about November 29, 1983, Respondent Dart met with one of the citizeninformants. At that meeting, the citizen informant, according to his handwrittennotes of that meeting (Agency Exh. 22) roughly repeated the technical statementsquoted above; and Respondent Dart, at the direction of and on behalf ofKubicek, signed a modification of Kubicek's contract with RMI.Finally, the Agency cited several documents (Agency Exh. 31-38) to showRespondent Dart's familiarity with the relevant technical characteristicsof wafer polishers. These documents are mostly various business notes andpapers connected with this transaction.None of the above evidence, however, individually or cumulatively, provesthe Agency's argument. The Agency cited the evidence to contend that RespondentDart knew or should have known that the upgrading of the used wafer polishersgave them those technical characteristics that meant a validated licensewas required for their export. The Agency's evidence does show that RespondentDart had some knowledge was enough to have told him that the upgradingwould mean a validated licensing requirement.As for the discussion at the November 9th meeting, it was of course clearthat the purpose of the upgrading was to make the used model of wafer polishermore like the advanced model. But the export licensing ramifications ofthat upgrading_even to the citizen informants who were in the businessof rebuilding and upgrading such equipment_was sufficiently unclear thatone of them wanted to travel all the way to Washington to check out thatpoint.As to Respondent Dart's November 15, 1983 telephone call to an officialof the manufacturer of the wafer polishers, Respondent Dart asked aboutthe licensing situation for the models represented by both the used machineand the more advanced machine. The official replied with various information,including his view that at that time only the model of the used machinewould have any chance of being licensed for Czechoslovakia. The officialexplained also some of the technical differences between the two models.But there was no discussion at all of upgrading the lesser model in thedirection of the more advanced, or of the licensability of the resultingmachine. Moreover, this telephone conversation occurred before the tripto Washington by the one citizen informant that was to be undertaken specificallyto check that licensability.Finally, as to documents, Respondent Dart saw the contract for upgradingthe used machines at the November 9th meeting, and signed a modificationof it on or about November 29th. The modification concerned nontechnicalmatters, and Respondent Dart signed it at the same time that he was conferringon the telephone with Kubicek, on whose behalf he signed it. RespondentDart did hear reports on the technical characteristics of these machinesand validated licensing requirements on November 23rd and on or about November29th. But that evidence falls short of showing that he could have relatedwhat he had learned from seeing the contract to the technical characteristicsthat he was told are significant for export licensing. The additional documentscited by the Agency (Agency Exh. 31-38) were not shown by the Agency toreflect any significant additional understanding on Respondent Dart's part.The Agency's own expert witness on wafer polishers, an official of themanufacturer of the machines at issue here, testified that ``it would takesomewhat of an expertise'' to determine, from a reading of the contract,the technical significance of the upgrading it provided (V Tr. 794). Anotherofficial of that manufacturer, whom Respondent Dart telephoned November15, 1983 and who was a member of that company's customer service unit,did testify as to Respondent Dart's knowledge in this area. This witnesssaid that, as to ``semiconductor materials,'' Respondent Dart was ``quiteknowledgeable * * * because he * * * seemed to know what he was talkingabout on wax versus waxless machines * * * [and] knew what the polisherwas'' (I Tr. 76).Respondent Dart, in his own behalf, testified that he had never seen awafer polisher before mid-1983. He testified further that, while he didsee the six used wafer polishers after their purchase by Kubicek, thesepolishers had a lid that was always down, and he never lifted the lid ofany of them to look inside, nor has he ever in his life seen the interiorof a wafer polisher. Finally, he testified that he never saw the two machinesthat were upgraded after their upgrading, nor the export documentationfor them.Taken as a whole, all this evidence clearly shows that Respondent Dartknew something about wafer polishers. But the evidence is short of establishingthat Respondent Dart had enough ``expertise'' to have understood, or havebeen able reasonably to understand, that the technical upgrading specifiedby the contract encompassed characteristics that would require a validatedlicense for export of the end product.The difficulty encountered by the Agency and by the Commerce Departmentthemselves in applying the licensing requirements to wafer polishers suggestshow hard it can be, even for experts. Everything in the record indicatedthat, from the November 1983 trip to Washington by RMI's president allthe way to the March 1986 hearing almost two and a half years later, theAgency's position was that the used model of wafer polisher could be exportedto Czechoslovakia under general license. Then, on the evening of the fourthday of the five-day March 1986 hearing, an expert witness from the Department,sponsored by the Agency, changed that position. He testified that thismodel of wafer polisher, like the more advanced model, required a validatedlicense for export to Czechoslovakia. The Agency has not challenged thischange of its position by its expert witness.This change meant that, on the RMI president's trip to Washington in November1983, the advice given him by the Departmental licensing officer, whosespecialty is the types of equipment that include wafer polishers, was inaccurate.Two of the Agency's special agents, one of whom had been called into theRMI president's meeting with that Departmental licensing officer, instructedthe citizen informants to tell Respondent Dart that the used model couldgo general license. So the Agency's change of position meant that its specialagents had directed that Respondent Dart be given this inaccurate licensingadvice. The Agency's change of position meant that it itself, in its April1985 charging letters issued to all the respondents, stated incorrectlythat this model of used wafer polisher could be exported to Czechoslovakiaunder general license.The point of this episode is not that even skilled licensing officers andeven efficient organizations may occasionally err in making technical determinations.The point is that it suggests that a fair degree of technical expertiseabout wafer polishers is needed to know whether their export to Czechoslovakiarequires a validated license. Although this proceeding turns on the licensabilityof the used wafer polishers upgraded to the level of the more advancedmodel, not on the licensability of the used model before the upgrading,the pertinent licensing provisions of the Regulations are the same.For Respondent Dart, the record does not reflect that he was a technicallytrained person. He did acquire knowledge about wafer polishers during thecourse of the 1983-84 export transaction, and he did see the contract,hear discussion of it, and then hear the above cited reports from the citizeninformants of the Washington trip. But his technical knowledge was notshown to have reached a level such that, from his exposure to the contractand the reports of the citizen informants, he would, or should, have knownthat the upgrading of the used machines was to involve those characteristicsthat entail a validated licensing requirement. Therefore the Agency's argumentsbased on Respondent Dart's technical knowledge of wafer polishers and licensingrequirements fail to persuade.Respondent Dart's ConversationsA second argument by the Agency that Respondent Dart knew, or should haveknown, of the validated licensing requirement for the upgraded wafer polishersis based on certain of his conversations. According to the Agency, theseconversations suggest an awareness on Respondent Dart's part of participatingin an unlawful transaction. The two citizen informants took notes on fiveconversations with the respondents and then covertly recorded thirty. Inten of these conversations, Respondent Dart was one of the speakers.Only three of these conversations, however, really concerned the lawfulnessof the export. One particularly lends itself to the Agency's argument.On February 1, 1984 one of the citizen informants told Respondent Dartthat the export transaction carried a risk because it involved the shipment,without a validated license, of wafer polishers that had been upgradedbeyond the model they originally represented (Agency Exh. 7, item 4.d.15,at 3). Respondent Dart's subsequent explanation of this conversation wasthat these statements by the citizen informant were included in a lengthymonologue to which he, Respondent Dart, was paying little attention. Inthis connection Respondent Dart argued that he generally paid little attentionto the details of this export transaction because he himself had no financialstake in it. Moreover as to the February 1, 1984 conversation, it occurredwell after the transaction had presumably already been structured on thebasis of the November 1983 Washington trip.The Agency cited also another exchange at a later point in this February1, 1984 conversation. The citizen informant told Respondent Dart that anotherof the respondents ``didn't want me to ship the manual with the * * * machines''(<T3>id.</T3> 4). Continuing, the citizen informant referred to still anotherrespondent, who was to install the machines in Czechoslovakia, and said,``This is going to be absolutely invaluable to him in hooking the thingup, * * * [a]nd that [manual] covers absolutely everything applicable tothe [advanced model]'' (<T3>id.</T3>). Respondent Dart replied, ``[H]e should hand-carry this then''(<T3>id</T3>). As interpreted by the Agency, this exchange apparently showedRespondent Dart's intention to ship an equivalent of the more advancedmodel. In terms of Respondent Dart's version of what happened, it apparentlywas just a well meaning effort to provide something that the citizen informanthad said would be useful for the installation in Czechoslovakia.An earlier conversation by Respondent Dart with both citizen informantssquarely supports, according to Respondent Dart, his version of what heintended. In a November 23, 1983 conversation, they told him that the reportof the Washington trip was that export of the lesser model of wafer polisherdid not need a validated license, but that export of the more advancedmodel did. Respondent Dart then replied that the transaction should goahead with the lesser model. The counter interpretation of this conversation,advanced by the Agency, was that Respondent Dart was simply stating whatwas to be the respondents' public position. It remains unclear from thatinterpretation how the citizen informants would have known that they wereto disregard Respondent Dart's explicit direction. The Agency cited, in connection with its interpretation, another conversation,on or about November 29, 1988, again between Respondent Dart and this samecitizen informant, held at the time Respondent Dart signed a modificationof the contract for upgrading the used machines. As written in notes madeafter the meeting by the citizen informant, ``Bill asked what brought upthe discussion of [the more advanced] model in Washington meeting'' (AgencyExh. 22, at 1). On behalf of Respondent Dart, it could be argued that thisquestion was simply an innocent inquiry, or else just a reiteration ofthe intent to export only a model that remained within the licensing statusof the lesser model. The two conversations stressed by the Agency_those of November 29 and February1_can be read, as urged by the Agency, as indicating an awareness by RespondentDart that the planned export would be unlawful. On the other hand, thealternative interpretation of them_that they reveal only lawful intentions_isalso plausible. Taken as a whole, they are inconclusive, and thus failto establish the point that the Agency seeks to derive from them. Theirinconclusiveness is heightened by the consideration that they representall the evidence the Agency was able to muster on the issue from thirtycovertly recorded conversations with the respondents and five more on whichnotes were taken, ten of the conversations' involving Respondent Dart.A further noteworthy feature of all the conversations is the absence ofany clearly incriminating statements by Respondent Dart. The Agency's explanationof this absence is that conspirators rarely voice illegal designs openly.That explanation has some realistic logic. At the same time, here the Agencyhad the advantage of citizen informants who were expressly directed totry to engage the respondents in incriminating conversations. One possibilitywould have been for an informant simply to have told Respondent Dart thatthe Washington trip had ascertained that the used machines, upgraded asplanned, would need a validated license for export to Czechoslovakia, andthen to have asked Respondent Dart what accordingly should be done. Other Agency Arguments The Agency advanced several other arguments to support its charges. Thusone of the citizen informants, supported generally by the other, testifiedat the hearing that Respondent Dart knew that the used wafer polishersto be exported had been upgraded to the model that needed a validated license,but were being exported as the lesser model in an effort to circumventthis requirement. Both citizen informants were articulate witnesses atthe hearing. But the force of their testimony on this point is significantlydiminished by the lack of any solid corroboration in the thirty recordedand five noted conversations. Partly to counter the apparent failure of the citizen informants to includethe licensing status of the upgraded machines in the oral report to RespondentDart of the Washington trip, the Agency attributed particular significanceto his not then pressing the question with them (Agency Nov. 2, 1988 Submission16-17). The Agency's theory is apparently that, once RMI was willing tohandle the exporting, he sought to know as little as possible about thelicensing requirements. At least there is nothing illegal as such in the transfer of the exportingresponsibility to RMI, especially absent a showing, which the Agency hasnot made, that Respondent Dart knew the shipment would need a validatedlicense. Moreover, the November 23, 1983 conversation in which RespondentDart was told the report of the Washington trip is equally consistent withan innocent explanation of events. As described above, in that conversation the citizen informants told RespondentDart that export of the lesser model of wafer polisher would need a validatedlicense but export of the more advanced model would not, and RespondentDart replied that the transaction should proceed with the lesser model.Since RMI then proceeded to perform the contract, that exchange could reasonablybe viewed, from Respondent Dart's standpoint, as having settled the matter.The Agency additionally tried to support its charges against RespondentDart through certain actions of Kubicek. To reduce the meaning of the Washingtontrip by RMI's president, the Agency cited statements by Kubicek at theNovember 9, 1983 meeting at which this trip was agreed upon. Accordingto both citizen informants, Kubicek repeatedly told RMI's president, whenat the Commerce Department in Washington, to describe the wafer polisherto be exported as the less advanced model. These statements by Kubicek, however, would not have undercut the meaningthat Respondent Dart derived from that Washington trip. RMI's presidenttestified clearly that Respondent Dart had not suggested that the exportbe described in Washington as anything other than what it was to be. Morebasically, RMI's president had every incentive in his own self interestto describe the proposed export accurately to the Commerce Department.That self interest existed regardless of what Kubicek might have suggestedto him. RMI was to be the exporter of record; and consequently, to avoid any legaltransgression by himself or RMI, he needed to obtain licensing informationaddressed specifically to his proposed export. The licensing status ofboth the lesser and more advanced models of wafer polisher were pertinent,but he knew that it was the licensing status of the upgraded machines forwhich he and RMI were to be held accountable. Therefore Respondent Dartcould reasonably have concluded that, if RMI continued to perform its contractafter the Washington trip, the firm's president had satisfied himself asto the legality of the proposed export. The whole background of the tripto Washington suggests that its only purpose was to ascertain this legality,and the Agency has not suggested any other logical reason why RMI's presidentwould have undertaken the trip. The Agency further cited Kubicek's statements at the November 9th meetingas a reason why Respondent Dart had been properly alerted to the possibilityof an unlawful export. To make this same point, the Agency cited also aprevious export involving Kubicek and Respondent Display Systems, Inc.In that transaction, according to the Agency, Kubicek, apparently withoutthe knowledge of Respondent Display Systems, Inc., inserted in an exportgoing general license some items that required a validated license. Theshipment was seized by Customs, according to the Agency, but nothing issaid as to whether any sanction was imposed. The Agency's argument cited Respondent Dart's continuing to engage in exportingwith Kubicek after this incident, and his continuing with the export ofthe used wafer polishers after hearing Kubicek's statements at that November9th meeting. The Agency requested that its other evidence be viewed inlight of this background that, it contended, should have alerted RespondentDart to the possibility of illegality in the export of these upgraded machines.These background circumstances cited by the Agency are, as the Agency suggested,relevant to the evaluation of all the evidence. But these circumstancesof themselves do not_nor does the Agency assert otherwise_establish thatRespondent Dart knew or should of known of intended illegality in the exportof the upgraded wafer polishers. Specifically, these circumstances failto undercut the reasonableness of Respondent Dart's conclusion that RMI'scontinuing to perform the contract after the Washington trip meant thatthe licensing question had been resolved satisfactorily. The Agency did advance one argument that might sustain its charges notwithstandingthe estoppel consideration discussed above. According to that argument,there is enough evidence of the existence of an unlawful conspiracy involvingRespondent Dart before the November 9, 1983 meeting, or alternatively beforethe ensuing Washington trip, that a violation may be found on the basisof that evidence, independently of what transpired at the November 9thmeeting or thereafter (Agency Nov. 21, 1988 Reply 6-9; Agency Dec. 29,1988 Submission). The difficulty with this Agency argument is that it cited little meaningfulevidence. Most of the evidence that it did cite showed nothing illegal,and most of the assertions in the argument that claimed illegality wereunsupported by citations to evidence. One fact stressed by the Agency in this argument was the request at theNovember 9th meeting that RMI be the exporter of record. The Agency suggestedtwo reasons for that request. The first was that Kubicek and RespondentDart thought that, as a result of the Customs' seizure of the export describedabove, any shipment by any of their respondent companies would be subjectedto a close monitoring, which they sought to avoid. The second suggestedreason was their desire to insulate themselves from the actual export ofthe wafer polishers as much as possible, in case anything went wrong. Oneof the citizen informants testified that Respondent Dart himself said therequest was made because he, Respondent Dart, was then encountering ``someproblems'' in obtaining export licenses from the Commerce Department, sothat shipping the wafer polishers would be easier if RMI handled the exporting(II Tr. 134).This testimony by the citizen informant lends credence to the Agency'sfirst suggested reason. The Agency cited no evidence for its second suggestedreason. But the evidence for the first reason does not establish anythingunlawful. In 1983-84 the processing of export licensing matters in theCommerce Department sometimes entailed delays that exporters would tryto minimize or avoid. Respondent Dart's exports, according to the testimony,may have encountered particular delays. His efforts to avoid such delaysby exporting through RMI was not illegal. It would be consistent with theAgency's theory of an unlawful conspiracy; but it would also be consistentwith Respondent Dart's professed innocent intentions, and the Agency citedlittle other evidence to prefer its theory of events.<ITAG tagnum="84">Under Secretary's Questions</ITAG>The Under Secretary's September 15, 1988 Decision and Order included aremand of seven questions. Each of these questions is set forth below,followed by the answer.<ITAG tagnum="21">1. A person violates andSection; 387.4(a) of the Regulations if he orshe commits a prohibited act with `reason to know' that a violation has,is about to, or is intended to occur. In light of this, how can knowledgethat the model 320B wafer polishers `were upgraded to become in importantrespects like a more advanced model that it did require a license' (ALJ,p. 8) not lead to the reasonable conclusion that Dart `should have known'the upgraded polishers would likewise require licenses?''</ITAG>The reason, as discussed in more detail above, is that RMI's presidenttold Respondent Dart and others at a November 9, 1983 meeting that thefirm would become the exporter of record only after he, RMI's president,had traveled to Washington, DC to check the pertinent licensing requirementswith the Commerce Department. RMI's president made the trip to Washington,and upon his return neither he, nor the firm's vice president who alsowas working on this transaction, told Respondent Dart the licensing requirementsfor the upgraded machines; but their firm did continue to perform its contractto upgrade and export them. This conduct of RMI's president and vice presidentand their firm could reasonably have led Respondent Dart to the conclusionthat RMI's president had been told by the Commerce Department in Washingtonthat the upgraded machines did not need a validated license for the intendedexport.<ITAG tagnum="21">2. In light of the documented continuing business relationship betweenDart and Kubicek, is it necessary that Dart have had a monetary interestin the particular transaction at issue to find a violation of the Regulations?</ITAG> Respondent Dart could be found to have violated the Regulations as chargedin this proceeding whether or not he had a monetary interest in the exportof the upgraded wafer polishers. The significance of his not having hadsuch an interest is that it is a factual point to be weighed in evaluatinghis claim that he paid little attention to the details of this export becauseof his lack of such an interest.<ITAG tagnum="21">3. Can an individual who `clearly participate(s)' (ALJ, p. 9) in aprohibited transaction as an accommodation to another be found to havecommitted a violation absent a monetary interest in the transaction?''</ITAG>Such a person may be found to have committed a violation, on the basisof the participation, absent a monetary interest in the transaction, andalso regardless of whether the person's motive was to accommodate somebodyelse.<ITAG tagnum="21">4. Does the evidence support a finding that Dart and Kubicek wantedto upgrade the model 320B polishers to be the functional equivalent ofthe model 3700 polisher? If so, how can it follow that there was no knowledgeor reason to know of the requirement of an export license?</ITAG>The Agency cited evidence that, in the Agency's words, ``Kubicek intendedto export to Czechoslovakia a wafer polisher which could perform the samefunctions as a model 3700'' (Agency Nov. 2, 1988 Submission 9). For RespondentDart, the Agency advanced little definition with citation to evidence ofprecisely what he wanted technically in terms of the upgrading (<T3>id.</T3> 9-11). Nonetheless, the evidence does support a finding thatboth Kubicek and Respondent Dart wanted the upgraded model 320B polishersto be in certain important respects like the model 3700 polisher. As tohow it could then follow that Respondent Dart neither knew nor had reasonto know of the licensing requirement for exporting such upgraded 320B polishers,the explanation is the conclusion that he could reasonably have drawn fromthe conduct of RMI and its president and vice president, as set forth inthe answer to question 1 above.<ITAG tagnum="21">5. Why is there no specific resolution in the recommended Decisionand Order of the charges encompassed in andSection; 387.3(a) and (b)? Ifthe finding of no knowledge or reason to know with respect to the andSection;387.4 charge precludes a positive finding under andSection; 387.3(a) and(b), so state. If not, the charges must be disposed of separately.</ITAG>As set forth in the Conclusion below, the estoppel that is applied againstthe Agency is dispositive of all the charges against Respondents in thisproceeding.<ITAG tagnum="21">6. Even though Kubicek and Dart asked RMI to be the exporter of record,Kubicek and Dart remained the real parties in interest. Does not this factplace on them the affirmative duty to comply with the Regulations? Maya real party in interest insulate himself or herself by transfer to anagent the obligation to obtain an export license? Absent entrapment, doesnot the agent act for and bind the principal?</ITAG>Kubicek and Respondent Dart retained an affirmative duty to comply withthe Regulations. Ordinarily a real party in interest would not insulatehimself or herself by transferring to an agent the obligation to obtainan export license, and ordinarily an agent acts for and binds a principal;but the facts of any individual situation would have to be examined fora final ruling on that situation.<ITAG tagnum="21">7. In view of <T3>United States </T3>v. <T3>Luk</T3>, Cr. 86-59 (HLH) (C.D. Cal.) and andSection; 388.13 of the Regulations,why should Department's exhibits 31 through 39 be excluded from evidence?Does the Under Secretary for Export Administration have the right to considerevidence excluded by the ALJ, or, alternatively, only the right to directthe ALJ to consider excluded evidence?</ITAG>As to <T3>United States </T3>v. <T3>Luk</T3>, Cr. 86-59 (HLH) (C.D. Cal.), which was cited first by theAgency (Agency April 24, 1986 Post-Hearing Brief 6 n.4), Respondent Dartobjected to its citation because, he asserted, it was an unreported decision(Respondent Nov. 2, 1988 Opening Brief 39-40). The Agency did not disputethat assertion, but subsequently submitted (Agency Dec. 8, 1988 Memorandum)a recently issued decision in <T3>Luk </T3>by the Ninth Circuit Court of Appeals, No. 86-5153, slip op.(Oct. 6, 1988). On the basis of that Ninth Circuit decision, the Orderof December 21, 1988 ruled that Agency Exhibits 31 through 38 for the March17-21, 1986 hearing were admissible into evidence. Both parties then madefurther submissions regarding such Exhibits.As for Agency Exhibit 39 for such hearing, it is missing from the recordpresently before this Tribunal, and the Agency has stated that it doesnot have the Exhibit or a copy (Agency Dec. 22, 1988 Response). The ChiefJudge of this Tribunal, in a Memorandum of January 6, 1989, stated thata search had failed to locate Exhibit 39 and that the record as to Exhibit39 was closed.As to the admissibility of Exhibit 39, one of the inquiries posed in thisQuestion 7, both parties have made filings. The Agency submitted (AgencyDec. 16, 1988 Submission) the recently issued decision in <T3>United States </T3>v. <T3>Kubicek</T3>, Misc. 22131(FFF), slip op. (Dec. 1, 1988). The answerto the admissibility of Exhibit 39 is as follows.Respondent Dart objected to the admission of Exhibit 39 on the basis ofits connection with a grand jury, and on that basis it had been ruled inadmissibleby the Ruling of April 2, 1986 and the Order of April 28, 1986. In viewof <T3>Kubicek </T3>and of the other material in the record relating to Exhibit39, however, the connection of this Exhibit with a grand jury is an insufficientbasis for ruling it inadmissible. This present ruling therefore amendsthe Ruling of April 2, 1986 and the Order of April 28, 1986 that declaredExhibit 39 inadmissible on that basis. For admission into evidence, theAgency would still of course have to show that this Exhibit satisfies andSection;788.13(b) of the Regulations and any other pertinent requirements.As for the grand jury connection of Exhibit 39, that Exhibit compriseddocuments that were, as far as the record shows, returned from the grandjury to Kubicek, from whom they had been obtained by a grand jury subpoena.The documents were created independently of the grand jury, not for thegrand jury; and it has not been shown that the Agency seeks them otherthan for the information they contain, as opposed to a revelation of thegrand jury's operations. In this situation, that the documents were oncesubpoenaed by the grand jury and in its custody does not of itself renderthem inadmissible in this proceeding.The last sentence in Question 7 inquired into the procedure to be followedif the Under Secretary determines that evidence was improperly excludedby this Tribunal. That point has now become moot for this proceeding, sincethe Agency's Exhibits 31 through 39 are no longer subject to rulings excludingthem from evidence.<ITAG tagnum="84">Conclusion</ITAG>As set forth above under Discussion, the appropriate elements exist forinvoking estoppel against the Agency. Respondent Dart reasonably concludedfrom the conduct of the about the pertinent licensing requirements.<ITAG tagnum="84">Order</ITAG>The charges made by the April 3, 1985 charging letter against RespondentWilliam Carlton Dart, individually and doing business as Respondent DisplaySystems, Inc. and as Respondent Perpetuum, Inc., are dismissed; and thenames of all three Respondents shall be deleted from the Table of DenialOrders in Supplement No. 1 to Part 788 of the Regulations.This Order as affirmed or modified shall become effective upon entry ofthe Secretary's final action in this proceeding pursuant to the Act (50U.S.C. App. 2412(c)(1)).<ITAG tagnum="21">Date: January 13, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Thomas W. Hoya,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrative Law Judge.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-3797 Filed 2-16-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3510-DT-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>