<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR891128-0019 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.11-28-89.f2.A1018</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4702"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 227 / Tuesday, November 28, 1989/ Proposed Rules<ITAG tagnum="1">Vol. 54, No. 227 </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="2">Tuesday, November 28, 1989</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF AGRICULTURE</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Agricultural Marketing Service</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">7 CFR Part 1079</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. AO-295-A38; DA-88-111]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Milk in the Iowa Marketing Area; Decision of Proposed Amendments toMarketing Agreement and to Order</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Agricultural Marketing Service, USDA.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Proposed rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This decision expands the Iowa marketing area to includecertain unregulted areas in Iowa, Illinois, and Missouri, and two Wisconsincounties not included in the marketing area for the Chicago Regional Order.Also adopted in a lock-in provision that would continue to fully regulateunder the Iowa order a distributing plant that also meets the pooling requirementsof another Federal order, until the third consecutive month that the plant'sClass I milk dispositions in the other order are larger than such dispositionsin the Iowa marketing area. However, if the other order does not recognizethe lock-in, the plant would shift to regulation under the other orderin the first month of such greater sales. A proposal to permanently poolunder the Iowa order a distributing plant located in the Iowa marketingarea is denied.The amendments are based on evidence received at a public hearing heldin August 1988 to consider proposals by Swiss Valley Farms, Co., a dairyfarmer cooperative. The amendments are necessary to reflect current salesdistribution patterns of handlers regulated under the Iowa order and tomaintain stable and orderly marketing conditions in the market. Cooperativeassociations will be polled to determine whether producers favor issuanceof the amended order.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Richard A Glandt, Marketing Specialist,USDA/AMS/Dairy Division, Order Formulation Branch, Room 2968, South Building,P.O. Box 96456, Washington, DC 20090-6456, (202) 447-4829.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>This administrative action is governedby the provisions of sections 556 and 557 of title 5 of the United StatesCode and, therefore, is excluded from the requirements of Executive Order12291.The Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601-612) requires the Agency toexamine the impact of a proposed rule on small entities. Pursuant to 5U.S.C. 605(b), the Administrator of the Agricultural Marketing Servicehas certified that this action will not have a significant economic impacton a substantial number of small entities. The amended order will promotemore orderly marketing of milk by producers and regulated handlers.Under the actions adopted herein, one currently unregulated handler thatis a small business may become partially regulated under the Iowa order.The order provides partially regulated plants with options that could tendto minimize the impact of such regulation. In any event, any impact ofadopting the proposed changes is expected to be minimal for this plant.Prior documents in this proceeding;<T3>Notice of Hearing: </T3>Issued July 11, 1988; Published July 13, 1988(53 FR 26446).<T3>Correction of Notice of Hearing:</T3> Published July 20, 1988 (53 FR27450).<T3>Notice of rescheduled Hearing:</T3> Issued July 21, 1988; publishedJuly 25, 1988 (53 FR 27863).<T3>Recommended Decision: </T3>Issued April 12, 1989; published April 18,1989 (54 FR 15417). <T3>Correction of Recommended Decision: </T3>published May 3, 1989 (54FR 18979).<T3>Proposed Termination: </T3>Issued April 12, 1989; published April 18,1989 (54 FR 15413).<T3>Extension of time to file Exceptions to the Recommended Decision andComments of Proposed Termination: </T3>Issued May 8, 1989; published May12, 1989 (54 FR 20605).<ITAG tagnum="84">Preliminary Statement</ITAG>A public hearing was held upon proposed amendments to the marketing agreementand the order regulating the handling of milk in the Iowa marketing area.The hearing was held, pursuant to the provisions of the Agricultural MarketingAgreement Act of 1937, as amended (7 U.S.C. 601-674), and the applicablerules of practice (7 CFR part 900), at Bettendorf, Iowa, on August 9-11,1988. Notice of such hearing was issued on July 21, 1988 and publishedJuly 25, 1988 (53 FR 27863).Upon the basis of the evidence introduced at the hearing and the recordthereof, the Administrator, on April 12, 1989, filed with the Hearing Clerk,United States Department of Agriculture, his recommended decision containingnotice of the opportunity to file written exceptions thereto.The material issues, findings and conclusions, rules, and general findingsof the recommended decision are hereby approved and adopted and are setforth in full herein, subject to typographical corrections and the followingmodifications:1. Under the heading ``Background statement,'' the third and fourth paragraphsare revised.2. Under issue number 1, ``Regulation of a distributing plant with greaterClass I route sales in the marketing area of another order.'', two newparagraphs are added after the last paragraph.3. Under issue number 2, ``Expansion of the Iowa marketing area.'', paragraphsare revised or added as follows:(a) Nine new paragraphs are added after paragraph number 36;(b) Under the subleading ``(c) Missouri territory:'', paragraphs 7, 9,and 10 are revised and three new paragraphs are added after paragraph number10;(c) Under the subheading ``(d) Wisconsin territory:'', paragraphs 3, 6,17, and 18 are revised, four new paragraphs are added after paragraph number6, and two new paragraphs are added after paragraph number 18.4. Under issue number 4, ``Whether an emergency exists to warrant the omissionof a recommended decision and the opportunity to file written exceptionswith respect to issue number.'', one new paragraph is added. The material issues on the record of the hearing relate to:1. Regulation of a distributing plant with greater Class I route salesin the marketing area of another order.2. Expansion of the Iowa marketing area.3. Location adjustment revision.4. Whether emergency conditions warrant the omission of a recommended decisionand the opportunity to file written exceptions with respect to issue number1. <ITAG tagnum="84">Findings and Conclusions</ITAG>The following findings and conclusions on the material issues are basedon evidence presented at the hearing and the record thereof.<ITAG tagnum="84">Background Statement</ITAG>Swiss Valley Farms, Co. (SVF), is a dairy farmer cooperative that operatesa distributing plant located in Dubuque, Iowa, which is a pool plant regulatedby the Iowa order. The plant has route dispositions in both the Iowa andChicago Regional marketing areas. Class I route disposition from the Dubuqueplant in the Chicago Regional (Order 30) marketing area exceeds that inthe Iowa (Order 79) marketing area. However, both orders recognize salesto pool plants qualified on the basis of route disposition in the marketingarea in determining which order will regulate the plant as a pool plant.In ordeer to maintain the Dubuque plant's regulation under the Iowa order,SVF handles milk that is moved as Class I milk to another pool plant underthe Iowa order. It is through this mechanism that the SVF plant has beenpooled on the Iowa order. SVF testified that this procedure is costly andthat there is no guarantee that the arrangement with other handlers forshipping milk to another plant or plants will continue. The cost was reportedto be about $16,000 to $20,000 per month, If it were not for sales to otherplants, the Dubuque plant would shift from regulation under the Iowa orderto regulation under the Chicago order. SVF maintains that such a switchwould be ``devastating'' to its producers because regulation under theChicago order would jeopardize SVF's ability to remain competitive in attractingmilk to the Dubuque plant.The record indicates that SVF procures milk in competition with about 40other handlers and has producers in four states. The handlers and the ordersthat they are regulated under are not identified, although there can belittle doubt that other handlers regulated under the Iowa order are included.There also can be little doubt that many of the Dubuque plant's producersare in Iowa. However, the record does not provide enough data to determinethe origin of SVF's receipts of farm milk at the Dubuque plant, althoughthe proponent's principal witness did express a belief that `` * * * morethan two-thirds of their producers * * * '' are in Iowa. Thus, it is notpossible from data in the record to determine the exact magnitude of theimpact that regulation under the Chicago order would have on SVF's abilityto maintain supplies for its Dubuque plant. SVF maintained that it couldcost in excess of $1 million per year if the Dubuque plant were regulatedunder the Chicago order.The blend, or ``uniform'' price, is higher under the Iowa order, than itis under the Chicago order. The location adjustment under the Chicago orderfurther reduces the blend price at Dubuque. Thus, the monies availableto SVF to pay producers in the procurement area (wherever it is) for theDubuque plant would be less under the Chicago order than under the Iowaorder. It is because of this that SVF wants to have the Dubuque plant continueits pool status under the Iowa order and this is the reason that SVF proposeda lock-in provision.The main issue at this proceeding involves defining the marketing areato appropriately reflect that territory within which Iowa handlers arethe principal distributors of milk. The marketing area issue cannot bedecided on the basis of a handler's ability to attract milk to its plant.The resolution of this issue is totally independent from the issue of alock-in provision.<ITAG tagnum="81">1. Regulation of a Distributing Plant With Greater Class I Route Salesin the Marketing Area of Another Order</ITAG>A modified version of the two-month lock-in provision originally proposedby SVF should be adopted. However, it must be recognized that such provisionwould have no effect unless the other order involved has a complementaryprovision that recognizes the lock-in. Thus, even though adopted, the provisionwould not prevent an Iowa pool distributing plant from shifting to theChicago order until such time that the Chicago order may be changed torecognize the Iowa provision.The witness for SVF testified that their proposal number 2 would establisha lock-in for Order 79 so that a handler regulated under that order wouldcontinue to be pooled there until the third consecutive month of greaterClass I route sales by the handler in another marketing area.The witness said that since monthly reports are due promptly after theend of the month it is difficult to make an accurate determination in timeto file the report as to within which area a plant has the greater volumeof sales. He said that the retroactive impact of a plant changing ordersis irreparable to the plant's customers and its producers. Producers, hesaid, may not want to deliver to the plant anymore, but that they may notbe aware of the plant's change in regulation until six to seven weeks later.The witness for the proponent stated that their lock-in proposal shouldbe modified to provide that the market administrator announce the namesof distributing plants that qualify pursuant to this provision.The representative for SVF testified that some lead time is needed to servethe interests of handlers, producers and customers. He said that in thecase of their Dubuque plant, a change in regulation would not be just asimple one-plant switch in regulation. This, he said, is because it wouldeffect supply plants, milk diverted to nonpool plants and pumpover stations.Furthermore, he said, different qualifying and pooling provisions wouldhave to be applied.Proponent's witness testified that SVF was modifying its lock-in proposalto make the lock-in permanent. The modified proposal, he said would applyso long as the Order 79 Class I price that applies at a plant locationis not less than the other order's Class I price that would apply to thatsame location. He said that this modified proposal would avoid the shiftingof an Order 79 plant to another order having a lower Class I price withthe consequent impairment of the plant's ability to maintain its producermilk supply.The witness for SVF said that if its Dubuque plant became regulated underOrder 30, it would have to increase the over order premium so as to bringthe producer pay price up to what would be payable if the plant had beenregulated by Order 79 for the same period. He said that if the Dubuqueplant became regulated by Order 30, its Class I price would decrease 21cents and the producer blend price would decrease even more.The witness for the proponent said that SVF cannot expect its dairy farmersin the Corydon, Iowa area to accept a 13-to-15 cent lower blend price anda minus 36-cent location adjustment for a total reduction of 50 cents.He said that the same would be true for producers in the Cedar Rapids area.Proponent's witness said that SVF has a cheese plant in Clayton Countyand the milk diverted to this plant receives the Iowa blend price lessa 24-cent location adjustment. He said that if milk diverted to this plantbecame regulated by Order 30, the blend price would be 13 to 15 cents lowerthan the Iowa blend, and a minus location adjustment of 36 cents wouldapply. Thus, returns to producers would be 26 cents per hundredweight lowerthan the Iowa blend price at that location.The witness for SVF said they must now pay more than the Iowa blend priceto procure milk. He said that if the Dubuque plant were to become regulatedunder Order 30 with its lower blend price and applicable location adjustments,it would be unable to compete for the procurement of milk from the farmsnow serving it. Regulation under Order 30, he said, would cost SVF approximatelyone million dollars per year because of the additional payments that wouldbe necessary to maintain its current producers.The proponent's witness stated that although the Department, in the past,has generally pooled a distributing plant in the order in which it hasthe largest volume of sales, it recently has departed from that policybecause of changes in the marketplace. He said that recently the Departmenthas locked in several distributing plants in markets where they were locatedeven though they had a larger volume of sales in other markets. He notedrecent such decisions involving the Louisville-Lexington-Evansville andOhio Valley orders and also the Nashville, Tennessee order.A dairy farmer who is a member of SVF testified that regulation under Order30 would cost him about $4,900 a year, therefore, he would have to findanother market.A witness for Central Milk Producers Cooperative (CMPC) testified thathe was appearing on behalf of AMPI-Morning Glory Farms Region, Golden GuernseyCooperative, Independent Milk Producers Cooperative, Lake-to-Lake Divisionof Land O'Lakes Dairy Cooperative, Manitowoc Milk Producers Cooperative,Midwest Dairymen's Company, Milwaukee Cooperative Milk Producers, OutagamieMilk Producers Cooperative, Southern Milk Sales, Wisconsin Dairies Cooperativeand Woodstock Progressive Milk Producers Association. The CMPC witnessindicated that CMPC is a federation of cooperatives whose members poolabout 93 percent of the producer milk on Order 30 and that in additionabout 94 percent of the Class I milk is priced through CMPC's premium pool.The CMPC witness testified that the lock-in proposal should be modifiedto make it clear that SVF does not intend to lock-in a pool supply plant.Furthermore, he said, there must be a corollary lock-out provision in Order30 in order to accommodate this proposal. He said without the lock-outprovision, both orders would be required to regulate the plant. The CMPCwitness proposed a modification to the proposed lock-in provision thatwas intended to insure that the Order 30 language not be superseded bythe Order 79 language.National Farmers Organization stated at the hearing that there may be somejustification for a one-month lock-in.The order currently provides that the term ``pool plant'' shall not applyto a plant that qualifies as a pool plant but which has a greater quantityof Class I dispositions in the marketing area of another order than inthe Iowa marketing area. However, the dispositions included in making thiscomparison include route dispositions plus dispositions to other plantsthat qualify as pool plants under the respective orders. So long as a plant'sroute dispositions in the Iowa marketing area plus dispositions to otherplants that are pool plants based on in-area route dispositions are greaterthan similar dispositions to another order, the plant will be pooled underthe Iowa order. The Chicago order has essentially the same provision. Thus,SVF's Dubuque plant has been able to remain fully regulated under the Iowaorder.As originally proposed, the lock-in would potentially create an impassewhere a distributing plant meets the pooling requirements of two orders.The impasse would exist because each order would claim the plant as a poolplant and neither order would yield to the other one. At the hearing, amodification was proposed such that the Iowa order lock-in would not takeeffect unless the other order had a provision that recognized the lock-in.At this time the only prospective application of a lock-in is in conjunctionwith the Chicago order. Some opponents expressed the view that a lock-inshould not be adopted since it could not function anyway.The basic purpose for a two-month lock-in is to prevent a plant from flip-floppingregulatory status between two orders and to allow some time for sales adjustmentsto be made in the event a plant has an unexpected change in its distributionpattern that would cause a shift in regulation from one order to another.Thus, such a provision may be helpful in preserving market stability atunforeseen times and circumstances that may develop in the future, sincesome other nearby orders would recognize a two-month lock-in.A lock-in provision should be applicable only to a distributing plant.This point was raised by CMPC, and is consistent with the intent of theprovision as revealed in the testimony of the proponent's witness. Therewas no indication that proponent intended any application to plants otherthan distributing plants.A suggestion by proponent that the market administrator publicly announcethe name of each handler qualifying a plant as a pool plant under the lock-inprovision should not be adopted. The purpose of this suggestion was sothat producers, handlers, and customers would have advance notice of apossible switch in regulatory status of such a plant.The evidence on the need for such a provision is sparse. It may be, asproponent contends, that producers need to know that a plant has switchedfrom one order to another. On the other hand, it does not necessarily followthat a plant pooled under the two-month lock-in will necessarily be regulatedunder another order in the next succeeding month. It may be that the lock-inprovision has been applicable in a situation where the handler has madeadjustments in operations that will result in the plant continuing to bepooled under the Iowa order. Given the possible range of conditions thatapplication of the lock-in may reflect, it does not appear that an announcementby the market administrator would be particularly useful. The lock-in provisionadopted in this decision does not contain such a requirement.As adopted, a plant that had been a pool distributing plant under the Iowaorder for the preceding month, but which in the current month has greaterClass I dispositions (route sales and/or transfers to plants) in anothermarketing area, would continue to be a pool plant until the third consecutivemonth of such greater dispositions in the other area, unless the otherorder nevertheless regulates the plant.A further proposed modification by the proponent should not be adopted.SVF proposed an additional provision to permanently lock a distributingplant located in the Iowa marketing area into the Iowa order so long asthe Iowa order's Class I price at that plant's location is not less thanthe price at that location under the order in which the plant had the greaterroute disposition. Such a provision was adopted recently in the Louisville-Lexington-Evansvilleorder, with a corollary change in the Ohio Valley order, and in the Nashvilleorder with a corollary change in the Georgia order. SVF maintains thatthe market situations that led to such amendments to these orders are similarto SVF's procurement problems involved in this proceeding. This latterproposed modification also was widely opposed.The two recent proceedings involving other orders that were cited by bothproponents and opponents have no bearing on this proceeding. Whether ornot there are certain similarities in the situation that concerns SVF andthose that existed in the other orders cannot be decisive in this proceeding.Moreover, without regard to the merit of any evidence submitted by SVFor opponents, further consideration at this time is unwarranted becausea corollary amendment to the Chicago order clearly would be required. However,such an amendment to the Chicago order is not an issue in this proceeding.Therefore, adoption of a permanent lock-in provision would serve no purpose.At the hearing, the witness for the proponents expressed his view thatabsent a corollary amendment of the Chicago Regional order to recognizea lock-in provision in the Iowa order, the lock-in nevertheless could beimplemented by terminating certain provisions of the Chicago order.If this were done, it would change the Chicago order's present applicationwhere the order does not recognize any lock-in provision, to potentiallyhaving to recognize lock-in provisions in any order having such provisions.The merits of such an action have not been explored on the record of thisproceeding. There simply is no record evidence supporting such a change,nor any other evidence that would lead to a conclusion that such actionwas necessary because the provision to be terminated obstructs or doesnot tend to effectuate the declared policy of the Act.SVF took exception to the above finding in the recommended decision, notingthat the recommended decision recognized that if the Dubuque plant becamepooled under the Chicago order, SVF would be ``competitively disadvantaged.''The exception maintains that this is evidence that the Chicago order's``unconditional lock-in'' obstructs the declared policy of the act, whichis to effect orderly marketing. The exception argues that it cannot bethe policy of the Act to perpetuate an order that effectively bars a plantthat is subject to a higher Federal order Class I milk price from expandingits distribution into the Chicago order marketing area. Further, it isargued that the Secretary must take action to remove inconsistencies andthat, therefore, the Iowa order should be amended to provide a permanentlock-in, and that an accommodating change should be made to the Chicagoorder.A lock-in provision in the Iowa order cannot be effective with regard tothe Chicago order until a corollary amendment of the Chicago order hasbeen made. The reasons for not terminating a provision of the Chicago orderto achieve the same thing has already been discussed. The exceptions ofproponent are denied.<ITAG tagnum="81">2. Expansion of the Iowa Marketing Area</ITAG>The Iowa marketing area should be expanded to incorporate additional territorieswhere it is clear that a majority of the milk distributed therein was distributedby plants fully regulated under the Iowa order. The specific territoriesthat should be added are identified on a state-by-state basis later inthe discussion of this issue.Swiss ValleyFarms, Co. (SVF), proposed that the Iowa marketing area beexpanded to include the following counties:1. In Iowa, the counties of Des Moines, Henry, Lee and Van Buren.2. In Illinois the counties of Hancock and Henderson, and the townshipsof Fulton, Ustick, Clyde, Genesee, Mount Pleasant, Union Grove, GardenPlain, Lynden, Fenton, Newton, Prophetstown, Portland and Erie in WhitesideCounty.3. In Missouri, the counties of Clark, Grundy, Harrison, Lewis, Mercer,Putnam, Schuyler and Scotland.4. In Wisconsin, the counties of Crawford and Grant.At the hearing, SVF modified the proposal by deleting Hancock County inIllinois and Lewis and Clark Counties in Missouri.The witness for the proponents testified that SVF markets milk of approximately2300 dairy farmer members and that most of the milk is pooled under theIowa marketing order (Order 79) through its fluid milk plant in Dubuqueand its supply plants that assemble milk for transfer to the Dubuque distributingplant.The proponent's witness said that SVF distributes a substantial amountof packaged fluid milk products into the Chicago Regional marketing area(Order 30) and that any further expansion into Order 30 will regulate theirDubuque plant under Order 30. He said that the impact of that change inregulation would be devastating because of the location adjustment provisionsand the unit qualification for supply plant provisions of Order 30. Hestated that the price that SVF would be able to return to its members underOrder 30 would not allow it to be competitive in the supply area for theirDubuque plant.SVF witness stated that its proposals would allow it to continue poolingtheir Dubuque plant under Order 79 and avoid jeopardizing its supply ofmilk.The proponent's witness said that SVF is not attempting to secure a lowerprice on the Class I milk distributed from its Dubuque plant. He said thatthe Class I price fixed by the Iowa order at the Dubuque location is 21.9cents higher than the Class I price fixed by Order 30 at this same location.The witness stated that the plants that SVF competes with in the Order30 marketing area are not placed at a competitive price disadvantage withthe Dubuque plant being pooled under Order 79 rather than Order 30.The witness for the proponent said that the location adjustment under Order30 fixes the minimum Order 30 Class I price and blend price at Dubuquebelow the prices set by Order 79. Order 79, he said, like most orders,establishes a lower price to the north and a higher price to the west andsouth whereas Order 30 establishes a lower price west and south. The proponent's witness said that the Agricultural Marketing AgreementAct of 1937 requires the Secretary to fix the price at locations that willinsure an adequate supply of milk at that location. He said that this standardis not met under both orders by having a lower price at Waterloo, Iowa,under Order 30, than the price at this same location under Order 79. Thenet effect of this misalignment, he said, is to create an artificial tradebarrier.The witness stated that proponent's exhibit shows that as the distancefrom Chicago increases in westerly direction through Davenport, Iowa, theprice difference increased from 29.2 cents at Davenport to 52.3 cents inJasper County (Iowa) and points west. He said that these price differenceshave stopped Iowa producers from supplying plants regulated by Order 30.There is no Iowa producer milk moving to Order 30 regulated plants, hesaid, except from the extreme northeast counties of Iowa.Proponent's witness indicated that in order for a distributing plant tocompete for sales, it must have raw product costs reasonably in line withothers selling in the area. He said that raw product costs are a combinationof the order's class prices and the additional payment that it takes toattract milk to the plant. He stated that the additional payment must bemade to all producers supplying the plant; otherwise there would be instability(disorderly marketing) in the procurement area. Thus, a plant located inIowa cannot pay the Order 30 price reduced by location adjustments andprocure milk in competition with plants paying the Order 79 price, he said.The witness for the proponent indicated that the Department in the pasthas recognized this inconsistency in other markets and has resolved theproblem by snubbing the price in a marketing area to the price fixed bythe order for that area. He said that would require a major overhaul ofthe Order 30 pricing system and the support of the majority of the Order30 producers and that a more expedient way in dealing with the problemis to revise the Order 79 marketing area to fit the distribution patternof plants subject to regulation by the order. In his opinion, the SVF proposalsdo not completely resolve this inconsistency in prices and that this problemeventually must be resolved by an appropriate amendment to Order 30. Inthe meantime, proponents are looking for other ways to keep the plant pooledunder the Iowa order.The proponent's witness testified that the distribution patterns of fluidmilk plants have changed substantially since the marketing orders in Iowaand neighboring states were established. He said that distributing plants,such as the SVF Dubuque plant, distribute fluid milk products over a muchgreater geographical area and that this benefits the milk suppliers, plantoperators and consumers by way of a lower per unit processing cost.The witness for SVF testified that a survey conducted by SVF indicatedthat Iowa handlers have approximately 92 percent of the sales in that portionof Whiteside County that is proposed being added to the marketing area.In Henderson County, he said, Iowa handlers have about 53 percent of thesales. In Hancock County, he said Order 32 handlers (Southern Illinois)have the majority of sales. Hancock County, he said, is included in theproposal for the convenience of Iowa handlers because of the requirementsfor reporting in-area and out-of-area sales.Iowa handlers, he said, have about 95 percent of the sales in Henry County;about 72 percent in Des Moines County; about 64 percent in Lee County andabout 94 percent of the sales in Van Buren County. He said in total, Iowahandlers have about 74 percent of the sales in the Iowa counties proposedto be added.In the Missouri counties of Harrison, Mercer, Putnam, and Schuyler, Iowahandlers, he said, have 100 percent of the sales. In Grundy, he said, Iowahandlers have 55 percent of the sales. He said that in Scotland Countysales are divided equally between Iowa and Illinois plants. Order 32 plants,he said, have the majority of sales in Lewis and Clark Counties. The inclusionof these two counties, he said, also is for the convenience of the Iowahandlers who have to report separately in-area and out-of-area sales. Intotal, he said, Iowa handlers have 61 percent of the sales in the Missouricounties proposed being added to the Order 79 marketing area.The witness for SVF said that for Grant and Crawford Counties, Iowa handlershave 61 percent of the sales, Upper Midwest handlers have 20 percent andChicago handlers have 14 percent. He said that adding these two countiesto the Order 79 marketing area will not change the current status of anyplant under either order or the classifcation of milk or the blend pricein either order.The proponent's witness stated that SVF wished to modify its expansionproposal by deleting Hancock, Lewis, and Clark Counties because the surveyshowed that Order 79 handlers do not have the majority of sales in thesecounties.Anderson Erickson Dairy Co., although it did not present testimony at thehearing, filed a brief in support of the SVF proposals.The first of many witnesses to testify in opposition to the proposals wasa representative for Prairie Farms Dairy (PFD). The PFD witness said thattheir organization, although it has a joint venture interest in an Order30 pool plant as well as a joint venture interest in two plants regulatedunder Order 79, was testifying on behalf of their solely owned plants pooledon the Southern Illinois market (Order 32). The opponent's witness stated that PFD has over 500 producers located inthe Order 32 marketing area and that it also acquires milk from cooperativeswhose members are located in Iowa, Minnesota, Wisconsin and Illinois. Hesaid that the SVF proposal could adversely impact on these cooperativesand their ability to provide milk to their Order 32 plants.The PFD witness said that their immediate concern was their distributingplant located at Quincy, Illinois (Adams County). He said that the Quincyplant receives about 8 million pounds of milk per month and utilizes about70 percent of this milk in Class I. The Quincy plant, he said, is in anunregulated county with large unregulated areas around Quincy.The witness for PFD testified that for the past 12 months the Quincy plantsales averaged about five percent in Central Illinois (Order 50), about19 percent in Order 32 and about 76 percent in non-regulated areas. Hesaid that SVF proposal for the expansion of the marketing area, prior toits modification deleting several counties, would have made it very difficultfor it to remain pooled under Order 32. He maintained that the expansionproposal would not solve the SVF problem but would shift the problem fromone cooperative to another.The witness for PFD testified that although they did not do their own surveyof the proposed expansion, it did compare its sales in the various countieswith SVF estimated PFD sales. He said that there is no economic, historical,practical, or beneficial justification for including any of the Missouri,Illinois or Iowa counties in the expansion except for the Iowa countiesof Henry, Des Moines, and the Illinois county of Henderson.The opponent's witness testified that its exhibit shows that for Hendersonand Hancock counties in Illinois in total, SVF had 15.1 percent of thesales in these two counties and that SVF estimated that PFD had 62 percentof the sales in the two counties while PFD's exhibit shows actual salesas 25.7 percent.The representative for PFD said that their exhibit shows for the eightMissouri counties in total, SVF has 7.9 percent of the sales in those countiesand that SVF estimated PFD had 29.6 percent of the total county sales.PFD's exhibit shows actual sales as 25.5 percent.The witness said that the PFD exhibit shows that for the four Iowa countiesin total, SVF had 21.4 percent and SVF estimated that PFD had 8.9 percentof those sales compared to PFD's actual sales of 19.1 percent.The witness for the opponent testified that for March 1988, the Quincyplant had 19.8 percent of its sales in Order 32 and if all of the countiesoriginally proposed by SVF would become part of the Order 79 marketingarea, their Quincy plant would have had 15.6 percent of their sales inOrder 79. He said that the 4.2 percent difference, which equates to about200,000 pounds of milk, is unacceptable to PFD.The opponent's witness proposed that only Henderson County (Illinois) andHenry and Des Moines Counties (Iowa) be included in the expanded marketingarea. These three counties, he said, would give SVF about 53 percent oftheir sales in all of the 14 proposed counties. He said that allowing the11 other counties to remain as unregulated would allow PFD a reasonablesales cushion between Orders 32 and 79. Of the 11 counties, he said, theQuincy plant would have had about 34 percent of the total sales comparedto 13 percent for SVF. He said that for the three counties that PFD suggestsbe added to the marketing area, SVF would have about 23 percent of thetotal and the Quincy plant less than one percent. He also indicated thatPFD could support adding the townships named in Whiteside County, Illinois,to the marketing area. Land O'Lakes, Inc., although not presenting testimonyat the hearing, filed a brief in support of PFD's modified proposal.The witness for PFD testified that the 120 Quincy producers are locatedin southeast Iowa, northeast Missouri, and western Illinois. He said thatthe central locations in the proposed two Illinois counties are on theaverage only 68 miles from Quincy while they are 154 miles from Dubuque.Central locations in the proposed Iowa counties, he said, are on the average74 miles from Quincy compared to an average of 154 miles from Dubuque.He said that central locations in the proposed Missouri counties show thaton average they are 99 miles from Quincy while being 236 miles from Dubuque.Efficiency of distribution alone, he said, should support the concept thatthis area is best served by the Quincy plant compared to the Dubuque plant.The witness for the opponent testified that regulation of its Quincy plantby Order 79 would be devastating to PFD and its dairy farmers. For example,he said that the blend price to dairy farmers associated with the Quincyplant would have averaged 45 cents less if the plant had been regulatedby the Iowa order. A 45-cent reduction in blend prices would amount toover $560,000 for one year, according to the witness Land-O-Lakes and AssociatedMilk Producers, Inc., he said, have told PFD that they could not delivermilk to Quincy at these prices.The representative for PFD said that since May 1987 PFD has been receivingmilk from SVF into its joint venture pool distributing plants located inIowa City and Des Moines, Iowa, for the purpose of helping SVF continueto qualify the Dubuque plant on Order 79.The expansion proposal, he said, would encourage SVF to increase its salesinto this newly expanded area, so as to be able to increase its sales intoOrder 30. He said that PFD would be discouraged from expanding into thearea that has been home country for the Quincy plant for over 50 years.Numerous interested parties that are either dairy farmer cooperatives orproprietary handlers regulated under the Chicago order presented testimonyin opposition to the SVF proposals. In general, such opposition expressedviews that: (1) SVF should be regulated under the Chicago order becauseit has greater Class I route dispositions in the Chicago marketing areathan in the Iowa marketing area; (2) SVF, due to the higher Iowa blendprices, has a competitive advantage over Order 30 regulated handlers inobtaining raw milk supplies in some areas of Wisconsin and Illinois; (3)because SVF has a milk procurement advantage, it also has an advantagein selling packaged milk (lower sales price). Chicago handlers have lostsales accounts to SVF; (4) SVF's problems are its own doing since SVF activelyhas expanded sales outlets in the Chicage market; (5) expansion of theIowa marketing area now will lead to further expansion in the future; (6)the Chicago and Iowa marketing areas should be merged; (7) SVF activelyseeks (and obtains) contracts to supply milk to schools and colleges inthe Chicage marketing area; (8) adding Crawford and Grant Counties in Wisconsinto the Iowa marketing area would increase the Iowa blend price and decreasethe Chicago order blend price, and thus take away about $1.6 million peryear from Order 30 producers; and (9) the evidence shows an overlap inthe milk procurement areas of the Chicago and Iowa orders such that theChicago marketing area should be expanded. Therefore, the record shouldbe kept open so that additional proposals on this issue could be submitted.In addition, CMPC witnesses specifically opposed all the SVF proposalsfor the following reasons:(1) Failure of the Department of Agriculture (USDA) to notify all interestedpersons that a hearing request had been made and to invite comments onadditional proposals;(2) USDA's refusal to consider that because a marketing area proposal wouldbe heard, then all other provisions of the order would be open for proposedamendments;(3) Removing two counties from the Chicago marketing area and adding themto the Iowa marketing area would, in effect, amend the Chicago order withoutproviding Order 30 interested parties an opportunity to submit additionalproposals; and(4) The proposal's attempt to circumvent the pool plant provisions of theChicago order without a proper notice to amend the order's pool plant definition.Most of the testimony by interested parties regulated under the Chicagoorder concerned opposition to continued pool status under the Iowa orderfor SVF's Dubuque plant. However, most of that testimony more nearly relatesto the issue of a lock-in provision. That issue has been dealt with earlierin this document. Therefore, only a brief summary of the Chicago parties'positions has been noted here.A witness for Deters All Star Dairy, Inc. (Deters), said that Deters operatesan unregulated distributing plant in Quincy, Illinois, with about 15 percentof its sales in the Iowa Counties of Lee, Des Moines, Henry and Van Buren;the Missouri Counties of Scotland, Putnam, Schuyler, and the Illinois Countiesof Hancock and Henderson. He said that Deters is opposed to all of theproposals except for adding the Wisconsin Counties of Crawford and Grant,the Illinois County of Whiteside or the Missouri Counties of Grundy, Harrisonor Mercer. The expansion proposal, he said, would cause Deters to becomeregulated, resulting in an increase in its reporting and bookkeeping costs.Exceptions to the recommended expansion of the Iowa marketing area werefiled by seven interested parties. The exceptions ranged from expressionsof frustration because additional proposals were not invited prior to thehearing to allegations that the Dairy Division [AMS-USDA] has erred inits judgment and condoned pooling a plant based on a ``sham'' qualificationmechanism. Some exceptions also claimed that the procedure to terminatetwo counties from the Chicago marketing area is illegal since it wouldamend the Chicago orders without a hearing.The question of whether the Secretary has authority to terminate a provisionof an order was discussed in the Recommended Decision. As we stated therein,such authority is clear. Furthermore, the procedures followed in announcingand conducting the hearing were in accordance with the Department's Rulesof Practice and Procedure.The only exceptions that require further response relate specifically tothe marketing area issue. Associated Milk Producers, Inc., Morning GloryFarms Region, again raised questions about the proponent's data that wererelied on in reaching the Recommended decision. The exception objectedto the marketing area expansion because (1) there was no way to verifySVF's sales figures; (2) no method was noted for calculating percent ofsales by other handlers; (3) no listing of retail establishments was madeavailable, and (4) there was no consideration of changes in sales overtime. The following observations are made in response to these objections:1. Given that proponent's sales data represent confidential information,it would be very unusual for the record of an amendment proceeding to containinformation that would allow verification of proponent's sales data;2. As noted in the Recommended Decision, estimates of sales by other handlersin the various counties were based on discussion with SVF customers andon in-store observations;3. A listing of retail establishments was not provided at the hearing;however, the proponent's witness indicated that the survey included visitsto most stores; and4. Since the SVF sales figures were derived from annual data divided by12 to arrive at an average monthly figure, the element of time was reflected,at least with respect to proponent's data.In its exception, CMPC argues that SVF maintains its Dubuque plant as apool plant under the Iowa order through a ``sham'' mechanism, and states,as it did in its brief, that the record fails to disclose details of SVF'soperations.It should be noted that the Chicago Regional order, in its definition of``pool plant'' (andSection; 1030.7), provides that the term ``pool plant''will not include a plant that has route disposition and disposition topool plants qualified on the basis of route dispositions that are greaterunder another order than under the Chicago order. This mechanism, the combiningof route disposition with shipments to other plants, which is what SVFhas relied on to keep the Dubuque plant pooled on the Iowa order, is clearlyrecognized under the Chicago order.The amount of information about its operations that SVF revealed for therecord was adequate to make the decision regarding marketing area. Thus,we find no basis in the exceptions for reaching any conclusions differentfrom those set out in the Recommended Decision.In its exceptions, the National Farmers Organization (NFO) opposed theIowa market area expansion. NFO claimed that the evaluation of producerblend price disparities between the Iowa and Chicago orders was arbitraryand capricious because it ignored the blend price advantage that SVF hasin Grant and Crawford counties. The exception also stated that SVF shouldnot be allowed to increase distribution of large amounts of milk in theChicago marketing area without being subject to pooling under the Chicagoorder.On the first point, the record clearly indicates, with respect to Iowaproducers, that if the Dubuque plant becomes pooled under the Chicago order,SVF would be disadvantaged in competing for local milk supplies. On theother hand, SVF has the benefit of a higher blend price under the Iowaorder when competing against Chicago handlers for Wisconsin milk supplies.However, the record shows that handlers regulated under other orders thathave blend prices higher than the Chigao order also compete for suppliesin Wisconsin. In any event, these facts are not of utmost importance indeciding the marketing area questions.On the second point, this decision does not convey to SVF any immunityagainst the Dubuque plant becoming fully regulated under the Chicago order.That could still happen if Class I dispositions in the Chicago marketingarea in the future became greater than Class I dispositions in the Iowamarketing area. This was clearly stated in the recommended decision andis repeated here. The exceptions are therefore denied.<T3>Specific territories to be added to the marketing area._</T3>(a) <T3>Illinois territory: </T3>The unregulated townships in Whiteside Countyand Henderson County should be added to the Iowa marketing area. In WhitesideCounty, the 13 townships are predominantly served by Iowa handlers, whoseClass I sales in the area are estimated at over 90 percent of the total.In Henderson County, SVF reported its own sales and estimated sales forone other Order 79 handler to comprise 53 percent of total Class I sales.SVF's survey resulted in an estimate that Prairie Farms (Quincy) had about28 percent of the sales and that another Order 32 plant had 19 percent.The only other data submitted at the hearing was by the Prairie Farms Dairyrepresentative. His data showed that the Quincy plant's sales amountedto only one percent of the estimated total in Henderson County. This isa large discrepancy (28 percent versus one percent). The SVF estimate ofthe Quincy plant's sales were larger than actual. Since it is clear thesurvey did not over-estimate the Order 79 sales, it is probable that the53 percent of total estimate may be too low. Henderson County's Class Isales appear to come mostly (more than half, at least) from Iowa handlers'plants. Accordingly, Henderson County should be identified as part of themarketing area for the Iowa order. (b) <T3>Iowa territory: </T3>Henry, Des Moines, and Van Buren Counties, whichnow are unregulated, should be included in the Iowa marketing area. Iowahandlers are estimated to have about 90 percent of the Class I sales inHenry and Van Buren Counties, and about 70 percent in Des Moines County.The Prairie Farms representative presented data on its sales in Henry andVan Buren Counties, which showed less sales than estimated by SVF. A witnessfor Deters Dairy, Quincy, Illinois, indicated that any sales from its plantin these counties would be very small. Therefore, there is no reason toquestion whether Iowa handlers predominate in service to these counties.No one offered any data other than SVF's estimate of sales in Des MoinesCounty. Lee County also was proposed to be in the marketing area. SVF's estimatedtotal distribution in this county was 804,358 pounds, of which SVF distributed173,339 pounds and estimated another 43 percent of the total to have beendistributed by two other Iowa handlers. SVF estimated that Prairie FarmsDairy, Quincy, Illinois, had another 20 percent, which left 16 percentdivided almost equally among three other non-Iowa order handlers. However,the Prairie Farms witness testified that actual sales in Lee County fromits Quincy plant amounted to 396,352 pounds, or 49.3 percent of estimatedtotal consumption, rather than the 20 percent figure noted above. Thisdiscrepancy cannot be explained from information available in the record.Thus, assuming that the estimated total consumption figure for Lee Countyis reasonable, it cannot be concluded that Iowa handlers have a majorityof Class I distribution in the County. Accordingly, Lee County should notbe identified as part of the marketing area for the Iowa order. (c) <T3>Missouri territory: </T3>Five of the eight proposed unregulated Missouricounties should be added to the marketing area. They are: Grundy, Harrison,Mercer, Putnam, and Schuyler Counties. The other three (Clark, Lewis, andScotland) should remain unregulated. Class I consumption in Grundy County was estimated by SVF to be about 223,000pounds per month. SVF's sales in Grundy County are small, at about 6,000pounds, while sales by other Iowa handlers were projected by SVF to bemore than 50 percent of the total. However, SVF overestimated the amountof milk distributed in Grundy County by Prairie Farms of Quincy. At thehearing, Deters Dairy indicated that they had no problem with Grundy Countybeing added to the marketing area of the Iowa order. Thus it appears thatIowa handlers have at least 55 percent of the Class I disposition in GrundyCounty. Harrison and Mercer Counties also should be included in the marketingarea. SVF's survey indicated virtually all of the Class I milk in bothcounties was distributed by plants regulated under the Iowa order. Therewas no contrary evidence concerning these counties. SVF's survey of Putnam County indicated that virtually all the Class Imilk was distributed in the County by Iowa order handlers. The witnessfor Deters Dairy indicated that any milk distributed from the Quincy planwould be small, and was not sure whether it would include any Class I milkat all. Thus, there is a sound basis in the record to include Putnam County.The preceding paragraph could apply to Schuyler County as well, since theSVF survey found only products distributed by Iowa handlers. However, therepresentative for Deters Dairy indicated that here, too, there might bea very small amount of Class I milk dispositions by a distributor, butnot any direct distribution by Deters. So, in Schuyler County, the evidenceleads to a conclusion that Iowa handlers have nearly all, if not all, ofthe Class I sales. Clark, Lewis, and Scotland Counties, should not be added to the Iowa marketingarea. The first two were dropped from the proposal by the proponents. Moreover,the sales data would not support the proposal. The later, Scotland County,should not be included because there is at least a 50 percent discrepancyin sales survey results. SVF's survey indicated 100 percent of the salesin Scotland County came from Iowa order plants. Prairie Farms, on the otherhand, indicated that it's Quincy plant had route sales equal to 58 percentof the estimated consumption. This discrepancy remains unresolved. Theavailable data do not permit a conclusion that Scotland is served primarilyby Iowa plants. Therefore, the inclusion of Scotland County must be denied.In several of these counties, the sales by SVF are a small proportion ofthe total. However, what is most important in this case is whether thepredominant distributors of Class I milk are handlers regulated by theIowa order. Deters, in its testimony and in its brief, took the view that several ofthe proposed counties should not be added to the marketing area becauseno evidence can be found that disorderly marketing conditions exist. Itis not necessary that disorderly marketing conditions exist before a countyor other parcel of territory may be annexed to a marketing area. Whileother factors may be involved, the principal basis for defining marketingareas under the Federal milk marketing order program long has been thata marketing area defines a common sales area served primarily by competinghandlers. If that condition exists, and it does in most of the countiesdiscussed thus far, then the absence of market disorder is of no consequence.A major purpose of the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937 isto promote orderly marketing. It is not a prerequisite that disorderlymarketing must exist before this goal of the Act may be achieved. The territory in Illinois, Iowa, and Missouri that should be added to theIowa marketing area should have no impact on the regulatory status of thePrairie Farms plant at Quincy, and only minimal impact upon Deters Dairy,which is unregulated. The representative of Prairie Farms introduced and exhibit showing theroute sales by its Quincy, Illinois, plant in the counties proposed tobe part of the Iowa marketing order. The total shown for March 1988 was871,842 pounds. The witness expressed concern that this amount was largeenough that any increase in sales in the Iowa order could cause the plantto flip over to regulation under the Iowa order. However, the plant's salesin the nine counties adopted in this decision amounted to only 115,273pounds, or only 13 percent of the total sales in the counties originallyproposed by SVF. This should minimize any concern of Prairie Farms thatexpanding the Iowa order could cause its Quincy plant to shift to the Iowaorder. Mid-American Diarymen, Inc. and Prairie Farms Dairy, Inc., both took exceptionto including the five Missouri counties in the marketing area. Both pointedout that SVF does not have a large volume of sales in the Missouri counties.Also, they claimed that handler costs would be increased due to havingto report separately the sale in Missouri. The Prairie Farms exceptionalso notes that the State of Missouri assesses a fee on milk sold on routesin the state. However, we see no reason why this information should haveany bearing on the issue under discussion here.The SVF distribution volume in these five counties is small. However, thedecision to include these counties in the marketing area is based on thepercentage of sales in each county that was distributed by plants regulatedunder the Iowa order. This is the same basis for including in the Iowamarketing area other territories in other states as well.On the matter of additional reporting burden, there is no indication inthe record that the type of accounting changes required by including thefive Missouri counties will result in the burden of regulation being increasedby any significant amount for plants that already are fully regulated undera federal milk order. In fact, we note that Anderson-Erickson Dairy Co.,which operates a pool plant in Des Moines, Iowa, and which distributesmilk on routes in the five Missouri counties, filed comments supportingthe Recommended Decision with regard to expansion of the marketing area.Accordingly, we reaffirm that the Iowa marketing area should be expandedto include the five Missouri counties. Therefore, the exceptions on thisissue are denied.With regard to Deters Dairy, it is not possible to state exactly what portionof its Class I distribution will be partially regulated under the expandedIowa order. However, in the nine counties in Illinois, Iowa, and Missouri,Deter's witness indicated only very small, or perhaps no sales at all.Therefore, it is expected that any impact upon Deters due to this actionwould be minimal, in that the plant would be only partially regulated.As the operator of a partially regulated distributing plant, Deters wouldbe required to pay an administrative assessment on the total hundredwieghtsof route dispositions in the marketing area, less any receipts of milkpriced as Class I milk under a Federal order. The maximum assessment ratefor this purpose is four cents per hundredweight.Additionally, Deters would have the option to have any further obligationcomputed under one of the following:1. Compute the handler's total value of milk at the order's class pricesjust as if the plant were a fully regulated pool plant. Subtract paymentsmade for milk that would have been producer milk if the plant had beenfully regulated. Any positive difference would be paid to the producer-settlementfund.2. An amount computed by multiplying the total hundredweights of routedispositions in the marketing area, less any receipts at the plant of milkpriced as Class I milk under a Federal order, by the difference betweenthe applicable Class I and uniform prices would be paid to the producer-settlementfund. If the plant received milk priced as Class I milk under a Federalorder in an amount at least equal to the in-area route dispositions, therewould be no obligation.In order to determine the payment obligations referred to above, Deterswould be subject to certain reporting requirements of the order.Deters undoubtedly operates a small business. Although the options justdescribed are available to any handler that operates a partially regulateddistributing plant, they do provide a small business with choices thatcan help minimize the impact of even partial regulation.(d) <T3>Wisconsin territory:</T3> The marketing area of the Iowa order shouldbe expanded to include Crawford and Grant Counties in Wisconsin. Both ofthese counties are currently included in the marketing area for the ChicagoRegional order.The data submitted by SVF in its sales survey included estimates for thesetwo counties. These estimates show that Chicago order handlers accountfor an estimated 8 percent of the route dispositions in Crawford County,and 16 percent in Grant County. The actual sales by SVF in these countiesrepresent 54 and 70 percent of estimated consumption in Crawford and GrantCounties, respectively. The remainder was estimated to be distributed bya handler regulated under the Upper Midwest milk order.At the hearing, a representative for Dean Foods indicated through cross-examinationthat his firm's route disposition amounted to some 13.6 percent of thetotal in Crawford County, rather than 8 percent as shown on the SVF exhibit.It must be noted that the exhibit does not list Dean Foods as a distributorin Crawford County, but does show Dean Foods as distributing 8 percentof the total estimated routes sales of fluid milk products in Grant County.This raises a question as to whether the SVF survey erred in not pickingup Dean as a distributor in Crawford County, or whether the Dean representativemisspoke in his question to a AMPI witness. It makes little differencebecause the sales figures quoted for SVF are based on actual sales figures,whereas the percentages indicated for other distributors are estimates.Thus, if the estimated total consumption figures are about right, an errorin estimates for other distributors would not change the conclusion thatan Iowa handler, SVF, is the largest distributor with more than half ofthe Class I milk in both counties. This being the case, both counties shouldbe identified as part of the Iowa order marketing area, rather than theChicago Regional order marketing area, based on current marketing conditionsas revealed in the record of this proceeding. In defining an order marketingarea, the major consideration is which competing handlers are the principaldistributors of milk within the territory under consideration.It is noted that there were no distributing plants under either order ineither county in May 1988. However, there were four reserve supply plantsunder the Chicago order that were located in these counties, and two supplyplants pooled under the Iowa order located therein.Crawford and Grant Counties clearly are areas where there is overlappingof supplies for both the Chicago and Iowa orders. The evidence in the recordindicates also that there is keen competition for those supplies. In December1987 the producers located in the two counties were about evenly dividedbetween the two orders, with a few more producers and a little bit moremilk that participated in the Iowa market than in the Chicago market.The facts just noted do not weigh heavily in favor of inclusion of twocounties in either marketing area based on sources of milk supply. Therefore,the question of which order's handlers distribute more milk in the twocounties takes on added importance as a determining factor concerning whichmarketing area should include the two counties. In this regard, this recordclearly supports a conclusion that Crawford and Grant Counties in Wisconsinhave a stronger association with the Iowa market than with any other marketfor which data were provided at the hearing.The Wisconsin Cheese Makers Association (WCMA) also filed an exceptionin opposition to adding Crawford and Grant counties to the Iowa marketingarea. WCMA claims that the expansion would have a substantial impact onsmall business and would be disruptive to normal marketing of milk. Accordingto the exception, handlers under the Iowa order will further extend milkprocurement in the Chicago marketing area. Also Iowa handlers will increasetheir Class I sales, which translates into a loss of Class I sales by Chicagoorder handlers. This in turn will reduce the Chicago order blend pricesand further increase the blend price disparity between the two orders.The comments by WCMA are speculative. First, changing the two countiesfrom the Chicago order area to the Iowa order area will not change theregulatory status of any plants. Thus, there will be no switching of producersfrom one order to another. Second, the change has no effect upon the abilityof Iowa handlers to entice milk supplies away from Order 30 handlers. Theresimply is no connection between which marketing area includes the two countiesand the ability of Iowa order handlers to solicit milk supplies therein.Finally, it is unknown whether Iowa handlers will expand their sales intothe Chicago marketing area. However, if SVF further expands its sales,it still could become subject to Chicago order regulation.The Notice of Hearing invited specific comments on the probable regulatoryand informational impact of the hearing proposals on small businesses.Only one handler testified directly in this regard and we have respondedin that case elsewhere in this decision. Otherwise, the Department believesthat any negative impact of the changes adopted in this decision will notbe substantial enough to cause concern. Moreover, when various witnesseswere questioned on this subject, the majority of them were either noncommittalor stated that there would be a negative impact without specifying theexact nature or scope of the impact and without offering any evidence insupport of their statements. In other cases, opposing views were expressed.For example, one witness indicated that if the proposals were adopted,some supply plants regulated under the Chicago order could have difficultyfinding bottling plants to accept shipments of milk that the supply plantsare required to make. However, another witness expressed no concern inthis regard, because, in his view, Chicago handlers always need milk.Exceptions also were filed on behalf of the Trade Association of ProprietaryPlants. However, while enumerating several points of disagreement withthe recommended decision, the exceptions contained arguments that alreadyhave been considered. The exceptions, therefore, are denied.At the hearing, and in certain briefs filed, the validity of the salessurvey conducted by or for SVF was questioned. Briefly stated, the estimateswere made as follows:(1) SVF estimated consumption of fluid milk products for each county inthe following manner:<ITAG tagnum="15">_Used a national average annual per capita consumption figure (source_MilkIndustry Foundation, Washington, DC) divided by 365 to get a per capitaconsumption figure of .622 pounds per day.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Use population data based on the 1980 U.S. Census, adjusted to 1985(source_Rand McNally Atlas).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="15">_Multiplied the population for a given county by the daily per capitaconsumption figure, and multiplied the result by 30 to get an estimateof total monthly fluid milk products consumption.</ITAG>(2) The sales figures for SVF are annual sales divided by 12 to producea monthly figure.(3) The estimated percentages of total sales in each county by handlersother than SVF were arrived at through discussions with customers and byon-site observations in ``Practically every store of any consequence.''There is no doubt that the methodology employed by SVF did not produceperfectly accurate results. The testimony by Prairie Farms' witness indicatingactual sales figures different from those estimated by SVF clearly showsthis. Nevertheless, such differences did not change the critical questionof whether Iowa handlers were the dominant distributors in a given countyin most cases. Where such differences appeared to raise a serious questionin that regard, the county was not included in the marketing area expansion.It also must be noted that except for Prairie Farms, no one else producedspecific sales data. By and large, SVF's estimates remained unchallengedand uncontradicted. Accordingly, they must be regarded in this record asreasonable estimates, except as otherwise noted in the discussions of theindividual counties.The current issue of whether Crawford and Grant Counties in Wisconsin shouldbe in the Iowa marketing area is quite similar to an earlier question involvingeight counties in northwestern Indiana. The eight counties, formerly knownas the Northwestern Indiana marketing area were included in the ChicagoRegional marketing area when that order was promulgated on July 1, 1968.However, only a few months later it was found that the inclusion of thosecounties in the Chicago Regional marketing area had caused major competitiveproblems for 12 small local handlers because they were not regulated ina way that insured a milk cost comparable with their main competition.This occurred because the blend price under the Chicago order would belower than the uniform prices as computed under the former NorthwesternIndiana order. For example, the decision notes that under the Chicago orderthe blend price at Northwestern Indiana plants ``* * * is expected to averagemore than 30 cents below the prices received by Indiana producers shippingto Fort Wayne or Indianapolis.'' Accordingly, the eight counties were removedfrom the Chicago order and were included in the new Indiana marketing area.\1\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ Official Notice is taken of the Assistant Secretary'sdecision, issued December 5, 1968, published on December 10, 1968 (33 FR18282) on Milk in Indianapolis, Ind. (Renamed ``Indiana:), Fort Wayne,Ind., and Chicago Regional Marketing Areas.The record in this proceeding clearly demonstrates that SVF's Dubuque plantwould be competitively disadvantaged in competing with other plants regulatedby the Iowa order for local supplies of milk if it became regulated underthe Chicago order. Thus, this decision parallels in many ways the 1968decision to remove the eight northwestern Indiana counties from the ChicagoRegional marketing area.Including Crawford and Grant Counties in the Iowa marketing area, basedon the fact that Iowa regulated handlers have the majority of Class I dispositionsin those counties, will lessen the likelihood that the Dubuque plant willswitch to regulation under the Chicago order. However, if SVF continuesto expand its sales in the remainder of the Chicago marketing area, suchaction nevertheless could bring about such a shift.The principal opposition to expanding the marketing area came from cooperativesand handlers subject to the Chicago Regional order. In their view, if SVFhad greater route dispositions in the Chicago marketing area than in theIowa area, then the Dubuque plant should be regulated under the Chicagoorder. Otherwise, SVF should reduce distribution in the Chicago marketingarea. The Chicago interested parties also held that SVF has an advantageover Chicago cooperatives and handlers in competing for producer milk suppliesin Wisconsin so long as SVF is regulated under the Iowa order, which hasa higher uniform price than the Chicago order. They also urged that otheravenues should be pursued, such as revising the location adjustment provisionsof the Chicago order, merging orders, and expanding the Chicago marketingarea to include the territory previously regulated by the Quad Cities-Dubuquemilk order, which is part of the marketing area of the current Iowa order.Accordingly, Counsel for CMPC moved that this proceeding should be terminatedwithout issuing a recommended or final decision. The basis for the motionwas that SVF failed to provide the data necessary to permit the Secretaryto reach a decision on the merits of the proposals considered at the hearing.Alternatively, he urged that the record be kept open so that other proposalsnot heard could be considered at a continuation of the hearing.The issuance of this document constitutes a denial of the motion to terminatethe proceeding or to keep the record open. As noted earlier, the limitedlock-in provision that is adopted cannot be made effective with respectto the Chicago order for the reason stated. Also, the proposal raised atthe hearing for a permanent lock-in is denied for the reasons stated. Theremaining issue, marketing area expansion, can be, and has been, appropriatelydecided based on the information obtained at the hearing. Therefore, itis concluded that it would serve no useful purpose to reopen the hearingto consider additional proposals at this time. Such action would only serveto delay the timely issuance of appropriate action based on the hearingrecord.It must be recognized that the limited marketing area expansion adoptedherein may not provide a permanent solution to the issues raised at thisproceeding. Rather, it may serve as a stop-gap approach to SVF's problemof regulatory status while the dairy industry in the areas involved searchesfor a broader based longer-term solution. Some of the information introducedin this proceeding suggests that the industry needs to study the questionof order mergers or other possible actions. However, there is no indicationat this point that such studies are under way or that any consensus existsabout what type of action to pursue in the future. Therefore, this proceedingshould be completed in a timely fashion. If and when the industry is readyto pursue some other action, a new proceeding can be requested.The Chicago interested parties also objected vigorously to the fact thatthe Chicago order was not open for amendment in the proceeding, especiallywith regard to the two Wisconsin counties considered for addition to theIowa marketing area. In the Chicago parties' views, the Secretary couldnot delete those counties from the definition of the Chicago order marketingarea without a proceeding to amend the Chicago order.In response we note that all cooperatives and handlers that supply milkto or are fully regulated under the Chicago order were sent a copy of theHearing Notice. That notice advised such parties of the nature of the proposaland invited any interested parties to participate in the hearing and toaddress specifically the question of whether the counties should be partof the Iowa marketing area. Even though the provisions of the Chicago orderwere not open for amendment, those who may be directly affected by thisproceeding were so notified and provided an opportunity to testify or otherwisesubmit evidence regarding the proposals submitted by SVF. No one was deniedan opportunity to be heard on this issue. At issue is the question of which mechanism to employ to implement findingsbased on a public hearing. This decision finds that Crawford and GrantCounties in Wisconsin should be included in the Iowa marketing area ratherthan in the Chicago marketing area. In order to implement these findings,two steps are necessary. One is to add the territory to the Iowa marketingarea by amendment of the Iowa order. The other step involves removing theterritory from the provision defining the Chicago order marketing area.This may be done either of two ways. One way is to amend the Chicago order.That cannot be done in this instance because the Chicago order was notopen in this proceding. However, the Secretary is required by andSection;608c(16)(A)(i) of the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937 (theAct) to terminate or suspend operation of any order or provision of anorder that he finds obstructs or does not tend to effectuate the declaredpolicy of the Act. Because it has been determined, on the basis of a properlynoticed public hearing, that the two Wisconsin counties should be includedin the marketing area defined by the Iowa order, it would be only logicalto conclude that the two counties should not remain under the Chicago order.This finding would be implemented by terminating that part of the Chicagoorder which provides that the two counties in question are included underthe order. Such method has an advantage in terms of timeliness and of economyin implementing a decision.CMPC's exceptions reiterated opposition to including Crawford and GrantCounties in the Iowa marketing area. The exception contends that the terminationof the two counties from the Chicago marketing area violates the noticeand hearing requirements of the Act. The exception cites <T3>Carnation Company</T3> v.<T3> Butz,</T3> 372 F. Supp. 883 (D.D.C. 1974), which held unlawful theuse of the suspension authority of the Act to change the pricing provisionsof an order. Moreover the exception claims that there is no basis in therecord to conclude that inclusion of these two counties in the ChicagoRegional marketing area `` * * * obstructs or does not tend to effectuatethe declared policy * * * '' of the Act.In response, we disagree that the present issue is governed by <T3>Carnation </T3>v. <T3>Butz.</T3> That case specifically involved minimum prices to be paidby milk handlers to milk producers. The court rendered its decision basedon its reading of section 8c(18) of the Act, which requires notice andopportunity for a hearing when adjusting prices. In the present documentwe are not involved in a pricing issue. In the Carnation opinion, the Courtalso held that the standard of review in determining whether removal oforder provisions through suspension without notice and hearing is properis `` * * * whether that removal has the effect of producing a new ordermaterially different from the old.'' The termination of the two countiesfrom the Chicago marketing area does not alter the Chicago order in a materialway. In response to CMPC's second point, we would reiterate that the findingthat the two Wisconsin counties should be part of the Iowa marketing areais based on record evidence obtained at a public hearing. Having made thisfinding, it would be inconsistent to find at the same time that the twocounties should remain part of the Chicago marketing area. Therefore, thisexception also is denied.3. <T3>Location adjustment revision. </T3>The order should amend to specifythat the territory in Whiteside County, Illinois, which is being addedto the marketing area, should be included in Zone 2 for location adjustmentpricing purposes. The other Illinois counties in the marketing area arein Zone 2 now.Aside from proponent's brief statement, no one else addressed this proposal.Currently there are no Iowa order pool plants in the 13 townships of WhitesideCounty. Thus, addition of these townships to Zone 2 (minus 7 cents) willnot change the Class I or uniform price of any handlers fully regulatedunder the Iowa order.This change is necessary to assure proper price alignment should thereever be a pool plant, or a nonpool plant that handles surplus milk pooledunder the Iowa order, located in the portion of Whiteside County that willbe in the marketing area. The townships are adjacent to other territoryin Illinois and Iowa that are in Zone 2. For these reasons, the proposalshould be adopted.4. <T3>Whether an emergency exists to warrant the omission of a recommendeddecision and the opportunity to file written exception with respect toissue number 1. </T3>The notice of hearing stated that evidence will betaken to determine whether emergency marketing conditions exist that wouldwarrant the omission of a recommended decision under the rules of practiceand procedure with respect to Proposal No. 2 (plant lock-in). Althoughthis decision provides for the two month lock-in as modified, the provisionwould have no application until such time as the Chicago order may be amendedto provide for an accommodating lock-out provision. Several parties objectedto the request by SVF for the omission of a recommended decision. We concludethat omitting a recommended decision would serve no useful purpose. Therecan be no justification for adopting and implementing on an emergency basisa provision that cannot be utilized in the foreseeable future. Accordingly,a recommended decision has been issued.Swiss Valley Farms took exception to the conclusion that omitting a RecommendedDecision would serve no useful purpose. The exception indicated that omissionof a Recommended Decision would have expedited the change in marketingarea. The Hearing Notice clearly stated that that omission of a RecommendedDecision would be considered with respect to proposal No. 2, which wasthe lock-in proposal. Emergency action to change the marketing area wasnot contemplated. Accordingly, this exception must be denied.<ITAG tagnum="84">Rulings on Proposed Findings and Conclusions</ITAG>Briefs and proposed findings and conclusions were filed on behalf of certaininterested parties. These briefs, proposed findings and conclusions andthe evidence in the record were considered in making the findings and conclusionsset forth above. To the extent that the suggested findings and conclusionsfiled by interested parties are inconsistent with the findings and conclusionsset forth herein, the requests to make such findings or reach such conclusionsare denied for the reasons previously stated in this decision.<ITAG tagnum="84">General Findings</ITAG>The findings and determinations hereinafter set forth supplement thosethat were made when the Iowa order was first issued and when it was amended.The previous findings and determinations are hereby ratified and confirmed,except when they may conflict with those set forth herein.(a) The tentative marketing agreement and the order, as hereby proposedto be amended, and all of the terms and conditions thereof, will tend toeffectuate the declared policy of the Act;(b) The parity prices of milk as determined pursuant to section 2 of theAct are not reasonable in view of the price of feeds, available suppliesof feeds, and other economic conditions which affect market supply anddemand for milk in the marketing area, and the minimum prices specifiedin the tentative marketing agreement and the order, as hereby proposedto be amended, are such prices as will reflect the aforesaid factors, insurea sufficient quantity or pure and wholesome milk, and be in the publicinterest;(c) The tentative marketing agreement and the order, as hereby proposedto be amended, will regulate the handling of milk in the same manner as,and will be applicable only to persons in the respective classes of industrialand commercial activity specified in, a marketing agreement upon whicha hearing has been held; and(d) All milk and milk products handled by handlers, as defined in the tentativemarketing agreement and the order as hereby proposed to be amended, arein the current of interstate commerce or directly burden, obstruct, oraffect interstate commerce in milk or its products.<ITAG tagnum="84">Rulings on Exceptions</ITAG>In arriving at the findings and conclusions, and the regulatory provisionsof this decision, each of the exceptions received was carefully and fullyconsidered in conjunction with the record evidence. To the extent thatthe findings and conclusions and the regulatory provisions of this decisionare at variance with any of the exceptions, such exceptions are herebyoverruled for the reasons previously stated in this decision.<ITAG tagnum="84">Marketing Agreement and Order</ITAG>Annexed hereto and made a part hereof are two documents, a Marketing Agreementregulating the handling of milk, and an Order amending the order regulatingthe handling of milk in the Iowa marketing area, which have been decidedupon as the detailed and appropriate means of effectuating the foregoingconclusions.It is hereby ordered that this entire decision and the two documents annexedhereto be published in the <T4>Federal Register. </T4>Determination of Producer Approval and Representative PeriodApril 1989 is hereby determined to be the representative period for thepurpose of ascertaining whether the issuance of the order, as amended andas hereby proposed to be amended, regulating the handling of milk in theIowa marketing area is approved or favored by producers, as defined underthe terms of the order (as amended and as hereby proposed to be amended),who during such representative period were engaged in the production ofmilk for sale within the aforesaid marketing area.<ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 7 CFR Part 1079</ITAG>Milk marketing orders, Milk, Dairy products.<ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, on November 20, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">John E. Frydenlund,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Deputy Assistant Secretary Marketing and Inspection Services.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="85">Order Amending the Order Regulating the Handling of Milk in the IowaMarketing Area</ITAG>(This order shall not become effective unless and until the requirementsof andSection; 900.14 of the rules of practice and procedure governing proceedingsto formulate marketing agreements and marketing orders have been met.)<ITAG tagnum="84">Findings and Determinations</ITAG>The findings and determinations hereinafter set forth supplement thosethat were made when the order was first issued and when it was amended.The previous findings and determinations are hereby ratified and confirmed,except where they may conflict with those set forth herein.(a) Findings. A public hearing was held upon certain proposed amendmentsto the tentative marketing agreement and to the order regulating the handlingof milk in the Iowa marketing area. The hearing was held pursuant to theprovisions of the Agricultural Marketing Agreement Act of 1937, as amended(7 U.S.C. 601-674), and the applicable rules of practice and procedure(7 CFR part 900).Upon the basis of the evidence introduced at such hearing and the recordthereof, it is found that:(1) The said order as hereby amended, and all of the terms and conditionsthereof, will tend to effectuate the declared policy of the Act;(2) The parity prices of milk, as determined pursuant to section 2 of theAct, are not reasonable in view of the price of feeds, available suppliesof feeds, and other economic conditions which affect market supply anddemand for milk in the said marketing area; and the minimum prices specifiedin the order as hereby amended are such prices as will reflect the aforesaidfactors, insure a sufficient quantity of pure and wholesome milk, and bein the public interest;(3) The said order as hereby amended regulates the handling of milk inthe same manner as, and is applicable only to persons in the respectiveclasses of industrial or commercial activity specified in, a marketingagreement upon which a hearing has been held; and(4) All milk and milk products handled by handlers, as defined in the orderas hereby amended, are in the current of interstate commerce or directlyburden, obstruct, or affect interstate commerce in milk or its products.<ITAG tagnum="84">Order Relative to Handling</ITAG>It is therefore ordered that on and after the effective date hereof, thehandling of milk in the Iowa marketing area shall be in conformity to andin compliance with the terms and conditions of the order, as amended, andas hereby amended, as follows:The provisions of the proposed marketing agreement and order amending theorder contained in the recommended decision issued by the Administrator,on April 12, 1989 and published in the <T4>Federal Register </T4>on April 18, 1989 (54 FR 15417), shall be andare the terms and provisions of this order, amending the order, and areset forth in full herein.<ITAG tagnum="52">PART 1079_[AMENDED]</ITAG>1. The authority citation for 7 CFR part 1079 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Secs. 1-19, 48 Stat. 31, as amended; 7 U.S.C. 601-674.</ITAG>2. Amend andSection; (1079.2) by revising paragraphs (a) and (b), and addingparagraphs (c) and (d) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;1079.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Iowa marketing area.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(a) The Iowa counties of: Adair, Adams, Allamakee, Appanoose, Audubon,Benton, Black Hawk, Boone, Bremer, Buchanan, Calhoun, Carroll, Cedar, CerroGordo, Chickasaw, Clarke, Clayton, Clinton, Dallas, Davis, Decatur, Delaware,Des Moines, Dubuque, Fayette, Floyd, Franklin, Greene, Grundy, Guthrie,Hamilton, Hancock, Hardin, Henry, Humboldt, Iowa, Jackson, Jasper, Jefferson,Johnson, Jones, Keokuk, Linn, Louisa, Lucas, Madison, Mahaska, Marion,Marshall, Monroe, Muscatine, Pocahontas, Polk, Poweshiek, Ringgold, Scott,Story, Tama, Taylor, Union, Van Buren, Wapello, Warren, Washington, Wayne,Webster, Wright, and the city of Osage in Mitchell County.(b) The Illinois counties of: Henderson, Henry, Mercer, Rock Island, andthe city of East Dubuque in Jo Daviess County, and the townships of Fulton,Ustick, Clyde, Genesee, Mount Pleasant, Union Grove, Garden Plain, Lyndon,Fenton, Newton, Prophetstown, Portland and Erie in Whiteside County.(c) The Missouri counties of: Grundy, Harrison, Mercer, Putnam, Schuyler.(d) The Wisconsin counties of: Crawford and Grant.3. In andSection;1079.7, revise paragraph (d) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;1079.7</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Pool plant.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>(d) The term ``pool plant'' shall not apply to the following plants:(1) A producer-handler plant;(2) A governmental agency plant;(3) A plant qualified as a pool plant pursuant to paragraph (a) in thissection which also meets the pooling requirements of another Federal orderand from which during the month a greater quantity of fluid milk products,except filled milk, was disposed of as route disposition, in such othermarketing area and to pool plants qualified on the basis of route dispositionin such other marketing area than was so disposed of from such plant inthe Iowa marketing area as route disposition, or to pool plants qualifiedon the basis of route disposition, except that if such plant was subjectto all the provisions of this part in the immediately preceding month,it shall continue to be subject to all the provisions of this part untilthe third consecutive month in which a greater proportion of its fluidmilk products disposition, except filled milk, is made in the above describedmanner in such other marketing area, unless, notwithstanding the provisionsof this paragraph, it is regulated by such other order;(4) A plant qualified as a pool plant pursuant to this section which alsomeets the pooling requirements of another Federal order and from whichduring the month a greater quantity of fluid milk products, except filledmilk, was disposed of as route disposition in this marketing area, andto pool plants qualified on the basis of route disposition in this marketingarea than was so disposed of in such other Federal order marketing areabut which plant is, nevertheless, fully regulated under such other Federalorder; and(5) That portion of a plant that is physically separated from the GradeA portion of such plant, is operated separately, and is not approved byany regulatory agency for the receiving, processing, or packaging of anyfluid milk product for Grade A disposition.4. In andSection;1079.52, revise paragraph (a)(2)(ii) to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection;1079.52</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Plant location adjustments for handlers.</ITAG>(a) * * *(2) * * *(ii) The Illinois counties of Henry, Mercer, Rock Island, and the townshipsof Fulton, Ustick, Clyde, Genesee, Mount Pleasant, Union Grove, GardenPlain, Lyndon, Fenton, Newton, Prophetstown, Portland and Erie in WhitesideCounty.<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Marketing Agreement Regulating the Handling of Milk In the Iowa MarketingArea</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">The parties hereto, in order to effectuate the declared policy ofthe Act, and in accordance with the rules of practice and procedure effectivethereunder (7 CFR part 900), desire to enter into this marketing agreementand do hereby agree that the provisions referred to in paragraph I hereofas augmented by the provisions specified in paragraph II hereof, shallbe and are the provisions of this marketing agreement as if set out infull herein.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">I. The findings and determinations, order relative to handling, andthe provisions of andSection;andSection;1079.1 to 1079.86, all inclusive, ofthe order regulating the handling of milk in the Iowa marketing area (7CFR part 1079) which is annexed hereto; and</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">II. The following provisions:</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73">andSection;1079.87 Record of milk handled and authorization to correcttypographical errors.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(a) Record of milk handled. The undersigned certifies that he handledduring the month of April 1989, <T2>XXXXX</T2> hundredweight of milk covered by this marketing agreement.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(b) Authorization to correct typographical errors. The undersignedhereby authorizes the Director, or Acting Director, Dairy Division, AgriculturalMarketing Service, to correct any typographical errors which may have beenmade in this marketing agreement.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73">andSection;1079.88 Effective date</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">This marketing agreement shall become effective upon the executionof a counterpart hereof by the Secretary in accordance with andSection;900.14(a)of the aforesaid rules of practice and procedure.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">In Witness Whereof, The contracting handlers, acting under the provisionsof the Act, for the purposes and subject to the limitations herein containedand not otherwise, have hereunto set their respective hands and seals.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(SEAL)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">_</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(Signature)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">By</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">  (Name)      (Title)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">_</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(Address)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">Attest</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="77">Date</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-27767 Filed 11-27-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 3410-02-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>