<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89608-0056 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.6-08-89.f2.A1055</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="52">Health Services Programs for Indian Infants, Children, and Youth</ITAG>Memorandum of Agreement Between The Department of the Interior Bureau ofIndian Affairs And The Department of Health and Human Services Indian HealthServices To implement a coordinated, multidisciplinary, interagency programfor services to handicapped Indian infants, children and youth from birththrough twenty-one years of age in accordance with Pub. L. 94-142 as amendedby Pub. L. 99-457, the 1986 Technical Amendments to the Education of theHandicapped Act.<ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Bureau of Indian Affairs, Interior.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Notice: Request for Comments.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>This is a republication for additional comments. Thefirst notice was published in volume 54FR9259.Notice is hereby given that the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) and theIndian Health Service (IHS) have completed a Memorandum of Agreement (MOA)regarding the implementation of a coordinated, multidisciplinary, interagencyprogram for services to handicapped Indian infants, children and youthfrom birth through twenty-one years of age. This agreement provides forthe development and implementation of joint policies and procedures anda method to establish program priorities for the education and treatmentof identified handicapped Indian children within the joint jurisdictionsof the BIA and IHS.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE: </T2>Comments shall be submitted on or before July 10, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>All comments concerning this Memorandum of Agreementshould be addressed to Goodwin K. Cobb, Acting Chief, Branch of ExceptionalEducation, Office of Indian Education Programs, Bureau of Indian Affairs,1951 Constitution Avenue NW. (MS 3512 MIB, Code 523), Washington, DC 20245.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Carol L. Zilka, Education Specialist,Early Childhood Program, Telephone: (202) 343-3559.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>This notice is published in exerciseof authority delegated by the Secretary of the Interior to the AssistantSecretary_Indian Affairs by 209 Department Manual 8. The authority forthis Memorandum of Agreement is the Snyder Act (25 U.S.C. 13), Pub. L.94-142, Education of the Handicapped Act (EHA) (20 U.S.C. Secs. 1400-1485),as amended by the Education of the Handicapped Amendments of 1986 (Pub.L. 99-457), and the Economy Act (31 U.S.C. 1535).Pub. L. 99-457 (The Education of the Handicapped Act Amendments of 1986)amended the Education of the Handicapped Act (Pub. L. 94-142), reauthorizedthe discretionary programs under the Act, and authorized a new early interventionprogram for handicapped infants and toddlers and their families.Under existing regulations (34 CFR 300.600), a State Education Agency (SEA)may utilize interagency agreements as a means of implementing its generalsupervision requirements. The 1986 Amendments require that State plansinclude policies and procedures for developing and implementing interagencyagreements between the State and ``other appropriate State and local agencies.''The BIA, while not a State, is required to submit a State plan that meetsthe requirements of Pub. L. 99-457 sec. 1413 and an application which meetsthe requirements of section 1414, as well as, section 1484 of Part H (Infantsand Toddlers Program).This Memorandum of Agreement reflects the BIA's understanding of section613(a)(13) of the statute that ``other appropriate'' agencies are thoseFederal, State, and local agencies other than the BIA that provide or payfor special education or related services for Indian children with handicappingconditions. The MOA describes the role that the BIA and IHS have in providingor paying for those services. The MOA also describes the responsibilitiesof each agency and establishes a mechanism for resolving interagency disputes.The 1986 Amendments state that Part B shall not be construed to limit theresponsibilities of agencies other than educational agencies for providingor paying for services provided to children under Part B. The 1986 Amendmentsalso state that Part B shall not be construed to permit a State to reduceassistance or alter eligibility under programs supported by Federal Medicaidand Maternal and Child Health Programs. This is intended to ensure thatno child is treated differently under those two programs because the childis receiving services under an individual Education Plan (IEP), or forany other reason related to the existence or applicability of Part B.While States have until 1990-1991 to provide services for handicapped children,ages three through five, the BIA was mandated under Pub. L. 99-457 to beginproviding services for these children during the 1987-1988 school year.The Education of the Handicapped Act Amendments of 1986 (Pub. L. 99-457)added a new State formula grant program to assist States in establishinga statewide system of early intervention services for infants and toddlerswith handicaps and their families. This new program (designated as PartH of the EHA) replaces, and substantially expands, the State grant provisionsestablished in 1983 under the Handicapped Children's Early Education Program(HCEEP). Part H focuses on similar activities, but limits the age rangeto children from birth through two years of age.Part H is the only program administered by the Department of Education(DOE) that focuses exclusively on meeting the needs of infants and toddlerswith handicaps. Children in this age group have been traditionally servedthrough programs administered by the Department of Health and Human Services.The BIA has been designated as the Lead Agency under Part H. The Lead Agencyis responsible for: (a) Submitting applications for, and receiving fundsunder this program, and (b) serving as the lead agency responsible forthe general administration of program and activities carried out underPart H. The BIA is mandated under Part H to develop a comprehensive systemof early intervention services for handicapped Indian infants and toddlersby 1990-1991 that fits the individual characteristics of the BIA.Each comprehensive system of early intervention is to be planned and carriedout as a coordinated, interagency, multidisciplinary program. Generally,no one agency has the funding resources, services, or authority to provideall appropriate early intervention services for all infants and toddlerswith handicaps. The legislative history of Pub. L. 99-457 emphasizes theconcept of interagency coordination, by acknowledging that even in Statesrequiring a free appropriate public education from birth, no single agencyprovides all services to all children with handicaps. Rather, existingservice delivery systems represent interdependence among public and privateagencies and organizations at the State and local levels.While the BIA is the Lead Agency under Part H, it does not have availablewithin its system, the full complement of services needed by handicappedinfants and toddlers and their families, e.g., developmental disabilityprograms, health services, education, social services, and mental health.Currently, the BIA has available special education, related services, andsocial services. The IHS provides, within the scope of its health program,direct medical, social, and mental health services to handicapped indianinfants and toddlers, children, and youth.This MOA provides the mechanism for the development of a coordinated, multidisciplinary,interagency program between the Bureau of Indian Affairs and the IndianHealth Service for the provision of services for handicapped Indian infants,toddlers, children, and youth. The MOA will remain in effect until suchtime as agreed upon by both parties. The MOA will be reviewed annuallyand modified as needed for compliance with law and regulation. A BIA andIHS Task Group will develop an Action Plan which will include: goals, objectives,related activities or products, names of responsible agency/person, timelines,and evaluation criteria for each objective. The Action Plan will be reviewedquarterly by the task group of appropriate BIA/IHS representatives andthe Plan will be revised annually.<ITAG tagnum="6">Wilson T. Babby,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Deputy to the Assistant Secretary_Indian Affairs/Director (Indian EducationPrograms), Memorandum of Agreement (MOA).</ITAG>This memorandum provides the terms of agreement for services to be sharedby the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) and the Indian Health Service (IHS)in fulfilling each agency's individual responsibilities and identifiedareas of joint cooperative needs for handicapped Indian children and youth.<ITAG tagnum="84">I. Purpose </ITAG>The purpose of this agreement is to provide for the development and implementationof joint policies and procedures and to establish program priorities forthe education and treatment of handicapped Indian children identified inthe statute within our joint jurisdictions.<ITAG tagnum="84">II. Authority </ITAG>Snyder Act (25 U.S.C. 13) and 20 U.S.C. 1400-1485, Pub. L. 94-142, theEducation of the Handicapped Act (EHA), as amended by the Education ofthe Handicapped Amendments of 1986 (Pub. L. 99-457), and the Economy Act,31 U.S.C. 1535.<ITAG tagnum="84">III. Introduction </ITAG>The Assistant Secretary of the Interior_Indian Affairs (BIA) and the Directorof Indian Health Service (IHS) as administrators of agencies responsibleto serve Indian children and youth recognize that: A. The BIA has responsibilities to the extent it receives set-aside fundingunder the EHA: (1) to provide special education and related services to handicapped Indianchildren attending BIA schools; a. <T3>Related services</T3> include diagnostic, developmental, correctiveand supportive services such as (1) speech pathology and audiology, (2)psychological services, (3) physical and occupational therapy, (4) recreation,(5) counseling, and (6) medical diagnosis and evaluation but <T3>not</T3> other medical services (20 U.S.C. 1401(a)(17)). (2) within a statewide system, to coordinate with State agencies for theprovision of special education and related services to preschool aged Indianhandicapped children, ages three through five, on reservations servicedby BIA schools; (3) within a statewide system, to coordinate with State agencies for theprovision of early intervention services to handicapped Indian infantsand toddlers, ages birth through two, on reservations serviced by BIA schools.a. <T3>Early interventing services</T3> include <T3>related services</T3> plus family training, counseling and home visits,case management services, and ``health services necessary to enable theinfant and toddlers to benefit from the other early intervention services''(20 U.S.C. 1472). With respect to infants and toddlers, ages birth through two, EHA requiresthat the State Lead Agency ensure that each handicapped infant and toddlerin the State (including Indian children) shall receive a multidisciplinaryassessment of a child's unique needs and identification of service to meetthose needs, a written individualized Family Service Plan (IFSP), and casemanagement services to implement the IFSP. The House Report (Report 99-860)at page 11 states:<ITAG tagnum="21">In State's (sic) serving significant numbers of Indian handicappedinfants and toddlers, the lead agency must consult with and obtain inputfrom Tribal education offices/committees, BIA schools, tribal schools,head start programs and other providers of service at the local and Statelevel to ensure that the needs of these infants and toddlers are consideredand accounted for in the statewide system.</ITAG>Handicapped Indian infants and toddlers are clearly included within theintended statewide system of services and in carrying out its responsibilitiesthe BIA is acting as part of the statewide system. B. The IHS provides health services to Indians under the discretionaryauthority of the Snyder Act, some of which overlap with <T3>related services</T3> and <T3>early intervention services</T3> as defined in the EHA. The IHS hasno responsibilities as such under the EHA. It is not an education agencyfunded under said act. The BIA and IHS in recognizing that neither agency can provide a comprehensiveprogram that would satisfy all the needs and services for different agegroups and handicapped conditions further confirms their respective beliefthat services within their jurisdictions require a comprehensive, multidisciplinary,interagency approach to meet the needs of handicapped Indian infants andtoddlers, children and youth. In keeping with the intent to provide appropriate services and to extendpresent collaborative efforts, the purpose of this MOA is to identify areasof national and local cooperation needed to serve the needs of handicappedIndian children and youth within our joint jurisdictions. Local BIA/IHSagreements are to be developed based on the identified areas of this MOAto ensure the purpose of the MOA is fulfilled.Tribal organizations, other Federal and State agencies providing servicesare to be included in agreements for handicapped services.<ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Substance of Agreement</ITAG>Areas of collaborationThe BIA and IHS recognize that the provision of services to handicappedIndian infants and toddlers, children and youth will require a comprehensive,interagency program which includes components for:a. Prevention, early recognition and intervention activities to providemedical, mental health, dental, education, social and family support servicesto handicapped Indian infants and toddlers from birth to two years of ageand their families.b. Education, medical, dental, mental health, social and family supportservices for handicapped Indian children and youth from three through twenty-oneyears of age.c. Transition, tracking and educational placement services for handicappedIndian children and youth.The BIA will establish, on an as needed basis, task force groups to reviewprograms and services under this agreement which will include appropriaterepresentatives from the Indian Health Service. These groups will meetas needs arise to develop procedures, guidelines and service prioritiesfor coordination with statewide systems. Major areas of focus are:A. The development of administrative policies, procedures, and guidelinesconsistent with applicable Federal regulations which reflect program, staffand funding responsibilities needed for interagency cooperation and servicesfor handicapped Indian infants and toddlers (birth to two years of age,inclusive) and children and youth (three through twenty-one years of age)including:(1) Eligibility and placement criteria for ``at risk'' and developmentallydelayed infants and toddlers.(2) Coordinate agency efforts regarding Child Find and screening.(3) Registry, tracking, and referral.(4) Multidisciplinary team evaluation and assessment.(5) Multidisciplinary team formulated Individual Education Plan (IEP) andIndividualized Family Service Plan (IFSP), which give attention to education,medical, mental health and social needs for:a. Special Educationb. Related Servicesc. Medical Servicesd. Social Servicese. Mental Health Servicesf. Communication and Audiological Servicesg. Physical and Occupational Therapy Servicesh. Nutrition Servicesi. Home Nursing Servicesj. Dental Servicesk. Vocational Servicesl. Parent and Family Training(6) Family involvement in formulating and implement the IEP and IFSP.(7) Follow-up and non-BIA/IHS referrals.(8) Transition Services(9) Institutional Care(10) Program EvaluationB. As funds become available under EHA, the BIA and IHS will delineateresponsibility within statewide systems for specific professional servicesand financial resources for providing comprehensive handicapped care whichincludes:(1) Guidance and consultation for determination of staffing and programneeds to provide services at local levels.(2) Determination of program cost and funding responsibilities for services.(3) Establishing policy, procedures and accountability for interagencytransfer of funds under the Economy Act.(4) Establishing and publishing policies and guidelines for distributionto each Agency's programs and staff regarding program requirements andresponsibilities.(5) Guidance and consultation for establishing local procedures to ensureservice delivery through interagency coordination, e.g., model agreements.C. Develop an interagency, confidential system of data collection and trackingof those Indian individuals (ages birth through twenty-one) within jointjurisdictions in need of and/or receiving handicapped services in eacharea and for information exchange for program services which includes:1. Development of a computerized program which will be used locally totrack Indian infants and toddlers, children and youth in need of handicappedservices.2. Informing health, education and social service professionals about thehandicapped differences and disputes for meaningful cooperation and coordination.<ITAG tagnum="84">V. Responsibilities</ITAG>The following areas of responsibilities are agreed to by the BIA and IHS.A. Responsibility of the BIA: The BIA is responsible for serving handicappedIndian children on reservations serviced by BIA operated elementary andsecondary schools. The BIA will assist individual States in the coordinationof State services for handicapped children, ages birth through five, wholive on reservations that are serviced by BIA elementary and secondaryschools. The BIA will develop within the statewide system a comprehensive,multidisciplinary, interagency program of services for exceptional educationand related services as specified in Pub. L. 94-142 as amended by Pub.L. 99-457.The BIA will submit an Annual Application to the Department of Educationfor funding of the handicapped infants and toddlers program (Part H) andfor Part B services under Pub. L. 94-142 as amended by Pub. L. 99-457 andDepartment of Education Regulations 34 CFR Parts 300, 301 and 303.Provide task groups and provide for representation of members from IHSon these groups.Provide staff to develop an interagency program to respond to the majorfocus of this MOA and to provide management of this MOA.B. Responsibility of the IHS: The IHS will assist in the development ofa systemwide, comprehensive, multidisciplinary, interagency program includingidentification and intervention services for handicapped infants and toddlersand their families by providing services consistent with the scope of IHShealth care and within the limitations of available IHS resources and bycoordinating services with other agencies responsible under 20 U.S.C. SubchapterVII.The IHS will participate in the development of an action plan as specifiedin Section IV, Terms of Agreement and will include the following elements:a. The IHS will assist in the development and implementation of a handicappedIndian children's registry and tracking system that will efficiently andeffectively facilitate provisions of education and health care needs ofhandicapped Indian children, ages birth through twenty-one. Componentsof this system will include: definitions of ``at risk'' and handicappingconditions, computer hardware and software needs, and registry and trackingformats.b. The IHS will coordinate, in cooperation with existing State and Federalcoordination activities, multidisciplinary activities necessary to meetthe comprehensive needs of handicapped Indian infants and toddlers andchildren through age twenty-one living on reservations where BIA operatedor funded schools exist. As funds become available, IHS area coordinationwill be established in consultation with the BIA to initiate and maintainlocal registries and tracking systems, to develop and strengthen communicationlinkages between the IHS and BIA and other Federal agencies, to facilitateinformation exchange between the IHS and other agencies, as required toserve the needs of handicapped Indian children, and, by regulation andpolicy, establish services ensuring efficient transition of handicappedIndian children from one jurisdiction of responsibility to another. c. This MOA focuses on the needs of handicapped Indian children who liveon reservations served by BIA funded schools, however, this does not precludethe IHS from meeting its legal service mandates.Such funds that may become available to the IHS during the first two yearsof this MOA will be used in program development. Based on the specificsof the Action Plan, the IHS is responsible to submit a plan detailing programactions including any plan to contract activities before any funds willbe transferred and to provide quarterly written progress reports to theBIA indicating program status.If the specifics of the Action Plan requires the transfer of any portionof the BIA's Pub. L. 99-457, Part H funds to the IHS, the IHS agrees tomaintain these funds separately and will account for these funds quarterlyand will meet any applicable requirements of the Economy Act.The IHS is currently providing within its health program, direct medical,social, and mental health services to handicapped Indian children. As programdevelopment progresses, and children are served, it is expected that additionalspecial consultation, evaluation and intervention services will be necessary.The IHS has inadequate resources to meet all these health needs. However,the IHS is responsible to assist in arranging for the comprehensive healthcare needs of handicapped Indian children and is committed to meet theneeds of handicapped Indian children and to collaborate with the BIA andother responsible agencies, to identify needs and funding sources to meetthe needs of handicapped Indian children.<ITAG tagnum="84">VI. Terms of Agreement</ITAG>This MOA will remain in effect until such time as agreed upon by both parties.This MOA will be reviewed annually and modified as needed for compliancewith law and regulation.Within 45 days of the effective date of this agreement and thereafter,within 45 days of the beginning of each fiscal year (FY) beginning with1990, a BIA and IHS Task Group will develop an Action Plan which will includethe following:a. Goals,b. Specific objectives to be accomplished, c. Related activities or products,d. Names of responsible agency/person,e. Timelines (beginning and ending) and,f. Evaluation criteria for each objective.This Action Plan will be reviewed quarterly by the Task Group of appropriateBIA/IHS representatives. The Action Plan will be revised annually.<ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-13595 Filed 6-7-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4310-02-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>