<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89119-0065 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.1-19-89.f2.A1064</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="18">Health Care Financing Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Statement of Organization, Functions, and Delegations of Authority</ITAG>Part F. of the Statement of Organization, Functions and Delegations ofAuthority for the Department of Health and Human Services, Health CareFinancing Administration (HCFA), <T4>Federal Register</T4>, Vol. 52, No. 185, dated Thursday, September24, 1987, pg. 35967; Vol. 52, No. 144, dated Tuesday, July 28, 1987, pp.28195-28196; Vol. 52, No. 43, dated Thursday, March 5, 1987, pp. 6880-6884;and Vol. 50, No. 74, pg. 15230, dated Wednesday, April 17, 1985) are amendedto reflect a realignment of functions in the Office of Program OperationsProcedures (OPOP), Bureau of Program Operations in the Office of the AssociateAdministrator for Operations as well as the creation of a new divisionentitled the Division of Operational Systems Development. Also, the PartA appeals responsibilities from the Office of Financial Operations (OFO),Division of Overpayment Prevention (DOP) are being transferred to the OPOP,Division of Entitlement Requirements.The specific amendments to Part F. are described below:andbullet; Section FP.10.A.3., Office of Program Operations Procedures (FPA8)(Organization),is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following section. SectionFP.10.A.3. now reads:3. Office of Program Operations Procedures (FPA8).a. Division of Provider Procedures (FPA81).b. Division of Carrier Procedures (FPA82).c. Division of Entitlement Procedures (FPA84).d. Division of Operational Systems Development (FPA85).andbullet; Section FP.20.A.3., Office of Program Operations Procedures (FPA8)(Functions), is deleted in its entirety and replaced by the following section.Section FP.20.A.3. now reads:<ITAG tagnum="84">3. Office of Program Operations Procedures (FPA8).</ITAG>Develops and promulgates the specifications, requirements, methods, systems,standards and procedures to implement and maintain the operational systemsfor the Medicare program Part A, Part B and Drug Benefit including detaileddefinitions of the relative responsibilities of providers, contractors,HCFA and the beneficiaries of HCFA's programs. Manages the Medicare contractorand drug processors workload, establishes priorities and monitors the implementationof major systems changes. Reviews and evaluates systems, systems plansand proposals and Automated Data Processing acquisition and modificationsinvolving carriers, intermediaries and drug processors. Plans, directsand coordinates operational policy, systems and procedures for the establishmentand maintenance of Medicare entitlement, premium billing and collection.Maintains a National Coding System for use in processing Medicare claims.Manages contractor medical review and drug utilization review functionsand develops and promulgates specifications and requirements for contractorprocessing of beneficiary and provider appeals.a. Division of Provider Procedures (FPA81)Directs the development and issuance of specifications, requirements procedures,functional standards, and instructional material to implement and maintainoperational systems for medical audit of claims, for processing MedicarePart A and outpatient claims, and for defining their applications to Medicarecontractors, providers, suppliers of services, and HCFA. Develops productivityinvestments and data initiatives designed to promote efficiency and uniformityof operations. Maintains contractor and provider instructional manuals.Serves as the Bureau resource for implementing legislative changes impactingon Part A and outpatient program operations. Prepares general systems plansand develops requirements for the detailed design and programming for specialpurpose software modules used by Medicare contractors. Develops and clarifiesmethodologies for performing medical review. Plans, conducts, and evaluatesstudies aimed at long-range improvements in systems, methods, and proceduresas they relate to the administration of the Medicare program. Integratessystems within the framework of HCFA policies, goals, and objectives inan efficient and cost-effective manner. Develops, directs, and coordinatessystems plans and studies for the effective integration of all Medicareautomated and nonautomated processing systems at the contractor level.Designs and conducts studies, demonstrations, and surveys to improve Medicareoperational systems, methods, and procedures. Designs and tests new claimsprocessing modules and changes. Conducts, reviews, and performs analysesfor future development of sub-systems functions in such areas as data management,database systems analysis and design, terminal operations, minicomputers,and operational security. Coordinates systems demonstration projects andparticipates in the review and evaluation of systems-related applicationprojects. Provides direction to, and liaison with, HCFA components involvedin the maintenance of health insurance utilization records. Manages dataexchange systems between contractors and HCFA.b. Division of Carrier Procedures (FPA82)Directs the development and issuance of specifications, requirements, procedures,functional standards and instructional material to implement and maintainoperational systems for processing Medicare Part B claims and definingtheir applications to Medicare carriers, providers, suppliers of services,beneficiaries, and HCFA. Directs the program operation and financial managementof the Part B medical review program conducted by Medicare carriers includingdevelopment of nationally mandated prepayment screens and operational policyand procedures for carrier postpayment medical review. Directs the annualcarrier program statistical data preparation and submittal process andserves as a focal point for efforts to assure the quality of data. Managescontractor workloads and sets priorities for workloads which compete forcontractor resources. Develops and monitors the implementation of productivityinvestments and data initiatives designed to promote efficiency and uniformityof operations. Develops and manages all aspects of the contractor budgetactivities including justification, guidelines, reallocations and trackingfor the contractor productivity and participating physician budgets. Servesas the focal point for all contractor budget activities for the Office.Serves as the Bureau resource for assessing the administrative impact ofproposed legislation and regulations and implementing legislative changesimpacting on Part B program operations. Maintains and issues Medicare CarriersManual instructions. Manages the annual reasonable charge update process.Issues instructions for the annual physician/supplier participation enrollmentand monitoring of physicians charges. Assists in developing and conductingstudies for the effective integration of all Medicare Part B automatedand nonautomated processing systems at the contractor level. Assists instudies, demonstrations, and surveys to improve Medicare Part B operationalsystems, methods and procedures. Maintains the national procedure codingsystem for Part B claims processing including procedures for local codingvariations. Provides staff support and coordinates agency positions forthe HCFA member of the American Medical Association (AMA) CPT EditorialPanel which is responsible for approving changes to procedure codes forphysician services and represents HCFA on the Alpha-Numeric Panel whichapproves modifications to procedure coding for non-physician services.Plans, conducts, and evaluates studies aimed at long-range improvementsin methods and procedures as they relate to the administration of the Medicareprogram. Integrates systems within the framework of HCFA policies, goalsand objectives in an efficient and cost-effective manner.c. Division of Entitlement Requirements (FPA84)Plans, directs, and coordinates the development of operational policy,systems and procedures for establishing and maintaining Medicare entitlementrecords, billing and collecting Medicare premiums, administering Statebuy-in agreements and coordinating entitlement for individuals coveredunder the Medicare program. Plans, directs, and coordinates the developmentof operational policy, specifications, procedural requirements and othermaterials to implement, maintain or revise the appeals process for PartA and B claims. Develops procedures for conforming Bureau of Program Operations(BPO) systems of records with the Privacy Act including maintaining thesystem of records current in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> and clearing requests for information. Acts asthe Privacy Act Coordinator for BPO. Assesses the impact of operating systemson beneficiaries of HCFA programs and develops proposals to better meettheir needs. Manages use by contractors of telephone, written and personalcommunications to provide quality services to Medicare beneficiaries. Reviewsthe adequacy of services furnished by the Social Security Administration(SSA) in establishing entitlement for Medicare beneficiaries and collectingpremiums. Prepares and releases instructional material to SSA districtoffices on the entitlement, premium and buy-in processes. Issues instructionsto SSA and SSA field offices on resolving entitlement, premium and buy-inproblems and assists in resolving individual problems of beneficiarieswhen normal processes fail. Manages premium collections for billable individuals,third-party groups, and the State buy-in program.d. Division of Operational Systems Development (FPA85)Designs, develops and manages, at the national level, activities requiredto implement new systems for improvement of the Medicare eligibility systems,Part A and Part B claims processing systems, drug benefit claims processingsystems and the Medicare program database. Prepares systems plans and developspolicies for the design, implementation and evaluation of standardizedsystems and modules for use by Medicare carriers, intermediaries and drugprocessors. Directs the design, development, testing and implementationof innovative systems designed to improve national Medicare claims operationsincluding the Common Working File System, standard claims processing systemsand prescription drug claims processing systems. Provides national analysisand planning for new Medicare systems required by legislative initiatives.Evaluates HCFA-wide systems plans for their impact on functions relatedto Part A, Part B and drug processing systems. Integrates new systems withinthe framework of HCFA policies, goals and objectives in an efficient andcost-effective manner. Coordinates new systems initiative activities withother HCFA components, the Social Security Administration, HCFA regionaloffices, provider groups and other affected organizations.andbullet; Section FP.20.A.4., Office of Financial Operations (FPA7) is beingamended to reflect a transfer of functions from the Office of FinancialOperations to the Division of Entitlement Requirements, OPOP. The new Officeof Financial Operations functional statement reads as follows:<ITAG tagnum="84">4. Office of Financial Operations (FPA7)</ITAG>Establishes the policies and procedures by which contractors and regionaloffices prepare and submit periodic budget estimates. In consultation withother HCFA and BPO components, develops and negotiates the national budgetfor Medicare contractors, including workload and funds estimates. Controlsand manages the Medicare cash flow and related banking activities. Reviewsperiodic contractor expenditure reports to evaluate budget execution anddetermine the allowability of costs. Prepares analyses of Medicare expendituretrends and patterns. Reviews regional office and contractor performancein determining the correct amount of provider, physician and supplier overpayments,and assists contractors in negotiations related to the acceptability ofthe technique for determining the amount of overpayments and the methodsof recovery. Prepares cases when compromises are not appropriate and overpaymentsare collectible and assists the Claims Collection Officer in preparingsuch cases for disposition. Prepares manual instructions concerning theprocedures for the recovery of provider cost report, physician and supplieroverpayments. Designs, implements and maintains a Medicare overpaymenttracking system. Establishes procedures and guidelines to target the auditactivities of Medicare contractors. Assures that audit funds are utilizedto provide a high rate of return in program savings. Directs special auditprojects. Compiles operational and performance data for recurring and specialreports to reflect the status and trends in program operations effectiveness.andbullet; Section FP.20.A.4.d., Division of Overpayment Prevention (FPA77),is being amended to reflect a transfer of functions from the Office ofFinancial Operations to the Division of Entitlement Requirements, OPOP.The new Division of Overpayment Prevention functional statement reads asfollows:d. Division of Overpayment Prevention (FPA77)Analyzes the capabilities of the Medicare regional offices, intermediariesand carriers to ascertain the most efficient management of HCFA's debtresulting from overpayments to providers and suppliers. Develops operatingpolicy and manual instructions for regional offices and contractors onthe proper determination and recovery of Medicare overpayments. Analyzes,controls and monitors outstanding overpayments to assure that contractors,in negotiations with providers, physicians and suppliers, are performingeffectively in following the law and regulations regarding particular techniquesof determining the amount of overpayments, the responsibility for repaymentand the method of recovery. Develops operating policy for determining whenrecovery actions may be nonprofitable. Makes final determinations regardingthe acceptability of compromises of beneficiary overpayments (up to $20,000).In cases for which recovery action is pursued, maintains the control systemrelating to the statute of limitations for filing suit and processes uncollectibleoverpayment cases to, and maintains liaison with the General AccountingOffice, the Office of Inspector General, the Office of the General Counseland the Department of Justice.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: December 28, 1988.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">William L. Roper,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-1245 Filed 1-18-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4120-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>