<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89322-0082 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.3-22-89.f2.A1081</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="52">Richard J. Oliver, D.D.S.; Revocation of Registration</ITAG>On December 14, 1988, the Deputy Assistant Administrator, Office of DiversionControl, Drug Enforcement Administration (DEA), issued an Order to ShowCause to Richard J. Oliver, D.D.S., of 1591 Phoenix Boulevard, Suite 6,College Park, Georgia, proposing to revoke his DEA Certificate of RegistrationA01133874, and to deny any pending applications for renewal of his registrationas a practitioner under 21 U.S.C. 823(f). The statutory predicate for theissuance of the Order to Show Cause was Dr. Oliver's lack of authorizationto handle controlled substances in the State of Georgia. In addition, theOrder to Show Cause alleged that his continued registration is inconsistentwith the public interest, as that term is used in 21 U.S.C. 823(f) and824(a)(4), thereby providing a second statutory basis for the revocationof his registration.A returned registered-mail receipt indicates that the Order to Show Causewas received by counsel for Dr. Oliver on December 19, 1988. A copy ofthe Order to Show Cause also received at his registered address on December29, 1988. More than thirty days have passed since the Order to Show Causewas received by Dr. Oliver and the Drug Enforcement Administration hasreceived no response thereto. Therefore, the Administrator concludes thatDr. Oliver has waived his opportunity for a hearing on the issues raisedin the Order to Show Cause and, pursuant to 21 CFR 1301.54(d) and 1301.54(e),enters this final order based on the information contained in the DEA investigativefile. 21 CFR 1301.57.The Administrator finds that the Georgia Board of Dentistry (hereinafterreferred to as the ``Board'') received reliable information and evidencethat, due to Dr. Oliver's chemical dependency, his continued practice ofdentistry was detrimental to the public health, safety and welfare. Basedupon his inability to practice dentistry with reasonable skill and safety,the Board executed an Order for Mental/Physical Examination on March 28,1988. On the same date, Dr. Oliver admitted himself to Talbott RecoverySystems for substance abuse treatment. In April 1988, he sold his dentalpractice.On August 3, 1988, the Board determined that Dr. Oliver posed a continuedthreat to the public health, safety and welfare, and ordered that his licenseto practice dentistry in the State of Georgia be suspended, pending proceedingsfor revocation for further action. Consequently, Dr. Oliver is no longerauthorized to handle controlled substances in Georgia.The Drug Enforcement Administration does not have the authority to maintainthe registration of a practitioner who is not authorized to handle controlledsubstances in the state in which he conducts his business. 21 U.S.C. 823(f)and 824(a)(3). The Administrator has consistently so held. See <T3>Fazal Ahmad, M.D.,</T3> Docket No. 85-46, 51 FR 9543 (1986); <T3>Avner Kauffman, M.D., </T3>Docket No. 85-8, 50 FR 34208 (1984); and<T3>Aquostino Carlucci, M.D.,</T3> Docket No. 82-20, 49 FR 33184 (1984).In the instant case, Dr. Oliver is not currently authorized to handle controlledsubstances in the State of Georgia. Without the appropriate state authorityto handle controlled substances, he cannot hold a DEA Certificate of Registration.The Administrator also finds that Dr. Oliver's continue registration isinconsistent with the public interest.On August 30, 1988, an Alabama pharmacist called the DEA Atlanta FieldDivision and provided information concerning Dr. Oliver's prescribing practices.On August 21, 1988, this pharmacist had filled a prescription for 15 Lorcettablets, a Schedule III controlled substance, written by Dr. Oliver. Accordingto the Pharmacist, Dr. Oliver had visited the pharmacy on August 21, 1988,and August 29, 1988, both times after 8:00 p.m., accompanied by the womanfor whom the prescription was issued. The pharmacist became suspiciousafter Dr. Oliver told her that he had relocated his practice from Atlantato Columbus, Georgia. The pharmacist called the Boards of Dentistry inAlabama and Georgia and discovered he had no valid license in either state.Based on this information, the Administrator finds that Dr. Oliver continuedto issue prescriptions for controlled substances when he did not maintaina dental practice and following the suspension of his Georgia State dentallicense.Additionally, the Administrator finds that Dr. Oliver has a history ofpersonal use of controlled substances for other than legitimate medicalpurposes. Reliable information received by the Georgia Bureau of Investigationindicates that on numerous occasions, Dr. Oliver illegally obtained controlledsubstances for his personal use at various local pharmacies by writingprescriptions in other people's names.In addition to illegally obtaining controlled substances for his own abuse,on several occasions Dr. Oliver issued prescriptions for controlled substancesto his friends for other than legitimate medical purposes and outside thescope of his professional practice. He gave one of his friends a prescriptionfor Valium, a Schedule IV controlled substance, prior to oral surgery.This individual informed police that she felt Dr. Oliver prescribed a largerquantity of drugs than was medically necessary to be ``favorable'' towardher. She also advised Georgia authorities that Dr. Oliver gave her permissionto contact a local pharmacy and pose as his employee when she wished tohave the prescription refilled for ``recreational'' use. This individuallater was arrested for possession of controlled substances and was foundto be in possession of Dr. Oliver's DEA Certificate of Registration. Dr.Oliver issued two prescriptions for Valium to another friend on the sameday. This individual indicated that Dr. Oliver was aware that he wantedthe Valium for recreational use.Reports on file with the Georgia Bureau of Investigation (GBI) documentthat Dr. Oliver kept illicit cocaine at his dental office. Individualsreported seeing ounces of cocaine in Dr. Oliver's dental office. GBI reportsreveal that Dr. Oliver was involved with a drug distribution network whichmoves illicit drugs from Darien, Georgia, into the Atlanta Metropolitanarea and had, on occasion, knowingly allowed other individuals to use hisdental office to weigh cocaine prior to distribution. The Administrator may revoke a registration or deny an application forregistration if he determines that such registration would be inconsistentwith the public interest. The factors which are considered in determiningwhether the registration would be in the public interest are enumeratedin 21 U.S.C. 823(f). The Administrator has considered these factors andfinds that Dr. Oliver's continued registration would be contrary to thepublic interest. The factors relevant to this case are Dr. Oliver's compliancewith Federal, state or local laws relating to controlled substances, hisexperience in dispensing controlled substances, and such other conductwhich may threaten the public health and safety. Based upon the evidencepreviously discussed, the Administrator concludes that Dr. Oliver improperlyhandled controlled substances by issuing controlled substance prescriptionsfor himself and his friends for no legitimate medical purpose. In addition,Dr. Oliver issued several prescriptions for controlled substances at atime when he did not possess a valid state license. These violations demonstratethat Dr. Oliver cannot handle controlled substances with the care and restraintrequired for registrants. In addition, Dr. Oliver has demonstrated a disregardfor the laws and regulations under which he is registered. Such behavioris inconsistent with the public interest and cannot be tolerated. Further,Dr. Oliver's personal abuse of and participation in the illicit distribtutionof controlled substances poses a significant threat to the public healthand safety. Based upon Dr. Oliver's lack of state authorization to handle controlledsubstances, the Administrator concludes that his registration must be revoked.Also, evidence of Dr. Oliver's unlawful prescribing practices, participationin illicit drug distribution, and personal abuse of controlled substancessupport the conclusion that his continued registration is contrary to thepublic interest. Therefore, the Administrator concludes that Dr. Oliver'sregistration must be revoked and that any pending applications for renewalthereof must be denied. Accordingly, the Administrator of the Drug Enforcement Administration,pursuant to the authority vested in him by 21 U.S.C. 823 and 824 and 28CFR 0.100(b), orders that DEA Certificate of Registration A01133874, previouslyissued to Richard J. Oliver, D.D.S., be, and it hereby is, revoked. Itis further ordered that any pending applications for renewal of said registrationbe, and they hereby are, denied.<ITAG tagnum="21">This order is effective March 20, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Dated: March 14, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">John C. Lawn, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Administrator.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-6411 Filed 3-17-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4410-09-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>