<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89130-0086 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.1-30-89.f2.A1085</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket Nos. 50-338 and 50-339]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Virginia Electric and Power Co.; Consideration of Issuance of Amendmentsto Facility Operating Licenses and Proposed No Significant Hazards; ConsiderationDetermination and Opportunity for Hearing  </ITAG>The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is consideringissuance of amendments to Facility Operating Licenses No. NPF-4 and NPF-7,issued to the Virginia Electric and Power Company (the licensee), for operationof the North Anna Power Station, Units No. 1 and No. 2 (NA-1andamp;2) locatedin Louisa County, Virginia.  The amendments would revise the NA-1andamp;2 Technical Specifications (TS)3/4.9.10, Refueling Operations Water Level_Reactor Vessel, to allow controlrod movement with the requirement of 23 feet of water above the irradiatedfuel assemblies within the reactor pressure vessel. The proposed amendmentsremove the ambiguity associated with control rod latching and unlatchingoperations where control rods are raised (with the upper internals packageinstalled) for weight or drag testing.  The proposed amendments would clarify the existing TS 3.9.10 by breakingit into two parts: TS 3.9.10.1 would address fuel assembles and assurethat at least 23 feet of water will be maintained over the top of the reactorpressure vessel flange in Mode 6 during movement of fuel assembles withincontainment. References to control rod evolutions would be deleted. A newTS, 3.9.10.2, would be added to address control rod evolutions in Mode6 and require at least 23 feet of water be maintained over the top of irradiatedfuel assemblies within the reactor pressure vessel. This is consistentwith the existing basis for the specification.  On April 1, 1987, the licensee submitted a proposed TS change for NA-1andamp;2which revised the applicability of TS 3.9.10, ``Refueling Operations WaterLevel_Reactor Vessel,'' to conform to Standard Technical Specificationsfor Westinghouse Pressurized Water Reactors, NUREG-452, Rev. 3. The changewas approved by the NRC on May 23, 1988 by issuance of License AmendmentNos. 102 and 89 for NA-1andamp;2, respectively. As discussed in the NRC SafetyEvaluation, the change allowed the removal of vessel internal assembleswith less than the specified water level but still required 23 feet ofwater above the reactor pressure vessel flange whenever fuel assembliesor control rods are moved.  The upcoming 1989 refueling outage for NA-2, currently scheduled to beginFebruary 10, 1989, is the first refueling outage which will be conductedunder the revised TS. In preparation of the upcoming refueling, and subsequentdiscussion with the NRC staff, it was determined that the wording of therevised TS appeared to preclude a refueling evoluation that had previouslybeen considered by the licensee to be routine. Current NA-1andamp;2 refuelingprocedures and equipment design are based on this evolution.  Specifically, although not the intent of the TS, the wording could be interpretedto mean that weight/drag testing of control rods during unlatching/latchingoperations (i.e., movement) would require 23 feet of water above the reactorpressure vessel flange. The licensee believes these control rod unlatching/latchingevolutions directly support and are part of the reactor vessel upper internalsremoval/installation evolutions. Until now, the licensee's normal refuelingsequence has required the water level to be lowered to 23 feet above thetop to the fuel assemblies within the reactor vessel for removal/installationof the upper internals package and maintained at that level during controlrod unlatching/latching. The licensee believes that evolution is acceptable,as is, and should not now be precluded because of this rewording of theTS in May 1988.  Once the concern was identified, the license worked with the NRC staffin the fourth quarter of 1988 to determine the appropriate mechanism forcorrectly interpreting or clarifying TS 3.9.10. The licensee worked ingood faith, attempting to resolve the issue in an efficient manner. Afterseveral discussions with the NRC staff, the licensee submitted a letteron December 23, 1988 requesting concurrence with the licensee's interpretationof the TS as described above. On January 4, 1989 the licensee was informedby the NRC staff that the appropriate mechanism to resolve the issue wouldbe to submit a TS change.  Because the guidance to submit a TS change was received on January 4, 1989,and the NA-2 refueling outage is scheduled to commence February 10, 1989,insufficient time remains for publication of the 30 day notice in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. Therefore, the licensee has requested that thechange be processed in an exigent manner.  The licensee believes that appropriate and timely actions were taken priorto, and including the licensee's submittal for, an exigent TS change datedJanuary 13, 1989. The licensee worked with the appropriate NRC staff tounderstand and define the scope of the TS in question. In addition, thelicensee attempted to obtain clarification in December 1988 and acted promptlywhen notified in early January 1989 that the licensee's effort to obtainclarifiation was not the appropriate vehicle to resolve the issue and thata TS change would be required. In summary, the licensee believed that theseactions constitute a best effort at obtaining resolution in a timely mannerand that sufficient justification has been presented to permit exigentprocessing of the requested TS change.The Commission has made a proposed determination that the amendment requestinvolves no significant hazards considerations. Under the Commission'sregulations in 10 CFR 50.92, this means that operation of the facilityin accordance with the proposed amendments would not (1) involve a significantincrease in the probability or consequences of an accident previously evaluated;or (2) create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident fromany accident previously evaluated; or (3) involve a significant reductionin a margin of safety. The proposed change does not involve a significanthazards consideration as defined in 10 CFR 50.92 because operation of NA-1andamp;2in accordance with this change would not:  (1) Involve a significant increase in the probability or consequences ofan accident previously evaluated. This change does not alter the conditionsor assumptions of the accident anaylsis or the basis of the current TS.Fuel handling operations during refueling are unchanged and the refuelingwater level requirement remains consistent with the accident analysis assumptionsin the UFSAR concerning the minimum required water level. Therefore theprobability and the consequences of the fuel handling accident are notincreased. (2) Create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident fromany accident previously identified. This change does not alter the conditionsor assumptions of the accident analysis or the basis of the current TS.Fuel handling operations during refueling are unchanged and therefore thefuel handling accident evaluated in the UFSAR remains bounding in termsof the type of accidents that may occur and a new and different kind ofaccident is not created. (3) Involve a significant reduction in a margin of safety. This changedoes not alter the conditions or assumptions of the accident analysis orthe basis of the current TS. Fuel handling operations during refuelingare unchanged and the refueling water level requirement remains consistentwith the assumptions of the accident analysis. Consequently, the marginof 10 CFR Part 100 dose limits is not reduced. Accordingly, the Commission proposes to determine that this change doesnot involve significant hazards considerations. The Commission is seeking public comments on this proposed determination.Any comments received within 15 days after the date of publication of thisnotice will be considered in making any final determination. The Commissionwill not normally make a final determination unless it receives a requestfor a hearing. Written comments may be submitted by mail to the Regulatory PublicationsBranch, Division of Freedom of Information and Publications Services, Officeof Administration and Resources Management, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, and should cite the publication date and page numberof the <T4>Federal Register </T4>notice. Written comments may also be delivered to Room P-216, Phillips Building,7920 Norfolk Avenue, Bethesda, Maryland from 8:15 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Copiesof written comments received may be examined at the NRC Public DocumentRoom, the Gelman Building, 2120 L Street, NW., Washington, DC. The filingof requests for hearing and petitions for leave to intervene is discussedbelow. By March 1, 1989, the licensee may file a request for a hearing with respectto issuance of the amendments to the subject facility operating licensesand any person whose interest may be affected by this proceeding and whowishes to participate as a party in the proceeding must file a writtenrequest for hearing and a petition for leave to intervene. Requests fora hearing and petitions for leave to intervene shall be filed in accordancewith the Commission's ``Rule of Practice for Domestic Licensing Proceedings''in 10 CFR Part 2. If a request for a hearing or petition for leave to interveneis filed by the above date, the Commission or an Atomic Safety and LicensingBoard, designated by the Commission or by the Chairman of the Atomic Safetyand Licensing Board Panel, will rule on the request and/or petition; andthe Secretary or the designated Atomic Safety and Licensing Board willissue a notice of hearing or an appropriate order. As required by 10 CFR 2.714, a petition for leave to intervene shall setforth with particularity the interest of the petitioner in the proceeding,and how that interest may be affected by the results of the proceeding.The petition should specifically explain the reasons why intervention shouldbe permitted with particular reference to the following factors: (1) Thenature of the petitioner's right under the Act to be made a party to theproceeding; (2) the nature and extent of the petitioner's property, financial,or other interest in the proceeding; and (3) the possible effect of anyorder which may be entered in the proceding on the petitioner's interest.The petition should also identify the specific aspect(s) of the subjectmatter of the proceeding as to which petitioner wishes to intervene. Anyperson who has filed a petition for leave to intervene or who has beenadmitted as a party may amend the petition without requestion leave ofthe Board up to fifteen (15) days prior to the first pre-hearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, but such as amended petition must satisfythe specificity requirements described above. Not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, a petitioner shall file a supplement to thepetition to intervene, which must include a list of the contentions thatare sought to be litigated in the matter, and the bases for each contentionset forth with reasonable specificity. Contentions shall be limited tomatters within the scope of the amendments under consideration. A petitionerwho fails to file such a supplement which satisfies these requirementswith respect to at least one contention will not be permitted to participateas a party.Those permitted to intervene become parties to the proceeding, subjectto any limitations in the order granting leave to intervene, and have theopportunity to participate fully in the conduct of the hearing, includingthe opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses.If the amendments are issued before the expiration of 30-days, the Commissionwill make a final determination on the issue of no significant hazardsconsiderations. If a hearing is requested, the final determination willserve to decide when the hearing is held.If the final determination is that the amendment request involves no significanthazards considerations, the Commission may issue the amendments and makeit effective, notwithstanding the request for a hearing. Any hearing heldwould take place after issuance of the amendments.If the final determination is that the amendment request involves significanthazards considerations, any hearing held would take place before the issuanceof any amendment.Normally, the Commission will not issue the amendment until the expirationof the 15-day notice period. However, should circumstances change duringthe notice period, such that failure to act in a timely way would result,for example, in derating or shutdown of the facility, the Commission mayissue the license amendments before the expiration of the 15-day noticeperiod, provided that its final determination is that the amendments involveno significant hazards considerations. The final determination will considerall public and State comments received. Should the Commission take thisaction, it will publish a notice of issuance. The Commission expects thatthe need to take this action will occur very infrequently.A request for a hearing or a petition for leave to intervene must be filedwith the Secretary of the Commission, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, Attention: Docketing and Service Branch, or may bedelivered to the Commission's Public Document Room, the Gelman Building,2120 L Street, NW., Washington, DC, by the above date. Where petitionsare filed during the last ten (10) days of the notice period, it is requestedthat the petitioner promptly so inform the Commission by a toll-free telephonecall to Western Union at 1-(800) 325-6000 (in Missouri 1-(800) 342-6700).The Western Union operator should be given Datagram Identification Number3737 and the following message addressed to Herbert N. Berkow: Petitioner'sname and telephone number; date petition was mailed; plant name; and publicationdate and page number of this <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice. A copy of the petition should also besent to the Office of the General Counsel, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, and to Michael W. Maupin, Esq., Hunton and Williams,P.O. Box 1535, Richmond, Virginia 23212.Nontimely filings of petitions for leave to intervene, amended petitions,supplemental petitions and/or requests for hearing will not be entertainedabsent a determination by the Commission, the presiding officer or thepresiding Atomic Safety and Licensing Board that the petition and/or requestshould be granted based upon a balancing of the factors specified in 10CFR 2.714(a)(1)(i)-(v) and 2.714(d).For further details with respect to this action, see the application foramendments dated January 13, 1989, which is available for public inspectionat the Commission's Public Document Room, the Gelman Building, 2120 L Street,NW., Washington, DC 20555, and at the Local Public Document Room, The AldermanLibrary, Manuscripts Department, University of Virginia, Charlottesville,Virginia 22901.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 25th day of January, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Leon B. Engle,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Project Manager, Project Directorate II-2, Division of Reactor ProjectsI/II, Office of Nuclear Reactor Regulation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">FR Doc. 89-2078 Filed 1-27-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>