<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89428-0089 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.4-28-89.f2.A1088</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="56">Commonwealth Edison Co.; Consideration of Issuance of Amendment toFacility Operating License and Proposed No Significant Hazards, ConserationDetermination and Opportunity for Hearing</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket Nos. 50-295 and 50-304]</ITAG>The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is consideringissuance of an amendment to Operating License Nos. DPR-39 and DPR-48, issuedto Commonwealth Edison Company (the licensee), for operation of Zion Station,Units 1 and 2 located in Lake County, Illinois. This amendment request dated April 17, 1989, is being made in accordancewith Generic Letter 85-09, entitled ``Technical Specifications for GenericLetter 83-28, Items 4.3,'' to change Tables 3.1-1 and 4.1-1 of TechnicalSpecifications for Zion Station. The proposed changes involve additionand/or clarifications to the operability and surveillance requirementsfor: (1) Manual Reactor Trip; (2) Automatic Reactor Trip Logic; and (3)Reactor Trip and Bypass Breakers. Before issuance of the proposed license amendment, the Commission willhave made findings required by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended(the Act) and the Commission's regulations. The Commission has made a proposed determination that the amendment requestinvolves no significant hazards consideration. Under the Commission's regulationsin 10 CFR 50.92, this means that operation of the facilities in accordancewith the proposed amendment would not (1) involve a significant increasein the probability or consequences of an accident previously evaluated;or (2) create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident fromany accident previously evaluated; or (3) involve a significant reductionin a margin of safety. The Commonwealth Edison has evaluated the proposed amendment and determinedthat it involves no significant hazards consideration. The licensee's evaluationis provided below. The proposed amendment involves revisions to the operability and surveillancerequirements given in Technical Specification Tables 3.1-1 and 4.1-1 forZion Station. The changes clarify the operability requirements for AutomaticReactor Trip Logic to include the Reactor Trip Breakers. The changes toTable 4.1-1 clarify the surveillance requirements for the Manual ReactorTrip function to require independent verification of the operability ofthe Undervoltage and Shunt Trip circuits and the operability of the BypassBreaker circuit; the Monthly Functional Test for the Automatic ReactorTrip Logic has been clarified to require testing each train on alternatemonths (at a 62-day interval) and to explicitly state where operabilityof circuit contacts may be verified by the use of indication circuitry.Monthly and Refueling Surveillance Requirements have been defined for ReactorTrip Breakers and Bypass Breakers. All of the proposed changes have been worded in accordance with the guidelinesof NRC Generic Letter 85-09, and are consistent with Technical Specificationsin effect for other Pressurized Water Reactors of similar vintage. Theclarification notes for the Automatic Reactor Trip Logic Surveillance andthe use of the alternate month testing interval are similar to the specificationscurrently in effect at [other plants.](1) <T3>The proposed changes do not involve a significant increase to the probabilityor consequences of an accident previously evaluated. </T3>The addition of the requirement for automatic actuation of the shunt tripdevice provides an alternate method to open the reactor trip breakers.Therefore, when a reactor trip signal is generated, there are diverse mechanismsto provide a reactor breaker trip which should minimize the possibilityof an Anticipated Transient Without Scram (ATWS). The proposed changesrevise the surveillances to require independent testing of the undervoltageand shunt trip devices for the manual reactor trip and the reactor tripbreakers. These surveillances ensure reactor trip breaker operability whenrequired and thus do not involve a significant increase to the probabilityor consequences of an accident that was previously evaluated.(2) <T3>The proposed changes do not create the possibility of a new or differentkind of accident from any previously evaluated.</T3>The proposed changes do not change the manner in which the reactor protectionsystem provides plant protection. The addition of the shunt trip attachmentprovides an alternate method to open the breakers when a reactor trip signalis generated. Therefore, if one trip mechanism fails, the other trip mechanismis available, which increases the reliability of the reactor protectionsystem and decreases the possibility of an ATWS event and therefore doesnot create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident thatwas previously evaluated. (3) <T3>The proposed changes do not involve a significant reduction in a marginof safety. </T3>The proposed changes are expected to increase the overall margin of safetybecause they provide an alternate method to trip the reactor trip breakers,thereby limiting the potential for an ATWS event. The proposed surveillancechanges are designed to verify operability of the reactor trip and bypassbreakers and therefore do not involve a significant reduction in the marginof safety. Based upon the above evaluation, Commonwealth Edison concluded that theproposed changes to the Technical Specifications do not involve a significanthazards consideration.The staff has reviewed the licensee's evaluation and agrees with the licenseethat these proposed amendments involve no significant hazards consideration.Before issuance of Generic Letter 85-09, by letter dated March 25, 1985,the licensee originally requested similar changes to clarify the automaticreactor trip logic testing in accordance with Generic Letter 83-28. Thestaff issued no significant hazard consideration notice on May 21, 1985(50 FR 20973). The April 17, 1989, submittal substantially revised theprevious submittal dated March 25, 1985. This notice supersedes the previousnotice. The Commission is seeking public comments on this proposed determination.Any comments received within 30 days after the date of publication of thisnotice will be considered in making any final determination. The Commissionwill not normally make a final determination unless it receives a requestfor a hearing.   Written comments may be submitted by mail to the Regulatory PublicationsBranch Division of Freedom of Information and Publications Services, Officeof Administration, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission, Washington, DC 20555,and should cite the publication date and page number of the <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice. Written comments may also be deliveredto P 223, Phillips Building, 7920 Norfolk Avenue, Bethesda, Maryland from8:15 a.m. to 5:00 p.m. Copies of written comments received may be examinedat the NRC Public Document Room, 2120 L Street, NW., Washington, DC. Thefiling of requests for hearing and petitions for leave to intervene isdiscussed below. By May 30, 1989, the licensee may file a request for a hearing with respectto issuance of the amendment to the subjct facility operating license andany person whose interest may be affected by this proceeding and who wishesto participate as a party in the proceeding must file a written petitionfor leave to intervene. Request for a hearing and petitions for leave tointervene shall be filed in accordance with the Commission's ``Rules ofPractice for Domestic Licensing Proceedings'' in 10 CFR Part 2. If a requestfor hearing or petition for leave to intervene is filed by the above date,the Commission or an Atomic Safety and Licensing Board, designated by theCommission or by the Chairman of the Atomic Safety and Licensing BoardPanel, will rule on the request and/or petition and the Secretary of thedesignated Atomic Safety and Licensing Board will issue a notice of hearingor an appropriate order.   As required by 10 CFR 2.714, a petition for leave to intervene shall setforth with particularity the interest of the petitioner in the proceeding,and how that interest may be affected by the results to the proceeding.The petition should specifically explain the reasons why intervention shouldbe permitted with particular reference to the following factors: (1) Thenature of the petitioner's right under the Act to be made a party to theproceeding; (2) the nature and extent of the petitioner's property, financial,or other interest in the proceeding; and (3) the possible effect of anyorder which may be entered in the proceeding on the petitioner's interest.The petition should also indentify the specific aspect(s) of the subjectmatter of the proceedings as to which petitioner wishes to intervene. Anyperson who has filed a petition for leave to intervene or who has beenadmitted as a party may amend the petition without requesting leave ofthe Board up to fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, but such an amended petition must satisfythe specificity requirements described above.Not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, a petitioner shall file a supplement to thepetition to intervene must include a list of the contentions which aresought to be litigated in the matter, and the bases for each contentionset forth with reasonable specificity. Contention shall be limited to matterswithin the scope of the amendment under consideration. A petitioner whofails to file such a supplement which satisfies these requirements withrespect to at least one contention will not be permitted to participateas a party.  Those permitted to intervene become parties to the proceeding, subjectto any limitations in the order granting leave to intervene, and have theopportunity to participate fully in the conduct of the hearing, includingthe opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses. If a hearing is requested, the Commission will make a final determinationon the issue of no significant hazards consideration. The final determinationwill serve to decide when the hearing is held.  If the final determination is that the amendment request involves no significanthazards consideration, the Commission may issue the amendment and makeit effective, notwithstanding the request for a hearing. Any hearing heldwould take place after issuance of the amendment. If the final determination is that the amendment involves a significanthazards consideration, any hearing held would take place before the issuanceof any amendment.  Normally, the Commission will not issue the amendment until the expirationof the 30-day notice period. However, should circumstances change duringthe notice period such that failure to act in a timely way would result,for example, in derating or shutdown of the facility, the Commission mayissue the license amendment before the expiration of the 30-day noticeperiod, provided that its final determination is that the amendment involvesno significant hazards consideration. The final determination will considerall public and State comments received. Should the Commission take thisaction, it will publish a notice of issuance and provide for opportunityfor a hearing after issuance. The Commission expects that the need to takethis action will occur very infrequently.A request for a hearing or a petition for leave to intervene must be filedwtih the Secretary of the Commission, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555. Attention: Docketing and Service Branch, or may bedelivered to the Commission's Public Document Room, 2120 L Street, NW.,Washington, DC, by the above date. Where petitions are filed during thelast ten (10) days of the notice period, it is requested that the petitionerpromptly so inform the Commission by a toll-free telephone call to WesternUnion at 1-800-325-6000 (in Missouri 1-800-432-6700). The Western Unionoperator should be given Datagram Identification Number 3737 and the followingmessage addressed to Daniel R. Muller; petitioner's name and telephonenumber; date petition was mailed; plant number; and publication date andpage number of this <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice. A copy of the petition should also besent to the Office of the General Counsel_Rockville, Maryland, U.S. NuclearRegulatory Commission, Washington, DC 20555, and to Michael Miller, Esquire;Sidley and Austin, One First National Plaza, Chicago, Illinois 60603, attorneyfor the licensee.  Nontimely filings of petitions for leave to intervene, amended petitions,supplemental petitions and/or requests for hearing will not be entertainedabsent a determination by the Commission, the presiding officer or theAtomic Safety and Licensing Board that the petition and/or request shouldbe granted based upon a balancing of the factors specified in 10 CFR 2.174(a)(1)(i)-(v)and 2.714(d).For futher details with respect to this action, see the application foramendment which is available for public inspection at the Commission'sPublic Document Room, 2120 L Street NW., Washington, DC., and for ZionStation, the Waukegan Public Library, 128 N. County Street, Waukegan Illinois60085.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 24th day of April 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Daniel R. Miller,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director, Project Directorate III-2, Division of Reactor Projects_III,IV, V and Special Projects. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-10234 Filed 4-27-89; 8:45 am] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-M  </ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>