<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89922-0020 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.9-22-89.f2.A1019</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Office of the Secretary</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">14 CFR Part 255</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. 46494; Notice No. 89-18]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="91">RIN 2105-AB47</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Computer Reservation System </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY:</T2> Office of the Secretary, DOT</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION:</T2> Advance notice of proposed rulemaking. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY:</T2> The Department is initiating this rulemaking to determinethe need to continue or modify its existing rules governing computer reservationssystems (CRS) and to obtain comments on a number of issues raised in petitionsfor rulemaking. Unless extended by the Department, the existing rules (14CFR part 255) expire on December 31, 1990. It is the Department's preliminaryposition that these rules should be continued, and perhaps revised.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATE:</T2> Comments must be submitted on or before November 20, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESS:</T2> Comments must be filed in Room 4107, Docket 46494, U.S.Department of Transportation 400 7th Street, SW., Washington DC 20590.Late filed comments will be considered to the extent possible.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2> Sam Whitehorn or Robert Young,Office of the General Counsel, 400 7th St., SW., Washington, DC 20590,(202) 366-9307 or 366-9285, respectively. <ITAG tagnum="84">I. Background</ITAG>A. History of the CRS Industry Beginning in the late 1960s, several airlines began investing substantialamounts of money to acquire the computer hardware and to develop the softwarethat would upgrade their internal computer reservation systems (CRSs) andthereby allow them to manage larger and more complex data bases. Thesesystems soon became an indispensable management tool_essential for operatingthe airline and for acquiring detailed information on the airline marketplace.It also was becoming apparent that travel agents could benefit significantlyfrom greater automation and, as a result, the American Society of TravelAgents (ASTA) began to take an active role in promoting the developmentof computer technology for the industry. Between 1967 and 1976, there were several attempts to develop and marketa neutral, industry-wide CRS. However, for a variety of reasons (e.g.,funding and potential antitrust concerns), such a system was never developed.For example, in 1967 the Donnelly Official Airline Reservation System wasdeveloped but failed because of a lack of financial support. The AutomatedTravel Agency Reservation System was started in 1969 by several carriersbut failed because of a challenge from the Department of Justice (DOJ)and concerns raised by the Civil Aeronautics Board (CAB). An industry-wideproject, the Joint Industry Computerized Reservation System, was then initiatedbut was discontinued after United Air Lines and American Airlines decidedto market their own systems. Finally, in 1979, the CAB approved an agreementunder its regulatory authority for 12 airlines, ASTA, and American Expressto develop a multi-access reservation system (MAARS); however, the CABdid not grant antitrust immunity and the effort was discontinued. As aresult, a number of other major carriers followed United's and American'slead and developed their own CRSs. The industry is now composed of five major systems: Apollo, also referredto as Covia, established by United in 1976 and now owned by United, USAirand several European carriers; Sabre, established by American Airlinesin 1976; Pars, established by TWA in 1978 and now owned by TWA and NorthwestAirlines; System One or Soda, established by Eastern in 1982 and now ownedby Texas Air Corp.; and DATAS II, established by Delta in 1982. In 1986,these CRS vendors had the following shares of U.S. automated travel agencybookings: Sabre, 43 percent; Apollo, 32 percent; System One, 10 percent;Pars, 10 percent; and DATAS II, 5 percent.Today's CRSs consist of a periodically updated central data base that isaccessed by subscribers (primarily travel agents) through computer terminals.The systems provide users with up-to-date information on airline faresand services, allow them to make reservations and issue tickets, and alsoprovide information on additional services (e.g., car rentals and hotelreservations). Travel agents generally lease the necessary computer terminalsand ticketing equipment from a vendor. Airlines and other travel providerspay the vendor a booking fee when their services are booked through theCRS. Travel agents in foreign countries are also relying more on CRSs for determiningwhat airline services are available, making bookings, and issuing tickets.The increasing importance of CRSs in other countries has caused severalforeign governments to adopt or begin to develop rules regulating CRSs,particularly in Europe where multinational rules are being adopted. Althoughthose rules generally are similar to ours, some contain provisions thatare significantly different. The European Economic Community rules, forexample, will prescribe the display algorithm and require all CRS chargesto be reasonably related to costs. B. History of the Rules In response to concerns raised by non-vendor airlines and many travel agentsabout the manner in which vendors operated their CRSs, in 1982 Congressrequested that the CAB, in consultation with the DOJ, investigate CRS practices.(H.R. Rep. No. 97-960, 97th Cong., 2d Sess. (1982)). The CAB's ``Report to Congress on Airline Commuter Reservation Systems''outlined various allegations of anticompetitive abuses by the vendors.While the report was being prepared, the Association of Retail Travel Agents(ARTA) filed a petition for rulemaking to correct flight display bias.Shortly thereafter, a dozen carriers filed two more petitions for rulemakingseeking relief from display bias and other alleged abuses. The CAB then issued an advance notice of proposed rulemaking (EDR-466,48 FR 41171 (September 14, 1983) and suggested that the CRS vendors mightwell have the ability to harm competition in air transportation and tomislead consumers. Comments were requested in three areas: Bias in flightdisplays, fare information and in the loading of data to favor the CRSvendors' services, discriminatory access fees charged other carriers byCRS vendors, and the vendors' use of CRS information on travel agent bookingsof their competitors. Each of the CRS owners also was directed to fileextensive information on its systems. Based on extensive comments (includingDOJ comments and the information supplied by the vendors), the CAB issueda notice of proposed rulemaking setting out rules designed to curb andcontrol CRS abuses. (EDR-466C, 49 FR 11644 (March 27, 1984)). Again a significantnumber of comments were filed, some in support of and some in oppositionto the rules, with others suggesting various modifications. The CAB ultimately concluded that, because the systems were so much moreefficient than other tools, almost all travel agents used CRSs to determinewhat airline services and fares are available, to make bookings, and toissue tickets. Each airline's ability to market its services, in turn,effectively depended on the fairness and accuracy of the data displayedin each system, because travel agents sold at least sixty percent of allairline tickets, and most travel agents used only one system. As a result,CRS vendors had a substantial degree of power over price and output inthe CRS industry. Moreover, as competitors in the ``downstream'' air transportationindustry, they had the ability and incentive to use that power in waysthat interfered with air transport competition and deceived consumers.Accordingly, the CAB concluded that rules were needed to prevent unfairmethods of competition and issued them. (ER-1385, 49 FR 32540 (August 15,1984)). The rules were challenged by United and others, but the challengewas rejected by the Seventh Circuit Court of Appeals. <T3>United Air Lines. Inc., </T3>v. <T3>CAB, </T3>766 F.2d 1107 (7th Cir. 1985). With the sunset of the CAB,responsibility for the rules was transferred to the Department of Transportation(DOT or Department).C. Summary of the Existing Rules The major provisions of the rules are as follows:andbullet; Participation in the various CRSs must be open to all carrierson a nondiscriminatory basis. andbullet; All systems must provide primary displays that include the schedules,fares, rules, and availability of carrier services. The information providedmust be organized in a manner that is based on objective and unbiased factors(e.g., it cannot be based on carrier identity). andbullet; In selecting information for the primary screens, vendors mustuse a minimum of nine alternative connecting points for city pairs in providingpassengers alternative choices. The selection of the connecting pointsmust be based on objective criteria. andbullet; A vendor must use the same standard of care and timeliness forloading each participating carrier's flight and fare information that ituses in loading its own, and if it provides special loading capabilitiesto participating carriers, it must do so in a nondiscriminatory manner.andbullet; No vendor may discriminate among participating carriers with respectto fees charged for participating in the system. andbullet; No subscriber contract may have a term in excess of five years.andbullet; No vendor may require a subscriber to use its system exclusively.andbullet; No vendor may require a travel agent to use its system as a conditionfor the receipt of a commission related to the sale of its air transportationservices. andbullet; If a vendor offers a service enhancement to any participatingcarrier, it must offer similar enhancements on nondiscriminatory termsto all participating carriers. andbullet; Each vendor must make available to all participating carrierson a nondiscriminatory basis all domestic marketing, booking, and salesdata that it elects to generate from its system. andbullet; System vendors need not comply with the rules with respect toforeign air carriers that operate CRSs that discriminate against U.S. carriersin their display of flights. In issuing the rules, the CAB added a provision that the rules would bereviewed within five years of their effective date, and, unless extendedon the basis of the review, the rules would terminate on December 31, 1990.The Department already has taken a number of steps in investigating theCRS business and the rule's effects. For example, the Department issuedits ``Study of Airline Computer Reservation Systems'' in May 1988 (the``CRS Study,'' a copy of which has been placed in the docket). The CRSStudy, initiated as a result of a General Accounting Office (GAO) study(``Airline Competition: Impact of Computerized Reservation Systems'', Washington,DC May 1986), and a request from Senator Kassebaum and Congressmen Minetaand Hammerschmidt (letter to former Secretary Dole dated May 21, 1986),focused on the extent to which CRS vendors obtain incremental revenues(i.e., revenues in excess of what their airline services might be expectedto garner if they did not control a CRS) and whether CRS booking fees areabove competitive levels. The Study concluded, among other things, thatvendors have continued to obtain incremental revenue despite the rule'sprohibition on display bias, and that participating fees charged by thelarger vendors are in excess of their current costs. The Study also wasthe subject of a hearing before the House Subcommittee on Aviation, Committeeon Public Works on September 14, 1988. The Department, as well as GAO,testified on the Study. GAO, without suggesting any specific action, urgedthat the Department should initiate a rulemaking. In addition, the Department recently began an investigation into the effectson airline competition of CRSs and the carriers'  distribution methods,including the role played by travel agents. The Department has sought informationfrom CRS vendors to update the Study and also look at other CRS issuesthat were not addressed in the study (Order 89-5-52, May 25, 1989). Theinvestigation also will provide information on the effects of the CRS rules,as will this proceeding as a result of comments submitted in response tothis notice. D. Rulemaking Petitions The Department has three pending petitions for rulemaking that concernthe relationship between CRS vendors and travel agent subscribers. SystemOne has filed a petition in Docket 45757, and the American Society of TravelAgents (ASTA) has filed petitions in Dockets 45140 and 45711. We summarizebelow these petitions and the comments filed in response to them. <ITAG tagnum="81">1. Petitions </ITAG>The petitions focus on the need for further regulation of the vendor/subscriberrelationship to increase CRS competition for agencies. System One and ASTApropose to reduce the maximum contract length from five to three years.ASTA also proposes to explicitly prohibit rollover provisions that automaticallyextend the length of a contract whenever a subscriber acquires new equipmentor services, and System One proposes to prohibit vendors from seeking torenew subscriber contracts if more than six months remain in their currentterms. Both System One and ASTA request that the Department amend the rules toprohibit minimum use clauses that require a subscriber to make a minimumnumber of bookings on each terminal. ASTA also wants to prohibit parityprovisions that require an agent using multiple systems to maintain a fixedratio of each CRS's equipment. System One seeks to amend the rules to prohibit the inclusion of lost bookingfee revenues in liquidated damages clauses. In its original petition, ASTAproposes a prohibition on onerous liquidated damages clauses. In its secondpetition, it proposes an outright ban on liquidated damages clauses. System One also wants to ban all ``coercive forms of inducement, whetherthreats or promises'' from CRS vendors. ASTA also complains about vendorpractices of limiting non-subscribers' access to last seat availability,wait list clearances, boarding passes, and other services.ASTA proposes to prohibit unreasonable restraints on connecting third-partyequipment to a CRS and on the business uses for which CRSs are available.In addition, it seeks a prohibition on assertedly onerous indemnificationand warranty provisions and forum selection clauses for litigation concerningsubscriber contracts. <ITAG tagnum="81">2. Industry Replies </ITAG>Delta/DATAS II, Northwest and ARTA support some additional regulation ofvendor/subscriber contracts. Delta/Datas II and Northwest support eliminationof minimum use provisions (and, according to Delta/DATAS II, parity provisions),although they argue that existing rules already prohibit them. Both carriersfavor rules to limit liquidated damages. Northwest also supports a reductionin the maximum contract term to three years. Delta/DATAS II opposes regulationof contract terms such as those governing indemnification and forum selection.United/APOLLO and American/SABRE oppose further regulation of vendor/subscriberrelationships. They argue that the five-year terms and minimum use provisionsenable them to charge lower fees to subscribers by allowing them to relyon booking fee revenues. The carriers defend their current liquidated damagesclauses and argue that they actually reduce an agent's cost of convertingto another system because they are lower than the actual damages that avendor could recover from the agent. They also assert that explicit prohibitionson rollover provisions and parity clauses are unnecessary. E. Enforcement Complaints Several enforcement complaints have been filed alleging that certain vendorshave engaged in practices that violate the CRS rules or constitute unfairmethods of competition which should be proscribed under section 411 ofthe Federal Aviation Act. These complaints include SystemOne's complaints(Dockets 45758 and 45759) alleging that the larger vendors' use of liquidateddamages clauses and five-year terms for their subscriber contracts is anunfair method of competition, that the major vendors' subscriber contractsviolate the Department's rules by requiring subscribers to make a minimumnumber of bookings each month, and that some major systems' reservationof certain enhancements (e.g., the issuance of boarding passes) for bookingson the vendor carrier unfairly discourages agents from booking on the non-vendorcarriers. A travel agent has complained that Northwest uses a minimum useclause that precludes agents from using another system and also that Northwestrefused to participate in Sabre's direct access enhancement. (Docket 45593).Northwest complained that Sabre's minimum use and liquidated damages clausesviolate the CRS rules. (Docket 45641). Several travel agents in Utah havefiled a complaint against Delta, that state's dominant carrier, chargingthat Delta provides certain benefits to the state's largest agents on thecondition that they install Delta's system. (Docket 45796). Commenters who believe that we should amend the CRS rules to regulate orproscribe the alleged practices underlying these complaints should explainwhy in their comments. <ITAG tagnum="84">II. Request for Comments </ITAG>Listed below are a series of questions on the rules that commenters shouldfocus on in considering the need to extend the effective date of the rulesand to modify them. Comment is also requested on the issues raised by therulemaking petitions noted above. In submitting their views, commenters should be aware that the Department'spreliminary position is that the CRS rules should be extended and thatrevisions related to further limiting the term of CRS contracts, prohibitingmandatory rollovers, and establishing a quantitative or qualitative standardon minimum use clauses may be warranted. A. General Questions 1. Should the rules be continued? If so, for how long? Should another reviewbe required in five years? If the rules should not be continued, commentersshould address the consequences of such action on airlines, competitionamong vendors, travel agents, and the public. 2. Have the rules been effective? Have the rules been sufficient to keepabreast of changing technology and changing business conditions in theairline and travel industries? Are changes needed since most systems areno longer controlled by a single airline? 3. In those areas where commenters believe the rules have not been effective,should the provisions be modified or deleted, and if modified, how so?Commenters should address how the rules have been effective or ineffectivein detail. 4. Have there been problems with the degree of information/participationin enhancements that vendor airlines are willing to make available throughtheir competitors' CRSs. Does the Department need to address this areaif the rules are continued? U.S. vendors attempting to sell their systems abroad have encountered somedifficulties when the dominant airline in a country has refused to participatein the U.S. CRS in the airline's home country, or has refused to permitthe U.S. CRS to be used to issue its tickets. We have found in two instancesthat such refusals are violations of the guarantee of equal opportunityto compete contained in most U.S. bilateral aviation treaties. Orders 88-7-11(July 8, 1988) and 88-9-33 (September 15, 1988). 5. Have similar problems been encountered by persons attempting to sellCRSs in the United States? Should U.S. vendors with a dominant airlinemarket share (nationally or regionally) be prohibited from refusing toparticipate in competing CRSs? B. Display of Information (andSection; 255.4) The display rules were intended to prevent consumer deception and to limitthe unfair competitive advantage that CRS vendors obtained through increasedairline sales generated by more favorable display of their flights. Despitethe elimination of overt display bias, vendors continue to earn incrementalairline revenues. 1. Does the continuing existence of incremental revenues adversely affectairline competition enough to warrant regulatory action?2. What are the causes or sources of the continuing incremental revenues?If regulatory action is justified to limit incremental revenues, how shouldthe rules be changed? 3. Are the existing rules requiring objective displays and a minimum ofnine connecting points still necessary to ensure that vendors do not programflight displays to favor their own services? 4. Are protections needed to prevent ``loading of information'' abuses(e.g., a vendor loading its information in a more timely fashion than otherparticipating carriers)? If so, in what format? 5. Should the Department adopt rules prohibiting or regulating the useof any of the objective ranking criteria (e.g., on-line preferences orelapsed times), which are used to rank flights? C. Contracts With Carriers and Subscribers (andSection;andSection; 255.5 andamp;255.6) 1. Are the provisions of these sections effective? Are additional regulationsneeded? The CAB chose not to regulate the level of fees charged by vendors forbooking of services through their CRSs. While the CAB hoped that the nondiscriminationrule and the largest air carriers' ability to negotiate with vendors wouldlead to prices close to competitive levels, failure to regulate has ledsome to criticize the rules, claiming that the booking fees charged bythe vendors raise competitive problems. The CRS Study found that bookingfees of most vendors greatly exceeded the costs allocated to the bookingprocess. Moreover, lower fees charged by DATAS II and System One shortlyafter the rule went into effect did not cause other vendors to reduce prices.2. Are booking fees an issue that we should consider addressing, and ifso, how? Does the lack of competition on booking fees adversely affectairline competition? If so, how should the rule be changed? 3. Do provisions such as minimum use clauses, liquidated damage clausesthat include payment of lost booking fees, or fiveyear contract terms adverselyaffect CRS competition? If so, how might the rules best be changed to eliminatethese adverse effects? NOTE: The arguments over contracts with carriersand travel agents are the primary focus of the rulemaking petitions. 4. Should the rule's prohibitions against tying airline sales to the useof particular systems, and against prohibiting the use of other CRSs, beeliminated, strengthened or clarified? To what extent do vendors currentlyabide by the spirit and letter of these provisions? Are they necessary?5. Should we consider prohibiting vendors from restricting the kinds ofequipment or software a subscriber may use in conjunction with their systems?D. Service Enhancements and Marketing Information (andSection;andSection; 255.7andamp; 255.8) 1. Are these sections of the rule necessary? How have they been effectiveor ineffective in meeting their intended purpose? If they have been ineffective,how should they be changed? E. Reciprocity 1. Should the rules be amended to allow U.S. vendors more discretion inresponding to foreign CRS practices or rules that unfairly discriminateagainst U.S. carrier services? 2. Should the rules be amended to require U.S. vendors to modify treatmentof foreign air carriers in response to foreign CRS practices or rules thatunfairly discriminate against U.S. carriers? If so, what action shouldbe taken? <ITAG tagnum="84">III. Timetable for Action </ITAG>As noted above, this ANPRM together with the competition study constitutesthe review of the CRS rules, and thus complies with andSection; 255.10(a).The rulemaking process will be completed well before the December 31, 1990,termination date so that vendors, carriers and travel agents will havesufficient notice of any changes that may be required. <ITAG tagnum="84">IV. Consolidation of Dockets/Comment Period </ITAG>All petitions and pleadings filed in the three dockets noted above willbe considered and consolidated in this rulemaking. Therefore, all futurecomments on those petitions, and on this rulemaking, should be filed inthis rulemaking docket. Comments are due no later than 60 days after publication in the <T4>Federal Register.</T4> <ITAG tagnum="84">V. Federal Assessment </ITAG>This action has been analyzed in accordance with the principles and criteriacontained in Executive Order 12612 and it has been determined that thisrulemaking action does not have sufficient federalism implications to warrantthe preparation of a Federalism Assessment. This rulemaking falls withinthe statutory responsibility of the Department of Transportation. Further,the national/international scope of the industry necessitates regulationon a national basis. The Department now regulates the industry and a myriadof state or local laws attempting to regulate would make compliance difficultfor vendors, carriers and travel agents in providing services nationwide.Finally, this ANPRM focuses on whether to extend or modify already existingFederal regulations. If commenters have information to the contrary, itshould be submitted to the docket for our consideration. <ITAG tagnum="84">VI. Regulatory Flexibility Act </ITAG>The Regulatory Flexibility Act, Public Law 96-354, is designed to ensurethat agencies consider flexible approaches to the regulation of small businessesand other small entities. It requires regulatory flexibility analyses forrules that will have a significant economic impact on a substantial numberof small entities. In accordance with the Act, the CRS rulemaking was reviewed by the creatorof the rule, the Civil Aeronautics Board. The CAB determined that the ruleswould not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number ofsmall entities. At this time, the Department has no basis to make a contraryfindings to those stated in the preamble to the CAB's final rule. Commentis requested. <ITAG tagnum="84">VII. Paperwork Reduction </ITAG>The collection-of-information requirements of the rule were approved bythe Office of Management and Budget (control number 2106-0028). Commentersshould address ways to reduce the paperwork burdens associated with theCRS rules. If the rules are extended or modified, appropriate OMB approvalwill be sought. <ITAG tagnum="84">VIII. Regulatory Impact Analysis and Review</ITAG>Executive Order 12291 on ``Federal Regulation'' and the Department's RegulatoryPolicies and Procedures require the preparation of a Regulatory ImpactAnalysis for every ``major rule''. A major rule is defined as any regulationthat is likely to result in one or more of the following: An annual effecton the economy of $100 million or more; a major increase in costs or pricesfor consumers, individual industries, Federal, State, or local governments,or geographic regions; or, significant adverse effects on competition,productivity, innovation, or on the ability of United States-based enterprisesto compete with foreign-based enterprises. The effects of the CRS rule were the subject of review and analysis whenoriginally proposed by the CAB. The Department recognizes that the effectsof the rule are substantial (and could be controversial), and thus anyrulemaking would be considered significant under the Department's RegulatoryPolicies and Procedures. The CAB analyzed the impacts of the rule and concludedthat it constituted a ``major rule'' under the Executive Order, and italso found that the rule was cost beneficial. (The CAB's analysis was notbased on the termination of the rule). This ANPRM seeks comments on whetherthe rule should be extended, modified or terminated. In addition and asnoted above, the CRS Study discusses industry costs and revenues, and acopy has been placed in the Docket for review in light of this ANPRM. Asnoted above, the Department's preliminary view is that regulation of theCRSs is needed. At this point, however, it is unclear whether the extension,modification or termination of the rule would ultimately be considered``major''. Comments submitted in response to this notice should address the potentialeffects any changes could have on the economy, costs or prices for consumersand the government, and adverse effects on competition. <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 14 CFR Part 255 </ITAG>Advertising, Air carriers, Air transportation-foreign, Antitrust, Consumerprotection, Essential air service, Travel agents.<ITAG tagnum="21">Issued in Washington, DC on September 14, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Samuel K. Skinner,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary of Transportation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-22234 Filed 9-18-89; 11:50 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4910-62-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>