<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89130-0077 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.1-30-89.f2.A1076</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="94"><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="50">DEPARTMENT OF LABOR</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="18">Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Application No. D-7590 et al.] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Proposed Exemptions; Restated Profit Sharing Plan and Trust Agreementof Anesthesiologists Associated of Rome, P.A., et al. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>agency:</T2> Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration, Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>action:</T2> Notice of proposed exemptions.  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>summarY:</T2> This document contains notices of pendency before theDepartment of Labor (the Department) of proposed exemptions from certainof the prohibited transaction restrictions of the Employee Retirement IncomeSecurity Act of 1974 (the Act) and/or the Internal Revenue Code of 1954(the Code). <ITAG tagnum="84">Written Comments and Hearing Requests </ITAG>All interested persons are invited to submit written comments or requestsfor a hearing on the pending exemptions, unless otherwise stated in theNotice of Pendency, within 45 days from the date of publication of this<T4>Federal Register</T4> Notice. Comments and requests for a hearing shouldstate the reasons for the writer's interest in the pending exemption.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>address:</T2> All written comments and requests for a hearing (at leastthree copies) should be sent to the Pension and Welfare Benefits Administration,Office of Regulations and Interpretations, Room N-5671, U.S. Departmentof Labor, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington, DC 20210. Attention:Application No. stated in each Notice of Pendency. The applications forexemption and the comments received will be available for public inspectionin the Public Documents Room of Pension and Welfare Benefit Programs, U.S.Department of Labor, Room N-5507, 200 Constitution Avenue, NW., Washington,DC 20210. <ITAG tagnum="84">Notice to Interested Persons </ITAG>Notice of the proposed exemptions will be provided to all interested personsin the manner agreed upon by the applicant and the Department within 15days of the date of publication in the <T4>Federal Register</T4>. Such notice shall include a copy of the noticeof pendency of the exemption as published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> and shall inform interested persons of theirright to comment and to request a hearing (where appropriate).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>supplementary information:</T2> The proposed exemptions were requestedin applications filed pursuant to section 408(a) of the Act and/or section4975(c)(2) of the Code, and in accordance with procedures set forth inERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR 18471, April 28, 1975). Effective December31, 1978, section 102 of Reorganization Plan No. 4 of 1978 (43 FR 47713,October 17, 1978) transferred the authority of the Secretary of the Treasuryto issue exemptions of the type requested to the Secretary of Labor. Therefore,these notices of pendency are issued solely by the Department. The applications contain representations with regard to the proposed exemptionswhich are summarized below. Interested persons are referred to the applicationson file with the Department for a complete statement of the facts and representations.<ITAG tagnum="84">Restated Profit Sharing Plan and Trust Agreement of AnesthesiologistsAssociated of Rome, P.A. (the Plan) Located in Rome, Georgia </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7590] </ITAG>Proposed Exemption The Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(a)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedures 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a), 406 (b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code shall not apply to the proposedcash sale by the Plan of certain real property located in Rome, Georgiato Park Professional Place (the Partnership), a partnership which is aparty in interest with respect to the Plan; provided that all terms ofsuch transaction are at least as favorable to the Plan as those which thePlan could obtain in an arm's-length transaction with an unrelated party.Summary of Facts and Representations 1. The Plan is a defined contribution plan with 20 participants and toalassets of $378,177 as of April 30, 1988. The Plan is sponsored by the AnesthesiologistsAssociated of Rome, P.A. (the Employer), a Georgia professional associationengaged in a specialty medical practice in Rome, Georgia. The trusteesof the Plan are Larry R. Cauthen, M.D. (Dr. Cauthen), Louise S. Hajosy,M.D., and Elaine L. Hajosy, M.D. (collectively, the Trustees). The Partnershipis a Georgia general partnership whose partners (the Partners) are theTrustees and William Atha, M.D. Each of the Partners is a shareholder/employeeof the Employer except Dr. Cauthen, a former shareholder/employee who remainsas a Trustee. 2. Among the Plan's assets ia a parcel of land (the Land) located at 13-AJohn Maddox Drive in Rome, Georgia. The Land features approximately eightyfeet of street frontage and constitutes approximately one-third of an acre.The Plan acquired the Land in an unimproved state and has leased it continuouslyto the Partnership under a net lease (the Lease) effective July 7, 1972.The Lease provides for an initial term of fifteen years, renewable forup two additional terms of five years each. The Lease includes provisions which authorize the Partnership's constructionof improvements on the Land and state that ownership of any such improvementswould pass to the Plan upon expiration or termination of the Lease. Pursuantto such provisions, the Partnership constructed a medical office buildingand parking lot (the Improvements) on the Land and immediately commencedleasing the Improvements and subleasing the Land (the Sublease) to theEmployer. The Employer occupies the Land and the Improvements as its principalplace of business. The Employer represents that the Lease and the Subleasewere exempt until June 30, 1984 from the prohibitions of section 406 ofthe Act by virtue of section 414 of the Act.\1\<NOTE/> <ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\1\ The Department expresses no opinion as to whether theLease and Sublease satisfied the requirements of section 414 of the Act.The Lease and Sublease have continued after June 30, 1984. In order toterminate the ongoing Lease and Sublease, the Trustees propose to sellthe Land to the Partnership. Since the Lease has become unenforceable dueto the expiration of the protections afforded by section 414 of the Acton June 30, 1984, the Partnership recognizes that the Plan has acquireda property interest in the Improvements as a result of such expirationand that the Partnership's proposed purchase of the Land must include thepurchase of the Plan's interest (the Interest) in the Improvements. TheTrustees are requesting an exemption to permit such sale transaction underthe terms and conditions described herein. 3. The Partnership will pay the Plan a cash purchase price for the Landand the Interest and will bear all costs and expenses related to the saletransaction. For the Plan's fee simple interest in the Land, the purchaseprice will be the greater of $30,000 or the appraised fair market valueof the Land on the sale date. As of June 3, 1988, the fair market valueof the unencumbered fee simple title in the Land was $30,000, accordingto Charles E. Griffin, Sr. (Griffin), an independent professional realestate appraiser in Rome, Georgia. Another independent professional realestate appraiser, Ben Lucas (Lucas) of Rome, Georgia, also determined thatthe Land had a fair market value of $30,000 as of August 23, 1988. For the Interest, the proposed purchase price will be cash in the amountof no less than the fair market value of the Interest. In order to determinethe nature and value of the Interest, the Trustees appointed the FirstBank of Rome, Georgia (the Bank), which represents that it is independentof and unrelated to the Employer and the Partnership except as trusteeof a defined benefit plan maintained by the Employer. The Bank was alsoappointed to oversee the consummation of the proposed transaction to ensure,if the exemption is granted, that the transaction proceeds as describedherein. The Bank represents that after research and consultation with legal counselover the application of Georgia law, it has determined that the natureof the Interest, which the Plan acquired as of June 30, 1984, as properlycharacterized as a reversionary interest in the Improvements rather thana fee simple interest therein. According to Joseph W. Walker, SRA, MAI(Walker), a professional real estate appraiser in Atlanta, Georgia, thefair market value of the Interest is appropriately determined by discountingthe present fair market value of the Improvements over the remaining termunder the Lease by the applicable prevailing mortgage rate. The Bank representsthat it has determined that this is the proper method of calculating thepurchase price of the Interest and that it will ensure that the Plan isappropriately and adequately compensated in the proposed transaction forits property interest in the Improvements under applicable Georgia law.According to Lucas, the Improvements has a fair market value of $71,100as of August 23, 1987. The Employer represents that the calcuation of thepurchase price of the Interest will be based on a fair market valuationof the Improvements of no less than $71,100. Therefore, it is proposedthat the Employer pay the Plan a total cash purchase price for its interestsin the Land and Improvements in the amount of (1) the greater of the Land'sfair market value as of the sale date or $30,00 plus (2) no less than $71,100discounted over the Lease's remaining term by the prevailing applicablemortgage rate as determined by the Bank. 4. The Bank represents that it has also investigated and considered whetherthe Plan has received fair market rentals under the Lease for its interestsin the Land and the Improvements since June 30, 1984. The Bank maintainsthat there should have been an upward adjustment of the rentals paid tothe Plan under the Lease as of June 30, 1984, the date on which the Interestarose in favor of the Plan, but that there was no such upward adjustmentmade by the parties. For this reason, the Bank represents that it undertookto determine the amount in which rentals paid to the Plan since June 30,1984 have been deficient and has determined such deficiency to be in theamount of $4,677 as of October 28, 1988. The Partnership agrees, as partof the proposed transaction, to pay the Plan the difference between therentals actually paid to the Plan and the fair market rentals which thePlan should have been paid for the period commencing July 1, 1984 to thedate of the proposed sale transaction, such amount to be cash of no lessthan $4,677, together with interest on such amount at a rate determinedby the Bank to be appropriate to compensate the Plan for lost income onthe rental underpayment.5. The Department is not proposing herein any exemptive relief with respectto the continuation of the Lease after June 30, 1984 to the date of theproposed sale transaction. Accordingly, within 60 days of the publicationin the <T4>Federal Register</T4> of a final grant of the exemption proposed herein,if granted, the Partnership will pay to the Internal Revenue Service allexcise taxes which are applicable under section 4975(a) of the Code byreason of the continuation of the subject lease arrangements past June30, 1984.6. In summary, the applicants represent that the criteria of section 408(a)of the Act are satisfied in the proposed transaction for the followingreasons: (1) The Plan will receive cash for (a) the full fee simple titlein the Land in the amount of the Land's fair market value as of the dateof the sale transaction, in no event less than $30,000, and (b) the fairmarket value of the Interest in an amount no less than $71,100 discountedover the remaining term of the Lease by the prevailing applicable mortgagerate as determined by the Bank; (2) The Plan will recover back rent dueunder the Lease, representing the difference between rentals actually paidto the Plan and the fair market rentals which should have been paid, plusinterest thereon; (3) The Partnership will pay all costs and expenses relatedto the proposed transaction; (4) The proposed transaction will terminatean ongoing prohibited transaction, the continuation of the Lease afterJune 30, 1984; (5) The Bank will oversee the proposed transaction to ensurethat it proceeds as described herein; and (6) The Bank has determined thatthe proposed transaction will constitute an appropriate disposition ofthe Plan's property interests in the Land and Improvements as determinedin accordance with applicable state law and that the proposed terms ofthe sale reflect the appropriate valuation of those interests.For Further Information Contact: Ronald Willett of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="84">Telephone Real Estate Equity Trust (the Trust). Located in New York,NY</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7745]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted, the restrictions ofsection 406(a) of the Act and the sanctions resulting from the applicationof section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1) (A) through(D) of the Code shall not apply to: (1) the past and continued leasingof commercial office space (Lease One and Lease Two) in One Riverwalk Place(the Property), located in San Antonio, Texas, by One Riverwalk CenterJoint Venture (the Joint Venture), an entity in which the Trust indirectlyowns a 74 percent interest, to Smith, Barshop, Stouffer and Millsap, Inc.(Smith Barshop), a party in interest with respect to the Trust and employeebenefit plans participating in the Trust (the Plans); (2) the proposedamendments, renewals or extensions by the Joint Venture to Smith Barshopof Lease One and Lease Two; and (3) the proposed leasing of commercialoffice space (the Future Leases)\2\<NOTE/> in the Property to other persons or entities that may beparties in interest with respect to the Trust and the Plans (except forfiduciaries with respect to the Property)\3\<NOTE/> including amendments, renewals or extensions by the JointVenture of such Future Leases, provided that the terms and conditions ofany Leases subject to this exemption are at least as favorable to the Trustas those which the Trust could obtain in arm's-length transactions withunrelated parties; and provided further that any such Leases, includingany amendments, renewals or extensions thereof, are approved on behalfof the Trust by Eastdil Advisers, Inc. (Eastdil).<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\2\ Lease One, Lease Two and the Future Leases are collectivelyreferred to as the Leases.<ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\3\ The term ``fiduciary'', as used here, includes the AmericanTelephone and Telegraph Company (ATandamp;T) and its affiliates and EastdilAdvisers, Inc. and its affiliates.Effective Date: If granted, this proposed exemption will be effective June2, 1982 with respect to Lease One and January 1, 1987 with respect to LeaseTwo. In addition, this proposed exemption will be temporary in nature andwill not apply to any Leases which are originated after five years fromthe date on which the Final Grant of this proposed exemption is publishedin the <T4>Federal Register</T4>.Summary of Facts and Representations1. The parties involved in the subject transactions are as follows:a. The Trust is a group trust qualified under section 401(a) of the Codepursuant to Revenue Ruling 81-100. The Trust is utilized for the investment,on an undivided basis, of certain real estate assets of its participatingplans. The Plans are employee benefit plans established by seven regionalholding companies resulting from the reorganization of ATandamp;T and itssubsidiaries pursuant to the Plan of Reorganization approved by the UnitedStates District Court for the District of Columbia in the matter of <T3>United States v. Western Electric Co., Inc., et al. </T3>(Civil ActionNo. 82-0192). The assets of predecessor entities to the Plans were formerlyheld in the Bell System Pension Plan Trust (the BSPP) and the Bell SystemManagement Plan Trust (the BSMPP). On January 1, 1984, the trusts for theBSPP and the BSMPP were merged into the Bell System Trust (the BST). Substantiallyall of the non-real estate assets in the BST were transferred to a newATandamp;T trust. The BST, which retained the real estate assets, was amendedand restated as the Trust. As of January 1, 1986, the Trust covered approximately1,226,000 participants. As of December 31, 1987, the Trust had assets havingan approximate fair market value of $3.99 billion.b. ATandamp;T, the named fiduciary of the Trust, is a corporation organizedand incorporated in the State of New York with its headquarters locatedin New York City. ATandamp;T's business objective is to meet customer needs,both within the United States and in foreign markets, for voice and datainformation movement and management. ATandamp;T, through several lines ofbusiness, provides a wide variety of national and international telecommunicationsservices. ATandamp;T also designs, manufactures, markets and services transmissionand switching equipment, central office products, apparatus for use inresidential and business markets, computers and products and services soldprimarily to the Department of Defense and related agencies. The primarybusiness of the seven regional holding companies and their subsidiaries,which maintain plans participating in the Trust, is the furnishing of exchangetelecommunications and exchange access services within specific geographicareas. The regional holding companies are also active in the provisionof advanced mobile communications services as well as publishing and marketingof telecommunications equipment.c. Eastdil is a Delaware corporation and a New York City-based investmentadviser registered under the Investment Advisers Act of 1940, as amended.Eastdil is a wholly owned subsidiary of Eastdil Realty, Inc. Eastdil wasincorporated in 1978 for the purpose of investing in and managing realestate assets for large pension plans. Eastdil manages approximately $1billion in pension plan assets primarily on an individual account basisbut also on a pooled basis. Investments made by Eastdil on behalf of suchplans consist mostly of multitenant commercial and industrial properties.As of December 31, 1987, Eastdil was managing approximately $450 millionof the assets of the Trust. Eastdil is totally unrelated to the partiesinvolved in the subject transactions.d. Rivertel (Rivertel) is a Delaware corporation wholly-owned by the Trustand exempt from Federal income taxation under section 501(c)(2) of theCode. Rivertel was organized by Eastdil as investment manager for the Trustfor the purpose of holding the Trust's interest in the Joint Venture describedherein, to collect the income therefrom and to distribute such income tothe Trust. All of the officers and directors of Rivertel are employeesof Eastdil. As trustee on behalf of the Trust, all of the stock of Rivertelis held by State Street Bank and Trust Company, a Massachusetts bankingcorporation with its principal office in Boston, Massachusetts.e. The Joint Venture is an entity formed on November 19, 1981 by and betweenRivertel and Riverwalk Center Joint Venture (RCJV). The Joint Venture wasformed to take title to, operate, lease, dispose of and otherwise dealwith the Property, the sole asset of the Joint Venture. The Joint Venturemaintains its principal office at 1900 One Riverwalk Place, 700 North St.Mary's Street, San Antonio, Texas. Rivertel has a 74 percent equity interestin the Joint Venture. RCJV, the other coventurer which holds a 26 percentequity interest in the Joint Venture, is an entity comprised of two otherjoint ventures. To the best of Eastdil's knowledge, neither RCJV nor anyof its Joint Venture partners has ever been a party in interest with respectto the Trust or any of the participating Plans.f. Smith Barshop is a full service law firm with fourteen attorneys. Itssole office is located in the building comprising the Property. Smith Barshopleases office space in the Property from the Joint Venture. By virtue ofperforming legal services for the Joint Venture, Smith Barshop has becomea party in interest with respect to the Trust and the Plans under section3(14) of the Act. Smith Barshop has no discretionary authority or responsibilitywith respect to the Property. In addition, Smith Barshop has no affiliationwith Eastdil.2. Among the assets that are indirectly owned by the Trust is the Propertywhich consists of an eighteen-story commercial office building and adjacentparking lot. The Property is located at 700 North St. Mary's Drive, SanAntonio, Texas and contains 263,623 square feet. The Property is the soleasset of the Joint Venture. RCJV was responsible for the development, constructionand ownership of the Property prior to the formation of the Joint Venture.Upon the formation of the Joint Venture in November 1981, Rivertel contributed$17.2 million in cash. RCJV contributed the Property and $1.1 million incash. The Property is not currently encumbered by a mortgage.3. The Joint Venture Agreement provides under section 6.2 that all leasesof space in the Property must be in form and substance satisfactory toRivertel and all tenants must be satisfactory in all respects to Rivertel.Section 6.2 of the Joint Venture Agreement also requires that all leasesmust be submitted to Rivertel at least ten business days prior to the anticipatedexecution date thereof and Rivertel has the right to approve or disapproveof such leases in its sole discretion. Based upon the Joint Venture Agreement,approximately 76 percent of the office space in the Property is leased,primarily to unrelated parties. Aside from the Smith Barshop Leases whichare described below, to the best of Eastdil's knowledge, no other partiesin interest lease space in the Property.4. On June 2, 1982, the Joint Venture entered into a lease agreement withDavis and Smith Incorporated, a law firm which became known as Smith Barshopin 1986. Lease One provided for occupancy beginning August 1, 1982 withrespect to the leased premises and was to terminate on July 31, 1987. SmithBarshop was also given options to renew such lease for two five year termson practically the same terms and conditions as provided in Lease One.Under Lease One, Smith Barshop leased approximately 6,672 rentable squarefeet of office space or approximately 2.5 percent of the space in the Property.The base rental was subject to periodic upward adjustments that were proportionateto increases in the operating expenses and real estate taxes associatedwith the Property. The Joint Venture was also permitted to terminate LeaseOne if Smith Barshop engaged in an ``event of default'' which includedthe nonpayment of rent.5. After arm's-length negotiations between Smith Barshop and the JointVenture, the parties entered into Lease Two effective January 1, 1987.The demised premises under Lease Two constitute the entire tenth floorof the Property and total 14,871 rentable square feet of office space orapproximately 5.6 percent of the rentable space in the Property. LeaseTwo will terminate on December 31, 1991, unless sooner amended, terminatedor extended by the Joint Venture. Lease Two provides that the Joint Venturemay terminate such lease upon an ``event of default'' which is definedin a manner substantially similar to the definition of the term as in LeaseOne. Lease Two also provides for periodic upward rental adjustments representinga proportionate share of the Property's operating expenses and real estatetaxes.6. In view of the party in interest relationship existing between SmithBarshop and Rivertel, Eastdil requests exemptive relief from the Departmentwith respect to Lease One and Lease Two. Eastdil also requests prospectiveexemptive relief for the continuation of the present leasing arrangementexisting between Smith Barshop and the Joint Venture under Lease Two. Eastdilrepresents that rentals under both Leases have been paid in a timely mannerand Smith Barshop has otherwise complied with the terms of such Leases.7. According to Eastdil, the Leases, which were standard commercial leasestypically used by Lessees in the Property, were negotiated and enteredinto in arm's-length transactions between the Joint Venture and Smith Barshop.Eastdil, on behalf of Rivertel, reviewed, approved and has monitored theterms of each Lease. Eastdil represents that the rental rates providedfor in the Leases were, at the time each was entered into, not less thanthe fair rental value of the demised space and comparable to the rentalrates paid by lessees in the Property and in other similar buildings inthe area at such time. Eastdil further states that the other terms andconditions of the Leases have also been comparable to those of similarleases of space in the Property and in similar commercial buildings inthe San Antonio, Texas area entered into at such time. In addition, itis Eastdil's judgment as an experienced real estate manager that SmithBarshop is an excellent lessee for the Property.8. Eastdil also requests exemptive relief, on a prospective basis, forany lease to a party in interest with respect to the Trust or any participatingPlan. ATandamp;T, Eastdil and other fiduciaries with respect to the Propertywill be specifically precluded from leasing space in the Property. Eachsuch Future Lease will, in form and substance, be a standard commerciallease generally used by lessees in the Property. Each Future Lease willbe for a fixed term that will be negotiated on an arm's-length basis onbehalf of the Trust by Eastdil. The terms and conditions of any such FutureLease will also be comparable to those of similar leases of space in theProperty and in similar buildings in the area entered into at such time.9. Eastdil further requests exemptive relief for prospective amendments,extensions, or renewals of Lease Two and the Future Leases. However, beforeany amendments, extensions or renewals of the Leases can be made, theymust be reviewed, approved, negotiated and monitored by Eastdil. Eastdilmust also make a prior determination that such amendments, renewals andextensions are in the best interests of the Trust and the Plans. In addition,the terms and conditions thereof must be comparable to the terms and conditionsthen negotiated with regard to similar Leases of space in the Propertyand in similar commercial office buildings in the San Antonio, Texas areaand reflect common industry practice. Finally, Eastdil represents thatit will apply the same standards of review and professional judgment ithas applied previously with regard to possible amendments, extensions andrenewals associated with Lease Two and the Future Leases.10. Eastdil states that its request for prospective exemptive relief isnecessitated by practical business considerations stemming from the largeseize of the Trust and the Plans and the large number of parties in interestwho deal with them. Eastdil maintains that Rivertel requires the abilityto negotiate and enter into Leases of the Property in the ordinary courseof business. Eastdil also represents that the requested prospective relieffor amendments, renewals or extensions of Lease Two and the Future Leaseswill provide Rivertel with additional flexibility which will expand thepotential value of lease transactions involving the Property, thereby increasingthe investment return to the Trust.11. In summary, it is represented that the subject transactions have satisfiedor will satisfy the statutory criteria for an exemption under section 408(a)of the Act because: (a) Lease One and Lease Two were negotiated in arm's-lengthtransactions on behalf of the Trust by Eastdil, an independent fiduciaryof the Trust which is unrelated to Smith Barshop; (b) any amendments, renewalsor extensions of Lease Two and any Future Leases of the Property with partiesin interest with respect to the Trust, including amendments, renewals orextensions thereof, will require the review, approval, negotiation andmonitoring by Eastdil; (c) the Leases that are subject to this proposedexemption will continue to be standard commercial office leases which areutilized generally for all lessees of the Property and which reflect commonindustry practices; and (d) the rentals under the Leases will continueto be no less than the fair market rental values of the demised premisesat the times of their executions.For Further Information Contact: Ms. Jan D. Broady of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="84">Mead Retirement Master Trust (the Trust) Located in Dayton, Ohio</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7789]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a), 406 (b)(1) and (b)(2) of the Act and the sanctions resultingfrom the application of section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section4975(c)(1) (A) through (E) of the Code shall not apply to (1) the proposedsale by the Trust of certain real property located in Michigan (the Timberlands),including certain timber rights pertaining thereto, to the Mead Corporation(Mead), a party in interest with respect to the Trust; and (2) the proposedsale by the Trust of all outstanding common stock of Copmead, Inc. to Mead;provided that all terms of such transactions are at least as favorableto the Trust as those which the Trust could obtain in arm's-length transactionswith unrelated parties.Summary of Facts and Representations1. Mead is an Ohio publicly-owned corporation with its principal officein Dayton, Ohio. Mead and its subsidiary entities sponsor several employeepension benefit plans (the Plans), the assets of which are commingled forinvestment purposes in the Trust, which is exempt from taxation under section501(a) of the Code. The trustee of the Trust is the Wachovia Bank and TrustCompany, N.A. (the Trustee), a national banking association with its principalplace of business in Winston-Salem, North Carolina. All control over theinvestment of the Trust's assets is exercised by Mead through its InvestmentPolicy Committee (IPC), which develops investment policies and procedures,implements investment programs and monitors designated activities of theTrust.2. Among the assets of the Plans in the Trust are the Timberlands, whichconstituted approximately 4.3 percent of the total assets in the Trustas of December 31, 1987. The Timberlands consist of approximately 429,000acres of land located in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan, together withcertain timber and timber rights with respect to such land. The Timberlandswere acquired and are owned by Copmead, Inc. (Copmead), Lamead, Inc., USMead,Inc., and Michland, Inc. (together, the Timberland Companies), each ofwhich is a tax-exempt title-holding company of which the Trust owns 100percent of the issued and outstanding common stock. The sole and statedpurpose of each of the Timberland Companies is the ownership of the Timberlandson behalf of the Trust.Since the acquisitions of the Timberlands in 1966 and 1982, the TimberlandCompanies have leased the Timberlands (the Leases) either to Escanaba PaperCompany (Escanaba), a wholly-owned subsidiary of Mead, or to Mead and UpperPeninsula Land Company (UPLCo) as joint lessees. UPLCo is a partnerhshipbetween Escanaba and another wholly-owned Mead subsidiary, the UPL Corporation.Mead represents that the acquisitions and the Leases of the Timberlandsby the Timberland Companies on behalf of the Trust satisfy the requirementsof section 408(e) of the Act relating to ``qualifying employer real property''and, therefore, are exempt from the prohibitions of section 406 of theAct.\4\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\4\The Department expresses no opinion as to whether the Timberlandsconstitute ``qualifying employer real property'' or whether the acquisitionsand Leases of the Timberlands satisfy the requirements of section 408(e)of the Act.3. Under the Leases, Mead and its subsidiaries actively manage the Timberlandson a continuous basis. However, Mead represents that the separate ownershipof the Timberlands among the Timberland Companies constitutes an impedimentto efficient management of the Timberlands. Mead maintains that the futureefficient management of the Timberlands will require greater managementflexibility in an ongoing program of sales, purchases and trades amongthe Timberland parcels to consolidate some tracts with parcels not presentlyowned and to dispose of other parcels which are either too remote for usersor have greater economic value for uses other than timber cutting. In orderto enable a more efficient management of the Timberlands, Mead has expresseda desire to purchase the Timberlands from the Trust. Concurrently, themembers of the IPC have expressed an interest in selling the Timberlandsin order to achieve for the Trust greater liquidity and flexibility ofinvestment. Therefore, Mead is proposing to purchase the Timberlands fromthe Timberland Companies and is requesting an exemption to permit suchtransaction under the terms and conditions described herein.\5\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\5\The Department is proposing exemptive relief herein solelyfor Mead's proposed purchase of the Timberlands and is not proposing anyexemptive relief with respect to the Trust's acquisitions of the Timberlandsor the Leases to Mead.4. According to Mead's representations, on March 5, 1987 the IPC authorizedits chairman, William W. Wommack (Mr. Wommack) to represent the Trust innegotiations with Mead representatives regarding a proposed sale of theTimberlands. Mead maintains that Mr. Wommack's extensive experience infinance and investment figured prominently in this authorization. Mr. Wommackis the retired vice-chairman of the board of directors of Mead and priorto his retirement in 1981, he served as Mead's Chief Strategic Officer.Mead represents that because the Timberlands constitute a long-term fixedinvestment of the Trust, the IPC determined that in any sale of the Timberlandsthe Trust must receive a price which includes the present value of futureeconomic benefits under the Leases, benefits which are summarized as (1)the current income streams under the Leases, and (2) the fair market valueof the Timberlands at the expiration of the Leases. According to Mead'srepresentations, after extensive discussion and analysis Mr. Wommack andrepresentatives of Mead reached agreement on an appropriate method forvaluation of each of these economic factors in order to determine an appropriatepurchase price. Mead represents that, based on this agreement, the partieshave determined an appropriate purchase price for the Timberlands (theDetermination). Mead proposes to pay the Timberland Companies cash fortheir interests in the Timberland in an amount established in accordancewith the Determination.5. Mead maintains that the Determination largely reflects the positionproposed on behalf of the Trust and notes that the Determination was reviewed,approved and in part suggested by Rogers, Casey and Barksdale, Inc., aninvestment advisory and research firm providing specialized financial andconsulting services to tax-exempt entities. Mead also represents that theTrustee reviewed the Determination and found it to be appropriate. TheDetermination includes a study commissioned by IPC from Salomon Brothers,Inc. on the appropriateness of various calculations involved in the Determinationand Mead represents that the parties also consulted with the investmentbanking firm of Smith Barney, Harris, Upham and Company and reviewed longrange forecasts of inflation and real returns on Treasury Bonds.Appraisals of the Timberlands were conducted by George Banzhaf and Company(Banzhaf), a commercial real property appraisal firm based in Milwaukee,Wisconsin which is represented to have extensive experience in appraisalsof timber property in Michigan's Upper Peninsula. Mead represents thatMr. Wommack and representatives of Mead carefully reviewed the appraisalsand discussions with the Banzhaf representatives and agreed to user Banzhaf'sappraisals in the Determination for calculating the Timberlands' presentfair market value and the real growth rate of their future value. Meadrepresents that the Determination also includes specific valuations ofthe Leases' income streams and the Timberlands' residual, or post-Lease,values to the Trust. The Trust's total investment in the Timberlands is$14.1 million and calculations made as of January 1, 1988 pursuant to theDetermination result in a proposed purchase price of $43,744,060. The purchaseprice will be adjusted upward as of the sale date to account for rentalsaccrued on and after January 1, 1988 and to reflect the reinvestment potentialof the purchase price as of January 1, 1988.6. Mead represents that the proposed transaction will consist of Mead'scash purchase of the Timberlands directly from all of the Timberland Companiesexcept Copmead. Mead's purchase of that portion of the Timberlands ownedby Copmead will be accomplished by means of Mead's cash purchase of allof the common stock of Copmead. Mead explains that during the negotiationsover the proposed Timberlands sale there wre 69,000 outstanding sharesof sinking-fund preferred stock (the Copmead Preferred) which Copmead hadsold to unrelated parties in 1982 after its purchase of certain Timberlandsproperty and which, by its terms, required that any transfer of Copmeadreal property assets be approved by the holders of the Copmead Preferred.Mead represents that the transfer of the Copmead common stock originallywas proposed in lieu of the transfer of Copmead assets in order to avoidthis procedural obstacle and the potential objections of the Copmead Preferredholders. The transaction proposed herein remains structured as a transferof Copmead common stock even though the Copmead Preferred has been redeemedby Copmead and is no longer outstanding. Mead represents that the proposedtransfer of the Copmead common stock will be tantamount to a transfer ofthe Copmead-owned Timberlands and that either of these transfers wouldaccomplish the same economic result: the transfer of ownership of the Copmead-ownedTimberlands from Copmead to Mead.7. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transaction satisfiesthe criteria of section 408(a) of the Act for the following reasons: (1)The Trust, through the Timberland Companies, will receive a cash purchaseprice for the Timberlands in the amount of no less than the Timberlands'fair market values including the present value of future economic benefitsunder the Leases; (2) the Trust is represented in the Determination, whichdefines the proposed transaction, by Mr. Wommack, who has extensive experiencein finance and investment; (3) the Determination has been reviewed andapproved by the Trustee on behalf of the Trust; (4) the Trust's positionand the valuation methods in the Determination were reviewed on behalfof the Trust and approved by the investment advisory and research firmof Rogers, Casey and Barksdale, Inc., which specializes in financial andconsulting services to tax-exempt entities; (5) The final purchase pricewill be adjusted as of the sale date to refelct rentals accrued under theLeases and to reflect the reinvestment potential of the purchase priceas of that date; and (6) The proposed transaction will achieve for theTrust greater liquidity and flexibility of investment.For Further Information Contact: Ronald Willett of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="84">The Lincoln Savings Bank, FSB (Lincoln) Located in New York, New York</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">[Application No. D-7827]</ITAG>Proposed ExemptionThe Department is considering granting an exemption under the authorityof section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of the Code and inaccordance with the procedures set forth in ERISA Procedure 75-1 (40 FR18471, April 28, 1975). If the exemption is granted the restrictions ofsection 406(a) of the Act and the sanctions resulting from the applicationof section 4975 of the Code, by reason of section 4975(c)(1) (A) through(D) of the Code shall not apply to the sale by Lincoln of its subordinatedcapital notes (the Notes) to the Keogh Plans (the Keoghs) and SimplifiedEmployee Plans (the SEPs) for which Lincoln serves as custodian or trustee,and the sanctions resulting from the application of section 4975 of theCode, by reason of section 4975(c)(1) (A) through (D) of the Code shallnot apply to the sale by Lincoln of the Notes to the individual retirementaccounts (the IRAs) for which Lincoln serves as custodian or trustee, providedthe Keoghs, IRAs and SEPs pay no more than the fair market value of theNotes on the date of the sale.\6\<NOTE/><ITAG tagnum="28"/><NOTE/>\6\ Pursuant to 29 CFR 2510.3-2(d), there is no jurisdictionwith respect to the IRAs under Title I of the Act. However, there is jurisdictionunder Title II of the Act pursuant to section 4975 of the Code.Summaryof Facts and Representations1. Lincoln is a federally-chartered stock savings bank the deposits ofwhich are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC),primarily involved in providing retail bank and residential and commerciallending services in the New York City area. Lincoln was organized in 1866as a New York State chartered mutual savings bank and converted to a federalcharter in 1983. As of June 30, 1988, Lincoln had total assets of $2.6billion, deposits of $2.3 billion and stockholder equity of $139.5 million.Lincoln was acquired by a wholly-owned subsidiary of Unicorp American Corporation(Unicorp) on December 31, 1987 and converted to a federal stock savingsbank. The conversion was supervised and approved by the Federal Home LoanBank Board (FHLBB) and the FDIC. In connection with the acquisition, theUnicorp subsidiary purchased all of the outstanding stock of Lincoln for$135 million and $15 million aggregate principal amount of Lincoln's subordinateddebentures.2. Lincoln is in the process of registration with the FHLBB for the saleof up to $30 million of the Notes, which are unsecured subordinated generalobligations of Lincoln. The Notes are being offered for sale to the generalpublic and to all existing Lincoln depositors. Lincoln also intends tooffer the Notes to the Keoghs, SEPs and IRAs for which it acts as trusteeor custodian.3. Lincoln currently acts as custodian and/or trustee for 22, 443 IRA customers,1,271 Keoghs and 65 SEPs with assets, in the aggregate, of approximately$219,600,000. These assets represent slightly less than 10% of the totaldeposits held by Lincoln. Lincoln has no discretionary authority with respectto investment of IRA, Keogh and SEP assets. All investments are made atthe direction of the account holder within the range of investment alternativespermitted by the plan documents. Lincoln represents that no single IRA,Keogh or SEP account will be permitted to invest more than 25% of the assetsof such account in the Notes in connection with the offering by Lincoln.4. The Notes will be issued in registered form in minimum amounts of $2,500,without limitation on the size of incremental amounts thereof. Interestwill be paid monthly, on the first business day of each month. The Noteswill mature on dates offered by Lincoln of at least 7 and not more than15 years from the date of issue. The pricing supplements to the offeringcircular will contain information as to the maturities then offered byLincoln.5. The Notes will be redeemable at the option of Lincoln, at any time afterthree years from the date of issuance, at the following redemption prices:102% of the principal amount if redeemed during the fourth year after thedate of issuance; 101% of the principal amount if redeemed during the fifthyear after issuance; and 100% of the principal amount if redeemed thereafter,in each case with accrued interest to the date of payment. No redemptionmay be made without the prior written consent of the FHLBB or if, aftergiving effect to such redemption, Lincoln would fail to meet its then applicableregulatory capital requirements. The Notes are subordinated to other debtsof Lincoln including deposit accounts.6. The Notes will be sold by certain officers and other full-time employeesof Lincoln. Written orders for the Notes will be solicited at the Bank'sexecutive offices and at all branch offices. No commissions will be paidto such employees for offering and selling Notes and no fees or commissionswill be payable to Lincoln by any purchaser of the Notes, including theIRAs, Keoghs and SEPs. Lincoln may also elect to offer all or a portionof the Notes through underwriters or dealers, although it does not currentlyintend to do so. The offering of the Notes will terminate no later thanOctober 1, 1989 unless previously terminated or extended (subject to FHLBBapproval) by Lincoln, and is not subject to any minimum amount of Notesbeing sold. It is anticipated that Lincoln will offer the Notes in threeseries in the aggregate principal amount of $10,000,000 each during theone year period of registration.7. The interest payable on the Notes will be at a fixed rate establishedby Lincoln. The rate offered on the Notes will be based upon then-existingmarket conditions. It is currently anticipated that the Notes will bearinterest at rates between 11% and 13% per annum. The interest on Notesacquired by Lincoln's IRAs, Keoghs and SEPs will be the same as the interestrate on Notes from the same series sold to the other Lincoln depositorsand the general public. The terms and conditions of the Notes issued willbe the same for IRAs, Keoghs and SEPs as for all other Lincoln depositorsand the general public. The interest rate on the Notes at the time of issuancewill be higher than that paid by Lincoln at that time on any of its certificatesof deposit. The Notes will be transferrable by purchasers. Each purchaserof a Note will have the right to rescind his or her purchase within threebusiness days from the date the order to purchase is received by Lincoln.8. In summary, the applicant represents that the proposed transaction satisfiesthe criteria of section 408(a) of the Act and section 4975(c)(2) of theCode because: (1) All decisions to purchase the Notes are to be made bythe IRA, Keogh and SEP account holders or fiduciaries other than Lincoln,which will have no discretion over such decision; (2) no fees or commissionswill be paid with respect to the transaction; (3) no more than 25% of theassets of any IRA, Keogh or SEP account will be invested in the Notes;and (4) the Notes will be offered to the Keoghs, IRAs and SEPs at the sameinterest rates, terms and conditions as to other Lincoln depositors andthe general public.For Further Information Contact; Gary H. Lefkowitz of the Department, telephone(202) 523-8881. (This is not a toll-free number.)<ITAG tagnum="84">General Information</ITAG>The attention of interested persons is directed to the following:(1) The fact that a transaction is the subject of an exemption under section408(a) of the Act and/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code does not relievea fiduciary or other party in interest or disqualified person from certainother provisions of the Act and/or the Code, including any prohibited transactionprovisions to which the exemption does not apply and the general fiduciaryresponsibility provisions of section 404 of the Act, which among otherthings require a fiduciary to discharge his duties respecting the plansolely in the interest of the participants and beneficiaries of the planand in a prudent fashion in accordance with section 404(a)(1)(B) of theAct; nor does it affect the requirement of section 401(a) of the Code thatthe plan must operate for the exclusive benefit of the employees of theemployer maintaining the plan and their beneficiaries;(2) Before an exemption may be granted under section 408(a) of the Actand/or section 4975(c)(2) of the Code, the Department must find that theexemption is administratively feasible, in the interests of the plan andof its participants and beneficiaries and protective of the rights of participantsand beneficiaries of the plan; and(3) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be supplemental to, and notin derogation of, any other provisions of the Act and/or the Code, includingstatutory or administrative exemptions and transitional rules. Furthermore,the fact that a transaction is subject to an administrative or statutoryexemption is not dispositive of whether the transaction is in fact a prohibitedtransaction.(4) The proposed exemptions, if granted, will be subject to the expresscondition that the material facts and representations contained in eachapplication are true and complete, and that each application accuratelydescribes all material terms of the transaction which is the subject ofthe exemption.<ITAG tagnum="21">Signed at Washington, DC, this 25th day of January 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Robert J. Doyle,</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director of Regulations and Interpretations, Pension and Welfare BenefitsAdministration, U.S. Department of Labor.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-2061 Filed 1-27-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4510-29-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>