<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89728-0111 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.7-28-89.f2.A1110</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket Nos. 50-277/278] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="56">Philadelphia Electric Co. et al.; Consideration of Issuance of Amendmentto Facility Operating License and Proposed No Significant Hazards ConsiderationDetermination and Opportunity for Hearing </ITAG>The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (the Commission) is consideringissuance of an amendment to Facility Operating License Nos. DPR-44 andDPR-56, issued to Philadelphia Electric Company, Public Service Electricand Gas Company, Delmarva Power and Light Company and Atlantic City ElectricCompany, (the licensees), for operation of the Peach Bottom Atomic PowerStation, Unit Nos. 2 and 3 located in York County, Pennsylvania. The proposed amendment would revise the Technical Specification (TS) LimitingConditions for Operations (LCO) and Surveillance Requirements (SRs) forthe Containment Cooling System (CCS) in TS 3/4.5.B and would revise relatedrequirements for diesel generator (DG) testing in TS 3/4.5.F and the associatedBASES in accordance with the licensee's application dated August 26, 1988.The application responds to issues identified in NRC Inspection Reports50-277/85-07; 50-278/85-07 and 50-277/86-16; 50-278/86-17 concerning (a)clarification of the specific LCO and SR requirements for components ofthe CCS and (b) revision of the alternate system testing requirements uponthe inoperability of a diesel generator. Inspection Report 85-07 identified concerns which are based on apparentinconsistent definitions between TS 3/4.5.B and the BASES of what constitutesthe CCS. The residual heat removal system is designed for three modes orsubsystems of operation: shutdown cooling, containment cooling and lowpressure coolant injection to the reactor vessel. The major equipment ofthe residual heat removal system (RHRS) includes four heat exchangers,four main system pumps (RHR pump) and four high pressure service water(HPSW) pumps for each unit. The containment cooling function also includesthree modes of operation: drywell spray, torus spray and torus coolingdepending upon the alignment of valves and piping within the system. Eachof the three containment cooling modes utilizes HPSW to remove heat fromthe RHR heat exchangers. The BASES identify the CCS as consisting of residualheat removal (RHR or LPCI) pumps and high pressure service water (HPSW)pumps. The concern identified by the Inspection Report 85-07 was that thelicensee interpreted the CCS to consist only of the HPSW pump. In addition,it was noted that the specific coolant paths for the three modes of operationof the CCS, namely drywell spray, torus cooling and torus spray, are describedin the FSAR but are not specifically reflected in the TS. The InspectionReport thus concluded that the TS were incomplete in this regard. In addition to similar comments made in IR 85-07, inspection report 86-16/17also noted that the TS 3/4.5.F requirement to perform daily testing of24 safety related pumps on the inoperability of one DG is not consistentwith the Standard Technical Specifications which do not require such alternatetesting of the ECCS pumps. The licensee has responded with nineteen identified types of changes tothe TS which augment and clarify the CCS specifications, revise the alternatetesting required for inoperable DG conditions and provide associated administrativechanges. Before issuance of the proposed license amendment, the Commission willhave made findings required by the Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended(the Act) and the Commission's regulations. The Commission has made a proposed determination that the amendment requestinvolves no significant hazards considerations. Under the Commission'sregulations in 10 CFR 50.92, this means that operation of the facilityin accordance with the proposed amendment would not (1) involve a significantincrease in the probability of consequences of an accident previously evaluated;or (2) create the possibility of a new or different kind of accident fromany accident previously evaluated; or (3) involve a significant reductionin a margin of safety. Changes 1 through 13 include administrative changes in nomenclature, cleareridentification of components and systems, changes to ensure consistencyand editorial changes to support the remaining numbered changes discussedbelow. The Commission has provided guidance for the application of thecriteria for no significant hazards consideration determination by providingexamples of amendments that are considered not likely to involve significanthazards considerations (51 FR 7751). These examples include: Example (i)``A purely administrative change to technical specifications: For example,a change to achieve consistency throughout the technical specifications,corrections of an error, or a change in nomenclature.'' The proposed changes,as discussed above, are examples of such administrative changes. Sincethese proposed changes are encompassed by an example for which no significanthazard exists, the staff has made a proposed determination that they involveno significant hazards consideration. Changes 14, 15, 16, 17_Jointly, these changes accomplish one of the majorobjectives of the licensee's proposed amendment which is to redefine, reformatand to provide greater specificity and restrictions in the technical specificationsregarding the major components and systems required to effect the containmentcooling function; namely the diesel generator emergency power supply, theHPSW pumps and the MDVs involved with the drywell spray and torus sprayand cooling modes of the RHRS. In this regard the licensee has expandedSR 4.5.B.1 to include the MOV's (Change 14), has reworded SR 4.5.B.3 toclarify that its applicability is to the HPSW pumps (Change 15) and hasexpanded LCO 3.5.B.4 (Change 16) and the corresponding SR 4.5.B.4 (Change17) to now include further restrictions specifying that two independentloops must be maintained, the components of each loop and limits on theinoperability of one or both loops for the individual modes of the RHR(drywell spray, torus spray and torus cooling). Thus, the currently defined``containment cooling subsystem loops'' components would now be reflectedin the TS as two loops each of RHR in the drywell spray, torus spray andtorus cooling modes by the expansion of 3/4.5.B.4 into new 3/4.5.B.4, 3/4.5.B.5and 3/4.5.B.6 and by the rewording of SR 4.5.B.3 so that it applies tothe HPSW portion of the containment cooling system. These proposed changesare intended to maintain the current intent of these specifications butwith further restrictions and clarifications. The Commission has provided guidance for application of the criteria forno significant hazards consideration determination by providing examplesof amendments that are not likely to involve significant hazards considerations(51 FR 7751). These examples include: Example (ii) ``A change that constitutesan additional limitation, restriction or control not presently includedin the technical specifications: for example, a more stringent surveillancerequirement.'' The proposed changes numbered 14, 15, 16 and 17, as discussedabove, are examples of such changes. Since the proposed changes are encompassedby an example for which no significant hazard exists, the staff has madea proposed determination that they involve no significant hazards consideration.Change 18 proposes to revise the operating restrictions of LCO 3.5.F.1for one diesel generator inoperable so that only the low pressure coreand containment cooling systems powered by the remaining operable DGs needbe operable. This would not reduce the as-analyzed ability of the plantto respond to the design basis accident since the systems powered by theinoperable diesel generator would not be given credit in the analyses formitigation of design basis accidents. The licensee has provided a discussionof the proposed changes as they relate to the three standards articulatedabove. The licensee states that these changes will not: <ITAG tagnum="21">(1) Involve a significant increase in the probability or consequencesof an accident previously evaluated. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Four design basis accidents described in Section 14 of the UFSAR arethe: Control Rod Drop Accident, the Loss of Coolant Accident, the RefuelingAccident and the Main Steam Line Break. Since no credit can be taken foroperability of the Low Pressure Core and Containment Cooling Systems whichare powered by the inoperable diesel generator, the precursors, initialconditions, assumptions or sequences-of-events of these conditions, asdescribed in the UFSAR are not impacted. It is, therefore, concluded thatthe probability or consequences of an accident previously evaluated arenot increased. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(2) Create the possibility of a new or different kind of accidentfrom any accident previously evaluated. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Removing the mechanical operability requirement of systems which donot have a reliable electrical source, as the associated diesel generatoris inoperable, will not introduce potential new accident precursors, sinceno credit can be taken for their operability. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(3) Involve a significant reduction in a margin of safety. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">The inoperable diesel generator renders the power supply to the LowPressure Core and Containment Cooling System loops unreliable. Thus, theseloops are effectively rendered inoperable. It is, therefore, concludedthat removing this mechanical operability requirement does not decreasea margin of safety.</ITAG>Change 19 proposes to delete the alternate testing requirements of SR 4.5.F.1for the low pressure core and containment cooling systems when one dieselgenerator is inoperable. The licensee states that this change will reduceunnecessary system startup stresses as well as reduce system unavailabilityresulting from systems being out of service during testing and that thischange is consistent with the Standard Technical Specifications. The licenseehas provided a discussion of the proposed change as it relates to the threestandards articulated above. The licensee states that these changes willnot:<ITAG tagnum="21">(1) Involve a significant increase in the probability or consequencesof an accident previously evaluated. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">The reliability and redundancy of the Low Pressure Core and ContainmentCooling Systems, along with the Surveillance Requirements established inother sections of the Technical Specifications, assure the operabilityof these systems necessary to mitigate the consequences of an accident.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Four design basis accidents described in Section 14 of the UFSAR are:the Control Rod Drop Accident, the Loss of Coolant Accident, the RefuelingAccident and the Main Steam Line Break. Change request (19) will not adverselyimpact the precursors, initial conditions, assumptions or sequences-of-eventsof these accidents, as described in the UFSAR. Therefore, an increase inthe probability or consequences of an accident previously evaluated isnot created. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(2) Create the possibility of a new or different kind of accidentfrom any accident previously evaluated. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Surveillance and operability requirements are not potential new accidentprecursors. The surveillance tests and their criteria will remain unchanged,and excessive challenges to the ECCS will be reduced. It is, therefore,concluded that implementation of Change Request (19) will not create thepossibility of a new or different kind of accident from any accident previouslyevaluated. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(3) Involve a significant reduction in a margin of safety. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Relaxing the accelerated testing provisions will reduce longterm equipmentwear-out and encourage preventive maintenance at more frequent intervals.For these reasons, a net improvement in the reliability of these essentialsystems can be anticipated, thus enhancing the margin of safety.</ITAG>The staff has reviewed the licensee's no significant hazards considerationfor changes 18 and 19 above and agrees with the licensee's analyses. Accordingly,the Commission has proposed to determine that the above changes 18 and19 do not involve a significant hazards consideration. The Commission is seeking public comments on this proposed determination.Any comments received within 30 days after the date of publication of thisnotice will be considered in making any final determination. The Commissionwill not normally make a final determination unless it receives a requestfor a hearing. Written comments may be addressed to the Regulatory Publications Branch,Division of Freedom of Information and Publications Services, Office ofAdministration and Resources Management, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, and should cite the publication date and page numberof the <T4>Federal Register</T4> notice. Written comments may also be delivered to Room P-223, Phillips Building,7920 Norfolk Avenue, Bethesda, Maryland from 7:30 a.m. to 4:15 p.m. Copiesof written comments received may be examined at the NRC Public DocumentRoom, 2120 L Street NW., Washington, DC. The filing of requests for hearingand petitions for leave to intervene is discussed below.By August 28, 1989, the licensee may file a request for a hearing withrespect to issuance of the amendment to the subject facility operatinglicense and any person whose interest may be affected by this proceedingand who wishes to participate as a party in the proceeding must file awritten petition for leave to intervene. Requests for a hearing and petitionsfor leave to intervene shall be filed in accordance with the Commission's``Rule of Practice for Domestic Licensing Proceedings'' in 10 CFR Part2. If a request for a hearing or petition for leave to intervene is filedby the above date, the Commission or an Atomic Safety and Licensing Board,designated by the Commission or by the Chairman of the Atomic Safety andLicensing Board Panel, will rule on the request and/or petition; and theSecretary or the designated Atomic Safety and Licensing Board will issuea notice of hearing or an appropriate order.As required by 10 CFR 2.714, a petition for leave to intervene shall setforth with particularity the interest of the petitioner in the proceeding,and how that interest may be affected by the results of the proceeding.The petition should specifically explain the reasons why intervention shouldbe permitted with particular reference to the following factors: (1) Thenature of the petitioner's right under the Act to be made a party to theproceeding; (2) the nature and extent of the petitioner's property, financial,or other interests in the proceeding; and (3) the possible effect of anyorder which may entered in the proceeding on the petitioner's interest.The petition should also identify the specific aspect(s) of the subjectmatter of the proceeding as to which petitioner wishes to intervene. Anyperson who has filed a petition for leave to intervene or who has beenadmitted as a party may amend the petition without requesting leave ofthe Board up to fifteen (15) days prior to the first pre-hearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, but such an amended petition must satisfythe specificity requirements described above.Not later than fifteen (15) days prior to the first prehearing conferencescheduled in the proceeding, a petitioner shall file a supplement to thepetition to intervene, which must include a list of the contentions thatare sought to be litigated in the matter, and the bases for each contentionset forth with reasonable specificity. Contentions shall be limited tomatters within the scope of the amendment under consideration. A petitionerwho fails to file such a supplement which satisfies these requirementswith respect to at least one contention will not be permitted to participateas a party.Those permitted to intervene become parties to the proceeding, subjectto any limitations in the order granting leave to intervene, and have theopportunity to participate fully in the conduct of the hearing, includingthe opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine witnesses.If a hearing is requested, the Commission will make a final determinationon the issue of no significant hazards considerations. The final determinationwill serve to decide when the hearing is held.If the final determination is that the amendment request involves no significanthazards considerations, the Commission may issue the amendment and makeit effective, notwithstanding the request for a hearing. Any hearing heldwould take place after issuance of the amendment.If the final determination is that the amendment request involves significanthazards considerations, any hearing held would take place before the issuanceof any amendment.Normally, the Commission will not issue the amendment until the expirationof the 30-day notice period. However, should circumstances change duringthe notice period, such that failure to act in a timely way would result,for example, in derating or shutdown of the facility, the Commission mayissue the license amendment before the expiration of the 30-day noticeperiod, provided that its final determination is that the amendment involvesno significant hazards considerations. The final determination will considerall public and State comments received. Should the Commission take thisaction, it will publish a notice of issuance and provide for opportunityfor a hearing after issuance. The Commission expects that the need to takethis action will occur very infrequently.A request for a hearing or a petition for leave to intervene must be filedwith the Secretary of the Commission, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, Attention: Docketing and Service Branch, or may bedelivered to the Commission's Public Document Room, 2120 L Street NW.,Washington, DC, by the above date. Where petitions are filed during thelast ten (10) days of the notice period, it is requested that the petitionerpromptly so inform the Commission by a toll-free telephone call to WesternUnion at 1 (800) 325-6000 (in Missouri 1 (800) 342-6700). The Western Unionoperator should be given Datagram Identification Number 3737 and the followingmessage addressed to Walter R. Butler, Director, Project Directorate I-2,Division of Reactor Projects I/II: petitioner's name and telephone number;date petition was mailed; plant name; and publication date and page numberof this<T4> Federal Register</T4> notice. A copy of the petition should also besent to the Office of the General Counsel, U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission,Washington, DC 20555, and to Conner and Wetterhahn, 1747 Pennsylvania AvenueNW., Washington, DC 20006, attorney for the licensee. Nontimely filings of petitions for leave to intervene, amended petitions,supplemental petitions and/or requests for hearing will not be entertainedabsent a determination by the Commission, the presiding officer or thepresiding Atomic Safety and Licensing Board that the petition and/or requestshould be granted based upon a balancing of the factors specified in 10CFR 2.714(a)(i)-(v) and 2.714(d).For futher details with respect to this action, see the application foramendment dated August 26, 1988, which is available for public inspectionat the Commission's Public Document Room, 2120 L Street NW., Washington,DC 20555, and at the Local Document Room, at the Government PublicationsSection, State Library of Pennsylvania, Commonwealth and Walnut Streets,Harrisburg, Pennsylvania 17126.<ITAG tagnum="21">Dated at Rockville, Maryland, this 21st day of July 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">For the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">Walter R. Butler, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Director, Project Directorate I-2 Division of Reator Projects I/IIOffice of Nuclear Reactor Regulation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-17683 Filed 7-27-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 7590-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>