<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR89406-0005 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.4-06-89.f2.A1004</DOCID><TEXT><ITAG tagnum="69"><ITAG tagnum="52">12 CFR Part 229</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="41">[Docket No. R-0649; Regulation CC]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Availability of Funds and Collection of Checks</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Final rule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Board is adopting a number of amendments to RegulationCC and its Commentary (Appendix E to Regulation CC). The regulation requiresbanks to make funds available to their customers within specified times,to disclose their funds availability policies to their customers, and tohandle returned checks expeditiously. Since the publication of RegulationCC, the Board has received numerous requests from banks and others forclarification of various provisions of the regulation. The Board believesthat the changes to Regulation CC and its Official Commentary (AppendixE) respond to many of these questions and will aid banks in understandingand complying with the regulation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>EFFECTIVE DATE: </T2>The effective date for the amendment to andSection;229.2(e) regarding agencies of foreign banks and the amendment to AppendixA is August 10, 1989. All other amendments are effective April 10, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT:</T2>Louise L. Roseman, Assistant Director(202) 452-3874 or Gayle Thompson, Program Leader (202) 452-2934 Divisionof Federal Reserve Bank Operations; Oliver I. Ireland, Associate GeneralCounsel (202) 452-3625 or Stephanie Martin, Attorney (202) 452-3198, LegalDivision; or Thomas J. Noto, Attorney (202) 452-3667, Division of Communityand Consumer Affairs. For the hearing impaired <T3>only, </T3>Telecommunications Device for the Deaf, Earnestine Hillor Dorothea Thompson (202) 452-3544.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2>On May 13, 1988, the Board adoptedRegulation CC (12 CFR Part 229) to carry out the provisions of the ExpeditedFunds Availability Act (``Act'') (12 U.S.C. 4001-4010). See 53 FR 19372(May 27, 1988). The regulation requires banks to make funds available totheir customers within specified times, to disclose their funds availabilitypolicies to their customers, and to handle returned checks expeditiously.After the publication of Regulation CC, the Board received numerous requestsfrom banks and others for clarification of various provisions of the regulation.In October 1988, the Board proposed changes to Regulation CC and its OfficialCommentary (Appendix E) to respond to many of these questions and to aidbanks in understanding and complying with the regulation (53 FR 44343,November 2, 1988). The Board received 63 comments on the proposed amendments. Commenters comprised:<ITAG tagnum="38">Commercial banks </ITAG>.....26<ITAG tagnum="38">Bank holding companies </ITAG>.....15<ITAG tagnum="38">Trade associations </ITAG>.....10<ITAG tagnum="38">Savings and loan institutions </ITAG>.....4<ITAG tagnum="38">Clearinghouses </ITAG>.....3<ITAG tagnum="38">Banking service corporations </ITAG>.....2<ITAG tagnum="38">Credit unions </ITAG>.....1<ITAG tagnum="38">Federal Home Loan Banks </ITAG>.....1<ITAG tagnum="38">Law firms </ITAG>.....1The final amendments and substantive comments are summarized below.Section 229.2 (Definitions)(d) <T3>Available for withdrawal. </T3>The Commentary originally stated thatfunds are considered to be available for withdrawal even though they cannotbe used because they are subject to garnishment, tax levy, or court orderrestricting disbursements from the account. The Board proposed to revisethe Commentary to make it clear that when a bank places a hold on fundsset aside as a result of the certification of a check, a check guaranty,purchase of a cashier's check, or similar transaction, the bank has notfailed to make funds available for withdrawal.Two commenters suggested that the Board clarify that funds should be consideredavailable for withdrawal if used by a bank in accordance with its rightof set-off or if a bank holds the funds ``in an account prior to initiationof a wire transfer.'' The final revision expands on the proposed languageto make it clear that the Commentary's list of reasons is not exhaustiveand clarifies that banks are permitted under the regulation to place ahold on funds to cover a check that was certified or purchased and notdebit the account until the check is presented for payment.(e) <T3>Bank.</T3> The Expedited Funds Availability Act's definition of ``depositoryinstitution'' includes ``an office, branch, or agency of a foreign banklocated in the United States'' (12 U.S.C. 4001(12)). The definition ofbank in Regulation CC, for purposes of subpart B, originally included onlybranches of foreign banks as defined in the International Banking Act (12U.S.C. 3101). In some cases, however, agencies of foreign banks may holdaccounts. Accordingly, the Board proposed an amendment to the definitionof ``bank,'' for purposes of subpart B, to cover agencies of foreign banksthat are located in the United States. (Agencies of foreign banks are alreadyincluded in the definition of ``bank'' for purposes of subpart C.) Officesof foreign banks in the United States that are not branches or agenciesare not permitted to hold accounts. No substantive comments were receivedon this change, and the Board has adopted the amendment as proposed. Thisamendment will become effective 120 days following its final adoption toprovide agencies of foreign banks sufficient time to implement the requirementsof subpart B. In addition, the Act did not include Edge Act corporations, agreement corporations,and commercial lending companies (such as banking companies incorporatedunder Article XII of the New York Banking Law) under the definition of``depository institution''; consequently, the Board did not subject themto the availability and disclosure requirements of subpart B of RegulationCC. For purposes of subpart C, however, the term ``bank'' also includesany person engaged in the business of banking, so that the same rules applyto the return of checks by institutions that do not hold ``accounts'' asapply to institutions that do hold ``accounts.'' Edge Act corporations,agreement corporations, and commercial lending companies pay and returnchecks and drafts and would generally be considered to be engaged in thebusiness of banking. The Board proposed to revise the Commentary to thedefinition of ``bank'' to clarify the status of Edge Act and similar corporationsunder the regulation. No substantive comments were received on this change,and the Board has adopted the revision as proposed. (f) <T3>Banking day</T3> and (g) <T3>Business day.</T3> The Commentary to these definitions originally statedthat deposits made to an ATM are considered made at the branch holdingthe account into which the deposit is made for the purpose of determiningthe day of deposit. The Board believes that it is appropriate to applythis rule to deposits made at off-premise facilities, such as remote depositoriesand lock boxes, as well as at ATMs. All other deposits should be consideredmade at the branch at which the deposit is received for purposes of determiningthe day of deposit. The Board proposed to revise the Commentary accordingly.Many commenters requested that the Board clarify the interaction of theproposed Commentary to the definitions of ``banking day'' and ``businessday'' and andSection; 229.19(a). The commenters stated that it was unclearunder the proposed language whether deposits to off-premise facilitieswould still be considered received in accordance with andSection; 229.19(a).The Board has added language in the final revision to the Commentary toclarify the relationship between the two sections. (i) <T3>Cashier's check</T3> and (gg) <T3>Teller's check.</T3> Sections 229.2(i) and (gg) of the regulationsdefine ``cashier's check'' and ``teller's check.'' The Board has receivedseveral inquiries as to the types of checks that are included within thesedefinitions. One commenter requested that the Board revise the Commentaryto the definition of ``teller's check'' to include checks drawn by a nonbankand payable through a bank. The Board has clarified that such checks arenot considered teller's checks under the Act, and has expanded the Commentaryto the definitions of ``teller's check'' and ``cashier's check'' to makefurther clarifications. (k) <T3>Check.</T3> The Commentary to the definition of ``check'' originallystated that a credit card draft is not considered a check for purposesof the regulation. The Board proposed to clarify the term ``credit carddraft'' by revising the Commentary to specify that the term includes salesdrafts used by merchants or generated by banks but excludes checks thatbanks provide to their customers as a means of accessing credit lines withoutthe use of credit cards. Two commenters expressed confusion regarding theproposed revision, in particular as to what checks would be excluded as``credit card drafts.'' The Board has revised the Commentary to eliminateconfusion. (u) <T3>Noncash item.</T3> The definition of noncash item includes an itemthat would otherwise be a check, except that it has not been preprintedor post-encoded in magnetic ink with the routing number of the paying bank.Under the definition of ``paying bank,'' published by the Board as an interimrule on August 18, 1988 (53 FR 31290) and adopted as a final rule on November2, 1988 (53 FR 44324), the routing number on certain payable through checksmay no longer be that of the paying bank for purposes of subpart B of theregulation. The Board is revising the Commentary to clarify that, in thecontext of this definition, ``paying bank'' refers to the paying bank forpurposes of subpart C. This amendment clarifies that checks payable througha bank are not noncash items. (z) <T3>Paying bank.</T3> The definition of ``paying bank'' originally includedthe state or unit of general local government on which a check is drawn.Some states and local governments issue checks drawn on themselves, butdesignate the checks as payable through or at a bank. The Board proposedto amend the definition of paying bank to provide that a state or unitof general local government is a paying bank only if the check is actuallysent to the state or unit of general local government for payment or collection.No substantive comments were received regarding this change, and the Boardhas adopted the amendment as proposed. The Board has also approved a relatedamendment, as proposed, to conform the warranty provisions in andSection;229.34 (a) and (b) to the definition of ``paying bank.'' (bb) <T3>Qualified Returned Check. </T3>The regulation defines a qualified returnedcheck (``QRC'') as one that has been prepared for automated return to thedepositary bank by placing the check in a carrier envelope or placing astrip on the check and encoding the strip or envelope in magnetic ink.Under andSection; 229.31(a), a returning bank's return deadline is extendedby one business day if the returning bank converts a returned check toa QRC. Under the current regulation, returning banks that might want to use anothertechnology for automating returned check processing may not extend theirreturn deadline when using a methodology other than that defined for aQRC. The Board requested comment on whether a broader definition of QRCis warranted to accommodate different technologies, whether banks woulduse an alternative method of qualifying returned checks if it were available,whether the number of alternative methodologies allowed should be limited,and whether a returning bank should be permitted to extend its return deadlineby the additional day to prepare the returned check for processing usinganother technology if the returned check had originally been qualifiedby the paying bank. Twenty-seven commenters opposed broadening the defintion of QRC at thistime. The reasons cited were a need for uniformity, a need to adapt tothe new return system as it exists before experimenting with new technologies,and the need for careful industry study before implementing alternativemeans of creating QRCs. Six commenters favored broadening the definitionnow, but three believed the Board should do so only in ``a limited way.''Nineteen commenters opposed and two commenters favored allowing an extraday for a returning bank to qualify a returned check using an alternativetechnology. Some of those opposed said they would favor the extra day ifan agreement was reached between the interested banks or if it would ultimatelyspeed the return. Most commenters said that they would use a new technologyin the future if it is sufficiently studied and tested, cost-efficient,and available to all banks. The final amendment does not expand the definitionof QRC nor does it allow an extra day for qualifying a returned check usingan alternative technology. The Board will, however, continue to study newtechnologies and options for speeding the return process and may make furtherproposals in the future. In addition, the Board proposed to clarify the Commentary to indicate thatQRCs prepared using envelopes preprinted with the return item identifiermay conform to the guidelines established in <T3>Specification for the Placement and Location of MICR Printing, X9.13</T3>by the American National Standards Committee on Financial Services (Sept.8, 1983) (``ANSI guidelines'') for the external processing code (``EPC'')field for printing the identifier. The ANSI guideline states that the EPCfield is located within \1/4\ inch to the left of the routing number, thusallowing the identifier to be in either position 44 or position 45 on preprintedenvelopes. The commenters generally approved of universal standards for carrier stripsand envelopes. Several commenters opposed the proposal that the ``2'' identifierbe allowed in either position 44 or 45 because their software is capableof reading position 44 only. Since the publication of the proposed amendment,the Board has learned that the ANSI guidelines regarding the EPC fieldare in the process of revision. The Board will delay action on this amendmentuntil the new ANSI standards are finalized. (cc) <T3>Returning bank.</T3> The definition of ``returning bank'' in RegulationCC originally stated that a returning bank is a collecting bank for purposesof U.C.C. 4-202(1)(e), which specifies a collecting bank's duty to notifyits transferor of delays in transit. On further consideration, the Boarddid not believe that it was necessary for Regulation CC to require thata returning bank notify its transferor of any loss or delay in transit,and therefore the Board proposed to delete this reference from the definition.One commenter objected to the deletion, stating that the transferor needsthe notice for chargeback and monitoring purposes. The Board believes,however, that while such a notice is necessary in the forward collectionprocess, when collecting banks may be in doubt as to whether the checkwill be paid, it is not as important in the return process, when paymentis generally assured as long as the depositary bank is solvent. A returningbank will still be a collecting bank for purposes of U.C.C. 4-202(2), whichsets out when a collecting bank's action would be considered to be seasonable,and a returning bank is analogous to a collecting bank for purposes offinal settlement. Therefore, the Board is adopting the amendment to theregulation as proposed and has added clarifications to the Commentary accordingly.(kk) <T3>Unit of general local government.</T3> The Board has been asked whetherIndian nations are considered to be units of general local government withinthe meaning of Regulation CC. The Act provides next-day availability forchecks drawn by a unit of general local government. Under the Act, a unitof general local government is defined as any city, country, town, township,parish, village, or other general purpose political subdivision of a state.As Indian nations are not subdivisions of the states, Indian nations arenot units of general local government within the meaning of the Act, andthe Board consequently proposed a revision to the Commentary to make itclear that Indian nations are not included within the meaning of this term.No substantive comments were received on this revision, and the Board hasadopted it as proposed. Section 229.10 (Next-Day Availability)  <T3>Certain check deposits.</T3> The Commentary to andSection;229.10 originallystated that banks are required to provide next-day availability (or two-dayavailability under andSection;229.10(c)(2)) for Federal Reserve Bank andFederal Home Loan Bank checks. The Board proposed to revise the Commentaryto provide that the next-day and second-day availability requirements applyonly to checks that are encoded with a routing number listed in AppendixA to the regulation. Banks generally must rely on the routing number todetermine whether these checks are subject to next-day availability becausethe banks cannot require the use of special deposit slips to identify them.The routing numbers assigned to the Federal Reserve Banks and Federal HomeLoan Banks may change from time to time, and the Board does not believethat banks should be held liable for not providing next-day availabilityfor a Federal Reserve Bank or Federal Home Loan Bank check that containsa newly issued routing number that has not yet been included in AppendixA.One commenter favored the proposal that a bank should be able to rely onthe routing numbers published in Appendix A for giving next-day availabilityto certain checks, but suggested that Appendix A updates have a delayedeffective date to facilitate depositary bank programming changes. The Boardwill update Appendix A periodically to incorporate recently issued FederalReserve Bank and Federal Home Loan Bank routing numbers and will allowa lead time for banks to update their computer systems before imposingliability. The Board adopted the revision as proposed.In addition, andSection;229.13(a) of the regulation requires that depositarybanks give next-day availability to traveler's checks when they are depositedto new accounts. The Board proposed to add a sentence to the Commentaryto andSection;229.10 that cites this requirement, cross-referencing the newaccount exception in andSection;229.13. Several commenters suggested that,to avoid confusion regarding the proposed language, the Commentary shouldclarify that traveler's checks are ``included in the $5000 aggregation''for next-day availability for new accounts. The Board has redrafted thefinal revision to the Commentary to make this clarification.<T3>Deposits made to an employee of the depositary bank.</T3> In most cases,andSection;229.10(c) conditions next-day availability on the check beingdeposited in person to an employee of the depositary bank. Deposits madethrough the mail or at an ATM or night depository must be made availablenot later than the second business day after the banking day of deposit.Some questions have been raised about the meaning of the term ``in personto an employee of the depositary bank,'' e.g., whether it covers situationswhere a bank sends a courier to the customer to pick up checks for deposit.The language used by the Act is ``deposited in a receiving depository institutionwhich is staffed by individuals employed by such institution'' (12 U.S.C.4002(a)(2)), and the Act defines ``receiving depository institution'' tomean ``the branch of a depository institution or the proprietary ATM inwhich a check is first deposited'' (12 U.S.C. 4001(20)). The Board interpretsthese provisions as requiring next-day availability only for deposits madeto staff of the depositary bank at a branch of the bank. Under andSection;229.10(c)(2),second-day availability would apply to deposits described in this sectionthat are made at a teller station staffed by a person that is not an employeeof the depositary bank (e.g. a shared staffed teller facility located ina retail store) and to deposits picked up at the customer's premises byan employee of the depositary bank. Accordingly, the Board proposed revisionsto this section of the Commentary to make these clarifications. One commenterrequested clarification in the Commentary as to the day of deposit fordeposits picked up by an employee of the depositary bank at the customer'spremises. The Board has made this clarification in the final revision andotherwise has adopted the revision as proposed.<T3>Fees for withdrawals.</T3> The Commentary to andSection;229.10(c) originallyprohibited a depositary bank from imposing a fee on a customer when thecustomer withdraws funds that must be made available under the regulationbut for which the bank has not yet received credit. The Board intendedthis provision to prevent practices designed to discourage customers fromexercising their right to withdraw these funds in accordance with the regulation.Banks have expressed concern, however, that this provision could be interpretedto prohibit the application of account analysis programs commonly usedby banks under which earnings credits are computed on the basis of collectedbalances. The Board believes that such programs are generally adopted forlegitimate purposes and not for purposes of evading the requirements ofthe Act. Because of the difficulties in distinguishing these programs fromdevices to evade the requirements of the Act, the Board proposed to deletethis provision of the Commentary.Thirteen commenters supported the Board's deletion of this provision, statingthat the change will prevent widespread confusion and operating problemsthroughout the industry. Five commenters opposed the proposal, statingthat the deletion would invite abuses of the regulation by depositary banks.The Board believes that the difficulties caused by the fee for withdrawallanguage to legitimate account analysis programs outweighs the danger ofabuse of the regulation by depositary banks. The final amendment deletesthe fee for withdrawal language, but the Board plans to monitor the practicesof banks in this area and may consider specific restrictions if it determinesthat abuses are occurring.<T3>Special deposit slips.</T3> The Commentary originally stated that ifa bank only provides special deposit slips upon the customer's request,the bank's tellers must advise customers of the special deposit slips'availability. Because banks indicated that this requirement places a difficultburden on tellers, the Board proposed to delete the reference to the tellers'duties. Some commenters expressed concern that if the Board deleted thisreference, customers would be told of the availability of such slips onlyat the time they receive their initial disclosures. The Board is revisingthe Commentary to indicate that either tellers can advise customers ofthe availability of special deposit slips, or the bank may post a noticeindicating that special deposit slips are available upon request. The noticemay be placed, for example, at teller windows or near or with the lobbynotice required under andSection;229.18(b).Section 229.11 (Temporary Availability Schedule)(c) <T3>Nonlocal checks.</T3> Under the temporary schedule, funds depositedby nonlocal check must be made available for withdrawal no later than theseventh business day following the banking day of deposit. The Commentaryoriginally stated that exceptions to this rule include deposits in accountsof banks located outside the 48 contiguous states and deposits made tononproprietary ATMs. The Board proposed to delete the reference to nonproprietaryATM deposits because andSection;229.11(d) already requires that all checksdeposited at nonproprietary ATMs be made available no later than the seventhbusiness day following the banking day of deposit. No substantive commentswere received on this change, and the Board adopted the revision as proposed.Section 229.13 (Exceptions)(b) <T3>Large deposits</T3>. Section 229.13(b) permits a depositary bank toextend the hold placed on local and nonlocal check deposits to the extentthat the aggregate amount of the deposit on any banking day exceeds $5,000.After the final rule was adopted, several banks asked if there is a ruleto determine what portion of a large-dollar deposit that is composed ofboth local and nonlocal checks should be made available in accordance withthe schedule and which checks may be held for a longer period of time underthis exception. The Board intended to leave this determination to the discretionof the depositary bank, and proposed a revision to the Commentary to clarifythis point. No substantive comments were received on this change, and theBoard has adopted the revision as proposed.(e)(2) <T3>Overdraft and returned check fees</T3>. Originally, the last sentenceof this paragraph of the regulation stated that ``[t]he overdraft and returnedcheck notice must state that the customer may be entitled to a refund ofoverdraft or returned check fees * * *.'' This sentence, when read withthe notice requirement of andSection; 229.13(g), could have been interpretedto require banks to provide duplicate notices to their customers in certaincases. The Board proposed to amend the last sentence of this paragraphto clarify that only one notice is required. No substantive comments werereceived on this change, and the Board has adopted the amendment as proposed.Section 229.16 (Specific Availability Policy Disclosure)The Board is clarifying two disclosure issues that have been raised sinceRegulation CC took effect. These clarifications would not require banksto change disclosures that have already been printed or mailed.(a) <T3>General</T3>. Section 229.16(a) of the regulation requires banks toprovide their customers with a specific policy disclosure that reflectsthe bank's availability policy followed in most cases. The Board proposedtwo revisions to the Commentary to clarify this provision. First, the Boardproposed to clarify that if a bank discloses the policy it follows in mostcases, it need not disclose to some customers that they may get fasteravailability. In addition, the Board proposed to clarify that a bank doesnot violate the disclosure requirements of the regulation if it pays checkswritten on an account prior to the day funds in the account become availablefor withdrawal according to its disclosure. Generally, as long as fundsare not available for withdrawal for all uses permitted to the customer,they are not ``available for withdrawal'' as that term is defined in theregulation and, generally, disclosures based on the time that funds areavailable for all uses are proper. No substantive comments were receivedon these changes, and the Board has adopted the revisions as proposed.(b) <T3>Content of specific availability policy disclosure</T3>. Section 229.16(b)of the regulation describes the required contents of the specific availabilitypolicy disclosure. The Board proposed to revise the Commentary to andSection;229.16(b) to clarify that a bank that provides availability based on whenthe bank generally receives credit for deposited checks need not disclosethe time when a check drawn on each bank will be available for withdrawal.Instead, the Board proposed that the bank may disclose the categories ofdeposits that must be available on the first business day after the dayof deposit, state the other categories of deposits and the time periodsthat will be applicable to those deposits, and state that the customermay request a copy of the bank's schedule for when deposits of those checkswill be available for withdrawal. No substantive comments were receivedon this change, and the Board has adopted the revision as proposed.(c)(3) <T3>Overdraft and returned check fees</T3>. The last sentence of this paragraphof the regulation originally stated that ``[t]he overdraft and returnedcheck notice must state that the customer may be entitled to a refund ofoverdraft or returned check fees * * *.'' This sentence, when read withthe notice requirement in andSection; 229.16(c)(2), could have been interpretedto require banks to provide duplicate notices to their customers in certaincases. The Board proposed to amend the last sentence of this paragraphto read ``the notice must state that the customer may be entitled to arefund of overdraft or returned check fees * * *.'' No substantive commentswere received on this change, and the Board has adopted the revision asproposed.Section 229.19 (Miscellaneous)(a) <T3>When funds are considered deposited.</T3> This paragraph establishesrules to determine when funds are considered received in various circumstances.Rules applicable to deposits made at staffed teller stations differ fromthose that apply to deposits made at off-premises facilities, such as lockboxes or night depositories. The Board proposed a revision to the Commentaryto clarify that the rules applicable to funds deposited in a deposit boxlocated in the lobby of the bank should be similar to the rules for fundsreceived at a staffed teller station. Seven commenters favored the proposal,stating that the change is reasonable in light of customer expectationsbut that the Board should clearly distinguish between boxes inside thelobby and boxes attached to the lobby but accessed from outside. Six commenterswere opposed, explaining that for security reasons, lobby boxes are notemptied while the lobby is open to the public, and consequently it is impracticalto treat those deposits the same as deposits to a teller. One commentersuggested that a notice on the lobby box as to when funds will be consideredreceived would be sufficient. The final revision provides that a lobbybox deposit is treated the same as a deposit to a staffed teller station,unless the bank treats lobby box deposits the same as deposits to nightdepositories and provides a notice on the lobby box informing customerswhen deposits at the lobby box will be considered received.Section 229.19(a)(5)(ii) permits a bank to establish a cut-off hour of2:00 p.m. or later, after which deposits may be considered made on thefollowing banking day. This provision is similar to U.C.C. 4-107. Recognizingthat many banks close before 2:00 p.m., the Commentary notes that thisprovision does not require banks to stay open until 2:00 p.m. The languagein the Commentary raised a number of issues, such as the effect of closingmost of the bank but leaving drive-up teller windows open. The Board proposeda revision to the Commentary to clarify the effect of closing practiceson cut-off hours. The Board received one comment regarding the provisionprohibiting a bank from considering checks accepted at certain teller stationsbefore 2:00 p.m. as the next day's deposits. The commenter stated thatprohibiting this practice would hurt many small rural banks that must closetheir teller windows before 2:00 p.m. to meet courier schedules. The commenterstated that these banks would incur greater risk by losing a day of collectiontime for those deposits accepted before 2:00 p.m. but after the courierdeadline. Regulation CC, however, incorporates the U.C.C.'s existing 2:00p.m. cut-off hour for over-the-counter deposits, thus these delays alreadyoccur. The Board has adopted the final revision as proposed, which reflectscurrent law under the U.C.C. (e) <T3>Holds on other funds.</T3> Section 229.19(e) of the regulation limitsthe hold a depositary bank may place on any funds of the customer due toa deposit to an account covered by the regulation. For example, for depositsmade to a customer's checking account, if a bank places a hold on fundsin a nontransaction account, such as certain savings accounts, rather thanthe customer's checking account, the bank may place such a hold only tothe extent that the funds held do not exceed the amount of the depositand the length of the hold does not exceed the time periods permitted bythe regulation. This restriction is intended to prevent evasion of a principalpurpose of the Act, i.e., to limit holds on deposits to transaction accounts.The regulation originally limited holds that a bank can place on fundsof the customer if the customer cashes a check over the counter to holdsthat do not exceed the time periods prescribed in the regulation and donot exceed the amount of the check cashed. A number of banks argued that,as to checks cashed over the counter, the restriction was overly broadbecause cashing a check over the counter and placing a hold on a nontransactionaccount does not involve an ``account'' covered by the Act.The Board proposed to amend andSection; 229.19(e) so that, in the case ofchecks cashed over the counter, the regulation would not limit holds placedon funds that are not held in accounts as defined by the regulation. Thecomments on the proposal were split, four opposed and three in favor. Thoseopposed stated that the change was contrary to the spirit of the Act andinvites abuses of hold periods. The Board believes, however, that it isinappropriate to regulate holds when there has not been a deposit to orhold on an account covered by Regulation CC. The amendment to andSection;229.19(e) has been adopted as proposed. The Board has also clarified inthe Commentary to andSection; 229.19(e) that a depositary bank may not placea hold on any account when an on us check is cashed over the counter, becauseon us checks are considered finally paid when cashed.Section 229.20 (Relation to State Law)The Act (section 608, 12 U.S.C. 4007) provides that any state law in effecton or before September 1, 1989, that provides for a shorter hold for acategory of checks than is provided under Federal law will supersede thefederal provision. Section 229.20 of the regulation provides for Boarddeterminations, upon request, of whether state law relating to the availabilityof funds is preempted by Federal law and also provides certain preemptionstandards.In August 1988 and October 1988, the Board adopted preemption determinationswith respect to the laws of several states. See, for example, 53 FR 32359(Aug. 24, 1988). In formulating those preemption determinations, the Boardadopted certain uniform principles that will apply in all Board preemptiondeterminations. The Board proposed to revise the Commentary to andSection;229.20 to incorporate these principles for preemption determinations.One commenter suggested that if a state law provides for the same availabilityschedules as the Federal law but does not provide for exceptions to theschedules, then the Federal exceptions should apply. The Board believesthat, under the Act, such a state law would, in effect, provide for a shorterhold period than Federal law and would therefore supersede Federal lawto the extent that the Federal exceptions provided a longer hold period.One commenter argued that Federal law should preempt state law when stateavailability schedules are the same as the Federal schedules, as well aswhen state schedules are shorter. The Act, however, states that the Federallaw shall supersede inconsistent state laws, and the Board believes thatstate laws that are the same as the Federal law are not inconsistent withthe Federal law. The commenter was also of the opinion that under the Act,state law may preempt Federal law only if the state law applies to allfederally insured depository institutions within a state; however, theAct provides that if state availability schedules are shorter than theFederal schedules, then the state schedules shall supersede the Federalschedules and shall apply to all federally insured depository institutionslocated within the state.Another commenter suggested that because the relationship between Stateand Federal law is often complicated, the Board should relieve banks fromliability due to unintentional noncompliance due to that complex relationship;however, such a revision would be contrary to the Act. The Board has adoptedthe revisions to this section of the Commentary as proposed. Section 229.30 (Paying Bank's Responsibility for Return of Checks) (a) <T3>Return of checks. </T3>Prior to the effective date of Regulation CC,a paying bank usually returned a check to the presenting bank and automaticallyreceived a refund of any provisional settlement it may have made. UnderRegulation CC, the paying bank must make an expeditious return, which mayor may not involve returning the check through the presenting bank. Ifthe paying bank does not return through the presenting bank, it will receivepayment for the check from the bank to which the check is returned (a returningbank or the depositary bank). In these cases, any credit given to the presentingbank is not charged back. In rare cases, a paying bank that returns a check may not have settledfor the check with the presenting bank. In such cases, if the paying bankreturns the check other than through the presenting bank, it should berequired to make prompt payment for the amount of the check to the presentingbank. The Board proposed to revise the Commentary to andSection; 229.30(a)to clarify this point. No substantive comments were received on this change,and the Board has  adopted  the  revision  as  proposed.  In addition,the Board has added a cross-reference to the Commentary to andSection; 229.33(a)regarding a paying bank's duty toward a party that has breached a presentmentwarranty. (b) <T3>Unidentifiable depositary bank. </T3>if a paying bank is unable toidentify the depositary bank, it may return the check to any bank thathandled the check for forward collection, even if that bank has not agreedto act as a returning bank. If a paying bank chooses this option, it mustadvise the collecting bank that it is unable to identify the depositarybank. The Board proposed to revise the Commentary to provide that thisnotice must be conspicuous, and that the paying bank may not prepare thecheck for automated processing. Nine commenters opposed this proposal, and three specifically supportedit. Those opposed stated that if the depositary bank is unidentifiable,the check would be returned faster if the paying or subsequent returningbank were allowed to qualify the returned check with the routing numberof the prior collecting bank to which it is being sent (and also signifyon the check that the depositary bank is unidentifiable). The commentersstated that, under their approach, the check would not have to be handledmanually until it rejected at the prior collecting bank. The Board doesnot believe that return times would be shorter if the returned checks arequalified to the prior indorser. Further, the Board believes that in somecases such a check would be returned to the depositary bank later thanwould be the case had the check been handled as a raw return. Commenters also stated that under the proposal, the paying or returningbank would be charged a higher raw return fee because of another bank'serror. Five commenters claimed that Federal Reserve Banks have been ``dumping''returned checks on the prior collecting bank with the clearest indorsementwithout making a serious effort to identify the depositary bank. The commentersobjected to this practice and were concerned that the liabilities werebeing shifted from the Reserve Bank to the prior collecting bank. One commentersuggested that the Board establish a procedure by which the cost of handlinga returned check for which the depositary bank is unidentifiable is passedalong to the bank at fault. The Board believes that these problems are directly related to the easeof identifying depositary banks and that the number of returned checksfor which the depositary bank is unidentifiable can best be reduced byimproving the quality of depositary bank indorsements. The Federal ReserveBanks are currently working with depositary banks with poor-quality indorsementsto improve indorsement legibility. The higher costs being imposed on payingbanks due to poor depositary bank indorsements should be minimized as indorsementquality improves. The Board further believes that by keeping unidentifiable depositary bankchecks in the raw processing stream, paying and returning banks will haveincentives to make additional efforts to identify the depositary bank.Allowing paying or returning banks to qualify returned checks sent to aprior indorser would provide an incentive for the bank to qualify returnedchecks to the prior indorser to obtain the lowest per item fee rather thanto make every effort to identify the depositary bank. In addition, a returningbank may have more familiarity with various depositary bank indorsementsand may be able to determine the depositary bank, even when the payingbank is unable to do so. Accordingly, the Board has decided to adopt theproposed revision prohibiting the preparation of returned checks for whichthe depositary bank is unidentifiable for automated return. In addition, several commenters asked the Board to define ``conspicuousnotice.'' The Board proposed a conspicuous notice requirement so that abank that receives a returned check will be readily able to distinguisha check for which the depositary bank is unidentifiable from other returnedchecks. If returned checks for which the depositary bank is unidentifiableare received in a cash letter commingled with other returned checks, conspicuousnotice would have to be given on each individual check for which the depositarybank is unidentifiable, for example in the form of a stamp on the check.If returned checks for which the depositary bank is unidentifiable arereceived in a separate cash letter, only one notice would need to be givenfor the entire cash letter. The final revisions to the Commentary havebeen revised accordingly. Furthermore, the Commentary originally stated that the sending of a checkto a bank that handles the check for forward collection under this paragraph,but that has not agreed to handle returned checks expeditiously, is notsubject to the requirements for expeditious return by the paying bank.The Board proposed to delete the phrase ``but that has agreed to handlereturned checks expeditiously.'' The duty of expeditious return would notapply when a check for which the depositary bank is unidentifiable is sentto a prior indorser, regardless of whether the prior indorser agrees tohandle expeditiously returned checks in general. No substantive commentswere received on this change, and the Board has adopted the revision asproposed. <T3>(f) Notice in lieu of return. </T3>This paragraph originally providedthat a paying bank may send a notice of nonpayment in lieu of the physicalcheck if the check is lost or otherwise unavailable. The Board does notbelieve that a check is unavailable merely because a bank has filed itin a way that makes its retrieval inconvenient or difficult. The Boardproposed to clarify that notice in lieu of the return of the actual checkshould be permitted only when a bank does not have and cannot obtain possessionof the check or must retain possession of the check for protest. Severalcommenters requested that a legible photocopy should be the only allowableform of notice in lieu. Others suggested that notices in lieu could bediscouraged by providing that the paying bank send a fee to the depositarybank when it sends a notice in lieu. The Board believes that the currentrequirements for the content of a notice in lieu provide the depositarybank with sufficient information. The Board recognizes that the cost ofprocessing a notice in lieu can be higher than the cost of processing areturned check and has clarified the limited situations in which a noticein lieu may be sent. The final amendment includes the proposed languageand also clarifies that the notice in lieu must be sent in the same manneras other returned checks. The final amendment makes these changes in bothandSection;andSection; 229.30F(f) and 229.31(f).Section 229.31 (Returning Bank's Responsibility for Return of Checks) (b) <T3>Unidentifiable depositary bank.</T3> This paragraph provides, amongother things, that a returning bank that receives a check from a payingbank that could not identify the depositary bank must return the checkexpeditiously to the depositary bank if it is able to identify the depositarybank. The Board proposed to amend the regulation to clarify that this requirementalso applies to checks that a returning bank receives from another returningbank where the prior returning bank is not able to identify the depositarybank. Comments on this section were similar to those on andSection; 229.30(b).One commenter suggested that the Board clarify that a bank must acceptreturns only if it agrees to handle returns or is the depositary bank ora prior collecting bank. Another commenter suggested that if a prior collectingbank is able to identify the depositary bank by looking at the indorsement(which would indicate that the sender of the check had not made a goodfaith effort to make the identification), the prior collecting bank shouldbe able to charge the sender a fee. One commenter asked the Board to establisha preferred sequence for where to send a check when the depositary bankis unidentifiable. Because the comments on the proposed revisions to andSection; 229.31(b) ofthe regulation generally referenced back to the Board's proposal regardingthe Commentary to andSection; 229.30(b), they are discussed above in thatsection. The proposed changes to andSection; 229.31(b) of the regulationwere intended to clarify that the same rules applied to returned checksreceived from a paying bank and those received from another returning bank.None of the comments directly addressed this issue, and the Board has adoptedthe amendment as proposed. In addition, the Board proposed a revision to the Commentary to andSection;229.31(b). Originally, the Commentary stated that a returning bank maysend a check for which the depositary bank is unknown to a returning bankthat agrees to handle ``the returned check'' for expeditious return orto a prior collecting bank, even though the prior collecting bank doesnot agree to handle ``returned checks'' expeditiously. The Board proposedto change the phrase ``returned checks'' to ``the returned check'' to clarifythat a returned check may be sent to a prior collecting bank even thoughthe prior collecting bank does not agree to handle the returned check expeditiously.No substantive comments were received on this change, and the Board hasadopted the revision as proposed. In addition, the Board has added clarifyinglanguage similar to the language adopted in the Commentary to andSection;229.30(b) regarding conspicuous notice and the prohibition on qualifyinga check for return if the depositary bank is unidentifiable. The Boardhas also added a cross-reference in the Commentary to andSection; 229.31(c).Section 229.32 (Depositary Bank's Responsibility for Returned Checks) Under andSection; 229.32(a)(2), a depositary bank must accept returned checksat a location consistent with the name and address of the depositary bankin its indorsement on the check, or, if no address appears in the indorsement,at a branch or head office associated with the routing number of the depositarybank in its indorsement. A depositary bank's indorsement could containan address that is in a different check processing region from an addressassociated with the routing number in the indorsement. As returned checkswill be routed on the basis of the routing number in the depositary bank'sindorsement, the return of checks will be facilitated if returns can bemade to an address in the same check processing region as the locationassociated with the routing number. Therefore, the Board proposed to amendandSection; 229.32(a)(2) to provide that if the address in the depositarybank's indorsement is not in the same check processing region as the addressassociated with the routing number in its indorsement, the depositary bankmust accept returned checks at a branch or head office associated withthe routing number in the indorsement. Three commenters opposed the amendment, stating that it would force changesin operating procedures, cause a loss of efficiency, specialization, andeconomy of scale, and increase confusion and delay. Others suggested thatas long as one address is known, it should be sufficient. One commentersupported the amendment only if the address associated with the routingnumber is a forward presentment receipt site. The Board has adopted the amendment with slight modification. This amendmentwould not prevent a bank from centralizing its check processing operationsto gain efficiencies and economies of scale. The Board believes that ifa bank operating in multiple check processing regions chooses to centralizecheck processing at one site, then that bank should bear the extra costof transporting checks to that site. Furthermore, paying banks generallyreturn checks based on the depositary bank's routing number. A paying banklocated in the same check processing region as the depositary bank shouldhave the option of sending returned checks to the depositary bank's addressthat is associated with its routing number in its indorsement, rather thanbearing the possibly higher cost of delivery to a nonlocal processing center.Section 229.32(a) also permits depositary banks to require that returnedchecks be sorted separately from forward collection checks. The intentof this provision is to require paying or returning banks to present returnedchecks to the depositary bank separately sorted from forward collectionchecks, unless the depositary bank agrees to take returned checks commingledwith forward collection checks. The Board proposed to add similar language to the regulation and Commentaryto state that a depositary bank may require returned checks for which itis the depositary bank to be separately sorted from checks for which itis a returning bank, including those for which it is a prior indorser.This amendment was intended to facilitate the handling of checks that arereturned to prior indorsers because of difficulty in identifying the depositarybank. Five commenters opposed requiring separate cash letters for different typesof returns. Those who opposed the proposal said that the benefits to thereceiving bank were outweighed by the burden on the sending bank and thatmore errors and longer delays would result. Four commenters explicitlysupported the proposal. The Board has found that most banks that receivereturned checks both as prior indorser and depositary bank currently receivethese checks commingled. The Federal Reserve Banks have received few complaintsabout the commingled cash letters. Thus, the Board has determined thatcommingled return cash letters are not causing a problem and that currentpractices should be allowed to continue. The Board has not adopted theproposed amendment. The Board also proposed to add a sentence to the Commentary to andSection;229.32(a) to clarify that, under andSection; 229.33(d), a depositary bankreceiving a returned check or notice of nonpayment must notify its customerby its midnight deadline or within a reasonable time. One commenter suggestedthat the amendment should read ``must send notice to its customer'' ratherthan ``must notify its customer.'' The Board has incorporated this suggestionin the final revision.Section 229.33 (Notice of Nonpayment) (a) <T3>Requirement. </T3>This section requires a paying bank to give noticeof nonpayment to the depositary bank if it determines not to pay a checkof $2,500 or more. The Board proposed a revision to the Commentary to clarifythat a paying bank's failure to give notice of nonpayment may be offsetby a depositary bank's breach of warranty of title or other warranty regardinga check. One commenter disagreed with the proposal, stating that the payingbank should be responsible for failure to give notice of nonpayment inall instances. One rationale for the commenter's position is that, in somecases, the loss to the depositary bank would not occur but for the failureof the paying bank to give timely notice of nonpayment. At least one courthas agreed with the commenter's position, interpreting the warranty provisionsof U.C.C. 4-207(a)(1) and Regulation J to apply only when a paying bankpays the check and holding that a depositary bank's breach of presentmentwarranty did not absolve the paying bank from liability for failing togive timely notice of nonpayment. (See <T3>First American Savings </T3>v. <T3>M andamp; I Bank, </T3>57 U.S.L.W. 2406 (3rd Cir. 1989).) The Board, however, believes that a paying bank should not be responsibleto a depositary bank for failure to give notice in a case where the depositarybank has breached its warranty, such as where the check has been stolenor an indorsement forged. This position places the loss on the bank closestin the collection chain to party who is responsible for the check (e.g.,the person who stole the check or forged the indorsement). Accordingly,the Board has adopted the amendment as proposed and has also added similarwording to the Commentary to andSection; 229.30(a). (d) <T3>Notification to Customer. </T3>This section requires a depositary bankto notify its customer upon receipt of a returned check or notice of nonpayment.The Board has received several requests from banks to clarify whether thisduty applies to all returned checks or only to returned checks of $2,500or more. The Board is revising the Commentary to clarify that this provisionapplies in the case of any returned check or notice of nonpayment, regardlessof amount. 229.34 (Warranties by Paying Bank and Returning Bank) and 229.38 (Liability)The Board proposed several technical amendments that are necessary to accommodatecases where a check is payable by one bank but payable through another.These amendments to andSection;andSection; 229.34 and 229.38 clarify that incases of payable through checks payable by a bank, the bank by which thecheck is payable, not the payable through bank, makes the paying bank'swarranties and is liable for the condition of the back of a check. No substantivecomments were received regarding these changes, and the Board is adoptingthe amendments with slight technical modification. Section 229.35 (Indorsements) (a) <T3>Indorsement standards. </T3>The indorsement standard in andSection; 229.35and Appendix D specifies the information that must be included in a depositarybank's indorsement. The standard also permits depositary banks to includeother identifying information in their indorsements. Some banks have includednine-digit zip codes in their indorsements. The Board believes that theinclusion of the nine-digit zip code could lead paying and returning banksto confuse the zip code with the routing number, which also contains ninedigits. In order to prevent this confusion, the Board proposed to amendthe Commentary to andSection; 229.35(a) to advise depositary banks not toinclude in their indorsements information, such as a nine-digit zip code,that could be confused with required information, such as the depositarybank's routing number. Eight commenters specifically favored the Board'sproposal to discourage the use of numbers in depositary bank indorsementsthat could be confused with routing numbers, such as nine-digit zip codes.One commenter opposed the proposal on the grounds that use of the nine-digitzip code will grow over time. Another commenter suggested that any banon use of nine-digit zip codes should allow a sufficient lead time forimplementation. The Board has adopted the amendment as proposed. The Boardis not banning the use of nine-digit zip codes in indorsements but is merelydiscouraging them. The Board also proposed revisions to the Commentary to andSection; 229.35(a)to reference the amendments to andSection; 229.32(a) and to clarify thatthe collecting and returning banks must indorse checks for tracing purposes.No substantive comments were received on these changes, and the Board hasadopted the revisions as proposed. (b) <T3>Liability of bank handling check. </T3>This paragraph originally providedthat a bank handling a check for forward collection or return may havethe rights of a holder. The Board proposed to revise the Commentary toclarify that a bank may become a holder or a holder in due course regardlessof whether prior banks have complied with the regulation's indorsementstandards. No substantive comments were received regarding this change,and the Board has adopted the revision as proposed and has also added languageto this section clarifying the use of the term ``final settlement.'' Section 229.37 (Variation by Agreement) The Commentary to this section notes that the Board did not adopt the rulestated in U.C.C. 4-103(2), which provides that Federal Reserve regulationsand operating letters, clearinghouse rules, and the like have the effectof agreements under the U.C.C. that apply to parties that have not specificallyassented to them. The Board did not, however, intend to affect the statusof such agreements under the U.C.C., and the Board proposed to clarifythis point in the Commentary. No substantive comments were received regardingthis change, and the Board has adopted the revision as proposed.Appendix A (Routing Number Guide to Next-Day Availability Checks and LocalChecks) The Board is updating the list of Federal Home Loan Bank routing numbersto include a newly-issued routing number of the Houston Branch of the FederalHome Loan Bank of Dallas. Appendix C (Model Forms, Clauses and Notices) Forms C-1 through C-3 disclose that a bank generally provides next-dayavailability for all funds deposited to an account. Forms C-4 through C-7list social security benefits and payroll payments as examples of preauthorizedcredits that are given next-day availability. Under U.S. Treasury regulations,government payroll and benefit preauthorized transfers must be made availableon the payment date. ACH association rules encourage banks to make directdeposit of payroll payments available to the customer on the payment date.The Board is adding language in the Appendix C Commentary to the modelforms to clarify that banks that have relied on the model forms are protectedfrom civil liability under andSection; 229.21(e) as to disclosure of electronicpayments, even though social security benefits and payroll payments arebeing made available on the same, not the next, business day. Banks areencouraged to revise their forms to reflect same-day availability for theseelectronic payments credits when reordering new stocks of forms. <ITAG tagnum="84">Final Regulatory Flexibility Act Analysis </ITAG>Two of the three requirements of a final regulatory flexibility analysis(5 U.S.C. 604), (1) a succinct statement of the need for and the objectivesof the rule and (2) a summary of the issues raised by the public comments,the agency's assessment of the issues, and a statement of the changes madein the final rule in response to the comments, are discussed in the preambleabove. The third requirement of a final regulatory flexibility analysisis a description of significant alternatives to the rule that would minimizethe rule's economic impact on small entities and reasons why the alternativeswere rejected. These changes are primarily clarifications to RegulationCC in response to questions and requests for clarification that the Boardhas received since Regulation CC was adopted. The Board considered theeffect of these revisions when developing them and does not believe thechanges will result in any significant adverse economic impact on a substantialnumber of small entities. One commenter stated that one of the revisions to the Commentary to andSection;229.19(a), which prohibits banks from considering checks received before2:00 p.m. as the next day's deposits, would hurt small rural banks thatclose their teller windows before 2:00 p.m. to meet courier schedules.(See discussion in above preamble.) Under the Board's Commentary revision,certain remote banks may be unable to collect checks received for depositclose to the cut-off hour of 2:00 p.m., and consequently such checks maybe returned later than checks deposited in time to meet the day's courierschedule. It is possible that the late return could increase the risk thatthe bank will have to make funds available before the check is returned.The Board believes that the risk associated with possible late returnsapplies only to a small number of remote banks and is dependent on thebanks' location, courier schedule, and availability policy. The Board believesthat the effect of the revision on small rural banks is minimal and thatit would not be practical to attempt to define an exception to the cut-offhour provisions to address these situations. <ITAG tagnum="84">List of Subjects in 12 CFR Part 229</ITAG>Banks, banking; Federal Reserve System.For the reasons set out in the preamble, Title 12, Chapter II, Part 229of the Code of Federal Regulations is amended as follows:  <ITAG tagnum="56">PART 229_AVAILABILITY OF FUNDS AND COLLECTION OF CHECKS </ITAG>1. The authority of Part 229 continues to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="21"><T4>Authority: </T4>Title VI of Pub. L. 100-86, 101 Stat. 552, 635, 12U.S.C. 4001 <T3>et seq.</T3></ITAG>2. In andSection; 229.2, paragraphs (e)(7), (z)(5), and (cc) are revisedto read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 229.2</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89">Definitions. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(e) ``Bank'' means_<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(7) An ``agency'' or a ``branch'' of a ``foreign bank'' as defined in sectionl(b) of the International Banking Act (12 U.S.C. 3101). <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(z) ``Paying bank'' means_<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(5) The state or unit of general local government on which a check is drawnand to which it is sent for payment or collection. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(cc) ``Returning bank'' means a bank (other than the paying or depositarybank) handling a returned check or notice in lieu of return. A returningbank is also a collecting bank for purposes of U.C.C. 4-202(2).<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>3. In andSection; 229.13, the last sentence of paragraph (e)(2) concludingtext is revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 229.13</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Exceptions. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(e) * * * (2) <T3>Overdraft and returned check fees.</T3> * * * The notice must statethat the customer may be entitled to a refund of overdraft or returnedcheck fees that are assessed if the check subject to the exception is paidand how to obtain a refund. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>4. In andSection; 229.16, the last sentence of paragraph (c)(3) concludingtext is revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 229.16</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Specific availability policy disclosure. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(c) * * * (3) <T3>Overdraft and returned check fees.</T3> * * * The notice must statethat the customer may be entitled to a refund of overdraft or returnedcheck fees that are assessed if the check subject to the delay is paidand how to obtain a refund. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>5. In andSection; 229.19, paragraph (e) is revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 229.19</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Miscellaneous. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(e) <T3>Holds on other funds.</T3> (1) A depositary bank that receives a checkfor deposit in an account may not place a hold on any funds of the customerat the bank, where_(i) The amount of funds that are held exceeds the amount of the check;or (ii) The funds are not made available for withdrawal within the times specifiedin andSection;andSection; 229.10, 229.11, 229.12, and 229.13. (2) A depositary bank that cashes a check for a customer over the counter,other than a check drawn on the depositary bank, may not place a hold onfunds in an account of the customer at the bank, if_(i) The amount of funds that are held exceeds the amount of the check;or (ii) The funds are not made available for withdrawal within the times specifiedin andSection;andSection; 229.10, 229.11, 229.12, and 229.13. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>6. In andSection; 229.31, the last sentence of paragraph (b) concluding textis revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 229.31</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Returning bank's responsibility for return of checks.I37* * * * *</ITAG>(b) <T3>Unidentifiable depositary bank.</T3> * * * A returning bank that receivesa returned check from a paying bank under andSection; 229.30(b), or froma returning bank under this paragraph, but that is able to identify thedepositary bank, must thereafter return the check expeditiously to thedepositary bank. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>7. In andSection; 229.32, the word ``or'' is removed at the end of paragraph(a)(2)(ii), paragraph (a)(2)(iii) is redesignated as paragraph (a)(2)(iv),and a new paragraph (a)(2)(iii) is added to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 229.32</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Depositary bank's responsibility for returned checks. </ITAG>(a) * * * (2) * * * (iii) If the address in the indorsement is not in the same check processingregion as the address associated with the routing number of the bank inits indorsement on the check, at a location consistent with the addressin the indorsement and at a branch or head office associated with the routingnumber in the bank's indorsement; or * * * <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>8. In andSection; 229.34, paragraph (a)(1), (a) concluding text,  paragraph(b) introductory text, (b)(1), and (b) concluding text are revised to readas follows: <ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 229.34</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Warranties by paying and returning bank. </ITAG>(a) <T3>Warranties.</T3> * * * (1) The paying bank, or in the case of a check payable by a bank and payablethrough another bank, the bank by which the check is payable, returnedthe check within its deadline under the U.C.C., Regulation J (12 CFR Part210), or andSection; 229.30(c) of this part; <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">These warranties are not made with respect to checks drawn on theTreasury of the United States, U.S. Postal Service money orders, or checksdrawn on a state or a unit of general local government that are not payablethrough or at a bank. (b) <T3>Warranty of notice of nonpayment.</T3> Each paying bank that givesa notice of nonpayment warrants to the transferee bank, to any subsequenttransferee bank, to the depositary bank, and to the owner of the checkthat_(1) The paying bank, or in the case of a check payable by a bank and payablethrough another bank, the bank by which the check is payable, returnedor will return the check within its deadline under the U.C.C., RegulationJ (12 CFR Part 210), or andSection; 229.30(c) of this part; <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG></ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10">These warranties are not made with respect to checks drawn on a stateor a unit of general local government that are not payable through or ata bank. <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>9. In andSection; 229.38(d), the first sentence is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="80">andSection; 229.38</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="89"> Liability. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>(d) <T3>Responsibility for back of check.</T3> A paying bank, or in the caseof a check payable through the paying bank and payable by another bank,the bank by which the check is payable, is responsible for damages underparagraph (a) of this section to the extent that the condition of the checkwhen issued by it or its customer adversely affects the ability of a bankto indorse the check legibly in accordance with andSection; 229.35. * * *<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Appendix A_[Amended] </ITAG>10. Appendix A is amended by adding a new routing number to the list, underthe heading <T3>Federal Home Loan Banks,</T3> in numerical order, as follows: <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>1130 1750 8 <ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Appendix E_[Amended] </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73">Section 229.2_[Amended] </ITAG>11. The Commentary to andSection; 229.2 is amended as follows:a. In paragraph (d), removing the last sentence of the second paragraphand replacing it with two new sentences.<ITAG tagnum="21">(d) <T3>Available for withdrawal.</T3> * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">* * * For purposes of this regulation, funds are considered availablefor withdrawal even though they are being held by the bank to satisfy anobligation of the customer other than the customer's potential liabilityfor the return of the check. For example, funds are available for withdrawaleven though they are being held by a bank to satisfy a garnishment, taxlevy, or court order restricting disbursements from the account, or tosatisfy the customer's liability arising from the certification of a check,sale of a cashier's or teller's check, guaranty or acceptance of a check,or similar transaction.</ITAG>b. In paragraph (e), revising the second paragraph.<ITAG tagnum="21">(e) <T3>Bank.</T3> * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21"> ``Bank'' is defined to include depository institutions, such as commercialbanks, savings banks, savings and loan associations, and credit unionsas defined in the Act, and U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks.For purposes of Subpart B, the term does not include corporations organizedunder section 25(a) of the Federal Reserve Act, 12 U.S.C. 611-631 (Edgecorporations) or corporations having an agreement or undertaking with theBoard under section 25 of the Federal Reserve Act, 12 U.S.C. 601-604a (agreementcorporations). For purposes of subpart C, and in connection therewith,Subpart A, any Federal Reserve Bank, Federal Home Loan Bank, or any otherperson engaged in the business of banking is regarded as a bank. The phrase``any other person engaged in the business of banking'' is derived fromU.C.C. 1-201(4), and is intended to cover entities that handle checks forcollection and payment, such as Edge and agreement corporations, commerciallending companies under 12 U.S.C. 3101, certain industrial banks, and privatebankers, so that virtually all checks will be covered by the same rulesfor forward collection and return, even though they may not be coveredby the requirements of Subpart B. For the purposes of Subpart C, and inconnection therewith, Subpart A, the term may also include a state or aunit of general local government to the extent that it pays warrants orother drafts drawn directly on the state or local government itself, andthe warrants or other drafts are sent to the state or local governmentfor payment or collection. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>c. In paragraphs (f) and (g), revising the last paragraph.<ITAG tagnum="21">(f) <T3>Banking day </T3>and (g) <T3>Business day.</T3> * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">The definition of ``banking day'' is phrased in terms of when ``anoffice of a bank is open'' to indicate that a bank may observe a bankingday on a per-branch basis. A deposit made at an ATM or off-premise facility(such as a remote depository or a lock box) is considered made at the branchholding the account into which the deposit is made for the purpose of determiningthe day of deposit. All other deposits are considered made at the branchat which the deposit is received. For example, under andSection; 229.19(a)(1),funds deposited at an ATM are considered deposited at the time they arereceived at the ATM. The day of deposit for such funds is determined bythe banking day at the account-holding branch at the time the funds arereceived at the ATM. Similarly, under andSection; 229.19(a)(3), funds depositedto a night depository, lock box, or similar facility are considered depositedwhen the funds are removed from the facility and are available for processing.If such a facility is not on the premises of a branch, the day of depositis determined by the banking day at the account-holding branch. If sucha facility is on branch premises, the day of deposit is determined by thebanking day at the branch at which the deposit is received, whether ornot it is the account-holding branch.</ITAG>d. In paragraph (i), removing the second sentence and replacing it withtwo new sentences, and removing the last sentence and replacing it withfour new sentences.<ITAG tagnum="21">(i) <T3>Cashier's check.</T3> * * * The definition of cashier's check includeschecks provided to a customer of the bank in connection with customer depositaccount activity, such as account disbursements and interest payments.The definition also includes checks acquired from a bank by noncustomersfor remittance purposes, including loan disbursement checks. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">* * * The definition excludes checks that a bank draws on itself forother purposes, such as to pay employees and vendors, and checks issuedby the bank in connection with a payment service, such as a payroll ora bill-paying service. Cashier's checks are generally sold by banks tosubstitute the bank's credit for the customer's credit and thereby enhancethe collectibility of the checks. A check issued in connection with a paymentservice is generally provided as a convenience to the customer rather thanas a guarantee of the check's collectibility. In addition, such checksare often more difficult to distinguish from other types of checks thanare cashier's checks as defined by this regulation.</ITAG>e. In paragraph (k), revising the last paragraph.<ITAG tagnum="21">(k) <T3>Check</T3> * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">The definition of check does not include an instrument payable ina foreign currency (i.e., other than in United States money as definedin 31 U.S.C. 5101) or a credit card draft (i.e., a sales draft used bya merchant or a draft generated by a bank as a result of a cash advance).The definition of check includes a check that a bank may supply to a customeras a means of accessing a credit line without the use of a credit card.</ITAG>f. In paragraph (u), adding a new sentence to the end of the second paragraph.<ITAG tagnum="21">(u) <T3>Noncash item.</T3> * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">* * * (In the context of this definition, ``paying bank'' refers tothe paying bank as defined for purposes of Subpart C.) </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * *</ITAG>g. In paragraph (cc), revising the last sentence and adding a new sentenceimmediately following.<ITAG tagnum="21">(cc) <T3>Returning bank.</T3> * * * A returning bank is also a collecting bankfor the purpose of a collecting bank's duty to act seasonably under U.C.C.4-202(2) and is analogous to a collecting bank for purposes of final settlement.(See Commentary to andSection; 229.35(b).)</ITAG>h. In paragraph (gg), removing the fourth sentence and replacing it withseven new sentences.<ITAG tagnum="21">(gg) <T3>Teller's check</T3> * * * The definition does not include checks thatare drawn by a nonbank on a nonbank even if payable through or at a bank.The definition includes checks provided to a customer of the bank in connectionwith customer deposit account activity, such as account disbursements andinterest payments. The definition also includes checks acquired from abank by a noncustomer for remittance purposes, including loan disbursementchecks. The definition excludes checks used by the bank to pay employeesor vendors and checks issued by the bank in connection with a payment service,such as a payroll or a bill-paying service. Teller's checks are generallysold by banks to substitute the bank's credit for the customer's creditand thereby enhance the collectibility of the checks. A check issued inconnection with a payment service is generally provided as a convenienceto the customer rather than as a guarantee of the check's collectibility.In addition, such checks are often more difficult to distinguish from othertypes of checks than are teller's checks as defined by this regulation.* * *</ITAG>i. Adding a new paragraph (kk) immediately following paragraph (ii).<ITAG tagnum="21">(kk) <T3>Unit of general local government </T3>is defined to include a city,county, parish, town, township, village, or other general purpose politicalsubdivision of a state. The term does not include special purpose units,such as school districts, water districts, or Indian nations. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73">Section 229.10_[Amended] </ITAG>12. The Commentary to andSection; 229.10(c) is amended as follows: a. In paragraph (c) introductory text, revising the last sentence and addingtwo sentences to follow.<ITAG tagnum="21">(c) <T3>Certain check deposits. * * * </T3>For the purposes of this section,all checks drawn on a Federal Reserve Bank or a Federal Home Loan Bankthat contain in the MICR line a routing  number that is listed in AppendixA are subject to the next-day availability requirement if they are depositedin an account held by a payee of the check and in person to an employeeof the depositary bank, regardless of the purposes for which the checkswere issued. For all new accounts, even if the new account exception isnot invoked, traveler's checks must be included in the $5,000 aggregationof checks deposited on any one banking day that are subject to the next-dayavailability requirement. (See andSection; 229.13(a).) </ITAG>b. Revising the heading ``Deposit at Staffed Teller Station'' and the firstparagraph under that heading. <ITAG tagnum="73">Deposits Made to an Employee of the Depositary Bank </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">In most cases, next-day availability of the proceeds of checks subjectto this section is conditioned on the deposit of these checks in personto an employee of the depositary bank. If the deposit is not made to anemployee of the depositary bank on the premises of such bank, the proceedsof the deposit must be made available for withdrawal by the start of businesson the second business day after deposit, under paragraph (c)(2) of thissection. For example, second-day availability rather than next-day availabilitywould be allowed for deposits of checks subject to this section made ata proprietary ATM (and at a nonproprietary ATM under the permanent schedule),night depository, through the mail or a lock box, or at a teller stationstaffed by a person that is not an employee of the depositary bank. Second-dayavailability may also be allowed for deposits picked up by an employeeof the depositary bank at the customer's premises; such deposits wouldbe considered made upon receipt at the branch or other location of thedepositary bank. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>c. Removing the heading ``Fees for Withdrawals'' and the paragraph appearingunder it. d. In the fifth paragraph under the heading ``Special Deposit Slips,''revising the second sentence.<ITAG tagnum="73">Special Deposit Slips </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">* * * If a bank only provides the special deposit slips upon the requestof a depositor, however, the teller must advise the depositor of the availabilityof the special deposit slips, or the bank must post a notice advising customersthat the slips are available upon request. * * *</ITAG>13. The Commentary to andSection; 229.11(c) is amended by revising the firstsentence to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="73">Section 229.11_Temporary Availability Schedule </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(c) <T3>Nonlocal checks. </T3>Under the temporary schedule, funds depositedby nonlocal checks must be made available for withdrawal not later thanthe seventh business day following the banking day the funds are deposited,except in the case of deposits in accounts of banks located outside the48 contiguous states. * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>14. The Commentary to andSection; 229.13(b) is amended by adding a new sentenceafter the second sentence in the first paragraph of paragraph (b) to readas follows: <ITAG tagnum="73">Section 229.13_Exceptions </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(b) <T3>Large Deposits.</T3> * * * When the large deposit exception is appliedto deposits composed of both local and nonlocal checks, the depositarybank has the discretion to choose the portion of the deposit to which itapplies the exception. * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>15. The Commentary to andSection; 229.16 is amended by adding two new paragraphsto paragraph (a) and adding a new paragraph at the end of paragraph (b)to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="73">Section 229.16_Specific Availability Policy Disclosure </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(a) <T3>General.</T3> * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">The disclosure must reflect the policy and practice of the bank regardingavailability as to most accounts and most deposits into those accounts.In disclosing the availability policy that it follows in most cases, abank may provide a single disclosure that reflects one policy to all itstransaction account customers, even though some of its customers may receivefaster availability than that reflected in the policy disclosure. Thus,a bank need not disclose to some customers that they receive faster availabilitythan indicated in the disclosure. If, however, a bank has a policy of imposingdelays in availability on any customers longer than those specified inits disclosure, those customers must receive disclosures that reflect thelonger applicable availability periods. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">A bank may disclose that funds are ``available for withdrawal'' ona given day notwithstanding the fact that the bank uses the funds to paychecks received before that day. For  example, a bank may disclose thatits policy is to make funds available from deposits of local checks onthe second business day following the day of deposit, even though it mayuse the deposited funds to pay checks prior to the second business day;the funds used to pay checks in this example are not available for withdrawaluntil the second business day after deposit because the funds are not availablefor all uses until the second business day. (See the definition of ``availablefor withdrawal'' in andSection; 229.2(d).) </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(b) <T3>Content of Specific Policy Disclosure.</T3> * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">A bank that provides availability based on when the bank generallyreceives credit for deposited checks need not disclose the time when acheck drawn on a specific bank will be available for withdrawal. Instead,the bank may disclose the categories of deposits that must be availableon the first business day after the day of deposit (deposits subject toandSection; 229.10) and state the other categories of deposits and the timeperiods that will be applicable to those deposits. For example, a bankmight disclose the four-digit Federal Reserve routing symbol for localchecks and indicate that such checks as well as certain nonlocal checkswill be available for withdrawal on the first or second business day followingthe day of deposit, depending on the location of the particular bank onwhich the check is drawn, and disclose that funds from all other checkswill be available on the second or third business day. The bank must alsodisclose that the customer may request a copy of the bank's detailed schedulethat would enable the customer to determine the availability of any checkand must provide such schedule upon request. A change in the bank's detailedschedule would not trigger the change in policy disclosure requirementof andSection; 229.18(e).  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73">Section 229.19_[Amended] </ITAG>16. The Commentary to andSection; 229.19 is amended as follows: a. Adding a new sentence after the third sentence of the first paragraphof paragraph (a) and removing the last sentence of the last paragraph andadding a new paragraph at the end thereof.<ITAG tagnum="21">(a) <T3>When Funds Are Considered Deposited.</T3> * * * Funds deposited toa deposit box in a bank lobby that is accessible to customers only duringregular business hours are generally considered deposited when placed inthe lobby box; a bank may, however, treat deposits to lobby boxes the sameas deposits to night depositories (as provided in andSection; 229.19(a)(3)),provided a notice appears on the lobby box informing the customer whensuch deposits will be considered received. * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">A bank is not required to remain open until 2:00 p.m. If a bank closesbefore 2:00 p.m., deposits received after the closing may be consideredreceived on the next banking day. Further, as andSection; 229.2(f) definesthe term ``banking day'' as the portion of a business day on which a bankis open to the public for substantially all of its banking functions, aday, or a portion of a day, is not necessarily a banking day merely becausethe bank is open for only limited functions, such as keeping drive-in orwalk-up teller windows open, when the rest of the bank is closed to thepublic. For example, a banking office that usually provides a full rangeof banking services may close at 12:00 noon but leave a drive-in tellerwindow open for the limited purpose of receiving deposits and making cashwithdrawals. Under those circumstances, the bank is considered closed andmay consider deposits received after 12:00 noon as having been receivedon the next banking day. The fact that a bank may reopen for substantiallyall of its banking functions after 2:00 p.m., or that it continues itsback office operations throughout the day, would not affect this result.A bank may not, however, close individual teller stations and reopen themfor next-day's business before 2:00 p.m. during a banking day.</ITAG>b. In paragraph (e), revising the second paragraph and adding a third paragraph.<ITAG tagnum="21">(e) <T3>Holds on other funds.</T3> * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">This paragraph clarifies that if a customer deposits a check in anaccount (as defined in andSection; 229.2(a)), the bank may not place a holdon any of the customer's funds so that the funds that are held exceed theamount of the check deposited or the total amount of funds held are notmade available for withdrawal  within the times required in this subpart.For example, if a bank places a hold on funds in a customer's nontransactionaccount, rather than a transaction account, for deposits made to the customer'stransaction account, the bank may place such a hold only to the extentthat the funds held do not exceed the amount of the deposit and the lengthof the hold does not exceed the time periods permitted by this regulation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">These restrictions also apply to holds placed on funds in a customer'saccount (as defined in andSection; 229.2(a)) if a customer cashes a checkat a bank (other than a check drawn on that bank) over the counter. Theregulation does not prohibit holds that may be placed on other funds ofthe customer for checks cashed over the counter, to the extent that thetransaction does not involve a deposit to an account. A bank may not, however,place a hold on any account when an on us check is cashed over the counter.On us checks are considered finally paid when cashed (see U.C.C. 4-213(1)(a)).</ITAG>17. The Commentary to andSection; 229.20(c) is revised to read as follows:<ITAG tagnum="73">Section 229.20 Relation to State Law </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(c) <T3>Standards for preemption. </T3>This section describes the standardsthe Board will use in making determinations on whether federal law willpreempt state laws governing funds availability. A provision of state lawis considered inconsistent with federal law if it permits a depositarybank to make funds available to a customer in a longer period of time thanthe maximum period permitted by the Act and this regulation. For example,a state law that permits a hold of four business days or longer for localchecks permits a hold that is longer than that permitted under the Actand this regulation, and therefore is inconsistent and preempted. Stateavailability schedules that provide for availability in a shorter periodof time than required under Regulation CC supersede the federal schedule.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Under a state law, some categories of deposits could be availablefor withdrawal sooner or later than the time required by this subpart,depending on the composition of the deposit. For example, the Act and thisregulation (andSection; 229.10(c)(1)(vii)) require next-day availabilityfor the first $100 of the aggregate deposit of local or nonlocal checkson any day, and a state law could require next-day availability for anycheck of $100 or less that is deposited. Under the Act and this regulation,if either one $150 check or three $50 checks are deposited on a given day,$100 must be made available for withdrawal on the next business day, and$50 must be made available in accordance with the local or nonlocal schedule.Under the state law, however, the two deposits would be subject to differentavailability rules. In the first case, none of the proceeds of the depositwould be subject to next-day availability; in the second case, the entireproceeds of the deposit would be subject to next-day availability. In thisexample, because the state law would, in some situations, permit a holdlonger than the maximum permitted by the Act, this provision of state lawis inconsistent and preempted in its entirety. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">In addition to the differences between state and federal availabilityschedules, a number of state laws contain exceptions to the state availabilityschedules that are different from those provided under the Act and thisregulation. The state exceptions continue to apply only in those caseswhere the state schedule is shorter than or equal to the federal schedule,and then only up to the limit permitted by the Regulation CC schedule.Where a deposit is subject to a state exception under a state schedulethat is not preempted by Regulation CC and is also subject to a federalexception, the hold on the deposit cannot exceed the hold permissible underthe federal exception in accordance with Regulation CC. In such cases,only one exception notice is required, in accordance with andSection; 229.13(g).This notice need only include the applicable federal exception as the reasonthe exception was invoked. For those categories of checks for which thestate schedule is preempted by the federal schedule, only the federal exceptionsmay be used. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">State laws that provide maximum availability periods for categoriesof deposits that are not covered by the Act would not be preempted. Thus,state funds availability laws that apply to funds in time and savings depositsare not affected by the Act or this regulation. In addition, the availabilityschedules of several states apply to ``items'' deposited to an account.The term ``items'' may encompass deposits, such as nonnegotiable instruments,that are not subject to the Regulation CC availability schedules. Depositsthat are not covered by Regulation CC continue to be subject to the stateavailability schedules. State laws that provide maximum availability periodsfor categories of institutions that are not covered by the Act would alsonot be preempted. For example, a state law that governs money market mutualfunds would not be affected by the Act or this regulation.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Generally, state rules governing the disclosure or notice of availabilitypolicies applicable to accounts are also preempted, if they are differentfrom the federal rules. Nevertheless, a state law requiring disclosureof funds availability policies that apply to deposits other than ``accounts,''such as savings or time deposits, are not inconsistent with the Act andthis subpart. Banks in these states would have to follow the state disclosurerules for these deposits. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73">Section 229.30_[Amended] </ITAG>18. The Commentary to andSection; 229.30 is amended as follows: a. In paragraph (a), under the fourth numbered example, adding a new sentenceto the end of the third paragraph and adding a new sentence to the endof the eighth paragraph.<ITAG tagnum="21">(a) <T3>Return of checks. </T3>* * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73">Examples  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">4. * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">* * * If a paying bank returns a check on its banking day of receiptwithout paying for the check, as permitted under U.C.C. 4-302(a), and receivessettlement for the returned check from a returning bank, it must promptlypay the amount of the check to the collecting bank from which it receivedthe check. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">* * * Also, a paying bank is not responsible for failure to make expeditiousreturn to a party that has breached a presentment warranty under U.C.C.4-207(1), notwithstanding that the paying bank has returned the check.(See Commentary to andSection; 229.30(a).) </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>b. In paragraph (b), revising the fourth sentence of the second paragraphand adding two new sentences to immediately follow, and revising the firstsentence of the third paragraph.<ITAG tagnum="21">(b) <T3>Unidentifiable depositary bank. </T3>* * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">* * * A paying bank returning a check under this paragraph to a bankthat has not agreed to handle the check expeditiously must advise thatbank that it is unable to identify the depositary bank. This advice mustbe conspicuous, such as a stamp on each check for which the depositarybank is unknown if such checks are commingled with other returned checks,or, if such checks are sent in a separate cash letter, by one notice onthe cash letter. The returned check may not be prepared for automated return.* * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">The sending of a check to a bank that handled the check for forwardcollection under this paragraph is not subject to the requirements forexpeditious return by the paying bank. * * *  </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>c. Revising the first paragraph of paragraph (f).<ITAG tagnum="21">(f) <T3>Notice in Lieu of Return. </T3>A check that is lost or otherwise unavailablefor return may be returned by sending a legible copy of both sides of thecheck or, if such a copy is not available to the paying bank, a writtennotice of nonpayment containing the information specified in andSection;229.33(b). The copy or written notice must clearly indicate it is a noticein lieu of return and must be handled in the same manner as other returnedchecks. Notice by telephone, telegraph, or other electronic transmission,other than a legible facsimile or similar image transmission of both sidesof the check, does not satisfy the requirements for a notice in lieu ofreturn. The requirement for a writing and the indication that the noticeis a substitute for the returned check is necessary so that the returningand depositary banks are informed that the notice carries value. Noticein lieu of return is permitted only when a bank does not have and cannotobtain possession of the check or must retain possession of the check forprotest. A check is not unavailable for return if it is merely difficultto retrieve from a filing system or from storage by a keeper of checksin a truncation system. A notice in lieu of return may be used by a bankhandling a returned check that has been lost or destroyed, including whenthe original returned check has been charged back as lost or destroyedas provided in andSection; 229.35(b). A bank using a notice in lieu of returngives a warranty under andSection; 229.34(a)(4) that the original check hasnot been and will not be returned. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73">Section 229.31_[Amended] </ITAG>19. The Commentary to andSection; 229.31 is amended as follows: a. In paragraph (b), revising the last sentence of the first paragraphand revising the last paragraph.<ITAG tagnum="21">(b) <T3>Unidentifiable depositary bank. </T3>* * * In the limited cases wherethe returning bank cannot identify the depositary bank, the returning bankmay send the returned check to a returning bank that agrees to handle thereturned check for expeditious return under andSection; 229.31(a), or itmay send the returned check to a bank that handled the check for forwardcollection, even if that bank does not agree to handle the returned checkexpeditiously under andSection; 229.31(a). </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">As in the case of a paying bank returning a check under andSection;229.30(b), a returning bank returning a check under this paragraph to abank that has not agreed to handle the check expeditiously must advisethat bank that it is unable to identify  the depositary bank. This advicemust be conspicuous, such as a stamp on each check for which the depositarybank is unknown if such checks are commingled with other returned checks,or, if such checks are sent in a separate cash letter, by one notice onthe cash letter. The returned check may not be prepared for automated return.</ITAG>b. In paragraph (c), revising the parenthetical at the end of the secondparagraph.<ITAG tagnum="21">(c) <T3>Settlement. </T3>* * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">* * * (See andSection; 229.36(d) and Commentary to  andSection; 229.35(b).)</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>c. In paragraph (f), adding a new sentence before the parenthetical phrase.<ITAG tagnum="21">(f) <T3>Notice in lieu of return. </T3>* * * Notice in lieu of return is permittedonly when a bank does not have and cannot obtain possession of the checkor must retain possession of the check for protest. A check is not unavailablefor return if it is merely difficult to retrieve from a filing system orfrom storage by a keeper of checks in a truncation system. * * *</ITAG>20. The Commentary to andSection; 229.32(a) is amended by redesignating item2(iii) as 2(iv), adding a new item 2(iii), and adding a new paragraph afterthe last paragraph to read as follows:  <ITAG tagnum="73">Section 229.32 Depository Bank's Responsibility for Returned Checks</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(a) <T3>Acceptance of returned checks.</T3> * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">2. * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(iii) The depositary bank must accept returned checks at the addressin its indorsement and at an address associated with its routing numberin the indorsement if the written address in the indorsement and the addressassociated with the routing number in the indorsement are not in the samecheck processing region. Under andSection;andSection; 229.30(g) and 229.31(g),a paying or returning bank may rely on the depositary bank's routing numberin its indorsement in handling returned checks and is not required to sendreturned checks to an address in the depositary bank's indorsement thatis not in the same check processing region as the address associated withthe routing number in the indorsement. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Under andSection; 229.33(d), a depositary bank receiving a returnedcheck or notice of nonpayment must send notice to its customer by its midnightdeadline or within a longer reasonable time. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73">Section 229.33_[Amended] </ITAG>21. The Commentary to andSection; 229.33 is amended as follows: a. In paragraph (a), adding a new paragraph at the end thereof.<ITAG tagnum="21">(a) <T3>Requirement. </T3>* * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Unless the returned check is used to satisfy the notice requirement,the requirement for notice is independent of and does not affect the requirementsfor timely and expeditious return of the check under andSection; 229.30 andthe U.C.C. (See andSection; 229.30(a).) If a paying bank fails both to complywith this section and to comply with the requirements for timely and expeditiousreturn under andSection; 229.30 and the U.C.C. and Regulation J (12 CFR Part210), the paying bank shall be liable under either this section or suchother requirements, but not both. (See andSection; 229.38(b).) A paying bankis not responsible for failure to give notice of nonpayment to a partythat has breached a presentment warranty under U.C.C. 4-207(1), notwithstandingthat the paying bank may have returned the check.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="20">(See U.C.C. 4-207(1) and 4-302.)</ITAG>b. In paragraph (d), revising the first sentence.<ITAG tagnum="21">(d) <T3>Notification to Customer. </T3>This paragraph requires a depositarybank to notify its customer of nonpayment upon receipt of a returned checkor notice of nonpayment, regardless of the amount of the check or notice.* * *</ITAG>22. The Commentary to andSection; 229.34(a) is amended by revising the firstand last sentence thereof to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="73">Section 229.34 Warranties by Paying Bank and Returning Bank </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(a) <T3>Warranty of returned checks. </T3>This paragraph includes warrantiesthat a returned check, including a notice in lieu of return, was returnedby the paying bank, or in the case of a check payable by a bank and payablethrough another bank, the bank by which the check is payable, within thedeadline under the U.C.C., Regulation J, or andSection; 229.30(c); that thepaying or returning bank is authorized to return the check; that the returnedcheck has not been materially altered; and that, in the case of noticein lieu of return, the original check has not and will not be returned(see Commentary to andSection; 229.30(f)). * * * These warranties do notapply to checks drawn on the United States Treasury, to Postal Servicemoney orders, or to checks drawn on a state or a unit of general localgovernment that are not payable through or at a bank (see andSection; 229.42).</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73">Section 229.35_[Amended] </ITAG>23. The Commentary to andSection; 229.35 is amended as follows: a. In paragraph (a), adding two sentences to the end of the fourth paragraph,revising the first two sentences in the fifth paragraph, and adding a sentenceto the end of the last paragraph.<ITAG tagnum="21">(a) <T3>Indorsement Standards.</T3> * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37"> * * * * *</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">* * * Depositary banks should not include information that can beconfused with required information. For example, a nine-digit zip codecould be confused with the nine-digit routing number. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">A depositary bank is not required to place a street address in itsindorsement; however, a bank may want to put an address in its indorsementin order to limit the number of locations at which it must accept returnedchecks. In instances where this address is not consistent with the routingnumber in the indorsement, the depositary bank is required to accept returnedchecks at a branch or head office consistent with the routing number. Banksshould note, however, that andSection; 229.32 requires a depositary bankto accept returned checks at the location(s) it accepts forward collectionchecks. * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">* * * The standard requires collecting and returning banks to indorsethe check for tracing purposes.</ITAG>b. In paragraph (b), adding four sentences to the end of the fifth paragraphand adding a new paragraph after the fifth paragraph.<ITAG tagnum="21">(b) <T3>Liability of bank handling check. </T3>* * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">* * * Nor does this paragraph affect a collecting bank's accountabilityunder U.C.C. 4-211 (2) and (3) and 4-213(3). A collecting bank becomesaccountable upon receipt of final settlement as provided in the foregoingU.C.C. sections. The term ``final settlement'' in andSection;andSection; 229.31(c),229.32(b), and 229.36(d) is intended to be consistent with the use of theterm ``final settlement'' in the U.C.C. (e.g., U.C.C. 4-211, 4-212, and4-213). (See also andSection; 229.2(cc) and Commentary.) </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">This paragraph also provides that a bank may have the rights of a``holder'' based on the handling of the check for collection or return.A bank may become a holder or a holder in due course regardless of whetherprior banks have complied with the indorsement standard in andSection; 229.35(a)and Appendix D. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>24. The Commentary to andSection; 229.37 is amended by revising the secondsentence of the first paragraph and revising the second paragraph to readas follows:  <ITAG tagnum="73">Section 229.37 Variations by Agreement </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">* * * To achieve consistency, the official comment to U.C.C. 4-103(1)(which in turn follows U.C.C. 1-201(3)) should be followed in construingthis section. * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">The  Board  has  not  followed  U.C.C.  4-103(2), which permits FederalReserve regulations and operating letters, clearinghouse rules, and thelike to apply to parties that have not specifically assented. Nevertheless,this section does not affect the status of such agreements under the UniformCommercial Code. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG>25. In the Commentary to andSection; 229.38(d), the first two sentences ofthe second paragraph are revised to read as follows: <ITAG tagnum="73">Section 229.38 Liability </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">(d) <T3>Responsibility for back of check.</T3> * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">The paying bank or, in the case of a check payable through the payingbank and payable by another bank, the bank by which the check is payable,is responsible for the condition of the check when it is issued by it orits customer. (It would not be responsible for a check issued by a personother than such a bank or customer.) * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">Appendix C_[Amended]</ITAG>26. In the Commentary to Appendix C, under the heading ``Models C-1 ThroughC-7 Generally,'' a new paragraph is added after the fifth paragraph toread as follows:<ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="73">Models C-1 Through C-7 Generally </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">Banks that have used model forms C-1, C-2, or C-3 or have used formsC-4, C-5, C-6, or C-7 (which give social security benefits and payrollpayments as examples of preauthorized credits available the day after deposit)and that at the same time follow Treasury regulations (31 CFR Part 210)and ACH association rules requiring that these credits be made availableon the day the bank receives the funds are protected from civil liabilityunder andSection; 229.21(e). Such banks are encouraged to  disclose same-dayavailability for those electronic payments when reordering supplies offorms. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="37">* * * * * </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="21">By order of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,March 31, l989. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="6">William W. Wiles, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">Secretary of the Board.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-8130 Filed 4-5-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 6210-01-M</ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>