<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> FR891103-0144 </DOCNO><DOCID>fr.11-03-89.f2.A1143</DOCID><TEXT><FTAG tagnum="4701"/><ITAG tagnum="90"><T4>Federal Register</T4> / Vol. 54, No. 212 / Friday, November 3, 1989/ Notices<ITAG tagnum="52">OVERSIGHT BOARD </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="52">Strategic Plan for the Resolution Trust Corporation </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>AGENCY: </T2>Oversight Board.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ACTION: </T2>Proposed Strategic Plan. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUMMARY: </T2>The Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and EnforcementAct of 1989, requires the Oversight Board to develop a strategic plan forthe Resolution Trust Corporation's functions and activities. The OversightBoard is seeking public comment on the proposed strategic plan for theResolution Trust Corporation. The strategic plan establishes overall goalsand objectives for the RTC in six areas: case resolution, asset disposition,affordable housing, conflicts of interest and ethical standards, externalrelations, and administration.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>DATES: </T2>Comments must be submitted on or before December 4, 1989.The strategic plan must be submitted to Congress by December 31, 1989.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>ADDRESSES: </T2>Comments may be mailed to the Policy and FinancialAnalysis Unit, Oversight Board, Room 906, 1825 Connecticut Avenue NW.,Washington, DC 20232.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: </T2>Johathan L. Fiechter, the Policyand Financial Analysis Unit, Oversight Board, 202-376-5464.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="10"><T2>SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION: </T2><ITAG tagnum="84">Background and Statutory Requirements </ITAG>The Resolution Trust Corporation (RTC) and the Oversight Board of the ResolutionTrust Corporation (Oversight Board) were established as instrumentalitiesof the United States on August 9, 1989, by the enactment of section 21Aof the Federal Home Loan Bank Act (12 U.S.C. 1441a) as added thereto bysection 501(a) of the Financial Institutions Reform, Recovery, and EnforcementAct of 1989 (FIRREA) (Pub. L. No. 101-73, section 501(a), 103 Stat. 183,363-393). Throughout this document, all references to section 21A are tosection 21A of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act as amended by section 501(a)of FIRREA. FIRREA requires the Oversight Board, in consultation with the RTC, to developa strategic plan for the RTC's functions and activities, and to submitthe plan to Congress no later than December 31, 1989. FIRREA establishesthe minimum contents required for the strategic plan, which are listedin the Appendix to this Preamble. FIRREA further requires the OversightBoard to appear with the RTC, by January 31, 1990, before the Committeeon Banking, Finance and Urban Affairs of the House of Representatives andthe Committee on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs of the Senate to describethe strategic plan established for the RTC. At its public meeting on September 21, 1989, the Oversight Board determinedthat it would be beneficial at an early stage in the development of thestrategic plan to make a draft available for public comment. Accordingly,this preliminary, draft strategic plan is being published for comment.The Oversight Board wishes to emphasize that this is an early draft thatwill be revised in response to comments received and in the course of theBoard's own further review and deliberation. The Board recognizes thatcertain aspects of this preliminary draft might be regarded by some ascontroversial or that others might recommend the inclusion of matters thatare omitted. That is, of course, the purpose of soliciting comment on thisproposed strategic plan. The Board will consider all comments receivedas it shapes the final plan for submission to Congress. <ITAG tagnum="84">Duties of Resolution Trust Corporation and Oversight Board </ITAG>The mission of the RTC is to carry out a program, under the general oversightof the Oversight Board, to manage and resolve institutions that come underits jurisdiction and to dispose of any residual assets in a manner that:andbullet; Maximizes return and minimizes loss; andbullet; Minimizes the impact on local real estate and financial markets;and andbullet; Maximizes the preservation of the availability and affordabilityof residential property for low- and moderate-income individuals. The duties of the Oversight Board are to oversee and be accountable forthe RTC. The Oversight Board is required, in consultation with the RTC,to develop and establish overall strategies, policies, and goals for theRTC's activities, including the RTC's overall financial goals, plans andbudgets. The Oversight Board is also required to review the overall performanceof the RTC on a periodic basis, including its work, management activities,and internal controls and the performance of the RTC relative to approvedbudget plans pursuant to the terms of FIRREA. <ITAG tagnum="84">Purpose and Contents of the Strategic Plan </ITAG>The purpose of the strategic plan is to set forth the RTC's goals and objectivesin support of its mission. The RTC will develop specific procedures forimplementing the general guidance provided by the strategic plan. Untilsuch specific procedures are developed by the RTC, the Oversight Boardhas directed the RTC to operate in accordance with existing FDIC procedures.The strategic plan elaborates on the mission of the RTC through goals,objectives, and implementation procedures. The strategic plan's goals establishbroad, general direction for the RTC in six areas: Case resolution, assetdisposition, conflicts of interest and ethical standards, external relations,and administration. The strategic plan's objectives provide more specific statements with respectto the goals set forth. Subject to the review of the Oversight Board, theRTC is responsible for adopting the rules, regulations, standards, policies,procedures, guidelines, and statements necessary to implement the strategicplan established by the Oversight Board. The strategic plan will be refined and strengthened through experienceand ongoing review. Additionally, the National and Regional Advisory Boardswill provide input to the policies and procedures developed by the OversightBoard and RTC for the sale or disposition of real property assets.<ITAG tagnum="84">Strategic Plan Development </ITAG>The strategic plan was developed by Oversight Board staff in consultationwith the staff of the RTC. At its first meeting, on August 9, 1989, theOversight Board established a Joint Policy Development Task Force withstaff from both the Oversight Board and the RTC to make recommendationsto the Oversight Board on overall strategies, policies and goals for theRTC and the strategic plan. In addition, the strategic plan reflects input from staff of the TreasuryDepartment, the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the FederalReserve Board, the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and the Officeof Thrift Supervision. Furthermore, the strategic plan incorporates individual policies that havebeen adopted by the Oversight Board during the period between the OversightBoard and the RTC's creation on August 9, 1989, and publication of thisproposed strategic plan. <ITAG tagnum="84">Request for Comment </ITAG>At its September 21, 1989 Board meeting, the members of the Oversight Boarddecided unanimously to invite public participation in the development ofthe strategic plan before submitting it to Congress. The Oversight Boardis seeking comments on all aspects of the strategic plan, and particularlyon the questions posed by the Oversight Board. Public comment should contributeto a more effective strategic plan. It is hoped that publication of anearly and preliminary draft of the strategic plan will promote participationin formulating the RTC's goals, objectives and implementation procedures.In addition, the Board wants the strategic plan to reflect expertise availablein the private as well as the public sector. The private sector has extensiveexpertise in matters of loan workouts, asset management and disposition,which would be invaluable to the Oversight Board in formulating the strategicplan. Furthermore, FIRREA requires the RTC to utilize the private sectorin carrying out its duties, including real estate and loan portfolio assetmanagement, property management, auction marketing, and brokerage services,to the extent that those services are available and their utilization bythe RTC would be practicable and efficient. Because it is expected thatthe RTC will utilize the private sector in carrying out its mission, theOversight Board believes it is important to receive comment from that sectorin developing the strategic plan.<ITAG tagnum="85">Appendix to the Preamble_FIRREA-Mandated Contents of the StrategicPlan </ITAG>Section 21A(a)(14)(B) requires the strategic plan and implementing policiesand procedures to contain, at a minimum, the following:<ITAG tagnum="4"> </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">1. Factors for determining the order of resolutions. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">2. Standards to select the type of resolution. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">3. Factors to consider in deciding treatment of nonperforming assetsin assisted acquisitions. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">4. Plan for the disposition of assets. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">5. Management objectives for measuring progress. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">6. Plan for organizational structure, staffing, and use of third-partycontracts. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">7. Consideration of incentives to promote efficient asset management.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">8. Standards for competition among and fair treatment of offerors.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">9. Standards to prohibit discrimination in solicitation and considerationof offers. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">10. Procedures for active solicitation of offers from minorities andwomen. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">11. Procedures for notification of rejected offers. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">12. Procedures for establishing the market value of assets. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">13. Procedures requiring timely evaluation of purchase offers. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">14. Procedures for bulk sales and auction marketing of assets. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">15. Guidelines for determining which assets have no reasonable recoveryvalue and may, therefore, be considered for public purposes. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">16. Guidelines for conveyance of assets to state and local governmentagencies for use in HUD urban homesteading programs. </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">17. Policies and procedures for avoiding political favoritism andundue influence in contracts and decisions made by the Oversight Boardand RTC.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="71">Table of Contents </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">I. Mission Statement </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">II. Background </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">A. Case Resolution </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">B. Asset Disposition </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">C. Affordable Housing Provisions </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">D. Conflicts of Interest and Ethical Standards </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">E. External Relations </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">F. Administration </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">G. Specific Questions for Public Comment </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="26">III. Goals, Objectives, and Implementation Procedures </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">A. Case Resolution </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">B. Asset Disposition </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">C. Affordable Housing Provisions </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">D. Conflicts of Interest and Ethical Standards </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">E. External Relations </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">F. Administration </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="24">G. Appendix </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="84">I. Mission Statement </ITAG>The Resolution Trust Corporation should carry out a program, under thegeneral oversight of the Oversight Board, to manage and resolve institutionsthat come under the jurisdiction of the RTC and to dispose of any residualassets in a manner that: andbullet; Maximizes return and minimizes loss; andbullet; Minimizes the impact on local real estate and financial markets;and andbullet; Maximizes the preservation of the availability and affordabilityof residential property for low- and moderate-income individuals.<ITAG tagnum="84">II. Background </ITAG>A. Case Resolution FIRREA gives the Resolution Trust Corporation (RTC or the Corporation)the responsibility for managing and resolving all cases involving depositoryinstitutions previously insured by the Federal Savings and Loan InsuranceCorporation (FSLIC) for which a conservator or receiver is appointed fromJanuary 1, 1989 through August 8, 1992. As of September 30, 1989 therewere 256 institutions holding $101 billion in assets under RTC jurisdiction.Additional insolvent institutions are expected to be transferred to theRTC over the next three years. <ITAG tagnum="81">Resolution Schedule </ITAG>Given the expected costs associated with resolving the institutions underRTC jurisdiction, the large backlog of insolvent institutions and the potentialdisruption these resolutions could impose on the financial and real estatemarkets, it is important to carefully consider the process by which theseinstitutions are resolved. Furthermore, given that institutional, financial,and human resource constraints preclude simultaneous resolution of insolventinstitutions presently under RTC jurisdiction, it is important to establisha prioritization schedule for case resolutions. FIRREA stipulates thatthe strategic plan for the RTC will include the ``factors the Corporationshall consider in deciding the order in which failed institutions or categoriesof failed institutions will be resolved.'' There are numerous factors to consider in deciding which institutions toresolve first. For example, of primary importance is the deteriorationat an institution, a measure of the cost savings the RTC could achieveby resolving an institution immediately. As such, institutions with thehighest operating losses (both in absolute terms and relative to the expectedcost of resolution) should be given first priority in order to save theRTC these additional losses. Additionally, the estimated loss in franchise value due to eroding customerbases and the loss of key personnel and systems is important in determiningdeterioration and therefore, should also be evaluated in deciding the priorityof resolutions. Likewise, the ongoing risk exposure to the RTC should beconsidered. Institutions posing the greatest risk to the RTC should begiven priority. Also, the order of resolutions should reflect the mostefficient use of RTC resources and staff. The strategic plan requires theRTC to evaluate all of these factors in establishing a case resolutionschedule.Many of the factors that need to be considered in establishing a priorityschedule are not easily quantified. It would not be cost effective, however,to devote inordinate time and resources to developing a precise priorityschedule if such an effort delays the resolution process. Therefore, inevaluating the various factors, the RTC may consider establishing prioritydeciles or quartiles rather than attempting to establish the order of resolutionfor each institution. <ITAG tagnum="81">Method of Resolution </ITAG>In addition to establishing resolution priorities, the RTC will need toselect a method of resolution for each institution. Resolutions generallytake the form of either liquidations accompanied by the payment of insureddeposits, or assisted acquisitions. In paying insured deposits, the FDIChas generally paid cash to depositors, either directly, or indirectly througha ``paying agent.'' An insured depositor may choose to take the cash oruse it to open a deposit account with the paying agent. The RTC may usethe same techniques. Use of a paying agent is often referred to as an insureddeposit transfer. In an assisted acquisition, the acquiring entity assumes some portion ofthe assets and liabilities of the failed institution. The RTC providessufficient cash to the acquiring institution to offset the difference betweenthe amount of liabilities assumed and the market value of assets acquiredfrom the failed institution_net of any premium paid by the acquiring institution.To the extent the acquiring institution acquires substantially all of theassets of the failed institution, the transaction is termed a ``whole thrift''purchase and assumption. If the acquiring institution acquires only the``good'' assets (e.g., cash, securities, and performing loans), the transactionis termed a ``clean thrift'' purchase and assumption. There is no precise line of demarcation between a whole-thrift transactionand a clean-thrift transaction. Rather, they run on a continuum. In fact,the results of a deposit transfer can be similar to a purchase and assumptiontransaction. For example, if in its role as the paying agent, an institutionis able to attract and retain the deposits from the failed institutionand uses the deposits to purchase the good assets of the failed institution,the net result resembles a clean-thrift purchase and assumption. If thepaying agent further purchases the problem assets, the net result resemblesa whole-thrift purchase and assumption. In selecting a method of resolution, FIRREA, by cross referencing the FederalDeposit Insurance Act, prohibits the RTC from providing assistance in anamount in excess of that required to liquidate an institution, unless theRTC determines that the continued operation of the institution is essentialto provide adequate banking services in its community. FIRREA also stipulatesthat the RTC conduct its operations in a manner which ``maximizes the netpresent value return from the sale or other disposition of institutions,''and ``minimizes the amount of any loss realized in the resolution of cases.''Finally, FIRREA stipulates that the RTC's strategic plan and its implementingpolicies and procedures must include ``standards the Corporation shalluse to select the appropriate resolution action for a failed institution,''and ``factors the Corporation shall consider in deciding whether nonperformingassets of the failed institution will be transferred to the acquiring institutionrather than retained by the Corporation for management and disposal.''This latter requirement regarding the treatment of nonperforming assetsdraws attention to the whole-thrift versus clean-thrift decision. The strategicplan requires the RTC to consider each of these statutorily imposed criteriain selecting the preferred method of resolution. One policy issue that arises in the selection of a resolution method iswhether the RTC should sell an individual institution as a whole or inparts. For example, some have suggested that the RTC could obtain a higherprice if it were to sell individual branches to separate acquirers ratherthan attempting to sell all the branches to one acquirer. It has been furtherargued that selling smaller pieces, such as individual branches, mightalso increase the pool of eligible bidders, thereby increasing the competitivenessof the bidding. A counter to these arguments is the amount of time andadministrative costs associated with attempting to evaluate and comparemultiple combinations of offers. Also, in deciding whether to pursue thesale of individual branches, consideration must be given to the effectof this policy on cash outlays, the expected volume of assets to be liquidatedand the disruption payoffs of insolvent branches could cause. <ITAG tagnum="81">Financial Assistance </ITAG>Another area of policy debate is the type of assistance that the RTC mayprovide in order to facilitate an assisted acquisition. In the past, variousforms of assistance have been used including, but not limited to, cash,notes, yield-maintenance agreements, capital-loss coverage, asset puts,and regulatory forbearances. Yield maintenance was sometimes given to an acquirer that accepted problemassets (or assets with below market contract rates due to interest ratechanges) in lieu of immediately paying the institution for the capitallosses on the assets. The guaranteed yield for these assets was generallybased on a cost-of-funds index, plus a spread to cover operating expensesassociated with managing the asset and, in some cases, a profit margin.Capital-loss coverage effectively guarantees that the acquiring institutionwill not sustain any further capital losses on specified or ``covered''assets after the sale of these assets to the institution. When capitalloss coverage is offered in conjunction with yield maintenance, the provider(e.g., the RTC) effectively retains all the risks associated with problemassets and the acquiring institution may have disincentives to minimizethe losses in the assets.Asset-puts as a form of assistance can be used when the acquirer has nothad sufficient time to evaluate the condition of all the assets in theportfolio or mark them to market. If an asset that has been sold to aninstitution becomes ``bad'' or non-performing, does not have clear title,or there is some litigation liability, the association may sell or ``put''the asset back to the RTC in exchange for cash or other assets. An ``asset-put''provision reduces the discount a purchaser would otherwise require on acceptingassets of unknown quality and allows for more expedient disposition ofinstitutions with problem assets. Asset-puts can be thought of as a formof capital loss coverage and, like the capital loss coverage and yieldmaintenance, creates a financial contingent liability for the RTC and reducesthe incentive for acquiring institutions to maximize recoveries. Ownership interests in resolved institutions allow the RTC to protect itsinterests when at the time of resolution there is continued uncertaintyregarding the value of the resolved institution and, therefore, the appropriateamount of assistance. This uncertainty creates the potential for largeupside gains for the acquirer. Equity participations, such as common stock,give the RTC a direct ownership position in a thrift and allow the RTCto share in upside gains. Equity participations, however, may create aconflict if the RTC assumes a controlling position and thereby becomesa competitor with other financial institutions. Warrants are passive equityinstruments that allow the RTC to share in the profits of a resolved institution,but if structured properly, can avoid the control issue. Regulatory forbearances occur when a merging institution is granted non-cashassistance by having the regulator abstain from enforcing certain regulatoryrequirements. In the past, regulators have granted forbearances from complyingwith capital requirements, liquidity requirements, and asset restrictions.In most, but not all, situations, forbearances do not reduce the requirementbut merely preclude the regulator from taking action as a result of noncompliance.Forbearances were usually granted only for a limited period of time. Grantingforbearances may reduce the resolution cost to the RTC and unlike otherforms of assistance, often do not involve a direct financial outlay orimmediate risk to the RTC. They may, however, transfer risk to the insurancefunds and are inherently difficult to value. Each of these forms of assistance entails different costs and levels ofongoing risk exposure for the RTC. The Oversight Board has already adoptedpolicies that: (1) Limit the period of assistance involving a financialcontingency (e.g., asset-puts, asset guarantees, capital loss coverage,yield maintenance guarantees) for the RTC to the lesser of 6 months orthe time necessary to complete due diligence; and (2) limit the RTC fromtaking an active equity positions in resolved institutions. The strategicplan requires the RTC to develop written guidelines for the use of variousforms of financial assistance. <ITAG tagnum="81">Bidding Procedures </ITAG>A significant way to reduce the cost of resolutions is to encourage activeparticipation in the resolution process by all qualified bidders. Also,FIRREA explicitly requires the RTC to develop standards for fair, non-discriminatorytreatment and competition among prospective bidders and requires the RTCto encourage the active participation of women and minorities. These requirements can best be fulfilled by having an open and widely publicizedbidding procedure and a broad dissemination of information regarding institutionsbeing marketed and the terms of previous transactions. This need for opennesshas been highlighted by the public reaction to the transactions completedby the Federal Home Loan Bank Board in December 1988. In addition, providingsufficient time to disseminate the pertinent information to a wide rangeof bidders and allowing adequate time for carefully constructing competitivebids, should assure that the RTC receives the best offer. Finally, thefair and consistent evaluation of all bids and the timely notificationof rejected bids should encourage continued participation in future marketingefforts by prospective purchasers. The strategic plan identifies each ofthese items as an area for the RTC to develop implementation procedures.<ITAG tagnum="81">Use of Private Sector </ITAG>FIRREA requires the RTC to use the services of private persons if suchservices are available and the RTC determines that the utilization of suchservices are practicable and efficient. While the statute appears to presumethat this will occur primarily in the asset disposition process, the RTCmight use the services of private sector entities in activities relatedto the resolution of institutions. These services could include managinginstitutions or performing due diligence for the RTC. The strategic plandirects the RTC to identify areas where private sector services could beused in resolving institutions.B. Asset Disposition Assets not sold as a part of a thrift institution resolution will haveto be disposed of separately by the RTC. The volume of assets the RTC willdispose of is uncertain and will depend in part on the method chosen bythe RTC to resolve thrift institutions. Whatever the eventual volume, most of the assets under RTC jurisdictionwill fall into one of three categories: (1) Cash and readily marketableloans, servicing rights, and securities; (2) high risk or otherwise undesirable,but performing, loans; or (3) real estate owned and nonperforming loans,including loans in foreclosure. Most of the policy issues relate to thedisposition of the second and third groups; accordingly, these assets arethe focus of this section. The task facing the RTC for asset disposition is unprecedented in magnitudeand complexity. The RTC will need to try alternative approaches, learningfrom experience what works and what does not work. Nothing in this planis intended to preclude that flexibility. <ITAG tagnum="81">Use of the Private Sector to Maximize Net Present Value </ITAG>The sheer number of assets to be worked out will require that the RTC relyheavily on private sector contractors for the management and dispositionof these assets, subject to general oversight and audit by the RTC. Inaddition, the private sector's expertise and the opportunity for the RTCto utilize incentive-based contracts argue for the RTC to use private contractorswhenever practicable and efficient, as called for in FIRREA. The RTC should develop and employ incentive structures tailored to maximizingthe net present value of the assets to the RTC. While the RTC staff willbe monitoring its contractors, it will be the contractors who, in mostinstances, manage the assets and negotiate their disposition, subject toappropriate RTC approval. The RTC should, therefore, rely on incentiveschemes for contractors as a means of assuring that the government receivesthe maximum net present value return on its assets. No incentive structure,however, can eliminate the need for managerial oversight by RTC staff.Neither the eventual proceeds from asset disposition nor the interim operatingreturns will be known to the RTC or the contractor at the time the assetsare placed under private control. Therefore, when practical, the RTC shouldenter into contracts that have the RTC and the contractor sharing in better-than-expectedreturns, as well as sharing the risk that net proceeds will fall shortof expectations (i.e., yielding the contractor less than a market rateof return). <ITAG tagnum="81">Competitive Procurement </ITAG>Depending on the structure of the contract, a variety of procurement designsmay be appropriate for promoting competition consistent with the objectiveof maximizing net present value. In all instances, the RTC must make available,in writing and to all requesting parties, its procurement policies andprocedures. <ITAG tagnum="81">Sales Methods </ITAG>As a general rule, bulk contracts for management and disposition of a largeblock of assets should be used if the RTC deems that this is the strategythat will maximize the net present value of the proceeds. Furthermore,the administrative constraints on the number of separate transactions thatcan be directly executed by the RTC suggests that bulk transactions maybe an efficient method for disposing of assets. The RTC should experimentwith alternative methods of structuring bulk transactions. In bulk sales,modest discounting in price may be appropriate because of the reductionin the RTC's sales costs per unit. The RTC can delegate many of the decisions regarding choice of dispositionmethods to private contractors, subject to guidelines established by theRTC. However, there may be instances in which the RTC should override therecommendation of its contractors. For example, using large-volume auctionsto dispose of single-family homes or raw land in distressed areas may maximizenear-term returns to the RTC but could have adverse market effects thatcould be avoided through an alternative sales method. <ITAG tagnum="81">Continuing RTC Involvement with Assets </ITAG>As with resolutions of insolvent thrifts, the RTC should avoid retaininglong-term equity interests in assets under its jurisdiction. These assetsshould be sold expeditiously following orderly and thorough marketing.The RTC should explore ways, however, in which it can participate in anyextraordinary gains realized at the time of disposition. The RTC will have to develop criteria that must be met for the RTC to undertakemajor capital improvements (i.e., buildouts of incomplete properties andmajor rehabilitation of completed structures) prior to marketing. Theremay be some special cases in which the net present value of propertiesto the RTC will be enhanced by capital improvements prior to sale, butin most instances properties should be sold in ``as is'' condition (exclusiveof minor cosmetic repairs). <ITAG tagnum="81">Financing of Asset Sales</ITAG>If the RTC were to provide financing of asset sales, it should do so onlywhen necessary to complete transactions that maximize the present valuereturn to the RTC, net of the value of any concessions provided in thefinancing. Unless directed otherwise by the Oversight Board, the RTC should,in general, offer financing only as a marketing tool. If private sectorlenders are unwilling to finance a proposed purchase on terms as favorableto the buyer as those offered by the RTC, then the RTC is providing a subsidythat should be recouped through a higher purchase price. <ITAG tagnum="81">Data Base Development </ITAG>To assure the RTC's capability to respond to future data requests, thedatabase system developed to inventory RTC assets should be flexible andcontain as many descriptors of assets as is practicable. As required byFIRREA, the data base should identify those properties with natural, cultural,recreational, or scientific values of special significance. Compliancewith this requirement will be difficult, but the RTC should develop proceduresand guidelines for determining these designations as quickly as practicable.<ITAG tagnum="81">Ethics and Conflicts of Interest </ITAG>Ongoing enforcement of ethics and conflicts of interest requirements willcomplement the incentive schemes and regular audits as methods of assuringthat contractors promote the objectives of the RTC. The interim statementof Principles of Ethical Conduct for Independent Contractors to the RTC,on which public comment has been solicited, will be succeeded by regulationson this subject. The ethics standards should not preclude asset managers from acting inmore than one capacity for the RTC, if the RTC determines that no conflictsor potential conflicts of interest exist with respect to the services performedfor the RTC by RTC contractors. For example, if appropriate, asset managersshould be allowed to sell RTC properties in one region of the country andbuy properties in another. <ITAG tagnum="81">Asset Disposition in Distressed Areas </ITAG>RTC will be a significant holder of real estate in some local real estatemarkets already beset by economic problems and experiencing declining realestate values. FIRREA notes this fact and calls for special asset dispositionprocedures to protect against the dumping of assets while not restrictingthe flexibility RTC needs to make sound business decisions. The RTC willconsider providing seller financing in distressed areas. FIRREA specifies that in distressed areas the RTC should not sell at lessthan a specified minimum disposition price. The legislation sets this priceat 95 percent of market value and gives the RTC Board of Directors theauthority to change this percentage if a change is deemed consistent withthe overall objectives of the RTC. Outside of distressed areas, the RTCshould strive as well to sell only at prices at or near market value, unlessotherwise directed by the Oversight Board. The term ``market value'' isdefined in FIRREA to mean ``the most probable price which a property shouldbring in a competitive and open market if: (1) All conditions requisiteto a fair sale are present, (2) the buyer and seller are acting prudentlyand are knowledgeable, and (3) the price is not affected by any undue stimulus.''Thorough marketing of properties will be particularly important in distressedareas for the RTC to secure offers near market value. But even with carefuland comprehensive marketing, market value and, therefore, the dispositionprice of RTC properties in distressed areas may often be a small fractionof book value. The RTC should avoid deferring the marketing of properties, subject tothe right of first refusal marketing provisions in FIRREA. Holding propertiesoff the market for an extended period of time will generally not servethe interests of either the local community or the taxpayer. The uncertainty caused by an overhang of properties held off the marketmay depress local property values more than would their sale. Furthermore,holding rental housing off the market increases rents and, therefore, mayplace renters at a disadvantage. Properties held off the market especiallyvacant properties_can deteriorate and lose value, raising the cost to theRTC and ultimately to the taxpayer. Even properties that do not deteriorateimpose carrying costs on the RTC. The RTC should not attempt to ``outguessthe market'' by speculating on future developments not reflected in thecurrent market values of properties. The ongoing resolution of insolvent thrift institutions during the nextseveral years, together with delays in securing clear title to propertiesthat come under the RTC's control, will result in the disposition of RTC'sassets over a multi-year period, even if individual properties are marketedexpeditiously. If the RTC were to delay disposition of currently marketableproperties, it would only concentrate the peak load problem, and placepressure on local markets in years to come. While the RTC should dispose of properties expeditiously following thoroughmarketing, in some instances certain marketing methods may have adverseconsequences for local property values that could be avoided. For example,in areas where the RTC is a large holder of similar properties, includingraw land, disposition according to a pre-advertised multi-month marketingschedule may be preferable to disposing of a large number of propertiesby auction on a single day. <ITAG tagnum="81">Keep the Market Informed </ITAG>The RTC should keep market participants and other interested parties fullyinformed, to the extent practical, on RTC's plans for asset sales. Uncertaintyincreases the risk of investing in real estate and thereby depresses realestate values. The ``overhang'' of RTC properties in local real estatemarkets increases uncertainty and depresses real estate values for tworeasons: (1) Market participants do not know the RTC's plans for theseproperties, and (2) even if RTC's plans were known, the resulting marketeffects are uncertain. RTC can eliminate at least part of this uncertaintyby providing as much information as practical about its inventory and generalpolicies and strategies for asset disposition to all interested partiesin the local market areas where RTC has properties.C. Affordable Housing Provisions FIRREA mandates maximizing the preservation of the availability and affordabilityof residential real property for low and moderate-income individuals. Onemechanism that FIRREA provides for meeting this mandate is to require aspecified right of first refusal period for qualified purchasers of certaineligible single and multi-family properties. The RTC's implementing procedures for housing disposition should be designedto maximize the effectiveness of this initial marketing or right of firstrefusal period. Eligible properties are to be offered to qualifying households,public agencies, or nonprofit organizations so that the properties maybe available for purchase or occupancy by lower-income families. To assurethat its disposition strategies for low and moderate income housing areeffectively implemented, the RTC should consult on an ongoing basis withlocal and state housing finance agencies, other governmental agencies,and local and national nonprofit organizations with specialized knowledgeof low-income housing. No later than March 30, 1990, the RTC will submit to the Oversight Boardcomprehensive guidelines and procedures to implement the low- and moderate-incomehousing provisions of FIRREA. (The specific coverage of these guidelinesand procedures is detailed in a subsequent section of this strategic plan.)To avoid keeping needed housing off the market and to avoid any furtherdeterioration of the eligible properties involved while comprehensive guidelinesare developed by the RTC and reviewed by the Oversight Board, the RTC maysell eligible properties in accordance with the housing provisions of FIRREAprior to the delivery to the Oversight Board of these comprehensive guidelines.Prior to commencing such disposition, however, the RTC will prepare interimguidelines for disposition that are in accordance with the lower- and moderate-incomehousing provisions of FIRREA. The RTC will provide its interim guidelinesto the Oversight Board and will keep the Board apprised of its dispositionprocedures. (Public comment is specifically invited on whether the RTCshould begin disposing of eligible properties prior to development of comprehensivehousing program guidelines.) In order to facilitate the Oversight Board's review of the low- and moderate-incomehousing program as it evolves and to assist in identifying any areas needingspecial attention, the RTC will keep records on eligible properties andtheir disposition. As the RTC begins marketing eligible properties, itwill compile data on the number of eligible properties offered for sale,the number of these properties that are purchased for low- and moderate-incomehousing, and any other pertinent data related to the effectiveness of theinitial marketing period in meeting the FIRREA's housing goals. The RTCwill report regularly to the Oversight Board on its experience in meetingits low- and moderate-income housing objectives under FIRREA, includingproviding any relevant data. <ITAG tagnum="81">Marketing </ITAG>Marketing eligible residential properties may require special techniquesthat differ from the RTC's normal marketing methods. The RTC should developmarketing strategies in consultation with state housing finance agencies,other government agencies, and non-profit organizations for implementation,either directly or through contractors (including government agencies andnon-profit organizations). The RTC should also consider assigning low-incomehousing specialists to its field offices. <ITAG tagnum="81">Clearinghouses </ITAG>FIRREA requires that the RTC shall provide information on eligible propertiesto clearinghouses to make such information available to public agencies,non-profit organizations, and qualifying households. FIRREA authorizesstate housing finance agencies and the Federal Housing Finance Board toact as clearinghouses. The RTC can also authorize national non-profit organizationsas clearinghouses. The RTC shall develop guidelines for entering into contractsor other arrangements with clearinghouses to carry out their responsibilities.To assure a maximum level of operating efficiency by all clearinghouses,RTC personnel should work with organizations, including the FHFB, to developgeneral strategies, including agreement on both the form and content ofthe information the RTC will provide regarding eligible properties. Theinformation provided should be in a form suitable for immediate disseminationby the clearinghouses to eligible purchasers and include as much informationas necessary to assure the most informed possible basis for judgement bythe eligible purchasers. The RTC should also investigate the extent to which information about eligibleproperties may be provided to clearinghouses before the RTC has clear titleto the properties. <ITAG tagnum="81">Disposition of Eligible Properties </ITAG>FIRREA directs the RTC to determine a market value for each eligible residentialproperty and sell eligible properties at the net realizable market value.The net realizable market value is the price below the market value thattakes into account any reduction in certain holding and transactions costsresulting from expedited and direct sale of a property. Consequently, theprice reduction represents an economic discount, not a price subsidy.The costs that can be avoided through an expedited sale include, but arenot limited to, foregone real estate taxes, insurance, maintenance expenses,security costs and the loss of use of its funds as well as the avoidance,if applicable, of fees paid to real estate brokers, auctioneers, or otherindividuals usually involved in the sale of property. The RTC should consider selling eligible properties in bulk to capablenon-profit organizations and state and local housing finance agencies.The reduction in transaction costs to the RTC resulting from a bulk salemay permit the RTC to sell properties at a below-market price and stillmaximize net present value. <ITAG tagnum="81">Subsidies </ITAG>FIRREA authorizes the RTC to provide subsidies such as concessionary financingand price discounts in the furtherance of FIRREA's housing objectives.If subsidies are deemed necessary to meet the housing objectives, the appropriateform of the subsidies, as well as the total amount of subsidy providedfor this program, will be determined by the Oversight Board. Under sectionG of this strategic plan, Specific Questions for Public Comment, the staffof the Oversight Board specifically seek comment on subsidies and otherissues related to the affordable housing provisions in FIRREA. <ITAG tagnum="81">Qualifying Purchasers </ITAG>The legislation specifies which households and organizations are eligibleto bid on properties during the right of first refusal period. The RTCshould investigate the feasibility of contracting for the service of qualifyinghouseholds and institutions, in light of the relevant experience outsidethe RTC that could be drawn upon from such agencies and organizations asstate housing finance agencies, other government agencies, and non-profitorganizations. <ITAG tagnum="81">Competing Bids </ITAG>When selling single family properties, the RTC may have to choose betweensubstantially similar competing offers from low- and moderate-income households.In the case of multi-family housing, the conference report directs theRTC to give preference to offers that propose to house more lower incomefamilies for longer periods of time and the RTC will establish guidelinesto implement this directive. Given the RTC's mandate to maximize the affordabilityand availability of low-income housing, the RTC will establish guidelinesthat among substantially similar offers for single family properties givepreference to bids from lower-income families. <ITAG tagnum="81">Consultation with Other Agencies </ITAG>FIRREA directs the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and the Secretaryof Agriculture to expedite the processing of applications for assistanceunder a number of specified programs, including FHA mortgage insurance.To the extent practical, the RTC should consult with those parties, aswell as with other organizations that can financially assist qualifiedhouseholds and organizations in purchasing and renting housing. These organizationsinclude the federally sponsored housing credit agencies and corporations,and state and local housing finance agencies. The legislation requires the Federal Housing Finance Board (FHFB) to establishan Affordable Housing Program to subsidize interest rates on advances tomember savings institutions for lending for low- and moderate-income owneroccupied and rental housing. The RTC should work with the FHFB as the FHFBdesigns its Affordable Housing Program to maximize the mutual effectivenessof the RTC's and FHFB's respective programs. <ITAG tagnum="81">Use of Secondary Market Agencies </ITAG>As required in FIRREA, the RTC shall, in consultation with the Secretaryof HUD, explore opportunities to work with secondary market entities toprovide housing for lower- and moderate-income households. The Secretaryof HUD is authorized to work with the Government National Mortgage Association,the Federal National Mortgage Association, the Federal Home Loan MortgageCorporation, and other secondary market entities to develop risk-sharingstructures, mortgage insurance, and other credit enhancements to assistin the provision of property ownership, rental, and cooperative housingopportunities for lower- and moderate-income families. <ITAG tagnum="81">Enforcement of Low-Income Residency Requirements </ITAG>FIRREA requires purchasers of qualifying multi-family property to makeavailable a certain number of units for low- and very low-income residentsduring the remaining useful life of the property. (The requirements maybe reduced for a temporary period if HUD or the applicable state housingfinance agency determines that compliance is no longer financially feasible.)The residency requirements must be recorded in a deed or other legal instrument.FIRREA provides that the lower-income occupancy requirements shall be judiciallyenforceable against the purchasers of property by affected very low- andlower-income families. <ITAG tagnum="81">Regional Advisory Boards </ITAG>FIRREA directs the Oversight Board to select members of the regional advisoryboards who will represent the views of low- and moderate-income consumersand small businesses, or who have knowledge and experience regarding business,financial, and real estate matters. These groups can advise the RTC aboutimplementation strategies in specific regions. D. Conflicts of Interest and Ethical Standards <ITAG tagnum="81">Conflicts of Interest </ITAG>Within 180 days from the date of enactment, FIRREA requires the RTC topromulgate rules and regulations applicable to independent contractorsgoverning conflicts of interest, ethical responsibilities and use of confidentialinformation. The RTC has adopted an interim statement of principles establishingminimum standards of ethical conduct applicable to independent contractorsretained by the RTC. The RTC has also been charged with the obligationto utilize the private sector to the maximum extent possible. The RTC isfacing a monumental task and will have to rely heavily on third party contractorsto successfully accomplish that task. Accordingly, it is important thatany conflicts of interest standards will not preclude participation bya significant proportion of the private sector. If the standards established are too restrictive, the RTC will have difficultyhiring sufficient contractors to accomplish its mission. On the other hand,if the standards are too liberal or lax, they may not provide sufficientprotection against unethical conduct by the RTC employees, contractors,and agents. Proposed regulations concerning the conduct of the RTC's independent contractorsare expected to be published for public comment in the near future. Theproposed regulations are intended to require the RTC to preserve the integrityof the system while allowing it the flexibility needed to meet its statutorymandate. <ITAG tagnum="81">Political Favoritism </ITAG>FIRREA also requires that measures be taken to avoid political favoritismand undue influence with respect to the activities of the RTC. Until specificpolicies and procedures are developed, the RTC will draw upon current FDICpolicies. The FDIC has attempted to guard against undue political pressureby having policies that allow them to investigate and provide informationto those in political office in response to an inquiry, complaint or concern.The policies do not permit FDIC personnel to discuss the substance of pendingdecisions with respect to specific actions. In addition, the policies donot allow the FDIC personnel to alter or change an FDIC decision, policyor procedure at the request of any outside party. However, the RTC will be operating in a more diverse and complex environmentthan the FDIC. Due to the greater number of special interest groups involvedand the greater range of activities the RTC will be undertaking, the RTCmay be subject to more political pressure. The policies the FDIC has inplace may not be adequate to address the complexity of the RTC's mission.Staff of the Oversight Board invites comments on how to most effectivelyimplement the mandates of FIRREA regarding avoiding political favoritismin contracts and decisions made by the RTC. E. External Relations As a new instrumentality of the U.S., it is critical for the RTC to establishand maintain good relationships and open communications with other entities.The RTC must be responsive to Congressional inquiries and cooperate withother government offices. The nature of the mission of the RTC also makesimperative a positive relationship with the public. The External Relationssection of the strategic plan provides guidance on RTC activities designedto establish and enhance the RTC's reputation as an efficient and capableagency in achieving its mission. <ITAG tagnum="81">Communications with the Public </ITAG>The National and Regional Advisory Boards, which will be established bythe Oversight Board, will play an important role in maintaining open communicationswith the public regarding the RTC's policies and procedures for the saleor disposition of real property assets. The National and Regional AdvisoryBoards will bring local expertise and concerns to the attention of theRTC and the Oversight Board and will provide a means for the RTC and OversightBoard to improve public understanding of the RTC's activities. Questions or concerns may also be raised by the public through mechanismsthat will be developed by the RTC for accepting general complaints andcomplaints of discrimination on the basis of race, sex or ethnic groupin the solicitation and consideration of offers. FIRREA requires that thestrategic plan and its implementing policies and procedures include standardsthat prohibit discrimination. The complaint mechanism established by theRTC will provide a means for the public to provide input on the RTC's performancein this area. <ITAG tagnum="81">Congressional Reports </ITAG>FIRREA imposes two reporting periods on the RTC: (1) Semiannual reportscovering the October l-March 31 and April 1-September 30 periods; and (2)an annual report covering the January 1-December 31 period. In addition,FIRREA requires semiannual appearances by the Oversight Board before theHouse and Senate Banking Committees to report on RTC progress in certainareas. The specific information requested by Congress is somewhat differentfor the semiannual reports, the annual report, and the semiannual Congressionalappearances by the Oversight Board. These reporting requirements as wellas other reporting and disclosure obligations concerning the RTC's operations,which are required by Title V of FIRREA, are listed in the Appendix tothis strategic plan.F. Administration The Oversight Board oversees and is accountable for the RTC. In its oversightcapacity, the Board must periodically review the overall performance ofthe RTC including its work, management activities, internal controls, andperformance relative to its approved budget plans. The Administration sectionof the strategic plan sets forth objectives and strategies to assure thatthe RTC has sufficient and effectively managed resources to achieve itsmission. <ITAG tagnum="81">Planning and Budgeting </ITAG>The Administration section contains guidelines for the RTC's budgeting,planning, and staffing activities. FIRREA requires the strategic plan andimplementing policies and procedures to contain management objectives anda plan for the organizational structure and staffing of the RTC. The sectionalso includes guidelines to ensure fiscal responsibility. FIRREA requiresthe RTC to provide the Oversight Board with periodic financing requestsfor Oversight Board approval. At the Oversight Board's first meeting, it adopted a policy regarding proceduresand documentation for approving RTC financing requests. These proceduresrequire the RTC, in advance, to support the need for authorization of disbursementsof funds by the Oversight Board for case resolutions, working capital requests,high cost funds replacement, liquidity advances, and operating expenditures.This has evolved into a two-step process. The first step is the RTC's submission to the Oversight Board of a generalbusiness plan that describes its projected use of funds over succeedingweeks and requests a general authorization to spend the projected amount.After Board staff review, its recommendation and the RTC's request aresubmitted to the Oversight Board for a general authorization to spend allor part of the requested funds. The Oversight Board's general authorization does not release the funds,however. That comes during the second step of the process, when the RTCsubmits a written request for funds needed for specific transactions thatare consistent with the general authorization. The request is reviewedto determine if it includes all the required information, is signed bythe Certifying Officer, and conforms with the uses of funds permitted byFIRREA and Oversight Board policies. If the Oversight Board has authorizedsufficient funds to meet the request, a staff memorandum including recommendedaction is prepared and sent to the Oversight Board CEO. Only upon his approvalare funds actually transferred to the RTC account. <ITAG tagnum="81">Working Capital </ITAG>In order for the RTC to effectively accomplish its goal of resolving institutionsin an expeditious manner, it is important to develop a mechanism throughwhich the RTC can raise working capital. The need for working capital arisesfrom timing differences that occur in the case resolution process. Forexample, when the RTC liquidates an institution, the RTC must make up-frontpayments to depositors. This cash advance, however, does not representthe actual cost of resolution. The RTC will ultimately sell the assetsof the failed institution and recover the fair market value of the assets.Since the sale of these assets takes time, but depositors must be paidup front, the resources provided by FIRREA could quickly be tied up inthe illiquid assets acquired for resolved institutions. Working capitalallows the RTC to proceed with case resolutions while continuing the orderlydisposition of these assets. The strategic plan requires the RTC to establishthe necessary systems and procedures for implementing a working capitalprogram. <ITAG tagnum="81">Reporting Requirements </ITAG>FIRREA authorizes the Oversight Board to require from the RTC any reports,documents, and records it deems necessary to carry out its oversight responsibilities.Furthermore, FIRREA imposes reporting requirements on the RTC, includingreports to Congress. The RTC, in consultation with the Oversight Boardand Congress, will streamline the process for responding to the variousreporting requirements imposed on the RTC by Congress, the Oversight Board,and others, to the extent possible. <ITAG tagnum="81">Independent Audits and Other Appraisals of Operations </ITAG>FIRREA established an Inspector General (IG) for the RTC. The InspectorGeneral Act of 1978, as amended, requires the IG/RTC to prepare, by April30 and October 31 of each year, semiannual reports containing certain informationfor the six-month periods ending on March 31 and September 30, respectively,for submission to Congress. FIRREA also requires the Comptroller Generalto annually audit the financial statements of the RTC unless the ComptrollerGeneral notifies the Oversight Board not later than 180 days before theclose of a fiscal year that it will not perform an audit for that fiscalyear. In that event, the Oversight Board must contract with an independentcertified public accountant to perform the annual audit. (GAO, however,has indicated that agency will conduct an annual report of RTC's financialstatement.) The strategic plan requires the RTC to appraise its operations, includingcooperating fully in audits such as those performed by the Inspector General,Comptroller General, and Oversight Board to assist its Board of Directorsand management in ensuring an efficient, economical, and effective applicationof its resources. G. Specific Questions for Public Comment While the Oversight Board invites comments on all aspects of the proposedstrategic plan, comment on the following key issues is especially requested.1. The strategic plan identifies four factors that the RTC should considerin establishing its schedule for case resolutions: (1) Deterioration, (2)risk, (3) recovery of franchise value, and (4) efficient use of staff.How should each of these factors be measured? For example, should deteriorationbe measured as an absolute level (e.g., total operating losses) or on arelative basis (e.g., operating losses relative to expected cost of resolutionor relative to total assets)? Are there other factors that should alsobe considered? What is the relative importance of each factor? 2. As noted in the background section, there are a number of policy questionsregarding the method by which institutions are resolved. What factors shouldthe RTC consider in selecting a particular method of resolution? For example,should the RTC attempt to sell individual branches? What are the advantagesand disadvantages of selling the individual components of a thrift associationversus selling the thrift as a total unit. Do the costs of administeringa piecemeal liquidation approach outweigh the potential benefits of attractinga wider group of interested bidders? 3. There are a variety of forms of financial assistance available for theresolution of insolvent thrift institutions. The Oversight Board has adopteda policy limiting the maturity on assistance creating a financial contingencyfor the RTC to no greater than six months. Will limiting the terms of suchassistance significantly discourage potential acquirers? What types offactors should the Oversight Board and the RTC consider is establishingpolicies and procedures regarding the use of financial assistance? 4. What methods are available to ensure that all interested bidders arefully informed regarding the bidding procedure and the institutions beingmarketed? 5. Asset management and disposition involve a number of services, including:property management, loan servicing and workout, accounting and legal services,capital improvements to completed or partially built structures, marketingof loans and properties, and negotiating the terms of sale of these assets.A distinction can be made between asset managers and property managers.Asset managers in the private sector have responsibility for overseeingall of these services on behalf of the owners of portfolios of loans andproperties. FIRREA directs the RTC to utilize the private sector for suchservices_both the overall asset management function and its component services,including property management_if such services are available in the privatesector and the RTC determines utilization of such services to be practicableand efficient. The Oversight Board staff requests public comment on theextent to which it is practicable and efficient for the RTC to utilizethe private sector for the overall asset management function, rather thanfor RTC staff to serve as asset managers and contract directly with providersof the component services. 6. FIRREA calls for the RTC to utilize ``clearinghouses'' to serve as sourcesof information on eligible residential properties (i.e., properties heldby the RTC that are subject to the special marketing provisions specifiedin the statute). FIRREA permits the following organizations to serve asclearinghouses: state housing finance agencies, the Office of CommunityInvestment (or other comparable division) within the Federal Housing FinanceBoard, and any national nonprofit organizations that the RTC determinesto have the capacity to act as a clearinghouse for information. The OversightBoard staff requests public comment on other functions, in addition toinformation dissemination, that might be performed for the RTC by theseorganizations (e.g., qualifying the bidders for eligible residential properties)and the advantages these organizations have in providing these services.7. FIRREA contains several provisions relating to the objective of maximizingthe preservation of the availability and affordability of residential realproperty for low- and moderate-income individuals. For example, provisionsin FIRREA require a right of first refusal for qualified purchasers ofeligible properties. FIRREA authorizes the RTC to provide subsidies toqualified purchasers of eligible residential properties to the extent necessaryto facilitate purchases of properties by lower income families and to helppublic agencies and non-profit organizations to meet lower income occupancyrequirements for properties which these entities wish to purchase. The Oversight Board staff specifically requests public comment on strategiesfor and approaches to implementing the low and moderate income housingprovisions of FIRREA. Comments are requested on (1) methods for implementingthe FIRREA's right of first refusal provisions, (2) alternative approachesto providing subsidies to enable eligible individuals and public agenciesto purchase properties for lower-income housing while at the same timeproviding maximum return to the Government, (3) the extent and nature ofthe subsidies that would be most useful, singularly or in combination,under particular circumstances, including but not limited to price discountsor concessionary financing, as well as alternative program designs, (4)the proposed role of government and nongovernment entities, including butnot limited to national and regional nonprofit organizations, clearinghousesand other entities in carrying out FIRREA's housing objectives, and (5)the nature of Government assistance to best facilitate the program, <T3>e.g.</T3>, assistance to aid capacity building for nongovernment entities.<ITAG tagnum="84">III. Goals, Objectives, and Implementation Procedures </ITAG>A. Case Resolution <T3>Goal: </T3>Resolve institutions under RTC jurisdiction in a timelyand cost effective manner, while minimizing the negative effects on localfinancial and real estate markets. <T3>Objective 1. </T3>Reduce resolution costs by establishing a resolutionschedule for institutions under RTC jurisdiction that to the extent practicable:andbullet; Gives priority to institutions with relatively high rates of deterioration;andbullet; Minimizes the ongoing risk exposure to the RTC; andbullet; Maximizes the recovery of franchise value; and, andbullet; Makes the most efficient use of RTC resources and staff. <T3>Implementation Procedures: </T3>A. By November 30, 1989, develop writtenguidelines and procedures for evaluating each institution under RTC jurisdiction.B. By December 15, 1989, develop prioritization schedules for institutionsto be resolved after January 1, 1990, and update thereafter at least 30days before the end of each calendar quarter. <T3>Objective 2. </T3>Establish procedures for the selection of the preferredmethod of resolution that is consistent with: andbullet; The requirements in FIRREA that the RTC conduct its operationsin a manner that maximizes the net present value of return from the saleor other disposition of institutions and minimizes the amount of any lossrealized in the resolution of cases; andbullet; Section 13(c)(4) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act that prohibitsproviding assistance in an amount in excess of that required to liquidatean institution unless the RTC determines that the continued operation ofthe institution is essential to provide adequate banking services in itscommunity; andbullet; Minimizing the ongoing risk exposure to the RTC; andbullet; Minimizing the effects on local real estate and financial markets;and, andbullet; The provisions in FIRREA regarding the continuation of minority-ownedinstitutions. <T3>Implementation Procedures: </T3>A. By November 30, 1989, develop writtenguidelines for the ``cost test'' calculation required by Section 13(c)(4)of the FDI Act and the loss minimization criteria in FIRREA. B. By December 15, 1989, identify the factors the RTC will consider indeciding whether non-performing assets of a failed institution will betransferred to the acquiring institution rather than retained by the RTC;C. By December 15, 1989, develop written policies and procedures consistentwith the provisions of FIRREA regarding the continuation of minority-ownedinstitutions. D. By January 31, 1990, establish written guidelines on the use of variousforms of financial assistance available from the RTC. <T3>Objective 3. </T3>Develop and implement bidding procedures for sellinginstitutions under RTC jurisdiction that: andbullet; Encourage active participation by all qualified bidders, includingminorities and women; andbullet; Provide sufficient time for bidders to file necessary applicationsand for the chartering, regulatory and insurance agencies to process andevaluate the applications; andbullet; Provide for fair, nondiscriminatory treatment and competitionamong prospective bidders; and, andbullet; Enable the RTC to notify bidders of a rejected bid within 30 days.<T3>Implementation Procedures: </T3>A. As soon as possible, but not laterthan November 15, 1989, establish and publicize the criteria and proceduresfor qualifying bidders.B. By December 29, 1989, develop written plans for soliciting bids fromall interested qualified buyers without preference to type of organization,including procedures for encouraging the active participation in the biddingprocess by women and minorities. C. By December 29, 1989, develop written procedures for: andbullet; Making available to all interested qualified bidders, to the extentpractical, full and consistent information on institutions under RTC jurisdictionand the terms of previous transactions; andbullet; The timely and nondiscriminatory evaluation and selection of offers;and, andbullet; Notifying rejected bidders within 30 days. D. By March 30, 1990, establish written procedures for accepting and investigatingcomplaints of discrimination or unfair treatment in the consideration ofoffers. <T3>Objective 4. </T3>Establish computer systems and record keeping andreporting procedures necessary to keep the Oversight Board, the President,Congress and the general public informed of the case resolution process.<T3>Implementation Procedures: </T3>A. By December 29, 1989, in consultationwith the Oversight Board and the Congress, determine the extent of informationrequired to be reported under the provisions of FIRREA and for full andcomplete disclosure of the case resolution process. B. By March 30, 1990, develop and implement, to the extent possible, quarterlyand other periodic reports that present all required information in clearand consistent formats. <T3>Objective 5. </T3>To the extent practicable and efficient, use privatesector entities for the management and disposition of institution underRTC jurisdiction. <T3>Implementation Procedures: </T3>A. By December 29, 1989, identify areaswhere private sector entities could be used to facilitate the managementand disposition of institutions.B. Asset Disposition <T3>Goal: </T3>To dispose of real estate and other assets in such a wayas to maximize the net present value to the RTC while also minimizing theeffect of these transactions on local real estate and financial markets.<T3>Objective 1. </T3>Maximize the net present value recovery to RTC byestablishing appropriate policies, procedures and/or guidelines concerning:andbullet; appropriate methods of disposition; andbullet; asset marketing of pools of assets; andbullet; preserving and enhancing values during the asset management process;andbullet; distressed area designations; andbullet; establishing and defining market values; andbullet; keeping market participants and    other interested parties fullyinformed, to the extent practical, on RTC's inventory and plans for assetsales; andbullet; the active solicitation of offers from minorities and women; andandbullet; the prohibition of discrimination on the basis of race, sex, orethnic group in the solicitation and consideration of offers. <T3>Implementation Procedures: </T3>A. By March 30, 1990, establish comprehensiveperformance standards and written guidelines on overall asset dispositionstrategies. B. By December 29, 1989, provide the Oversight Board with issues and alternativesfor providing financing for assets sold. C. Consult with the Oversight Board and the National and Regional AdvisoryBoards and revise written guidelines on an ongoing basis as necessary.D. By December 29, 1989, develop record keeping requirements to facilitatethe orderly disposition of assets and to comply with the required semi-annualreporting of RTC's national inventory of real property assets. E. By December 29, 1989, develop policies and procedures for notifyingrejected bidders within 30 days. F. By December 29, 1989, develop policies and procedures for actively solicitingoffers for assets from minorities and women. G. By December 29, 1989, develop policies and procedures prohibiting discriminationon the basis of race, sex or ethnic group in the solicitation and considerationof offers. H. By March 30, 1990, establish written procedures for accepting and investigatingcomplaints of discrimination or unfair treatment in the consideration ofoffers of services to the RTC. <T3>Objective 2. </T3>To the extent practicable and efficient, place assetsunder private control for management and disposition under a program that:andbullet; Employs incentive schemes tailored to maximizing the net presentvalue of the assets to the RTC; andbullet; Assures compliance by contractors with the ethics and conflictsof interest provisions of FIRREA; and andbullet; Assures open and fair competition for asset management and dispositioncontracts. <T3>Implementation Procedures: </T3>A. By December 29, 1989, establishguidelines concerning contracting with public and private entities forperformance of asset management and disposition functions. B. By December 29, 1989, establish guidelines concerning incentive schemesin asset management and disposition contracts. C. By December 29, 1989, establish procedures to assure compliance by contractorswith the ethics and conflicts of interest provisions of FIRREA. D. By December 29, 1989, establish guidelines to assure open and fair competitionfor asset management and disposition contracts. E. By March 30, 1990, establish performance standards for asset managementand disposition contracts. F. By December 29, 1989, provide the Oversight Board with issues and alternativesfor implementing the statutory mandates for minority contractors. <T3>Objective 3. </T3>Minimize the impact of RTC transactions on localreal estate and financial markets. <T3>Implementation Procedures: </T3>A. By March 30, 1989, establish writtenguidelines for determining market values of assets based upon market analysisvaluation techniques and sound asset appraisal practices. B. By March 30, 1990, establish written general guidelines for acceptabledisposition prices in non-distressed areas.C. By March 30, 1990, develop guidelines for designating distressed areasand modifying the ``95%-of-market value'' rule for minimum dispositionprices in distressed areas. D. Establish an informal working group to consult with other federal agenciesthat are selling assets in the same geographical markets, as directed byOversight Board Policy 11, ``Interagency Consultation on Asset Sales''.<T3>Objective 4.</T3> Fully document asset management and disposition activitiesto ensure compliance with all relevant statutory requirements. <T3>Implementation Procedures:</T3> A. By December 29, 1989, in consultationwith the Oversight Board and the Congress, determine the extent of informationrequired to be reported under the provisions of FIRREA and for full andcomplete disclosure of the asset disposition process. B. By March 30, 1990, develop and implement, to the extent possible, semiannualand other periodic reports that present information in clear and consistentformats. C. Affordable Housing Provisions <T3>Goal:</T3> To dispose of qualifying single and multi-family residentialproperties in such a way as to maximize the availability and affordabilityof residential real property for low- and moderate-income households. <T3>Objective 1.</T3> Implement the housing and public use provisions ofFIRREA in order to maximize the preservation and affordability of housingfor low- and moderate-income individuals. <T3>Implementation  Procedures:</T3> A. By March 30, 1990, establish guidelinesfor determining which national non-profit organizations have the capacityto act as clearinghouses; develop strategies to ensure the effective andefficient dispersal of information by the clearinghouses, including guidelinesfor contracting with clearinghouses. B. By March 30, 1990, develop written guidelines to assure that adequateinformation, and access to properties, is made available to clearinghousesand eligible buyers on a timely basis. C. By March 30, 1990, develop a strategy for actively marketing eligibleproperties for sale to qualifying individuals and organizations. D. By March 30, 1990, develop and implement procedures for qualifying low-and moderate-income households, non-profit organizations, and for-profitentities for eligibility as preferred bidders on low-income properties.E. By March 30, 1990, develop guidelines for determining the net realizablemarket value of eligible properties. F. By March 30, 1990, develop and implement guidelines for choosing amongsubstantially similar competing bids for single-family properties, consistentwith the objectives of the low-income housing provisions and with the statutorydirective that the RTC should choose among substantially similar bids formultifamily properties those offers that propose to house more lower incomefamilies for longer periods of time. G. By March 30, 1990, develop procedures for coordinating RTC dispositionof eligible residential properties with programs at HUD (including FHAand GNMA), the Farmers Home Administration, and other government agenciesand organizations. H. By June 29, 1990, in consultation with HUD, develop written guidelinesfor conveyance of assets  to state and local government agencies and otheragencies and organizations participating in HUD's urban homesteading programs.I. By June 29, 1990, in consultation with HUD and state housing financeagencies, establish procedures to assure compliance of multi-family residentialproperty owners with the low-income occupancy requirements. J. By March 30, 1990, provide the Oversight Board with issues and alternativesregarding financing the purchase of low- and moderate-income housing. K. Consult with the national and regional advisory boards about strategiesfor meeting the low-income housing goal. L. Consult with the Federal Housing Finance Board about methods for coordinating,to the extent practical, the affordable housing program and the CommunityReinvestment Program.M. By March 30, 1990, establish guidelines for determining whether eligibleproperties should be sold individually or in bulk, including an evaluationof savings on disposition costs that may justify price discounts on bulksales. N. By March 30, 1990, establish written guidelines for determining if thevalue of an asset is so low that no reasonable recovery is anticipated.In such cases, the RTC may consider potential public uses, such as housingfor lower-income families (including the homeless), urban open space, daycare centers for the children of low- and moderate-income families, andother public purposes designated by the Secretary of Housing and UrbanDevelopment. <T3>Objective 2.</T3> Fully document affordable housing activities to ensurecompliance with all relevant statutory requirements. <T3>Implementation Procedures:</T3> A. By December 29, 1989, in consultationwith the Oversight Board and the Congress, determine the extent of informationrequired to be reported under the provisions of FIRREA and for full andcomplete disclosure of affordable housing activities. B. By March 30, 1990, develop and implement, to the extent possible, semiannualand other periodic reports that present information in clear and consistentformats. D. Conflicts of Interest and Ethical Standards <T3>Goal:</T3> Adopt conflicts of interest and ethical standards for RTCemployees, officers, advisory board members, contractors, and agents. <T3>Objective 1.</T3> Develop regulations and procedures that: andbullet; Govern conflicts of interest, ethical responsibilities, post-employmentrestrictions and use of confidential information for RTC employees, officers,advisory board members, contractors, and agents and andbullet; Ensure that RTC employees, officers, advisory board members, contractors,and agents meet appropriate competence, experience, integrity, and fitnessstandards. <T3>Implementation Procedure:</T3> Final regulations should be promulgatedwithin 180 days of enactment of FIRREA. <T3>Objective 2.</T3> Develop policies and procedures for avoiding politicalfavoritism and undue influence in RTC activities and decisions. <T3>Implementation Procedure:</T3> By March 30, 1990, the RTC will developspecific written policies and procedures that draw upon current FDIC policiesand that delineate internal operating procedures and methods for respondingto inquiries from those who are or have been in political office.E. External Relations <T3>Goal: </T3>Establish and maintain open communications with the Congress,other government offices, and the public to increase understanding of RTCpolicies and actions. <T3>Objective 1: </T3>Promote public understanding of the RTC's policiesand actions. <T3>Implementation Procedures: </T3>A. As soon as possible, but no laterthan March 30, 1990, develop written policies and procedures concerning:andbullet; providing timely responses to public inquiries; andbullet; the RTC's working relationship with the National and RegionalAdvisory Boards; andbullet; mechanisms for accepting general complaints and mechanisms foraccepting complaints of discrimination on the basis of race, sex or ethnicgroup in the solicitation and consideration of offers, as required by FIRREA.B. Report to Congress on the operations of the RTC as required. The Congressionally-mandatedreporting requirements included in Title V of FIRREA are listed in theAppendix to this plan. C. Prepare other reports requested by the Congress on a timely basis. Objective 2: As necessary, consult with other government offices in developingpolicies and procedures. <T3>Implementation Procedures: </T3>As needed, create or participate oninteragency working groups to resolve interagency issues. F. Administration <T3>Goal: </T3>Assure that the RTC has sufficient and effectively managedhuman and financial resources to achieve the mission and the goals of theagency. <T3>Objective 1: </T3>Assure that the RTC's resources are effectively managedto respond properly and promptly to the agency's needs and priorities.<T3>Implementation Procedures: </T3>A. Annually, develop and present tothe Oversight Board an operating plan and budget, including a staffingplan, for the upcoming calendar year. The operating plan and budget for1990 must be submitted to the Oversight Board 60 calendar days from theissuance date of this strategic plan. Subsequent annual budgets shall bepresented to the Oversight Board by November 30. B. Quarterly, the RTC will reassess the allocation of resources and makeadjustments. <T3>Objective 2: </T3>Ensure fiscal responsibility for operations. <T3>Implementation Procedures: </T3>A. As required by FIRREA, provide theOversight Board with periodic financing requests for prior approval thatdetail: a) anticipated funding requirements for operations including, caseresolutions, high cost funds replacement, liquidity advances, administrativeexpenses and asset disposition; b) anticipated payments on previously issuednotes, guarantees, other obligations, and related activities; and c) anyproposed use of notes, guarantees or other obligations. Such financingrequests shall be submitted on a quarterly basis or such other period asthe Oversight Board determines necessary. B. Manage assets under RTC jurisdiction and working capital in order toallow case resolutions to proceed at a rate that minimizes the net presentvalue cost to the RTC and the American taxpayer. C. As soon as practicable, after approval by the Oversight Board, establishthe systems and procedures to implement the working capital program. <T3>Objective 3: </T3>Respond to required reports in a timely and efficientmanner. <T3>Implementation Procedures: </T3>A. By December 29, 1989, in consultationwith the Oversight Board and Congress, streamline the process for respondingto the various reporting requirements imposed on the RTC by Congress, theOversight Board, and others, to the extent possible. B. As required by FIRREA, respond to requests from the Oversight Boardfor any reports, documents, and records that it deems necessary to carryout its oversight responsibilities.<T3>Objective 4: </T3>Appraise operations within the RTC, including cooperatingfully in independent audits, to assist the Board of Directors and managementin ensuring an efficient, economical, and effective application of resources.<T3>Implementation Procedures: </T3>A. By March 30, 1990, the RTC Boardof Directors and senior management should develop management processesdesigned to ensure compliance with policies, laws, rules and regulations.At a minimum, these processes should address planning, policy making, personnel,administration, and management information systems. B. Cooperate fully in the audits performed by the Inspector General. C. Cooperate fully in the annual audit performed by the Comptroller General,or other independent certified public accountant selected by the OversightBoard, as required by FIRREA. D. Cooperate fully in periodic reviews and audits of RTC activities performedby the Oversight Board in fulfilling its responsibility for reviewing theoverall performance of the RTC, including its work, management activities,and internal controls, and the performance of the RTC relative to approvedbudget plans as required by FIRREA. E. Within 60 days of receiving any audit or review, develop follow-up proceduresto ensure that deficiencies and recommendations cited in audits and reviewsby the Inspector General, Comptroller General, Oversight Board, publicaccounting firms or others, receive appropriate corrective action. <ITAG tagnum="84">Appendix to the Strategic Plan_ FIRREA, Title V Reporting and DisclosureObligations for the Resolution Trust Corporation </ITAG>The following reporting requirements are from Title V of the FinancialInstitutions Reform, Recovery, and Enforcement Act of 1989 (Pub. L. No.101-73, Section 501, 103 Stat. 183, 363-94) (``FIRREA''). All referencesto Section 21A, are to Section 21A of the Federal Home Loan Bank Act (12U.S.C. 1441a), as added by Section 501(a) of FIRREA. 1. The RTC shall make available to the public: andbullet; Any agreement by the RTC relating to a transaction that providesassistance pursuant to section 13(c) of the Federal Deposit Insurance Act(``section 13(c)''), not later than 30 days after the first meeting ofthe Oversight Board after such agreement is entered into; and andbullet; All agreements relating to the RTC's review of prior cases pursuantto subsection (b)(11)(B) of 21A. ``Agreement'' includes: (a) All documents that effectuate the terms andconditions of the assisted transaction; (b) a comparison by the RTC ofthe estimated cost of the transaction with the estimated cost of liquidatingthe insured institution, and (c) a description of any economic or statisticalassumptions on which such estimates are based. The Oversight Board may withhold public disclosure if it determines bya unanimous vote that disclosure would be contrary to the public interest.A written report containing a full explanation of the reasons for sucha determination must be published in the <T4>Federal Register</T4> and transmitted to the House and Senate BankingCommittees. Section 21A(k)(2) (A), (B), and (C) 2. The RTC shall make available to the House and Senate Banking Committeesany agreement by the RTC relating to a transaction for which the RTC providessection 13(c) assistance not later than 25 days after the first meetingof the Oversight Board after such agreement is entered into. This requirementis in addition to the RTC's obligation to make such agreements publiclyavailable.Section 21A(k)(3)(A) 3. The RTC shall submit a report to the Oversight Board and the Congresscontaining the results and conclusions of the review of 1988 and 1989 FSLICtransactions (pursuant to subsection (b)(11)(B) of 21A) and recommendationsfor legislative action that the RTC may determine to be appropriate. Section 21A(k)(3)(B) 4. The RTC's Real Estate Asset Division shall publish before January 1,1990 an inventory of real property assets of institutions subject to thejurisdiction of the RTC. The inventory must be updated semiannually andmust identify properties with natural, cultural, recreational, or scientificvalues of special significance. Section 21A(b)(12)(F) 5. Annually, the Comptroller General shall audit the financial statementsof the RTC unless the Comptroller General notifies the Oversight Boardnot later than 180 days before the close of a fiscal year that it willnot perform an audit for that fiscal year. In that event, the OversightBoard must contract with an independent certified public accountant toperform the annual audit. All books, records, accounts, reports, files,and property belonging to or used by the RTC, or the Oversight Board, orby an independent certified public accountant retained to audit the RTC'sfinancial statement, shall be made available to the Comptroller General.Sections 21A(k)(1) (A) and (B) 6. The Inspector General of the RTC shall comply with the reporting requirementsimposed on the Inspector General pursuant to the Inspector General Actof 1978, as amended. Section 501(b) of FIRREA 7. The RTC shall: (i) Document decisions made in the solicitation and selectionprocess and the reasons for the decisions; and (ii) maintain such documentationin the offices of the RTC, as well as any other documentation relatingto the solicitation and selection process. Section 21A(b)(12)(C) 8. The Oversight Board and the RTC shall annually submit a full reportof their respective operations, activities, budgets, receipts, and expendituresfor the preceding 12-month period. The RTC shall submit the annual reportto Congress and the President as soon as practicable after the end of thecalendar year for which the report is made, but not later than June 30of the year following that calendar year. The report shall include: andbullet; Audited statements and such information as is necessary to makeknown the financial condition and operations of the RTC in accordance withgenerally accepted accounting principles; andbullet; The RTC's financial operating plans and forecasts (including budgets,estimates of actual and future spending and cash obligations) taking intoaccount the Corporation's financial commitments, guarantees, and othercontingent liabilities; andbullet; The number of minority and women investors participating in thebidding process for  assisted acquisitions and the disposition of assetsand the number of successful bids by such investors; and andbullet; A list of the properties sold to State housing finance authorities(as such term is defined in section 1301 of FIRREA), the individual purchaseprices of such properties, and an estimate of the premium paid by suchauthorities for such properties. Sections 21A(k)(4) (A), (B), and (C) 9. The Oversight Board and the RTC shall submit to Congress not later thanApril 30 and October 31 of each calendar year, a semiannual report on theactivities and efforts of the RTC, the FDIC, and the Oversight Board forthe 6-month period ending on the last day of the month prior to the monthin which such report is required to be submitted. The report shall includethe following information with respect to the RTC's assets and liabilitiesand to the assets and liabilities of institutions for which the RTC isor has been the conservator or receiver:andbullet; The total book value of all assets held or managed by the RTCat the beginning and end of the reporting period; andbullet; The total book value of assets that are under contract to be managedby private persons and entities at the beginning and end of the reportingperiod; andbullet; The number of employees of the Corporation, the Federal DepositInsurance Corporation, and the Oversight Board at the beginning and endof the reporting period; andbullet; The total amounts expended on employee wages, salaries, and overhead,during such period that are attributable to: (a) contracting with, supervising,or reviewing the performance of private contractors, or (b) managing ordisposing of such assets; andbullet; The total amount expended on private contractors for the managementof such assets; andbullet; The efforts of the RTC to maximize the efficient utilization ofthe resources of the private sector during the reporting period and infuture reporting periods and a description of the policies and proceduresadopted to ensure adequate competition and fair and consistent treatmentof qualified third parties seeking to provide services to the RTC or theFederal Deposit Insurance Corporation; andbullet; The total book value and total proceeds from such assets disposedof during the reporting period; andbullet; Summary data on discounts from book value at which such assetswere sold or otherwise disposed of during the reporting period. andbullet; A list of all of the areas that carried a distressed area designationduring the reporting period (including a justification for removal of areasfrom or addition of areas to the list of distressed areas); andbullet; An evaluation of market conditions in distressed areas and a descriptionof any changes in conditions during the reporting period; andbullet; Any change adopted by the Oversight Board in the minimum dispositionprice and the reasons for such change; and, andbullet; The valuation method or methods adopted by the Oversight Boardor the RTC to value assets and the reasons for selecting such methods.Sections 21A(k)(5) (A) and (B) 10. Before January 31, 1990, the Oversight Board and the RTC shall appearbefore the House and Senate Banking Committees to: andbullet; Describe the strategic plan established for the operations ofthe RTC; andbullet; Describe the policies and procedures established or proposed tobe established for the RTC, including specific measures taken to avoidpolitical favoritism or undue influence with respect to the activitiesof the RTC; andbullet; Provide any regulation proposed to be prescribed by the RTC; andandbullet; Provide the proposed case resolution schedule. Sections 21A(k)(7) (A) and (B)   <ITAG tagnum="6">Daniel P. Kearney, </ITAG><ITAG tagnum="4">President and Chief Executive Officer.</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="40">[FR Doc. 89-25990 Filed 11-2-89; 8:45 am]</ITAG><ITAG tagnum="68">BILLING CODE 4810-25-M </ITAG></ITAG></ITAG></TEXT></DOC>