<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880107-0048 </DOCNO><HL> Currency Dare: Central Banks Gamble In Propping the Dollar Without Policy Steps --- They Sense a Pause in Its Fall And Bet the U.S. Deficit In Trade Will Narrow --- At Risk: Their Credibility </HL><AUTHOR> Walter S. Mossberg and Charles W. Stevens (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN EUROP CANDA </CO><IN> MON FRX BNK ECO FIN </IN><G> FED TRE EXE </G><TEXT>   Trying to resuscitate the battered dollar, the major industrial powers are taking a big gamble: They are spending a lot of money to prop up the greenback without making any new, sweeping economic-policy changes that might help erase the huge U.S. trade deficit.    The strategy could make them look very savvy and potent, or it could cost them billions of dollars and precious credibility, perhaps as soon as the end of next week.    According to senior U.S. officials, that gamble is based on two major assumptions. One is that many currency-market players themselves were sensing that the dollar was nearing a logical bottom in its slide or at least temporary plateau; thus, the governments, in acting, would be reinforcing market sentiment and not futilely trying to run against it. And the other is that the long string of dismal monthly figures on U.S. merchandise trade, measured in dollars, would start looking better soon.    So far, anyone betting on further declines in the dollar has been hurt. Since hitting record lows of 120.25 yen and 1.5630 West German marks in early Far East trading Monday, the U.S. currency has bounced back sharply. Yesterday in late New York trading, the dollar stood at 129.50 yen and 1.6470 marks, both up more than 1% from the day before.    &quot;This puts pressure on the gurus who have been forecasting {that the dollar would reach} 120, 110, 100 yen,&quot; says Scott E. Pardee, vice chairman of Yamaichi Securities Co. in New York. However, if the report on the November U.S. merchandise-trade deficit, which is due out Jan. 15, looks bad, the dollar could plunge again.    The strategy was agreed upon secretly by officials of the Group of Seven countries in late November and early December but not announced until an unusual communique was issued on the night of Dec. 22. The communique offered none of the fiscal or monetary steps -- higher U.S. interest rates, additional cuts in the U.S. budget deficit or new measures to stimulate European economies -- that many economists say should push up the dollar. Nevertheless, the G-7 declared that &quot;a further decline of the dollar . . . could be counterproductive&quot; and hinted that the governments would intervene in markets to buy dollars to support that view.    The central banks began buying billions of dollars on the currency markets to prop up the greenback. At first, they seemed to be failing as the dollar kept sliding. But after hitting record lows early Monday in Tokyo, the U.S. currency has surged, driven by an aggressive and unusually visible central-bank campaign. The Federal Reserve has even discovered the influence of television. One currency trader at a major bank says he was &quot;staggered&quot; when a Fed official encouraged him to spell out in a TV interview the central bank's recent trading activity.    Another bank trader attributes the dollar's rebound to Fed officials' increased openness about their activities. &quot;They're trying to get the biggest bang for the buck right now,&quot; the trader says. &quot;They want people to run out and say, 'The Fed's buying, the Fed's buying.' That's what's significantly different about the Fed's intervention this year.&quot;    Without underlying policy changes, however, the central banks' purchases of dollars to prop up the price might not work for long, especially if the U.S. merchandise-trade report for November, due out a week from tomorrow, looks bad. If that report, or anything else, stokes bearish sentiment, the governments' buying could be swamped by sell orders. The consequent loss of central-bank credibility not only could affect 1988 trade and economic developments but also could wound the governments in their longer-term efforts to exercise some control over the value of their free-floating currencies.    &quot;They know they have no major policy ammunition in their holsters right now; so they've resorted to financial engineering,&quot; says C. Fred Bergsten, a Washington economist who, during the Carter administration, was involved in intervention to prop the dollar. &quot;Whether it works is subject to the breaks of the game, things like the release of statistics. If next week's trade figures look bad to people, the governments are going to lose in a big way.&quot;    An especially bad report on October trade, issued Dec. 10, shocked the governments but also reinforced their hope that the Jan. 15 report couldn't help but look better and bolster their campaign to raise the dollar's value.    &quot;We think it's becoming risky for traders to bet against the dollar,&quot; said one high official involved in the effort. And last night, appearing on the Cable News Network program &quot;Moneyline,&quot; Federal Reserve Board Governor Wayne Angell warned that &quot;central banks have very deep pockets&quot; when it comes to currency-market intervention. He added that intervention can get results &quot;if the markets interpret central-bank action as being concerted and firm and positive.&quot;    The communique from the G-7 countries -- the U.S., Japan, Germany, Britain, France, Italy and Canada -- represented a change in U.S. policy, which had been to permit a dollar decline after the stock-market crash and focus economic policy on avoiding a recession. By December, Treasury Secretary James Baker and members of the Federal Reserve Board reached the conclusion that the dollar had fallen too far, officials say.    The G-7 statement didn't imply any U.S. commitment to raise interest rates to make the dollar more attractive to hold, but it didn't rule out such a step. That was a change from early November, when Mr. Baker voiced opposition to increasing interest rates to support the dollar in an interview with The Wall Street Journal.    Nevertheless, the high U.S. officials make it clear that both the Federal Reserve and Secretary Baker remain opposed to raising U.S. interest rates as part of a dollar-propping effort. Both the Fed and the Reagan administration are still concerned that higher rates could spark a recession, and neither yet believes that the plummeting dollar has produced significant signs of inflation. All bets would be off in a dollar free fall, especially with its danger of inflation -- but the officials don't expect such a plunge.    The officials said that, in connection with the Dec. 22 pact, the U.S., Germany and Japan have decided to try to keep the dollar within a rough range. The bottom of the range is somewhat below the level of 126.4 yen that prevailed on the night of Dec. 22, and the top is said to be far above even levels attained in the past few days -- possibly as high as the 150-yen range that prevailed at the time of last February's Louvre Accord on currencies, which preceded the Dec. 22 pact.    The officials stressed that the range is flexible and deliberately imprecise and could be revised depending on the countries' assessments of economic fundamentals. U.S. policy makers dismissed out of hand yesterday's Japanese TV news report placing the top end at 140 yen. The American officials said the countries would be comfortable with a significantly stronger dollar than the news report implied.    Without higher U.S. interest rates or major new economic policies in the U.S. and Germany, the G-7 governments are left with only relatively weak weapons -- intervention and public statements -- to get the dollar where they want it. And, for a while, they seemed to be blowing it.    Between Dec. 22 and New Year's Day, the greenback fell about 5% despite sizable central-bank intervention in thin currency markets. American officials and traders now ascribe the decline to two main factors: the Fed's lack of convincing visibility in the markets and public statements by Chief White House Economic Adviser Beryl Sprinkel. Mr. Sprinkel publicly stressed that the G-7 statement didn't commit the U.S. to raise interest rates and didn't refer, as the Louvre Accord had, to supporting the dollar around &quot;current levels.&quot; The Sprinkel remarks fueled market concerns that the communique was weak.    Officials in the Treasury and the Fed reminded American reporters that Mr. Sprinkel isn't a major participant in U.S. international economic policy and wasn't involved in drafting the G-7 accord; that task was handled for the U.S. by Secretary Baker and Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan. But in the markets, and especially overseas, the quick public playing down of the pact by the president's chief economist undercut it severely. Mr. Sprinkel couldn't be reached for comment.    &quot;The communique simply wasn't taken seriously by the market as an indication of a significant policy shift,&quot; says John Lipsky, an international economist at Salomon Brothers. He believes that the market focused on Washington's reluctance to raise interest rates rather than on its willingness to do &quot;enough intervention to hold the fort.&quot;    To compensate, the Fed this week has taken unusual steps to ensure that its intervention is both visible and recognized as unusually aggressive.    Market watchers estimate that total central-bank intervention this week has exceeded $3 billion. The Bank of Japan, the Fed and the West German Bundesbank all have played major roles, buying dollars and selling other currencies, traders add. In addition, the Bank of England, the Swiss central bank and other European central banks have chimed in as well.    Currency traders say the usually secretive Fed is suddenly welcoming publicity about its big dollar purchases to shore up the U.S. currency. The Fed also is hitting the market with a relentless stream of dollar-buy orders, rather than its previous strategy of letting the markets settle down before buying dollars again. And the size of individual Fed transactions has grown as well, causing commercial-bank traders to give the Fed new-found respect.    David J. Reason, a Chemical Bank vice president, says Fed traders &quot;seem to be a little more open&quot; about the U.S. government's currency-trading strategy. &quot;They are certainly more visible in the market and don't mind the banks discussing it in the press.&quot;    In a sign of the Fed's new aggressiveness, the central bank on Monday morning telephoned Chemical Bank's New York trading headquarters, asked for a dollar/mark exchange rate and bought $25 million. That was more than double the usual $10 million lot in which the Fed trades. During the day, the Fed mixed the size of its orders, dealing in both $10 million and $25 million lots. And it used a variety of banks, including Citibank, the largest U.S. currency trader.    The $25 million order &quot;made it clear to us that they want to hold&quot; the dollar, a Chemical trader says. He adds that in the past decade there have been only two major turning points like the huge Fed intervention this month. One was in November 1978, when the Fed intervened to lift the dollar from its lows during the Carter administration. The other was in September 1985, when the U.S. and its allies agreed to seek a lower dollar.    &quot;The central banks have really shown their resolve to stop the dollar from falling,&quot; the Chemical Bank trader adds. &quot;At the minimum, they've bought some time until the {November U.S.} trade figures come in. But if the trade deficit is $15 billion or more, they've only bought themselves two weeks.&quot;    The monthly trade figures for release next week will be measured against the stunning $17.6 billion deficit for October reported last month -- which Fed Chairman Greenspan has publicly called an &quot;aberration.&quot; But it will also have to be lower than market analysts' expectations to be of strong help to the governments' efforts. And those expectations range from $14 billion to $15.5 billion.    U.S. officials are optimistic the trade figures will soon turn around in dollar terms because they have been gradually improving for months in terms of the physical volumes, as the lower dollar has caused exports to rise and imports to ease. They believe that the trend is bound to show soon in the monthly dollar-denominated trade figures. For this to happen, the improvement will have to be strong enough to offset a built-in distortion in these figures, which aren't adjusted for seasonal variations or inflation. They thus tend to overstate the deficit when the dollar has been dropping, because the declining dollar raises the reported price -- in dollar terms -- of any given volume of imports.    Former Carter Treasury official Bergsten, who now heads the Institute for International Economics in Washington, says a figure of less than $14 billion &quot;would look very good for the governments in the short term.&quot; But he says it wouldn't change the fundamentally gloomy trade picture because &quot;it still leaves a massive level of imbalance of $150 billion a year or so.&quot;    &quot;They're playing a short-run strategy,&quot; Mr. Bergsten says. &quot;But I think it's probably a gamble worth taking. Suppose they hadn't done this and the new year had dawned with lingering bearish sentiment but no new G-7 statement or intervention. Then, you could have a real sharp fall in January, a scary scenario. In a sense, they're running it up towards 130 or 140 yen to avoid seeing it fall to 100.&quot;    A trader at a major New York bank adds that the Fed's sustained purchases of dollars earlier this week, even while the currency's value rose, departed from the central bank's past practice of letting the dollar slip back down before re-entering the market to provide additional support. &quot;Now, when they push it up, you can't be sure that it'll come back down again because the next time the phone rings, it could be the Fed wanting more dollars,&quot; he says.    Nonetheless, Yamaichi's Mr. Pardee, who once ran foreign-currency operations for the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, says, &quot;Markets will only listen to intervention when central bankers are punishing speculators.&quot; That requires a combination of surprise and sheer might. &quot;The surprise effect of the Fed showing up in Far Eastern markets on Jan. 4, the first day of trading -- where they hadn't been in years -- was an effective way of getting the markets' attention,&quot; he says.    Furthermore, Mr. Pardee says the Bundesbank is especially respected in the market because of the West German central bank's past ability to intervene effectively. &quot;They will come in and hit the market hard on a dime,&quot; he says.    If the G-7 countries can restore a measure of stability to the dollar, it would mark a return to the situation that largely prevailed under the Louvre Accord from February 1987 until the stock-market crash. During that period, the dollar's value was held relatively stable with the help of costly intervention, tighter U.S. monetary policy, and expanding consumer buying in Japan.    But the pact fell apart in October as the monetary policies of the U.S. and Germany diverged, and many economists now say it was too rigid and locked the countries into untenable positions. In the new agreement, dollar ranges are more imprecise and flexible, officials suggest.    However, the new approach raises questions. One is how long Germany and Japan will be willing to intervene to support the dollar. When the Bundesbank and Bank of Japan sell marks and yen, respectively, to buy dollars, they automatically expand their money supply. Last year, both countries tightened monetary policy to counteract the inflationary effects of their growing money supplies. That, in turn, lifted their currencies against the dollar and led to political confrontations with the U.S.    Nevertheless, the U.S. remains convinced that, with the right conditions, coordinated intervention can work to nudge the dollar up or down. The new G-7 approach is another sign that the Reagan administration has moved far away from its first-term exchange-rate policy, which was to keep hands off the markets.    To persuade markets that the U.S. is determined to defend the dollar, Mr. Pardee says &quot;it is absolutely necessary that everyone in the Reagan administration keeps his or her mouth shut or supports the policy.&quot;    ----   Michael R. Sesit contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>