<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880909-0153 </DOCNO><HL> Phone Firms Battle Cable-TV Operators Over Providing Fiber-Optic Home Links </HL><AUTHOR> Julie Amparano and Mary Lu Carnevale (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> NYN BEL BLS SBC USW PAC AIT </CO><IN> TEL </IN><G> JUS </G><TEXT>   Most Americans will have to wait years -- perhaps decades -- for their homes to be wired as communications hubs. For now, piping a vast array of information and entertainment services, including cable-television programs and movies, through a single, all-purpose hookup is still just a vision.    The problem isn't lack of technology; the fiber optics and other equipment are ready to go, soon to be tested in tiny communities such as Perryopolis, Pa. But for the rest of the country, the future is on hold because cable-TV operators and regional telephone companies are fighting over the right to provide the services. The two sides, now making their cases to Congress and regulators, can't even agree on the scope and design of the new offerings.    The telephone companies say they should provide and manage the network because they serve almost all American homes, compared with about 50% for cable. They also argue that they have been experimenting with fiber-optics technology for more than a decade, while most cable companies are just beginning to research fiber applications. But to justify the cost of installing fiber-optic lines, the phone companies say, they must be allowed to compete in the cable-television market as well as in voice and data transmission.    Federal law currently bars any regional telephone company from providing television service in its territory. In July, though, the Federal Communications Commission tentatively proposed lifting this ban. The FCC says the change, subject to final clearance by the commission and approval by Congress, would stimulate competition, creating new services and more cable TV options for consumers.    But cable operators say the phone companies would have unfair advantages in the field. James P. Mooney, president of the National Cable Television Association, argues that the phone companies would use their monopoly power and deep pockets for predatory pricing and for subsidizing their cable ventures. And though the cable operators are relative newcomers to fiber optics, they say they'll be just as ready as the phone companies to provide the technology by the time there's any substantial demand for it.    The stakes, while difficult to measure, are high. Cable operators had 1987 revenue of $12 billion. With the fiber-optic technology, revenue could jump because of new services and greater market penetration, especially if the phone companies become the providers. Installing the technology would take five to 10 years, according to phone company estimates.    Optical fiber cable, made of very thin strands of glass or other transparent material, transmits data, images and sound in digital form with greater accuracy and clarity than copper wire. It also has much more capacity: Pacific Telesis Group is testing a fiber system that can deliver billions of bits a second, compared with just over 64,000 bits a second for copper wire. Fiber's capacity makes practical a much greater number and wider variety of services. What's more, some services that fiber optics can handle easily just can't be transmitted over copper wire, including various high-speed data services and high-definition television, which delivers pictures as clear as 35mm film and sound quality rivaling that of a compact disk.    Customers without personal computers could take advantage of some information services on a fiber hookup, such as conducting transactions in their bank accounts and placing orders at local merchants; using more intricate data bases and sending electronic mail would still require PCs.    Because their systems are structured differently from cable operators', the phone companies could easily offer video programming on demand. This would let customers, for example, select and watch movies from home whenever they want, with either the phone companies or third parties as program providers. Before ordering a specific film, consumers also could dial up newspaper or television reviews, or even preview film clips. Cable companies could only offer programming on demand by restructuring their entire networks, which they aren't expected to do.    All seven regional Bell companies are eager to jump into the cable-TV market. &quot;It has phenomenal growth,&quot; says Sam L. Ginn, chairman and chief executive of San Francisco-based Pacific Telesis. &quot;It's a business that we know and understand.&quot;    Congress barred telephone companies from the cable-television market in 1970 because it feared the phone monopolies would thwart the growth of cable. But the phone companies say the cable industry is now big enough to withstand competition.    &quot;What's in the public's best interest?&quot; asks John R. Gunter, vice president of information services for Atlanta-based BellSouth Corp. &quot;There's only one supplier now. Competition would give consumers more choice.&quot; Many municipalities, weary of battling their local cable franchises over everything from prices to slow installation to programming, agree with Mr. Gunter.    But some cable officials say the phone companies, rather than stimulating competition, would drive current cable operators out of business. Robert Thomson, a vice president at Englewood, Colo.-based TeleCommunications Inc., asks, &quot;How can a cable company compete against a competitor eight times its size?&quot; Tele-Communications, the largest cable-TV operator, had 1987 revenue of $1.71 billion, compared with $9.13 billion for Pacific Telesis.    Despite their late start, cable operators say they're close to being able to build a fiber-optic superhighway themselves. But they also argue that the matter isn't urgent. Lynn McReynolds, a spokeswoman for the National Cable TV Association, says consumer demand for the services that would be available on such a network isn't great enough now to justify a fiber-optics network.    Phone company executives predict a long wait before the cable industry is opened up, because cable operators wield a lot of power in Congress. In the meantime, many phone officials say, they will seek joint ventures and cooperative arrangements with cable companies, rather than head-to-head competition.    Some executives envision the phone companies providing fiber optics and billing systems that cable programmers would use to transmit their programs -- giving consumers a bigger selection and providing upstart programmers with an easier entry into a market that usually requires tremendous capital outlays to build a network. But cable operators oppose even this limited role by the phone companies, saying it would open the door to further penetration in television.    Congress is expected to begin hearings on the FCC proposal as early as this fall. If Congress fails to act, the FCC may start issuing waivers allowing individual telephone companies to offer cable services, though in the past waivers have gone mainly to telephone companies seeking to provide cable services in rural areas where no cable operator wanted to go.    Even if they got clearance from Congress or waivers from the FCC, the phone companies still would need approval to offer cable services from federal judge Harold Greene, who oversees the accord under which the Bell System was broken up in 1984. Although he has eased his supervision considerably, he said in a recent speech that he doesn't accept the regional phone companies' view that they could stimulate competition in forbidden markets.    That, he said, is a bit like assuming that &quot;the addition of a wolf to a flock of sheep would maximize competition in the flock, or that the full-fledged participation of Citicorp or Chase Manhattan in Boise, Idaho, would increase banking competition in that city.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>