<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870401-0121 </DOCNO><HL> Grievous Work:Job of Shop StewardHas New FrustrationsIn Era of Payroll Cuts---At Inland Steel, Alan MoseleyFaces Technology FightsAnd Flak of Co-Workers---Bridge Over a Widening Gulf---By Alex KotlowitzStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR IADMINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN) </IN><DATELINE> EAST CHICAGO, Ind.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Alan Moseley, still sweating from his workday in the steel mill, lumbers into the office of United Steelworkers Local 1010 and slams his briefcase down in frustration.    Mr. Moseley is a union &quot;griever,&quot; or shop steward as he would be called in some unions, handling union members' complaints against his employer, Inland Steel Industries Inc. His frustration at the time results from a year of sometimes rancorous talks with Inland over whether eight new jobs in its plant should go to union or salaried workers.    Yanking the complaint from his bulging briefcase, he grouses that a tentative agreement is meeting resistance from his own members. &quot;It's total unrest out there,&quot; Mr. Moseley says, gesturing toward Inland's sprawling mill down the street. &quot;It's a daily battle over jobs.&quot;    Mr. Moseley and others like him are on the front lines of a growing battle for control of the shop floor. American industry's drive to cut costs through layoffs, new technology and work-rule changes has fostered frustration and mistrust among blue-collar workers. Unions are fighting back.    Grievers and shop stewards are at the center of this storm. As the face and voice of the union on the shop floor, Mr. Moseley combats the loss of jobs amid a rising backlog of increasingly complex grievances. And as the bridge across the widening chasm between labor and management, he frequently draws attacks from both.    &quot;The griever is getting hit from all sides,&quot; says Ruth Needleman, who teaches classes for grievers at Indiana University.    At the same time, grievers are considered critical to the future of management and labor alike. The battle over jobs &quot;boils down to a struggle for survival&quot; for both the company and the union, says Thomas J. Raleigh, a Dallas management consultant. Adds William Boehler, the head of labor relations at Inland's steelmaking facility: &quot;We can't do a thing without the support of the grievers.&quot;    In fact, Inland enjoys better relations with its union than other, more troubled steelmakers. USX Corp., for instance, recently weathered an acrimonious six-month strike. Of Inland's dealings with its workers, Mr. Boehler says, &quot;We hope we have bottomed.&quot; Top union leaders agree.    Nevertheless, worries about losing their jobs haunt workers at Inland. The company's vast Indiana Harbor Works, a 3.6-mile-long stretch of cavernous buildings and billowing smokestacks, continually sprouts new machines, computers and other labor-saving devices that eliminate blue-collar jobs.    As employment declines and workers complain of being worked too hard, the backlog of grievances against the company has jumped nearly 50% from a year ago. Some workers vent their wrath on the union: Last year, workers cut the brake lines of one griever's car. Another was punched out at a union meeting.    Such incidents reflect a broad blue-collar restlessness, some labor experts say. &quot;What we're looking at could be a slow-burning fuse that has explosive power somewhere down the road,&quot; says Harley Shaiken, a labor specialist at the University of California at San Diego.    Mr. Moseley's recent struggle over the eight new jobs at Inland reflects the deep tension. As his negotiations with the company dragged on, workers grew angry at the delay. Last summer, they circulated a cartoon depicting Mr. Moseley as a fat hog with a hoof in the company's till. Enraged, Mr. Moseley telephoned dozens of members but failed to find out who distributed the cartoon.    &quot;You've got to have a leather hide in this business, but that hurt me,&quot; the 41-year-old Mr. Moseley says.    After more than a year of effort, Mr. Moseley in February finally worked out a compromise with the company: Inland promised to let union members take four of the eight jobs in a new automated steeltesting laboratory.    Union members approved the plan at a recent meeting, but not before an angry worker accused Mr. Moseley of cutting a sweetheart deal with the company. &quot;That's completely untrue,&quot; he boomed, lumbering red-faced across the room to shake a finger in his critic's face.    &quot;I feel like I'm supposed to be a panacea&quot; for both the company and the union, Mr. Moseley says with a sigh.    Union work hasn't always been so pressured. Job-security worries were nonexistent in the steel industry when Mr. Moseley passed up a baseball scholarship in 1964 to join Inland. Seduced like his father before him by the mill's high pay and camaraderie, he became a steelworker at the age of 18 and was soon elected an assistant griever. Back then, most grievances concerned the company's efforts to discipline its young and rambunctious work force.    Mr. Moseley admits he was always loud and irascible. He and his partner, Donald Lutes, both heavyweights, were known as the &quot;two tons of fun.&quot; Mr. Moseley once slammed the door of a plant superintendent's office with such force that a picture did a pirouette on the wall, Mr. Lutes recalls.    Mr. Moseley still bellows when a nod would do. But for the most part, work as a griever today is &quot;a totally different ball game,&quot; he says. Imports, high labor costs and weak demand thrust Inland's results into the red for four consecutive years, a losing streak that only ended with last year's $19.3 million profit. At the same time, an ambitious modernization program earned Inland a reputation as one of the most efficient domestic steel producers.    Unlike other steelmakers, Inland's facilities are all in one location here at Indian Harbor, an area twice the size of New York's Central Park. The mill is so huge that Mr. Moseley, who labors for about $16 an hour as a quality inspector in a small, dimly lit room, has never seen steel made.    Inside the mill's rumbling buildings, the lives of workers and their union representatives have irrevocably altered. Employment has plunged 40% since 1979 to 11,100. The inspection workers Mr. Moseley represents have dwindled to 350 from 500.    The older work force -- the average age is 40 -- is fighting more furiously than ever to hold on to every job. Many complain that although members accepted temporary 9% wage cuts in 1983, the union has since lost 3,100 jobs. As a result, says Mr. Lutes, now secretary of the union's grievance committee, &quot;The people are scared. They don't trust the company.&quot; Mr. Shaiken of the University of California calls the mood &quot;the post-concession blues.&quot;    The 1983 contract didn't end the concessions, however. With Mr. Moseley on the union negotiating team, the Steelworkers last year accepted a wage freeze and a 40-cent-an-hour cut in benefits in exchange for a profit-sharing plan and improved seniority and pensions systems. The agreement represented a significant retreat by Inland from its initial demands for wage and benefit reductions of $2 an hour. Workers overwhelmingly voted for the contract.    But the morale of some workers remains so low that even minor disputes can become emotionally charged. One night, in the heat and clamor of the mill, a supervisor caught two sleepy workers sprawled on their workbenches and suspended them for a day, leading Mr. Moseley to file a grievance. Sympathetic workers felt they have been toiling harder than ever, and the dissension caused production to drop in subsequent shifts.    &quot;The whole thing stinks,&quot; roars Mr. Moseley, who after several meetings with management on the issue is still contesting the company's suspension of the workers. Inland refuses to comment on pending grievances.    New technology further complicates the griever's job. Inland hired outside lawyers to argue one complex case in which four jobs were at stake. The company contended that only a trained salaried worker could operate a computer that controlled a new heat-treatment machine. &quot;Managements are feeling their oats,&quot; says Clare B. McDermott, the arbitrator who heard the case.    After a 2 1/2-year battle, the union won. Today, the Star Wars-like machinery is operated by blue-collar workers incongruously wearing flannel shirts and jeans in the climate-controlled, glass-enclosed computer room. Inland, however, continues to protest, saying that the arbitrator's decision means it must retain four trained supervisors to oversee the union workers.    Such complex cases consume more and more of the griever's time. A grievance winds through an intricate maze of proceedings that can end up in arbitration, costing the company or the union $5,000 or more. One of Mr. Moseley's pending cases has dragged on since 1983.    The strain of the griever's job takes its toll. Mr. Lutes says the long hours and late-night telephone calls contributed to his divorce. Recently, two of the 24 grievers at Inland quit their $350-a-month union posts, exhausted and disillusioned. Most of the grievers represent individual departments, but Mr. Moseley's jurisdiction includes quality-inspection workers throughout the plant.    Mr. Moseley blames the stress of union work for his 50-pound weight gain in the past couple of years. His sleep is often interrupted by phone calls from workers on the midnight shift. On days off when he handles disputes in the mill, he brings along his wife. But he does much of his work at his home, and his kitchen table has become his office desk so he can spend more time with his wife and three grown children.    But despite all the frustrations and despite a high defeat rate among grievers who seek reelection, Mr. Moseley has continued to run every three years. Shunning the hard-hat decals many candidates pass out, Mr. Moseley laboriously handwrites a letter to each member, asking for his vote.    He continues at this often thankless job, he says, because of the &quot;injustices out there.&quot; He recalls handing out food last Christmas to a long line of laid-off workers: &quot;It made me want to hold on to the jobs I have.&quot; Besides, he adds, &quot;I enjoy defending people. If I had my life to do over, I'd probably be a lawyer.&quot;    Acknowledging the growing demands of the job, unions have intensified their training of grievers. The United Auto Workers union now holds winter and summer shop-steward classes in northern Michigan. The International Association of Machinists now conducts special classes on new technology for stewards and other union representatives.    Both Mr. Moseley and Inland have experimented with new tactics to adapt to the times. Although he had shunned overtures from management in the past, Mr. Moseley recently agreed to participate in some joint efforts, reasoning that he may be able to help the company raise production without erasing jobs.    In an unusual move early in 1986, Inland placed Mr. Moseley in a desk job for five weeks to help plan quality and production increases in one department. &quot;Because of his position as a griever, a lot of his co-workers would buy in&quot; with Mr. Moseley involved in the planning, says Edward Skuse, a plant manager.    Mr. Moseley, worrying that his co-workers might perceive him as being in management's pocket, made an extra effort to keep in touch with his constituency, and he got management to provide a refrigerator and microwave oven for the workers. Some of the proposals were eventually put into effect, he says. But he isn't sure whether he would take such a job if it was offered again.    In general, the gulf between management and labor continues to widen. Worker dissatisfaction has led two departments to drop out of joint committees with management, reducing Inland's joint labor-management committees to two.    The company's persistent effort to accomplish more with fewer people helps drain any reservoir of good will. Last fall, Inland eliminated the jobs of five women who inspected slabs of steel for defects. According to the union, though, the company within a day posted instructions to other workers who loaded the slabs on how to inspect the steel. Mr. Moseley immediately complained that the company had eliminated the jobs but not the duties.    &quot;I felt betrayed,&quot; says Mr. Moseley, pounding his kitchen table and sending a cluster of doughnuts dancing in the air. He waves a copy of the company's posted instructions like a district attorney flaunting a confession. Inland declines comment.    For the past couple of years, the company and the union have played each other in a friendly game of softball. Mr. Moseley played shortstop the first year; he would have played last year, except for illness.    Mr. Moseley grows unusually subdued as he tries to explain why he will probably boycott this year's game. &quot;I guess the longer the turmoil goes on, the longer it wears you down,&quot; he says. &quot;Maybe,&quot; he adds, &quot;I'm just getting burned out.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>