<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880314-0146 </DOCNO><HL> Manager's Journal: High Yen Forces Japanese to Go American </HL><AUTHOR> Sam Kusumoto </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN </CO><IN> MON </IN><TEXT>   The dollar's cheapness against the yen has inspired a wave of Japanese investment and sourcing in the U.S., which creates challenges for the executives who will be at the forefront of this accelerated presence.    This shift in production on the part of Japanese business is the mirror image of the movement of American production overseas in the early 1980s to keep U.S. products more competitive as the dollar hit record levels. However, the Japanese are still years behind American companies in this area.    One misleading aspect of the U.S.-Japan trade deficit is the fact that American companies long ago discovered the competitive advantage of integrating their operations into the Japanese market. As Ken Ohmae of McKinsey andamp; Co. has pointed out, although American-based businesses exported only $25.6 million to Japan in 1984, companies such as IBM, Texas Instruments, Coca-Cola and Schick with production and marketing arms in Japan produced and sold $43.9 billion in goods there. The total American &quot;product presence&quot; in Japan -- exports plus goods produced locally -- was $69.5 billion. This was about equal to the total Japanese &quot;presence&quot; in America of $69.6 billion.    What's more, IBM, Texas Instruments and others export products from Japan to the U.S., actually contributing, on paper, to the trade U.S. &quot;deficit&quot; with Japan. These can hardly be considered &quot;American&quot; companies anymore; they are truly multinational.    It is only natural that as the relationships of Japanese exporters began to mature in overseas markets, they, too, would opt for greater integration. But the higher yen will dramatically accelerate this trend. For example, my firm, Minolta Corp., soon will open a production facility in Goshen, N.Y., to manufacture toner for our copiers. We are building this facility in part because we want to assure our customers a continuous supply of toner for their Minolta machines. The cost savings associated with a lower dollar provided added impetus.    In the long run, increased Japanese investment and production here and the corresponding reduction in imports from Japan will contribute to a more balanced, realistic bilateral relationship between the two countries, although the effect on U.S.-Japanese trade will be offset somewhat by the fact that Japan also will be moving production to localities with even lower exchange rates against the yen, such as Hong Kong, South Korea and Taiwan. This means that part of the U.S.-Japan deficit will be shifted to these localities -- and it reinforces the folly of trying to address U.S.-Japanese exchange rates in a vacuum. Stable long-term relationships among all currencies are vital to a healthy international business environment.    In any event, the increased Japanese presence here will create a series of challenges for Japanese managers who will be called to the U.S. and will have to become more proficient in overseeing American employees. But these challenges will have nothing to do with popular caricatures of hard-driving Japanese bosses and &quot;laidback&quot; American workers.    One area of concern for Japanese managers is the comparative instability of American employment relationships. The long-time tradition of guaranteed lifetime association with a company is now a thing of the past, as Japanese managers seek to adopt some of the more competitive, entrepreneurial ways of their American counterparts. Even so, the Japanese are still unsure of how to deal with a situation in which a key manager literally may not be with the company tomorrow. They must ask themselves: How much proprietary data should be shared with American employees? How much should American executives be included in planning?    Even more important is the question: How much should the company invest in executive training and education of Americans? Knowing that a Japanese employee probably will remain with the company his entire career, Japanese companies invest a great deal in management development. Unlike American executives, who tend to develop into specialists, Japanese executives are rotated from one position to another, whether sales or operations or administration, to give them a broad perspective on the entire company. Can this kind of investment be made in the career of an American employee, only to see him or her move on and employ this expertise elsewhere?    A second challenge is the more dynamic expectations of American employees who anticipate moving up the career ladder much faster by Japanese standards. The reason for slower career development in Japan is that the former tradition of lifetime employment reached to the very top of a corporation. Although this, too, is gradually changing -- as dramatized by the 1987 dismissal of Komatsu president Shoji Nogawa -- a continued lack of mobility at the top results in slower movement up the ladder in a Japanese company. So the problem is how companies can match the career expectations of American employees to those of longtime Japanese employees, who cannot be leapfrogged on the organization chart. Our answer at Minolta has been to compensate for slower growth in terms of position with higher levels of compensation.    One would think that such mismatches in compensation could also ruffle the feathers of Japanese employees, not to mention cutting into the cost advantage provided by lower Japanese compensation -- an issue that has been raised especially in connection with the astronomical salaries being offered top U.S. talent by Japanese securities firms. However, most Japan-based employees understand the realities of the American market and are not disturbed by the higher salaries required to compete for talent and establish a foothold here. In fact, the integration of American executives into their operations here may help the Japanese adjust to a more entrepreneurial environment at home.    What conventional wisdom sees as the problem -- that Japanese &quot;work harder&quot; than Americans -- is not really a problem at all. One indication that this is true is the fact that most Japanese companies require all employees to punch time clocks -- unlike the U.S., where such devices are mostly limited to hourly workers.    In my experience, Japanese at the executive level spend more time at the office -- but that doesn't mean their productivity is any higher than that of American managers. At the blue-collar level, although Japanese employees work about four hours a week more than Americans (according to U.S. Bureau of Labor Statistics), American workers are still the most productive in the world -- despite the greater Japanese percentage gains in productivity in recent years. (Because productivity is measured by the dollar value of what is produced, drastic exchange-rate fluctuations render such comparisons somewhat problematical -- another indication of the need for stable rates in making business decisions.)    If there is a difference in level of effort and commitment, it might be attributable to the way employees are treated. Japanese management treats &quot;lower-level&quot; employees with greater respect, listening to them and accepting their ideas and suggestions constructively. Thus a true partnership is formed, which gives the employee a sense of being part of the company's achievements. This &quot;team&quot; concept has been employed with increasing success in many U.S. companies, such as Ford and the New United Motors Manufacturing Inc. joint venture between General Motors and Toyota.    The bottom line is this: If Japanese managers confront the American job market with an open mind and flexibility, taking advantage of the skills and productivity of American workers, a fine working partnership can be forged. The otherwise disruptive adjustment to a lower dollar and a higher yen can be turned into a big plus for the business communities of both nations.    ---   Mr. Kusumoto is president of Minolta Corp., the U.S. subsidiary of Minolta Camera Co. </TEXT></DOC>