<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880318-0192 </DOCNO><HL> Travel (A Special Report): On Business --- Travelin' Man: Bank Executive Is a Pro at Avoiding Hassles But Life Away From Home Is Still No Fun </HL><AUTHOR> Teri Agins </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   DICK HUBER JETTED to Sao Paulo five times last year. He traveled to London, Mexico City, Caracas, Buenos Aires and Santiago twice. And he also went to Tokyo and Quito, Ecuador. All on expense account.    For many who dream of jet-setting -- but rarely manage to get farther than a cabin in the Poconos -- Mr. Huber's life as a globe-trotter sounds romantic.    But not to Mr. Huber. &quot;Let's face it,&quot; the 51-year-old international banker says a little wearily. &quot;Business travel ain't a whole lot of fun.&quot;    In 28 years on the road, and in the air, Mr. Huber has missed more flights than a lot of people will ever take. He's shared hotel rooms with other stranded strangers. He rarely sees much more than the inside of offices and hotels.    Moreover, he's been away from home for numerous family occasions -- most notably the birth of his third son. While Mr. Huber tries to make up for it when he is at home, his traveling creates a certain hardship. &quot;You miss the companionship when he's away,&quot; says Roberta, his wife, who runs an Oriental bookshop in Manhattan, &quot;the gossip, the totally insignificant but wonderful little day-to-day things that become a blur by the time he returns.&quot;    By now, of course, Mr. Huber and his family are used to it. A trim, energetic New Yorker, Mr. Huber is a career traveler, a product of the growing world of international trade and finance. He's visited some 70 countries. He's lived abroad three times, working for the Bank of Boston in Buenos Aires and for Citibank in Sao Paulo and Toyko, and speaks Portuguese, Spanish and rudimentary Japanese. In 1981, while based in Tokyo, he was on the road 187 days.    After returning to the States in 1983, he shuttled several times a month to Latin America, London and the Far East for Citicorp Investment Bank. In late January, he joined Chase Manhattan Bank as an executive vice president. Week 2 found him on an intense, five-day swing to London and Tokyo.    Traveling abroad for a multinational bank isn't without perks, needless to say. Mr. Huber doesn't fly cattle class and stay in run-down pensiones to pinch pennies. He rarely bothers with crowded subways or grimy taxis, instead getting a chauffeur from the time he lands till he takes off.    Still, even going first class doesn't make Mr. Huber immune to the hassles of flight delays and other glitches that can botch his meticulous schedules.    When it comes to international travel, Murphy's Law holds true: anything that can go wrong will go wrong. Over the years, Mr. Huber has learned to always assume the worst. The first hint of mechanical trouble on a plane sends him scrambling to book an alternative flight. &quot;I'm convinced that flight delays progress geometrically the longer you wait to act,&quot; he says. So last year, he quickly staked out the Air Paraguay counter in Recife, in northeast Brazil, when his Air France flight to London was delayed, and secured one of the last available seats on the only other flight to Europe.    On a layover in Madrid, mechanical difficulties stalled Air Paraguay. Mr. Huber lost no time abandoning the flight and boarding another that got him to London in time to keep an afternoon appointment. He later learned that his original Air France flight was held overnight in Recife.    Getaways aren't always possible, however. As he was trying to leave Venezuela one night a few years back, a storm knocked out the power at Caracas' airport and all flights were canceled. Elbowing his way through the airport crowd, he grabbed a cab to search for a nearby hotel. The only place he could find was a seedy joint -- and he had to share a room with another stranded passenger.    Even when things go smoothly, the endless hours in airports and airplanes are numbing. &quot;My idea of a good flight is one where I have slept most of the way,&quot; he says. For that reason, Mr. Huber avoids airlines that stress their service. &quot;I don't want to be tapped on the shoulder by those girls that ask you for the third time, 'Are you sure you don't want breakfast?'&quot; he notes. He wears eyeshades and earphones to dissuade talkative seatmates. When he can't sleep, he says, &quot;I just sit back in a chair and get myself into a catatonic Zen state.&quot;    As for the in-flight movie, he knows he won't like it, and he has already seen it anyway. &quot;I must have seen 'Karate Kid II' a half-dozen times,&quot; he says.    Like most seasoned travelers, Mr. Huber has learned to pack light. He dresses casually for plane trips, in turtleneck sweater and loose loafers, with one &quot;beat-up navy canvas carry-on bag that a thief won't clip.&quot; To make sure it doesn't get lost, he carries it on the plane. He packs no more than one shirt for each day of travel, even when he has evening engagements in the tropics. (Of course, this can lead to problems, too. Occasionally the hotel laundry is so slow that he's had to wash his own underwear with soap and dry it in his room.)    For vacationers to exotic, faraway places, doing what they want after they arrive is worth the inconveniences of getting there. For Mr. Huber, there's little time to see anything (assuming he hasn't already seen it years ago).    He's usually in a city a scant 48 hours, his schedule crammed with meetings and business functions from early morning until late evening. A visit from headquarters, Mr. Huber believes, disrupts the bank's staffs in foreign countries. &quot;The objective is to get out of their way so they can get back to work,&quot; he says. His typical activities are visiting important clients, closing deals or intervening in delicate business situations. He adds, &quot;I'm only there to accomplish what they can't do.&quot;    So once he lands, Mr. Huber hits the ground running. On occasion when his flight is late, he takes a sponge bath in the airplane and heads straight for a meeting. Chauffeurs meet him at the airport and transport him about town, but never in showy stretch limousines or Mercedes.    Once he arrived in Buenos Aires, and was met by three husky bodyguards. &quot;I told the driver to get these guys outta here,&quot; he says. In 1969, a sniper shot his driver in Rio de Janeiro. (Mr. Huber wasn't in the car.) &quot;The objective is to be inconspicuous as a foreigner, to blend in,&quot; he says. Traveling with an entourage &quot;is like putting an arrow over your head to flag you as somebody important.&quot;    A long day at work often is followed by a long night. Although Mr. Huber dodges most formal events such as long-winded inaugurations and courtesy calls, he invariably gets roped into business obligations that are always and lamentably held at &quot;the best French restaurant in town.&quot; (Mr. Huber prefers local cuisine -- &quot;wandering through the stalls in South Korean streets and grabbing a dish of this or that,&quot; for example -- but his local staff likes to impress him.) In Korea, he must endure at least one kisaeng party a trip, a late-hours stag gathering of open-ended toasting. &quot;You can't just sip one drink and be polite,&quot; he says.    But Mr. Huber discourages the presence of wives at staff dinners. &quot;Nothing is worse that going to a dinner and getting stuck sitting between Mrs. Perez and Mrs. Garcia, who you have nothing in common with,&quot; he says. &quot;You end up talking with the whole night about the servant problem in Guayaquil.&quot;    All this leaves precious little time for fun, although there can be some special moments. Mr. Huber likes to visit clients at their factories or plantations, which gives him a whiff of the countryside. On long trips to Asia he schedules weekends in the Philippines, which offers &quot;some of the best diving in the world,&quot; he says. And last year, when Citicorp sponsored an overseas tour of the New York Philharmonic, Mr. Huber attended an exhilarating performance in Bombay, India, the hometown of the orchestra's conductor, Zubin Mehta; Mr. Huber sat in the front row between Mr. Mehta's mother and wife.    After all these years, most foreign cities blur together, but he is partial to bustling locales. His favorites: London and Sao Paulo. &quot;They're cosmopolitan cities with a lot going on,&quot; he explains. His least favorite: Tehran, which he visited in the late 1970s after the Iranian revolution. &quot;Usually you can say something nice about a place, if it's not the food, it's the people,&quot; he says, but Tehran is &quot;the only city where I've visited which has no redeeming qualities whatsoever.&quot;    When Mr. Huber returns home, things don't slow down much -- in part because he makes a special effort to devote time to his family. Once, his wife recalls, he rushed home from the airport after a long trip abroad, changed into a tuxedo and then took her out to compensate her for missing formal events she won't attend alone during his absences. &quot;Dick is really remarkable, unusually organized and efficient,&quot; she says, in his juggling of business and family obligations. (Mrs. Huber also joins her husband on one or two trips a year to Asia, where she can do business for her bookshop.)    While Mr. Huber may find business travel a bit tedious, the Hubers often head overseas on vacation -- but not for sightseeing.    For the past two years the Hubers have been volunteer research assistants for Earthwatch, a non-profit group. Last year they went on an archeological dig at Easter Island in the Pacific Ocean and in 1986 they studied the homing behavior of coastal fish in the Canary Islands in the Atlantic. The trips involve cave crawling, camping, digging and hiking &quot;with a group of people who are intellectual and highly stimulating in a different way. . . . They don't know or care absolutely anything about investment banking and that's just what we want. We love it,&quot; Mr. Huber says.    And there is one place Mr. Huber hasn't been to that he still would like to visit: Tibet. Why? &quot;It's supposed to be exotic and I've read a lot about it.&quot;    ---   Ms. Agins is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau. </TEXT></DOC>