<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870401-0068 </DOCNO><HL> Continental Illinois Ex-Chief Aids FDIC---Strategy ReversalExemplifies Quirky Trial---By Jeff BaileyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMT CIL CIHBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><DATELINE> CHICAGO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Only a year ago, Roger E. Anderson was being painted by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. as the chief culprit in the costly collapse of Continental Illinois Corp. But yesterday Mr. Anderson, Continental's former chairman and chief executive officer, testified as the FDIC's star witness, helping to point the finger at the banking concern's former auditors, Ernst andamp; Whinney.    The firm didn't warn him about danger signals coming from Penn Square Bank of Oklahoma City, where Continental bought $1 billion in mostly bad oil and gas loans, Mr. Anderson said on the witness stand.    The testimony, Mr. Anderson's first public statements on his role in the collapse of Continental, is the latest chapter in what has become a bizarre legal battle, marked by 180-degree changes in strategy and odd-couple alliances.    While the FDIC has sought to transform Mr. Anderson from villain to victim, lawyers in the nearly five-year old case have been rebuked by two federal judges for bickering, greed and the filing of frivolous claims. And some lawyers supposedly working together have accused each other of doing slipshod work.    The court battle long ago veered away from who wrecked Continental, concedes a lawyer in the case. Adds another: &quot;It's schizophrenic.&quot;    The trial, now six weeks old, pits the FDIC and some former Continental shareholders against Ernst andamp; Whinney, who are accused of doing a slipshod 1981 audit. It began like a Marx Brothers movie, with lawyers disagreeing about which side of the courtroom they belonged on. A battery of lawyers for defendants Ernst andamp; Whinney sat down at the table traditionally reserved for plaintiffs. Lawyers for the FDIC and holders, the plaintiffs, sat at the defense table -- until one objected and Judge Grady told them to switch: the roomful of lawyers solemnly rose and carried hundreds of pounds of briefcases and documents across the room.    Both sides in the case, fighting a myriad of skirmishes, have had their ups and downs. For example, early on, lawyers for the FDIC, which inherited its claim as part of the agency's $4.5 billion bailout of Continental, won a short-lived victory when a retired postal worker named William Cerny was chosen for the jury. Mr. Cerny had said during jury selection that his personal hero was Franklin Delano Roosevelt. Because FDIC was founded under President Roosevelt's administration, the lawyers made a point of talking up the agency's Depression-era origins in their opening arguments. But less than two weeks into the proceedings, Judge Grady told the courtroom that Mr. Cerny had died.    The case dates back to the days just after the July 1982 failure of Penn Square Bank. Continental shareholders immediately began suing, charging that Mr. Anderson and his subordinates mismanaged the bank and didn't promptly disclose its problems, misleading investors. Ernst andamp; Whinney, the Cleveland-based accounting firm, was accused of doing an inadequate audit of Continental's 1981 financial statement and not disclosing the problems.    The FDIC is seeking $180 million, and former shareholders, who saw the value of their stock plummet, are after more than $20 million. Sources say the FDIC once offered to settle for $20 million and that Ernst andamp; Whinney once offered the FDIC about $2.5 million.    Ernst andamp; Whinney has said all along that its audit was proper. Its top trial lawyer, Daniel F. Kolb, refuses to comment. So does the FDIC's trial lawyer, Lowell Sachnoff.    The FDIC argues that Ernst andamp; Whinney's ground-level audit turned up numerous red flags about Penn Square loans late in 1981, but that auditors didn't warn Mr. Anderson or other senior bank officers. Two-thirds of the $180 million in losses the FDIC seeks from Ernst andamp; Whinney were on Penn Square loans bought after Ernst andamp; Whinney approved the 1981 financial statement. The other third is based on the novel theory that those loans alone cost Continental a higher interest rate on its deposits.    Mr. Anderson said that he was in the dark about the disastrous quality of Penn Square loans Continental was buying until a federal regulator called in June 1982 to warn him that the Oklahoma bank would be closed in a matter of days. That bank closing marked the beginning of Continental's downfall.    Had he been warned months earlier, Mr. Anderson said, &quot;I would have either stopped (the lending) or modified the approval system . . . so we don't put more loans on like these. Ultimately,&quot; he said, such warnings would have prompted &quot;a very broad review of the whole portfolio of the bank.&quot;    But Ernst andamp; Whinney is expected to point out, supported by the bank's own internal investigation of the Penn Square episode, that Mr. Anderson saw some red flags himself and didn't act. During late 1981 and early 1982, the bank's investigation found, Mr. Anderson heard at meetings and elsewhere about a series of problems with the bank's loan portfolio, but didn't initiate the sort of broad-based investigation he now asserts he would have after a warning from the outside auditors.    Ernst andamp; Whinney's cross-examination of Mr. Anderson, expected to last through most of this week, will be &quot;brutal,&quot; says a person close to the case.    The case has been a bit unruly from the start. Each of the more than one dozen individual defendants had his own lawyer present at early hearings, the plaintiffs were well represented too, and soon U.S. District Court Judge John F. Grady had to start sorting things out. The bank's law firm couldn't also represent Mr. Anderson, the judge ruled -- it was a conflict of interest. And lawyers for the shareholders had better learn to get along, he suggested in late 1984.    &quot;The accusations that have been made back and forth in this fight over who will represent (Continental stock purchasers) have caused me to have serious doubts as to whether any of the contenders should be allowed the privilege,&quot; Judge Grady wrote. &quot;What is really at stake in this unseemly contest is the financial interests of the lawyers.&quot;    The big change in legal strategies came a year ago, when Continental, Mr. Anderson and the other former officers agreed to settle the FDIC and shareholder negligence claims against them. The officers settled for about $88 million, but that was from a directors-and-officers liability policy. No personal assets were involved.    If collected, that would be the biggest recovery ever by the FDIC from officials of a bank the agency closed or rescued.    The insurers, though, refused to pay and promptly sued, charging they were misled into writing the policy. The insurers, Continental charges, had advised against any settlement, saying there was no wrongdoing. But the insurers' lawsuit, the bank charges, now &quot;copies verbatim&quot; those same charges made by the FDIC and shareholders.    Would the insurers' suit be grouped with the others before Judge Grady? He demurred, as did several other wary federal judges. The insurers' suit finally landed with Judge Milton I. Shadur, and he has been stinging in his criticism of the insurance lawyers.    In January, Judge Shadur imposed sanctions on insurance company lawyers from the firm of Keck, Mahin andamp; Cate for needlessly including three former Continental officials as defendants. &quot;This is but another instance of insurers' efforts in these cases to sweep up all potentially involved actors in what would become litigation of global proportions,&quot; Judge Shadur wrote, characterizing the situation as &quot;the legal equivalent of transforming the assassination of an obscure Balkan Archduke into a world war.&quot; Lawyers at the firm wouldn't comment.    The FDIC, meanwhile, is worried that evidence will surface in the Ernst andamp; Whinney trial that could help the insurers to void their policy and, thus, the settlement. In essence, the stronger the case against the auditors, the weaker the case for the insurance settlement. Insurance lawyers are privately rooting for Ernst andamp; Whinney, hoping its defense will discredit Mr. Anderson. FDIC lawyers &quot;are walking a tightrope,&quot; says a person close to the case.    Judge Grady hasn't ruled on whether the jury can be told of Mr. Anderson's settlement.    Ernst andamp; Whinney's case has changed, too. It once appeared to favor a united-front defense with former officers, but now argues that it was badly misled by the bank. Continental officials withheld from the auditors knowledge that John R. Lytle, the bank's vice president who handled the Penn Square loan purchases, had $585,000 in personal loans from Penn Square that violated bank rules and possibly the law, Ernst andamp; Whinney charges.    Mr. Anderson appeared in his testimony to imply that knowledge of Mr. Lytle's personal loans was important to him. Asked what might have prompted him to take forceful action to stop the Penn Square loans, he interrupted the FDIC lawyer and asked: &quot;Would I (have known) about the Lytle loans?&quot;    Mr. Lytle, who denies wrongdoing, has since been indicted on bank and wire fraud charges and the government charges the personal loans were kickbacks. Judge Grady hasn't yet ruled whether Mr. Lytle can be called to testify or whether his indictment can be mentioned to jurors. </TEXT></DOC>