<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870825-0127 </DOCNO><HL> Waning Welcome:Tired of War Refugees,Pakistanis IncreasinglyCast Blame on the U.S.---Afghans Strain the ResourcesAnd Traditional KinshipsIn Peshawar, Near Border---Will It Be Another Beirut?---By Mary Williams WalshStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> PESHAWAR, Pakistan  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In the heart of old Peshawar, police in black shirts have cordoned off the main bazaar. A bomb blast in a packed movie theater a day before killed four people.    Now, members of the opposition party have brought several hundred men into the bazaar to condemn politicians and to blame refugees from Afghanistan for the growing violence in their country.    Pakistan's president &quot;is a dog,&quot; says a party member. &quot;Ronald Reagan is a dog.&quot; He burns an American flag as the crowd picks up the chant. &quot;The Pakistani people are being ground up like grains in a mill,&quot; he continues. &quot;The Afghan deserters should go home.&quot;    About three million Afghans now live in Pakistan, the largest refugee population in the world. Many Pakistanis are growing weary of the refugees, blaming them for indirectly causing everything from increasing terrorist bombings to rising rents to traffic jams.    Much of the complaining seems misplaced, as frustrated Pakistanis heap criticism on Afghan mud-hut dwellers who had nothing to do with the start of the nearly eight-year-old war. But mounting ill will toward the Afghans also reveals a deeper frustration Pakistanis feel about their own government and the U.S.    Pakistan is still America's chief agent in its effort to unseat the Soviet-backed government in Afghanistan, but many here would be happy to settle with the Afghan regime if they could. Louder and louder, they say it is time for the refugees to go home.    &quot;They use the refugees as a stick to beat the authorities,&quot; says Jon Anderson, an American anthropologist doing field work in Peshawar, less than 50 miles from the Afghanistan border. &quot;I don't think anybody wants to push the refugees across the border and watch them be massacred. But a lot of people are willing to play games with them.&quot;    The attitude was much different in 1973, when a coup in Afghanistan's capital, Kabul, sent the first few hundred refugees trickling to Pakistan. Islam calls on its faithful to shelter travelers, and for years, Pakistanis complied. Even after 1979, when the Soviets invaded Afghanistan and millions fled by truck, cart, donkey and on foot, Pakistan accepted the arrivals with remarkably few complaints.    But today, hospitality is wearing thin.    Pervez Kazi, chief reporter for Peshawar's English-language newspaper, is sitting at a cluttered newsroom desk, writing stories about the Pakistani budget. It is top-heavy with military taxes. At the border, Afghan government forces have been shelling and bombing Pakistan nearly every day. Mr. Kazi is angry about the war, its effect on his country's economy, and the refugees.    &quot;The Afghans rent houses and run them as hostels,&quot; he says. &quot;They dig up expensive tile mosaics from the verandas and install ovens for baking bread. When the landlord comes to know of this, there's precious little he can do. The Afghans just won't leave.&quot;    Mr. Kazi's colleague, a cartoonist named Feica, has been listening from across the room. &quot;Things are getting more expensive,&quot; he agrees. &quot;I can't even rent a house here. All because of these stupid Afghans.&quot;    Most of the refugees live here in Peshawar or in the countryside nearby. Their presence has transformed Peshawar, once a claustrophobic maze of spidery streets and shadowy bazaars, into a sprawling boomtown of traffic jams, mud-hut encampments, and boxy tract housing for relief workers.    Every morning, some 100,000 Afghan commuters stream into Peshawar from their outlying huts and tents, on four-lane highways that once were only dirt tracks. Pakistanis, who drive on the left side of the road, say the Afghans clog traffic and cause crashes. Afghans, who are used to driving on the right, say the Pakistanis are lousy drivers, and wouldn't have such nice roads in the first place if it hadn't been for the war boom.    Fleeing Afghans brought with them some three million sheep and cows; Pakistanis say the animals are denuding their land. The Afghans also brought some 4,000 trucks and buses duty-free; Pakistanis say that is unfair competition for their nation's commercial drivers.    Ask a Pakistani about heroin, and he is likely to say it flowered in Peshawar when the Afghans came. That is true, but coincidental: The refugee population happened to explode the same year Iran embraced revolutionary Islam and closed off a major drug-smuggling route to Europe. The route then shifted to Pakistan.    Similarly, ask a Pakistani about crime, and he may claim the Afghans have sparked a wave of kidnappings. There are lots of kidnappings in and around Peshawar, but historians say rural outlaws have been making a business of snatching up city dwellers since the days of the British Raj.    That is scant comfort to Sultana Altaf, who lives in a quiet, parklike neighborhood on the edge of Peshawar. She taught home economics at the local university until a fatal campus shootout closed the school this spring. &quot;Nowadays, every student carries a gun with him,&quot; she says. She came home one recent day to find two strangers on her roof; they ran away when they saw her. Another day, two boys were kidnapped from the school where she sends her children. Only one has been returned.    &quot;This city will become another Beirut,&quot; Mrs. Altaf worries.    Some Pakistanis still stand firm on sheltering the Afghans. Their conviction stems not only from religious faith, but from ethnic ties: When the British marked off Afghanistan from what is now Pakistan in 1893, they penned the line right through a tribe called the Pashtun. Even today, for many in Peshawar, a Pashtun from across the border isn't a foreigner, but kin.    Sayed Rahman is such a man. He runs a general store on the road leading west out of Peshawar toward Kabul. Years ago, the shop stood on a quiet lane. Today, it is part of a strip of concrete apartment blocks, parking lots, and outlets peddling cars, hardware, smuggled Afghan rugs, and guns.    Mr. Rahman is calm about the Afghan war and its economic consequences in Pakistan. &quot;I don't have any particular target in my business like a man with a 'Kalashnikov,'&quot; he says, referring to the Russian-made automatic rifle. &quot;I just work every day, sleep every night.&quot;    Recently, however, he crossed the mountains near here to fight with the resistance in Afghanistan. &quot;We're all Muslims,&quot; he explains, standing in his shop surrounded by cans of fruit and bins of grain.    An orange-squash wholesaler stops by to drop off a few cases of the drink. He listens to Mr. Rahman talk about the Afghans for a while, then pushes his way through the knot of customers to the counter.    &quot;The Afghan people are taking oil, wheat, gasoline, all these things from the Pakistani government,&quot; he tells Mr. Rahman. &quot;They are enjoying their lives here. Ever since they came, our lives have been very bad.&quot;    &quot;This place started to be developed when the refugees came,&quot; Mr. Rahman corrects him quietly. &quot;The refugees have built 500,000 mud houses. I know this.&quot;    &quot;Pakistanis built those houses,&quot; argues the orange-squash salesman. &quot;And the Afghans get their rent money for the houses from the Pakistani government.&quot; Mr. Rahman turns his back and begins silently scooping rice out of a bin. &quot;The Pakistani government doesn't want to finish this game,&quot; the orange-squash vendor continues, hoisting himself onto Mr. Rahman's oilcloth-covered counter and sitting there cross-legged. &quot;The Pakistani government wants the weapons to keep coming. It wants the money to keep coming. It wants to keep skimming all the aid that is coming. If the Pakistani government really wanted to end the war, it could do so right away.&quot;    Conversations with Pakistanis about the Afghans often take this turn; just when they seem to be complaining most bitterly about the refugees, their own government -- and America -- suddenly top their hate list. Let an angry Peshawar man ramble on about the refugees long enough, and he will eventually work his way around to domestic politics. Most likely, he will argue that Pakistan's president plays host to the Afghan refugees only to get the U.S. financial support he needs to stay in power.    In Pakistan, the most important political figure is a dead man, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, who ruled Pakistan from 1972 to 1977. He was deposed in a coup by the man who is president now, Gen. Mohammed Zia ul-Haq. Later, he was hanged.    Mr. Bhutto was unpopular with the U.S. government, but Pakistanis remember him as the leader who gave them a sense of self-worth and national pride. His hold on their imagination stays intact through his daughter, Benazir Bhutto, who heads the Pakistan People's Party. It is the strongest opposition party in Pakistan.    The party, among others, has linked the war in Afghanistan to the recent rise in terrorism. Since a nail bomb exploded in a theater here in 1984, the bombs have grown bigger and uglier, and have spread to other cities. Buses, teahouses, bazaars, the train station and the airline office have all been targets in Peshawar. In July, two car bombs in the southern port city of Karachi killed 72 people and injured 300.    Refugees aren't planting the bombs, police say; Afghan government agents are. But some locals blame the refugees anyway. When a Peshawar school was bombed this spring and several children died, anti-Afghan rioting shook the city for days.    Wounded survivors of the recent movie-house bombing here have been taken by cart, by rickshaw, and in the arms of bystanders to a crowded hospital in Peshawar's old British cantonment. They lie swathed in bloody gauze in the surgery ward.    Siraj ul-Haq, a young Pakistani soldier on leave, stopped to see a movie on the way home to his village and woke up in a hospital bed. &quot;There were no such events before the Afghans came here,&quot; he says. &quot;They want to ruin our country. The Afghans should be sent back.&quot;    His brother, Amin Jan, is standing by the bed. &quot;We would be better off if the Afghans left,&quot; he says. &quot;But our government benefits by their being here.&quot;    Amin Jan is a rural constable. Six months ago, he says, there was a bombing in his village, and the police force caught the culprit. But since then, he says, government higher-ups have refused to prosecute. The bomber, he maintains, is an Afghan refugee.    A young doctor, Salah Ud Din, has been listening from nearby. Alarm is mounting in his eyes. He doesn't like to hear blame for the bombings being placed on fellow Muslims.    &quot;These are uneducated people,&quot; he says in English, so the patients won't understand. &quot;Sending the refugees back isn't their idea; it's just what the {opposition} politicians are saying in our country these days. I will tell you what I think, in my office.&quot;    Dr. Din walks to his desk. He doesn't want to talk about the refugees, but about the Afghan air force's bombing raids on Pakistan, and about global politics. He doesn't trust Soviet hints that the Afghan war will end in a political settlement soon. As he sees it, Pakistan is being pulled inexorably into the war -- a war being fought in the name of Islam, his faith, but being waged from Washington and Moscow.    He feels torn between his religious duty to help the Afghans, and his nagging belief that this helps the U.S. at the same time.    &quot;The United States and the Russians are non-Muslims, and they are ruining the Muslims,&quot; he says. &quot;You can see it in Beirut. You can see it in Iran. You can see it in Pakistan.&quot;    The only way out, he thinks, is for Pakistan to arm itself more. &quot;We don't want the Americans; we don't want the Russians,&quot; he says. &quot; What we want is to be in a position where no enemy can defeat us. To be very honest, we just want the weapons.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>