<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880418-0054 </DOCNO><HL> ANC: Apartheid's Foes -- Four Who Dedicated Their Lives to the Cause </HL><AUTHOR> Lee Lescaze (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> AFRIC </CO><TEXT>   From its beginning in 1912, the African National Congress has had extraordinary leaders. Among its founders were men who had gone to the U.S. for college training, often with the help of Christian churches, in the first years of the 20th century.    But none of the first ANC generation became as well known as Albert John Lutuli, who headed the movement from 1952 until his death in 1967 and won the Nobel Peace Prize for 1960. He was the most widely known African leader of his era.    Nelson Mandela   Today, his renown is matched by that of Nelson Mandela. When the South African government imprisoned Mr. Mandela in 1962, it thought the world would forget him. Instead, his fame has grown. European cities have named streets for him, and African children are given his name. He is an inspiring teacher to fellow prisoners, according to men released after serving their terms.    If Mr. Mandela were free, there is no question he would be the African National Congress leader. Though he is 69 years old and had a prostate operation in 1985, visitors have found him in good health. They also have found him remarkable. &quot;We found him unmarked by any trace of bitterness despite his long imprisonment,&quot; the   British Commonwealth Eminent Persons Group wrote in 1986. Nigerian Gen. Olusegun Obasanjo, a member of that group, said recently: &quot;He made a great impression on all of us.&quot; Gen. Obasanjo remembers that Mr. Mandela wore a belt buckle in the black, green and gold colors of the African National Congress and was treated with respect by the wardens.    Mr. Mandela was born into the royal house of Tembu in the Transkei region of South Africa. He was athletic, fond of boxing, and friends described him as a born leader. He became a lawyer and opened a Johannesburg practice with Oliver Tambo, now the ANC president. He also played an increasingly prominent role in politics until he was elected leader of the ANC Youth League in 1950.    After a series of banning orders, Mr. Mandela went underground, eluding arrest for 17 months as he traveled the country in various disguises, prompting the media to call him the &quot;Black Pimpernel.&quot;    Shortly before he was arrested, he took a risk to say farewell to the first group of ANC students being sent out of the country -- illegally -- to study. He appeared unexpectedly through a back door wearing a knitted headgear that covered his face like a ski mask. Thabo Mbeki, now the ANC director of information, recalls that Mr. Mandela told the students: &quot;Remember, wherever you go you are the ambassadors of our people in your personal, political and academic conduct.&quot;    In the past few years he has been separated from the cellmates who had been with him for the first two decades of their imprisonment. Last Christmas, these old companions were allowed to see him one by one, for about 40 minutes each in his cell at Cape Town's Pollsmoor Prison.    He has taken correspondence courses from the University of South Africa throughout his term. Friends say he wrote an exam as recently as Jan. 15.    Oliver Tambo   Ruth Mompati, now administrative secretary of the ANC, was a secretary in the Mandela andamp; Tambo law firm. &quot;They are so different,&quot; she says of the two men. Mr. Mandela is charismatic. Oliver Tambo, she describes as a man who doesn't talk a lot. Mr. Mandela has a strong sense of humor, while with Mr. Tambo, &quot;You're a little surprised when he sees a joke because he tends to be a very serious person.&quot;    Christianity is the greatest influence on Mr. Tambo's life. His friend of 45 years, Anglican Archbishop Trevor Huddleston, says there isn't any doubt that Mr. Tambo would have become a priest if he could have chosen freely. He gave up plans for ordination when colleagues in the ANC appealed to him not to leave the liberation movement.    Archbishop Huddleston recalls a time when both of them were working in Tanzania. Often, in the early morning when no one else was in the cathedral, he would find Mr. Tambo at his prayers.    Mr. Tambo, now 70 years old, also comes from the Transkei. He was a brilliant student and then a teacher before becoming a lawyer. &quot;We were never really young,&quot; Mr. Tambo has said of his youth. &quot;There were no dances, hardly a cinema, but meetings and discussions, every night, every weekend.&quot;    Mr. Tambo, unlike Mr. Mandela, isn't a commanding speaker, but he kept the ANC alive in exile when it was in danger of perishing and he is its unchallenged leader.    The ANC, headquartered in Lusaka, Zambia, is governed in exile by a 30-seat National Executive Committee (there are three vacancies), but a triumvirate made up of Mr. Tambo, Secretary-General Alfred Nzo and Treasurer-General Thomas Nkobi are the most important figures.    Unlike Mr. Tambo, who has traveled the world speaking on behalf of the movement, the other two aren't well known abroad. Mr. Nzo, who was elected secretary-general in 1969, has begun to make more public appearances in recent years, but his office is the essential administration point for the ANC. He trained as a health inspector and became involved in politics in the 1950s. After a series of detentions, including one stretch of 238 days in solitary confinement, he went into exile.    Mr. Nkobi, who with Mr. Nzo helped organize the 1957 bus boycott in Alexandra township, grew up in Johannesburg and joined the ANC in 1950. He was elected treasurer-general in 1973. He won't give interviews and shuns public appearances.    Thabo Mbeki   Of the younger generation of leaders, Thabo Mbeki, 45, has become the most visible. Mr. Mbeki, whose father, Govan Mbeki, was released from Robben Island prison last fall and then quickly put under banning orders by the government, is the ANC director of information and plays a leading role in contacts with South African groups that seek to meet the ANC and with Europeans and Americans.    &quot;He's the international darling,&quot; says a Swedish diplomat.    The bearded Mr. Mbeki, a constant pipe-smoker, was raised to be part of the ANC. &quot;My parents told me not to expect to have parents,&quot; he says, so certain were they that they would be arrested and banned.    He was nine when he had his first political meeting where he grew up in the Transkei. Mr. Mbeki, like other boys, was tending cattle when a local chief asked for his opinion on proposed government regulations that would have limited grazing. At 20, the ANC sent him abroad for education and he took a degree in economics at Britain's Sussex University.    Joe Slovo   Joe Slovo is the only white member of the ANC's governing council. He is also the general-secretary of the South African Communist Party, and a man that South Africa has called a colonel in the Soviet KGB. He was born in Lithuania in 1926 and as a child emigrated to South Africa with his parents. A lawyer, he was defense counsel in many of the political trials of the 1940s and 1950s. As one of the 156 defendants in the famous treason trial of 1956, he also served on the defense team. His wife, Ruth Frist, a leading anti-apartheid activist, was killed by a parcel-bomb in 1982 in Mozambique.    A short, gray-haired man with thick glasses, Mr. Slovo has been a member of the Communist Party since the 1940s. He was elected to the ANC National Executive Committee in 1985, the year non-blacks were first permitted to join.    In large part because of Pretoria's vilification of him he is well known inside South Africa, even though he went into exile in 1963. The ANC military wing, of which he was chief of staff for many years, sings marching songs about him. Jackie Selebi, the ANC secretary for youth, says that among young people, only Mr. Mandela and Mr. Tambo are more popular.    (See related story: &quot;The Long Struggle: Foes of Apartheid, Beset but Undefeated, Grow Stronger in Exile --- African National Congress Ponders Its Own Future and That of South Africa --- Bureaucracy and Bloodshed&quot; -- WSJ April 18, 1988)</TEXT></DOC>