<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870930-0017 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 09/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE SENATE VOTED unanimously to shut off all U.S. imports from Iran.    The proposed embargo, attached to a $303 billion defense authorization bill, followed disclosures that the U.S. had increased oil purchases from Iran. The U.S. paid Iran about $700 million for oil from May through July. The U.S. says Iran uses its oil money to finance its war with Iraq, whose principal ally, Kuwait, receives Navy protection for its Persian Gulf oil tankers. In the gulf, British mine sweepers cleared a mine near Dubai as the 10th U.S.-escorted Kuwaiti convoy approached, Iraq set ablaze an Iranian tanker and Iran attacked a Greek tanker.    The House approval of the defense bill did not include an Iranian embargo. A committee must now work out the differences in the two chambers' bills.    ---   Bork met with top Reagan aides over the weekend and questioned the direction of the administration's campaign to secure his confirmation as Supreme Court justice, White House officials said. A new drive, with Reagan taking a more direct role, is planned. Sen. Cranston (D., Calif.) said Bork is &quot;licked.&quot;    Richardson defended Bork's firing of Watergate special prosecutor Cox. The former attorney general, in testimony to the Senate Judiciary panel, said Bork's action preserved the Watergate investigation. Richardson and his deputy resigned rather than obey President Nixon's firing order.    ---   The Pentagon charged the Commerce Department with a &quot;lapse of responsibility&quot; for licensing as many as 50 shipments of strategic products to Communist-controlled firms in non-Socialist countries. The department earlier this week reimposed Pentagon review, suspended in June, of such shipments.    ---   Canada agreed to continue high-level consultations with the U.S. to determine if the two countries can break a deadlock in talks on a free trade pact. The decision came after a cabinet meeting in Ottawa and a 7 1/2-hour Washington meeting Monday between Canadian ministers and Treasury Secretary Baker.    ---   A U.S. appeals court struck down an FCC ruling that allows toy makers to promote their products on cartoon shows without having to say they paid for the programs. Toy makers have helped produce about 75 such shows. A children's advocate said the ruling may end &quot;program-length commercials.&quot;    ---   Philippine troops were deployed at strategic points around Manila after the government received reports of a possible coup attempt by anti-government soldiers. Earlier, 60,000 people marched in the Manila funeral of an assassinated labor leader. Military coups have been staged within days of the past three major leftist demonstrations.    ---   Khomeini called on Iranians to maintain their unity and support the government following Tehran's announcement that it had executed a former close associate of the ayatollah's chosen successor. Khomeini did not mention the execution, but the timing of his remarks indicates a desire to prevent internal power struggles in its wake.    ---   Shultz is planning a tour of the Mideast next month in hopes of generating a &quot;spark of momentum&quot; in the stalemated peace process. The secretary of state will visit Israel and possibly Egypt and Jordan. In Israel, Prime Minister Shamir said the visit would not persuade him to drop his opposition to an international Mideast peace conference.    ---   Gorbachev appeared in public for the first time since Aug. 7 to greet a French Socialist delegation at the Kremlin, ending speculation that the Soviet leader was ill or the victim of an assassination attempt.    ---   El Salvador's Duarte said the only item he would discuss in peace talks scheduled for Sunday was a demand that leftist rebels lay down their arms. He also rejected a rebel offer of a cease-fire during the talks. In Managua, Ortega, responding to a call by Shultz, again ruled out talks between his government and the U.S.-backed Contras.    ---   Shevardnadze told Brazilian leaders the arms race partly caused South America's $380 billion debt and is blocking regional development. The Soviet foreign minister is on a two-week tour of the region.    ---   Colombo named an interim council to govern Sri Lanka's Tamil regions and gave a majority to the militant Tamil Tigers group. In return, the Tigers agreed to back an Indian-brokered peace accord to end the island nation's ethnic fighting.    ---   Col. Rabuka ordered Fiji's constitution rewritten, declared the Pacific island nation a republic and prepared to install himself as the head of state. Britain rejected the moves and Queen Elizabeth accused Col. Rabuka, leader of two coups in the past five months, of disloyalty. Fiji is a former British colony and a member of the Commonwealth.    ---   Panama expelled three opposition leaders to Venezuela after they had taken refuge two months ago in the Vatican Embassy. The three are the leader of Panama's Chamber of Commerce, a former chamber head and the president of the National Council of Private Enterprise. </TEXT></DOC>