<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871102-0147 </DOCNO><HL> Pension Funds: New Power, New Responsibility---By Edward V. Regan</HL><DD> 11/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABORFINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)MUTUAL AND MONEY-MARKET FUNDS (FND) </IN><TEXT>   Pension funds, long the most staid and quiet of shareholders, have suddenly awakened to the tremendous power they command. Public and private pension systems now own close to half the stock of all companies listed in the Sandamp;P 500. (Even after &quot;black Monday,&quot; most funds, looking to the long term, did not sell.) New York state's pension fund alone can vote up to 2% of most major U.S. corporations. On the verge of becoming majority shareholders in corporate America, pension funds are beginning to flex their muscles.    It used to be that resolutions introduced by shareholders at annual meetings, even the most publicized, typically attracted no more than 3% of the vote. But in the past 18 months, pension funds have initiated resolutions that tallied 15% to 40% of the vote. That a movement so powerful could emerge so suddenly has taken everyone by surprise -- not least of all the pension funds themselves. It is the result of three converging trends: mounting social pressures, takeover-generated battles for corporate control, and the sheer size of pension funds.    The societal pressures started in the early 1970s, when social and ethical resolutions sponsored by religious and other concerned groups began to appear on the agendas of annual meetings. (For example, this year alone, more than 100 major U.S. companies faced resolutions, filed by the New York fund, calling for them to pull out of South Africa. Half did so, most before the resolutions could be voted on.) These pressures were then joined with an equally powerful ownership pressure on the pension funds: the takeover phenomenon and its effect on stock value.    As the raiders moved in and corporate managers began to fight back, the resulting battles for control put the spotlight on shareholders. Shareholder votes, formerly under the virtually uncontested control of management, were fought over. Corporate management raised the specter of reductions in employment, economic downturns, high debt and breakup intentions. The raiders countered with arguments about corporate perks, slovenly management, failure to plan for the long term, and above all, potential increases in share values. Fearing for their personal and organizational futures, corporate management sought shelter by adopting anti-takeover defenses, including the &quot;poison pill.&quot;    As far as pension funds were concerned, however, poison pills had the effect of lowering the value of shares. Led by the California Public Employees Retirement System and joined by the College Retirement Equities Fund, large pension funds began to protest against them. Sixty shareholder resolutions were filed, asking companies either to rescind their poison pills, or at least put them to a shareholder vote.    Far and away the most important outcome of the social and takeover phenomena is the emergence of pension-fund investors as activist shareholders. In addition, the funds are forming themselves into powerful organizations. The Council of Institutional Investors already has 55 members, mainly public funds, with assets of more than $250 billion. In the private sector, the Committee on Investment of Employee Benefit Assets represents more than 1,000 corporate pension systems with assets of over $1 trillion.    The sheer size of pension funds has had another dramatic impact, and that's on the basic approach to the management of pension portfolios. The traditional method involved the buying and selling of stock, usually through professional money managers. If a pension fund didn't like the look of things in one corporation it could simply sell the stock and replace it with another. However, now that institutional investors own such huge blocks of shares, disposing of them isn't so easy.    Equally significant, most money managers in recent times have not been able to outperform standard market indexes, such as the Sandamp;P 500. As a result, computer models have been devised to construct a perfect matching of large portfolios and these indexes, so that now dozens of pension funds have hundreds of billions of dollars indexed in this fashion. Therefore, if it appears to a pension fund that things are not going well at Corporation X or Y or Z, a sale of stock in that company would disrupt the perfect match between the fund's portfolio and the index, negating the enormous advantage of the index system.    While no trustee can ever forgo the right to sell a stock, many large pension funds and the large corporations in which they hold shares are now virtually permanently wed to each other.    This relationship is likely to continue and grow even closer. The reason: Both are long-term players. The funds are investing to provide retirement payments for 10, 20, 30 years hence. And the nation's largest corporations will presumably be around just as long. Thus, there is little question that the large pension funds, in order to enhance the wealth of their beneficiaries, will henceforth have to do so not by relying as much on trading, but, as they have started to do, through voting.    It will come as no surprise that corporate management is hostile to the intrusion of large institutional owners into what had been its previously unchallenged domain. This attitude must change if we are to share the long haul together -- for we are partners, welcome or not.    Management must realize that the reach of fiduciary responsibility is expanding, particularly as it affects private pension funds. When asked in June about the vast number of private pension funds and institutional investors that, under peer pressure, routinely vote with management to retain poison pills, David Walker, assistant secretary of labor, said that there will be &quot;enforcement for violations of the fiduciary duty,&quot; and that the government will &quot;aggressively pursue&quot; evidence of violations. The result will be increasing numbers of large institutional investors voting against management attempts to shelter themselves from takeover activity.    Moves to open proxy voting procedures also are likely to promote activist voting. Under the current proxy system, major blocks are held in &quot;street&quot; or &quot;nominee&quot; names, making it difficult to know which institutional investors own which stocks, who has voting authority over those shares, and how that authority is exercised. The British resolved this problem by requiring a corporation, upon the petition of 10% of its owners, to reveal the names and addresses of its other owners.    Numerous initiatives in this country are directed at the same goal. The Dingell-Markey bill in the House would make it easier for large holders to make nominations to boards. A Securities and Exchange Commission proposal would make it easier for sponsors to solicit votes for their resolutions. And proposed legislation in California would require trustees and fiduciaries to keep and publicize records of their votes. But the best and most accessible way for investors to exercise control is through the boards. Their role in a corporation is not different in concept from the role of our nation's elected representatives. Shareholders elect a board to run a corporation; directors stand for reelection on their performance -- at least in theory.    Despite this, there is acknowledgment that boards often are echoes of management rather than their decisive overseers. As institutional investors look for ways to express their concern about corporate performance, the boards are one good focus of attention.    We cannot go back and recapture a simpler time when a handful of congenial corporate owners were related to or sympathetic to their managers. But we can create a modern version, with informed institutional investors, vigilant boards of directors (even some nominated by the funds themselves) and responsive managers.    We also have to think about the variety of corporate issues we will confront. Most poison pills, for instance, decrease share value. Thoughtful and forceful pronouncements should be welcomed by private and corporate pension funds that previously were pressured to vote with management. On the other hand, not all poison pills fit this definition and public investors should welcome guidance on such exceptions.    Those of us with fiduciary responsibilities also have to start thinking about what we must do when faced with troubled industries in which we have invested.    A good example might be pharmaceuticals. The Japanese are out to dominate this market, as they did in autos and electronics, by making major commitments to plants, equipment and research.    For American pharmaceuticals to respond effectively might require the industry to triple its expenditures on new product research. That might temporarily mean less profit per share. Speaking on behalf of the long-term value of these companies, institutional investors could perhaps support forgoing increased dividends for a few years to ensure future profitability. (That is different from the conventional wisdom that institutional investors are interested only in quarterly returns.)    A major explanation for the intense round of acquisitions and mergers of recent years can be laid at the door of board and shareholder inaction. The raiders spotted corporations with underutilized assets and made their moves, profiting enormously. If we owners had been alert, we could have spotted the same underutilization and could have been more aggressive with corporate management.    Within a few short years, the pension funds along with other large institutional investors have arrived at a position of substantial power. The flip side of power is responsibility. Beyond our legal obligations and our fiduciary obligations, we now find ourselves in the realm of moral responsibility, and the principled responses that this requires.    ---   Mr. Regan, New York state comptroller, is a trustee of the state and teachers' pension systems. </TEXT></DOC>