<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880921-0016 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   DUKAKIS PROPOSED a broad health-insurance program for American workers.    The Democratic presidential nominee said the federal government should enact legislation requiring company-provided medical insurance, with at least minimum benefits for most of the estimated 37 million workers currently without coverage. Under the proposal, all employers -- with the exception of some small firms -- would be required to provide such insurance. Speaking in Kentucky, Dukakis said he would submit the plan to Congress if he is elected. He accused Bush of a &quot;record of neglect&quot; on health-insurance issues.    Republican nominee Bush campaigned in a New Jersey flag factory, and declared that &quot;flag sales are doing well and America is doing well.&quot;    ---   Burma's leader named a nine-member cabinet. Six of the new ministers installed by Gen. Saw Maung were among the military officers who mounted a coup Sunday that ousted Rangoon's president; one was a civilian. Opposition leaders called for talks with the government as security forces continued a violent crackdown on dissent.    ---   Haiti's coup leader appealed for calm as soldiers from at least six army units ousted their commanders in a growing revolt in the military. And at least four people died in street violence, bringing the toll since Sunday's coup to 12. The new president also appointed a military chief who had served as foreign minister in the toppled regime.    ---   About 400,000 Armenians gathered in Yerevan and renewed demands for the annexation of Azerbaijan's disputed Nagorno-Karabakh territory, where a curfew reportedly was imposed. The demonstrators also protested weekend ethnic clashes, in which one person was said to have been killed. About 25 others were injured.    ---   The House passed a pesticide bill that would require the EPA to re-examine more than 600 ingredients used in pesticides for health and environmental effects. The measure, which was sent to the Senate, would also transfer some of the cost of banning and disposing of dangerous pesticides to the manufacturers.    ---   The PLO has dismissed the idea of forming a provisional Palestinian government in the near future, Reuter reported. The news service said, however, that two senior PLO officials said the organization would advise its parliament-in-exile to formally declare next month an independent Palestinian state with borders proposed by the U.N. in 1947.    ---   A car bomb exploded in mostly Christian eastern Beirut, killing at least five people and wounding about 25 others. The blast came as Christian lawmakers met to choose a presidential candidate to challenge the nominee favored by the U.S. and Syria. President Gemayel's term expires Friday.    ---   House Speaker Wright said the CIA has admitted using undercover operatives in Nicaragua to stir public protests in an effort &quot;to provoke an overreaction&quot; by the Sandinista government. Meanwhile, Managua officials and Contra rebel leaders traded blame for the breakdown of talks in Guatemala aimed at stabilizing a cease-fire.    ---   The 43rd General Assembly convened and voting member states elected Argentina's foreign minister as the U.N.'s president, a ceremonial but prestigious post. The world body begins its three-week General Debate next Monday. Reagan is to address the assembly at the start of the session.    ---   Emperor Hirohito of Japan was placed under 24-hour medical care after repeatedly vomiting blood. The 87-year-old leader, the world's longest-reigning monarch, was given three blood transfusions. Officials at the Imperial Palace wouldn't confirm reports that he appeared to be in critical condition, saying his condition was stable.    ---   Lauro Cavazos was sworn in as secretary of education. The move came after the Senate voted 94-0 to confirm his nomination. Cavazos, president of Texas Tech University, is the first Hispanic cabinet member. He succeeds William Bennett, who resigned.    ---   The U.N. Security Council approved an independence referendum for the Western Sahara, where Marxist guerrillas have been battling Morocco for 13 years. The 15-0 vote cleared the appointment of a special U.N. representative to monitor a plan that would result in the region's independence or affiliation with the Rabat government.    ---   An Israeli space official said the country's first satellite was performing better than expected, and he denied reports that the craft is carrying surveillance equipment to monitor Arab nations. The test probe was launched Monday, making Israel the first space power in the Mideast.    ---   Perez de Cuellar has invited leaders of all political parties in Namibia to meet with him when he arrives in South Africa to discuss independence for the territory. The U.N. secretary-general is to arrive in Pretoria today for his first visit to South Africa since 1983. South Africa has pledged to end its 73-year rule of Namibia. </TEXT></DOC>