<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870521-0058 </DOCNO><HL> Contra Connection:Rancher in Costa RicaWas Big Help to U.S.Against the Sandinistas---John Hull's Spread Was SiteFor Airdrops, Meetings,Gathering of Intelligence---A Paean to Oliver North---By Jonathan KwitnyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAMMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> MUELLE, Costa Rica  </DATELINE><TEXT>   John Hull, a native of Indiana, says he moved to Costa Rica about 20 years ago to clear the jungle and make his fortune as a rancher and a farmer.    But he does more than raise cattle and grow oranges. He is one of the many apparently private citizens the Reagan administration has used to support a guerrilla war against the Sandinistas in Nicaragua and who helped sustain the war even after Congress interrupted military funding.    &quot;I'm trying to fight Communists,&quot; Mr. Hull says. His extensive property, with half-a-dozen landing strips, is located just across the San Juan River from Nicaragua. It is well positioned to help the U.S.-backed Contras fighting the Marxist regime in Managua.    The 66-year-old rancher says he has orchestrated U.S. arms deliveries from El Salvador, provided campsites to the Contra army, fed troops before and after battle and was the host for some delicate political negotiations over the years as the Central Intelligence Agency and National Security Council tried to arrange a unified Contra leadership.    Mr. Hull, who has U.S. and Costa Rican citizenship and a long, but unclearly defined relationship with the U.S. government, now is emerging from the shadows of the Contra war. Last week Robert Owen, who served as a courier for Lt. Col. Oliver North, the fired National Security Council staffer, told congressional investigating committees that Mr. Hull is &quot;a man who has done a tremendous amount for his country&quot; by helping the Contras maintain a southern front against Nicaragua.    Mr. Owen also testified that Mr. Hull received $10,000 a month from Adolfo Calero, who heads the Nicaraguan Democratic Front, the largest Contra faction. Mr. Hull says he used the money to purchase food and clothing for the Contras, adding, &quot;I've got receipts for every penny of it.&quot; Mr. Calero's group has received U.S. funding and private support orchestrated in part by Col. North.    Mr. Hull says he expects to be called to testify before Congress in its investigations this summer, and will answer all questions. He answered some questions for a reporter during a recent two-day visit to his ranch, for the first time admitting to a major role in the war. In doing so, he shed light on how the war has been conducted.    He acknowledges receiving donations beyond the money he got from Mr. Calero and spending the funds on Contra needs -- including bailing out mercenaries arrested under Costa Rican law for violating that country's neutrality. The contributions came from &quot;private&quot; sources in the U.S., he says, but he wouldn't name them.    Asked about suspicions raised by congressional investigators that some of the money Congress appropriated in 1985 for nonmilitary &quot;humanitarian&quot; aid flowed through his account in a Panamanian bank, Mr. Hull simply says, &quot;I've never denied taking money any way I could get to help these people, and I do have an account at that bank.&quot; He says he doesn't remember any specific transactions.    Mr. Hull met Mr. Owen in the spring of 1983 during a visit to the office of Republican Sen. Dan Quayle of Indiana. Mr. Owen then was working on the senator's staff. After a long talk about conditions in Central America, Mr. Owen escorted Mr. Hull to the White House, where he met Col. North. In August 1983, Mr. Owen testified that he made his first trip to Central America, traveling to Costa Rica on a round-trip ticket provided by Mr. Hull.    The Special Review Board President Reagan appointed to investigate the Iran-Contra affair reported that Col. North's &quot;calendar shows that he met regularly&quot; with Mr. Owen in 1984-1985, and that &quot;sometimes these meetings took place with other figures often linked to the 'benefactors' network -- e.g. John Singlaub, John Hull and Adolfo Calero.&quot; John Singlaub, a retired Army major general, has helped raise money to supply the Contras.    Clearly Mr. Hull was close to Col. North. At the conclusion of his appearance before the congressional investigating committee Tuesday, Mr. Owen read a poem that he said later had been written by Mr. Hull. The Hull poem says that the anti-Sandinista forces draw sustenance from &quot;The knowledge that on this troubled earth there still walk men like Ollie North. . . . In our lifetime you have given us a legend.&quot;    Last year the former CIA station chief in San Jose told Department of Justice investigators that the U.S. military used Mr. Hull's ranch to deliver supplies to the Contras at least through March 1984, according to a Justice Department document that hasn't been made public.    Weapons for the Contras were routinely delivered to Mr. Hull's land from the Ilopango military air force base in El Salvador, according to present or former Contra officials, including Carol Prado, chief aid to Contra figure Eden Pastora; Roger Monge, former Contra business administrator, and Raphael Espinosa, former Contra airdrop expert. They say this went on at least into 1985, long after Congress enacted the 1982 Boland amendment, which sought to limit U.S. involvement in the war against Nicaragua.    The Contra sources also say that the former CIA station chief in San Jose told them that Mr. Hull was the CIA's representative in northern Costa Rica.    Asked about his CIA links, Mr. Hull says he has probably met many agency operatives, even at his ranch house, but because he says everyone involved in the war uses pseudonyms, he can't be certain.    Mr. Hull does describe himself as a second-generation military intelligence operative. His father, he says, was a World War I captain in military intelligence, who took up farming near Evansville, Ind., but still &quot;stayed with military intelligence until old age. I'd say it's somewhat the same situation I've got here,&quot; Mr. Hull says. &quot;He'd pass on information.&quot;    During the Depression, Mr. Hull says, his father infiltrated labor-union meetings for the federal government. &quot;He had men that could go into meetings that the Reds had, and come out remembering more than 200 names,&quot; Mr. Hull says.    Following in his father's footsteps, Mr. Hull says he reports what he learns to the U.S. Embassy in San Jose.    He recalls that he led a team of doctors into southern Nicaragua within a week of the 1979 Sandinista victory, and reported on conditions. His intelligence work expanded as the Contra war grew. He has assembled, he acknowledges, a vast network of informants who tell him things they won't tell anyone else. &quot;I know where these {Contra} camps are,&quot; he says. &quot;I even know where the Communist camps are on the other side of the river {in Nicaragua}. If you listen to what people tell you, you know everything that's going on.&quot;    Mr. Hull has developed quite an intelligence network in Costa Rica. For instance, he obtained personal notes that had been taken by this reporter's interpreter. Mr. Hull said the notes had been rifled from her belongings by Costa Rican security forces, &quot;maybe at the hotel.&quot;    Mr. Hull says that Costa Rican officials have warned him to keep a low profile and to avoid violations of Costa Rica's neutrality laws. Costa Rican government action against him could jeopardize his multimillion-dollar stake (he says he leaves the exact numbers to his accountant) in the tens of thousands of acres of grazing and crop land he owns or helps manage here.    In light of the Costa Rican concerns, Mr. Hull insists that all the military-type help he has arranged for the Contras has been supplied just beyond the boundaries of land he legally owns, on the property of native Costa Rican farmers in the area. &quot;I showed them {the Contras} the best landing sites,&quot; Mr. Hull says. &quot;The farmers around here were the ones wanting to help, and I helped coordinate the ones wanting to help.&quot;    But some former Contras say Mr. Hull himself was involved. &quot;He was one of the best Americans,&quot; says Mr. Espinosa, the former Contra. &quot;He helped us a lot. He let us use his airstrips&quot; and sometimes provided aviation fuel. Mr. Hull denies that he provided fuel to the Contras.    Two years ago Costa Rica jailed Peter Glibbery, a mercenary, and others after convicting them of violating the neutrality act by planning attacks on Nicaragua from Mr. Hull's land.    The U.S. attorney in Miami also began to look at Mr. Hull's possible connection with American gun-running and neutrality act violations. But Mr. Glibbery has said that Mr. Hull was slipped secret information from the National Security Council about the investigation and was told it would be taken care of.    Lawrence Spivey, a television-film producer who was working with Contra support groups in 1985, says he was with Col. North in his White House office and saw a report on the investigation prepared by George Kiszynski, a Federal Bureau of Investigation agent who later went to Costa Rica.    Until now Mr. Hull has been able to brush off investigations, and concedes that he may have had White House help, such as Mr. Glibbery describes.    In March 1986, Mr. Hull refused to see a federal prosecutor and two FBI agents who came to Costa Rica from Miami to talk to him about possible illegal-weapons shipments to his ranch. The prosecutor, Jeffrey D. Feldman, wrote in a still-unreleased report that the U.S. Embassy in San Jose told Mr. Hull to avoid the investigators. (Mr. Hull says he acted on his own.) The investigation of him apparently was called off.    Mr. Hull says he is willing to discuss some of his problems now because he is outraged by U.S. television reports that showed two convicted drug smugglers in U.S. jails alleging that they used Mr. Hull's airstrips on their drug runs. He strenuously denies any involvement in drug trafficking and, indeed, notes in detail that his runways are too short to accommodate the planes the smugglers claim they flew into and out of his ranch.    But the press and congressional investigations obviously upset him. Personnel from the nearby Voice of America station recently yanked the VOA radio-telephone from his ranch house, after a reporter from this newspaper called VOA in Washington to confirm Mr. Hull's statement that VOA provided his emergency communications service.    According to Mr. Owen, Mr. Hull has played an important role in helping the Contras maintain pressure on Nicaragua's southern front while the bulk of the Contra forces has operated out of Honduras to the north.    In the 1970s the northern Costa Rica area where Mr. Hull and other Americans have farms and ranches was a hotbed of Sandinista revolutionaries fighting to overturn the dictatorship of Anastasio Somoza in Nicaragua. Mr. Hull says he talked to many of them and visited airstrips where their weapons came in.    After the Sandinistas toppled the Somoza regime, Mr. Hull began working with Mr. Pastora, a former Sandinista who broke away from the revolutionary Managua government complaining of its leftward turn. Operating from Costa Rica, Mr. Pastora, also known as Commander Zero, opened a southern front.    Mr. Hull recalls that he and Jim Denby, an Illinois man who owns a ranch close to the Hull ranch, flew to the front along the San Juan River, which separates Costa Rica and Nicaragua, and removed the wounded for treatment. Planes were so scarce, he says, &quot;we said we'd take out the ones who could fight again. Others, we'd have to abandon.&quot;    After a Contra camp on the river was wiped out in a Nicaraguan offensive in early 1984, he says, dozens of survivors came straight to his farm, where he fed them. &quot;They hadn't had anything to eat for three days,&quot; he says, adding, &quot;I was expecting them.&quot;    A commercial-size chest freezer and two large refrigerators in his roomy kitchen attest to his ability to provide such hospitality. Last month, he says, he housed and fed more than a dozen Costa Rican anti-drug police for a week, while they tried to locate drugs that Mr. Hull says are being flown into Costa Rica from Nicaragua on Soviet helicopters. (He concedes the mission failed to nab any such smugglers. U.S. law enforcement officials say they haven't found any drugs being smuggled out of Nicaragua.)    A milestone for Mr. Hull came in May 1984, when the Pastora organization broke apart with the CIA's encouragement. Mr. Pastora had refused U.S. entreaties to join a CIA-led umbrella organization with Contras in Honduras.    When former Pastora ally Alphonso Robelo agreed to join the umbrella group with some followers, the CIA began working with them, and shut out Mr. Pastora. At one point Messrs. Pastora and Robelo, with a host of aides and bodyguards, sailed down from the front by river for a critical meeting in Mr. Hull's house.    Mr. Hull says (and several Contra leaders who were there confirm) that Mr. Robelo promised to support Mr. Pastora for the future presidency of Nicaragua in exchange for joining the umbrella group, but that Mr. Pastora refused. Mr. Hull pictures himself as a curious bystander who just provided food and beverages: &quot;They were all shouting and screaming at one another all night. I was just hoping the bodyguards wouldn't start shooting at each other,&quot; he laughs. But he leaves little doubt that he supported Mr. Robelo, the man the CIA would go with.    On May 30, 1984, a bomb exploded at a Pastora press conference in Nicaragua, killing eight people. Mr. Pastora and others have charged that Messrs. Hull and Owen helped plan the bombing.    Asked about the charge at congressional hearings Tuesday, Mr. Owen dismissed the charge as &quot;absolutely scurrilous . . . there's no truth to it.&quot; Mr. Owen did, however, confirm Mr. Pastora's assertion that he, Mr. Owen, was in Costa Rica &quot;on a survey for Col. North&quot; and meeting with Mr. Hull and the CIA station chief on the night of the bombing. Mr. Hull has said he believes Mr. Pastora, who was seriously injured by the blast, planted the bomb himself to generate publicity.    Mr. Hull says he broke with Mr. Pastora after deciding that the Contra leader was still a Communist who had secretly been working all along for the Managua government to subvert the Contra cause. Mr. Pastora, of course, denies this.    Mr. Hull says he based his judgment on Mr. Pastora's failure to act more aggressively as Mr. Hull advised. Mr. Hull says, for example, that he and others in the Contra movement urged Mr. Pastora to use his planes to sink a ship in a narrow channel that would have blocked Managua's use of East Coast ports, and that Mr. Pastora never did.    Mr. Hull also says he helped plan a bombing attack on Managua's main airport. He says a Contra airplane that was felled by its own bomb in the attack failed to get away because Contra leaders ignored his advice to use time-delayed bombs.    Why does Mr. Hull provide all this aid, intelligence and advice? It isn't because anyone instructs him to, Mr. Hull says. &quot;I'm just a hell of a nice guy,&quot; he explains with a laugh. </TEXT></DOC>