<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880614-0138 </DOCNO><HL> Over at the Rainbow, Hunger's Persistence Is a Growth Industry --- Soup Kitchen, Like Others, Adds Services to the Menu; Old Potatoes, New Ideas </HL><AUTHOR> Clare Ansberry (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT </CO><DATELINE> HOMESTEAD, Pa.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Rainbow Kitchen seems a restaurant's envy. It has hearty food and long waiting lines outside the door. Its clientele is fiercely loyal: Arped Kovacs, for one, often dines here five days a week.    But the Rainbow, a privately supported soup kitchen that feeds those who can't afford to feed themselves, wishes it weren't so popular. &quot;Our dream is to go out of business,&quot; says Dolores Patrick, Rainbow's director.    Instead, it is reluctantly thriving. The crush of needy diners has forced it to raise mounds of new cash to support a fifteen-fold increase in spending and a pending move into larger quarters. Moreover, the Rainbow is also moving into brave new territory, offering meat-and-potatoes social services necessitated by increasingly leaner helpings from the government.    When area residents faced the loss of their homes because of lagging mortgage payments, Rainbow officials worked with banks and the county sheriff to help forestall foreclosures. The kitchen organized protest rallies to lobby for more state highway-construction jobs in the area, and it sent busloads to Washington and Harrisburg to rally for a higher minimum wage and for additional help to the jobless.    The Rainbow has abundant company. Despite the longest economic expansion in postwar America, the nation's soup kitchens seem busier than ever, dishing out not just hash but everything from counseling to day care. At the Jubilee Kitchen in north Pittsburgh, patrons can take classes toward a high-school diploma, use laundry facilities and even take a shower. The Women's Lunch Place in Boston shops for necessities, arranges transportation and organizes birthday parties for clients; once a week it brings a nurse into its kitchen to attend to its diners' health problems.    In Minnesota, a psychiatric social worker now works full time with the Duluth Soup Kitchen to handle patrons' child-abuse and alcoholism problems.    &quot;I was just getting inundated with problems that I wasn't trained to handle,&quot; says the kitchen's director, Jean Gornick. As it is, Ms. Gornick spends much of her time making sure patrons get sufficient clothing and housing.    Like the Rainbow Kitchen, most soup kitchens arose as temporary shelters against economic storms; Pittsburgh-area steelworkers rocked by layoffs organized the Rainbow Kitchen five years ago by gathering donations on street corners. The trend toward institutionalization of their role troubles many.    &quot;The kitchens have become an excuse for public programs to get worse and worse,&quot; contends Francis Piven, a social activist and political-science professor at City University in New York.    &quot;We were only supposed to assist social-service agencies, but now we're carrying the burden,&quot; adds Duluth's Ms. Gornick. &quot;We're no longer an emergency center. We're entrenched.&quot;    Ms. Patrick points to an incident that she says illustrates the problem: A welfare caseworker recently called the Rainbow asking it to help get medication for a welfare client.    &quot;They should be doing that, not us,&quot; says Ms. Patrick. Some soup kitchen directors actually have considered the admittedly radical step of closing their facilities as a way of jolting government and community leaders into dealing with the hunger problem. But for now, they concede, the stakes are too great.    Statistics tell the story. Though the number of Americans living in poverty has climbed by three million since 1980, roughly one million fewer people are getting food stamps today, according to the Food Research and Action Center, a Washington, D.C., anti-hunger group.    Recent cutbacks in the federal food-surplus program, which distributes free cheese, rice and powdered milk, are likely to exacerbate the situation. And these come at a time when cutbacks in a variety of other social programs, from housing to medicine, are eating into the food budget of the poor.    Some regions are particularly hard hit. In recession-plagued Texas, the number of persons seeking emergency food hit four million in 1986, and in New York, the number of free-food providers jumped to nearly 500 last year from 30 in 1981. And many receiving such help aren't the chronic poor but newcomers to the underclass, including those with jobs.    Here in Allegheny County, 70% of the 7,618 households seeking emergency food from one hot line last year were first-timers. So far this year, calls for emergency food have increased nearly 25%, reports the local Hunger Services Network. Numbers like that help explain why the Rainbow Kitchen feels compelled to continue expanding.    The Rainbow's origins were humble and its goals modest enough. As one of the kitchen's organizers, Ms. Patrick begged bakeries and supermarkets for castoffs and collected them in the trunk of her rusting 1973 Dodge Dart. Aided by a $10,000 grant from the local Catholic diocese, the Rainbow found a home in a bankrupt diner and began serving meals.    At first the kitchen served lunch on only Mondays and Wednesdays, letting the local church up the street provide meals on Tuesdays and Thursdays. But soon, it was open on Friday, and three years ago, on Father's Day, it launched weekend meals. The place was jammed.    For families too proud to eat at the kitchen with its storefront windows, a food pantry was added, allowing them to slip in quietly for bags of noodles, bread and baby formula. And when a school-crossing guard overheard children confiding they hadn't eaten that morning, she looked to the kitchen for help. The upshot: The Rainbow began a hot-breakfast program that has since been adopted by area schools.    As a recent visit revealed, the soup kitchen has become a powerful magnet, drawing hundreds who come for more than just daily nourishment. Mr. Kovacs, an octogenarian who croons love ballads to anyone who will listen, comes for camaraderie. For George, a middle-aged retarded man, the kitchen is a lifeline. He arrived five years ago, picked up a broom and, without saying a word, started cleaning up; he now gets paid the minimum wage.    Fresh faces appear at the Rainbow Kitchen almost daily, among them a young couple back from a disillusioning job-hunting sojourn to the Sun Belt. They expect to be on their feet in a month. Others show up between odd jobs or in the summer, when their children can't get free lunch at school.    There are freeloaders, of course. A young, sturdy construction worker, his hands caked with dirt from a morning's work, wolfs down a meal, then dashes out the door. But Robert Fersh bristles at the notion that soup kitchens are thriving because of spongers. &quot;If it was all freeloaders, then why didn't we see these lines at soup kitchens seven years ago?&quot; asks Mr. Fersh, Food Research's executive director.    For the Rainbow Kitchen, growth has only meant bigger problems. The staff of four -- reinforced by a cadre of senior-citizen and Vista volunteers, mentally retarded residents learning community skills, and an occasional Boy Scout troop -- is lucky to make it through each day.    Forget long-range planning. Rickie Howell, who runs the kitchen, faces the same questions daily: What will she serve? Will there be enough? Conditions frequently dictate the menu. The Rainbow often receives last-minute food donations that must be used immediately because it has inadequate freezer space to store them.    One morning, someone drops off bags of old cold cuts and cheese. Mrs. Howell spends another afternoon sorting through four donated crates of warm purple grapes, most encrusted in soft white mold.    The castoffs are ridiculous at times. Once a truck dumped 40,000 pounds of sweet potatoes at the soup kitchen after a local food processor refused to accept the late delivery. The kitchen, unable to use that many, sprang into action; staff members used bullhorns to unload the free potatoes. &quot;The operation is terribly inefficient,&quot; says Robert Anderson, a Rainbow founder.    Under such conditions, nutrition and food quality often give way to a more urgent concern: quantity. Lunch at the Rainbow one day is pinkish-gray hot dogs sinking in soupy baked beans. There's even dessert -- crushed and broken doughnuts delivered in a hefty trash bag from a local church. But sometimes, there's not even enough quantity. Elizabeth, a Czechoslovak immigrant with a flowered scarf tied under her chin, arrives another day at 12:25 p.m. to find the chicken all gone. She lunches on cole slaw and green beans.    Far more frustrating for Mr. Anderson and Ms. Patrick is being tied to the telephones in their cramped back offices, soliciting donations or writing grant proposals. (They each earn $18,000 annually from a grant.)    Chasing dollars leaves less and less time to help the soup kitchen's clients, who arrive not only hungry but also with mental-health, marital and drug- or alcohol-related problems. One mentally ill patron threw a chair at a volunteer. Another regular, bundled in a brown cape, his feet wrapped in cloth, was seen touching all the bread in the basket &quot;hoping no one else will eat it,&quot; says Mrs. Howell. Ms. Patrick points to four children who hang out here: Their mother is an alcoholic abused by their father.    Yet if the Rainbow doesn't chase dollars, there won't be the larger building needed for day-care services, more freezer space and storage for donated furniture. That's a dilemma for Mr. Anderson, who dwells on the irony of doing his job better.    &quot;I'm afraid we're becoming the substitute for a long-term solution,&quot; he says. &quot;We aren't the answer -- but we can't get out from under it.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>