<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870529-0039 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 05/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN INTENDS to ask allies for help in protecting Persian Gulf shipping.    In a meeting with congressional Republicans, the president said he would raise the issue at a June 8 economic summit in Venice. Meanwhile, Shultz, in an effort to ease congressional concern, said the administration won't get into a war. And a Reagan official said it may be several weeks before U.S. naval escorts would be ready. Pentagon officials told members of Congress that Baghdad said the pilot involved in the May 17 attack never received a warning from the USS Stark. A joint U.S.-Iraqi inquiry is expected to end today.    A Tehran official said a U.S. warship forced an Iranian airliner to change course over the gulf this week. The Navy hadn't any immediate comment.    ---   A FORMER U.S. ENVOY SAID he worked with the CIA to aid the Contras.    Lewis Tambs, then ambassador to Costa Rica, told congressional investigators that he worked with the intelligence agency to open a second military front for the Nicaraguan rebels in 1985 and 1986. He said he received his first instructions from Lt. Col. North, but understood the former White House aide was speaking for the CIA and State Department. Meanwhile, a former CIA station chief said he worried that former Air Force Gen. Secord would seize Contra assets in 1986.    Former CIA chief Casey sent a memo to McFarlane in 1984 proposing a plan to finance and equip the Contras if Congress cut off official U.S. aid.    ---   A CUBAN OFFICIAL DEFECTED to the U.S., flying a small plane to Florida.    The defector, Brig. Gen. Rafael del Pino Diaz, identified as deputy chief of the Cuban defense department, and four family members were placed under FBI guard after landing at Key West Naval Air Station, Justice Department officials said. Del Pino Diaz, former chief of the Cuban air force, is considered the most senior Havana government official to defect.    U.S. intelligence officials believe the defector can provide a wealth of data about Cuban military capabilities and the workings of the Castro regime.    ---   Gorbachev discussed arms control issues with other Warsaw Pact leaders in East Berlin. While details weren't disclosed, Soviet officials indicated that there would be no unilateral withdrawal of Soviet troops from Eastern Europe. Spokesmen said there would be no report on the conference before its conclusion, scheduled for today.    ---   A House panel heard testimony and released documents indicating that ICN Pharmaceuticals may have attempted to illegally sell an anti-AIDS drug. The California company allegedly sold Virazole to doctors for use with AIDS patients even though the FDA hadn't approved it for that use, according to data gathered by the subcommittee.    Reagan is expected this weekend to recommend AIDS testing of many Americans but hold off on education programs that his own public health officials say are needed more urgently.    ---   The Senate voted 47-43 to delay for four months the sanctions on employers included in the sweeping immigration law enacted last year. The provision is part of a $9.4 billion supplemental appropriations bill for the fiscal year that began Oct. 1. The Senate is expected to complete work on the bill this week.    ---   A federal judge postponed the perjury trial of former Reagan aide Deaver until a U.S. appeals court decides his challenge to the constitutionality of the independent counsel law. Meanwhile, the State Department went to court to oppose an attempt to subpoena Canada's ambassador to the U.S. as a witness in the Deaver case.    ---   FAA chief Engen pledged to reduce airline flights if necessary to ensure safety this summer. The head of the National Transportation Safety Board, however, said that the situation already is &quot;critical&quot; in some areas because of overcrowding. Their comments came at a Senate Aviation subcommittee hearing.    ---   The African National Congress claimed responsibility for two car bombings that killed four white policemen outside a Johannesburg courthouse last week. The South African government had characterized the bombings as the worst ever in the city. The ANC pledged to continue anti-apartheid attacks within the country.    ---   Armed gunmen in Iran abducted a British diplomat, identified as first secretary at the British interests section at the Swedish Embassy in Tehran. Responsibility for the kidnapping wasn't immediately claimed.    ---   The Argentine House approved a presidential plan to move the country's capital from Buenos Aires to two small cities, Viedma and Carmen de Patagones, in the region of Patagonia. The Senate had approved the measure in March, and thousands of government workers are expected to begin moving as early as next year.    ---   The U.S. and New Zealand suspended aid to Fiji to protest the May 14 coup that ousted the South Pacific nation's elected government. Current figures are not available, but the U.S. gave Fiji about $1 million in 1982 while New Zealand provided $3.8 million in 1983. Hundreds of the majority ethnic Indians currently are seeking to emigrate.    ---   Gandhi denounced Sri Lanka's offensive against Hindu Tamil separatists. The Indian prime minister called on Colombo to halt the fighting, calling it a &quot;slaughter.&quot; A rebel group said as many as 500 civilians have been killed, while the government said it is consolidating its hold on the Jaffna Peninsula and successfully raiding its capital.    ---   An anti-terrorism conference opened in Paris as interior and justice ministers from nine Western nations sought to coordinate defense efforts among the 12 Common Market nations and other Western industrialized countries, including Japan and the U.S. </TEXT></DOC>