<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870401-0078 </DOCNO><HL> Your Money Matters:Trading at Time of Stock OfferingsRaises Questions of Manipulation---By Michael W. Miller and Ann MonroeStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><TEXT>   Case 1: It is the day before XYZ Corp.'s secondary offering of stock to the public. The offering's price tomorrow will be today's closing price. The securities firm underwriting the offering starts buying large amounts of XYZ stock with the express purpose of raising its price. At the end of the day, XYZ is up -- and so is tomorrow's offering price.    Case 2: Once again, it is the day before the offering and the underwriter is in the market buying XYZ's stock. The stock doesn't rise, but the underwriter's efforts keep it from falling. At the end of the day it closes unchanged -- and tomorrow's offering price is higher than it would have been without the underwriter's efforts.    These two scenarios don't look markedly different, but in the eyes of the law they are.    The first one is outright stock manipulation, a federal crime. The second is perfectly in compliance with securities laws. Indeed, the government and the securities industry agree this kind of trading is a vital part of the capital-raising process.    Judging right from wrong in trading a stock at the time of a public offering has become a subject of intense debate because of broker Boyd L. Jefferies. Two weeks ago, he agreed to plead guilty to two felonies, one of which was related to an alleged scheme to manipulate the price of Fireman's Fund Corp. shares just before a secondary stock offering last May 9. Mr. Jefferies, who resigned as chairman of the Los Angeles-based Jefferies Group Inc. securities firm, also settled related Securities and Exchange Commission charges without admitting or denying guilt.    Although Mr. Jefferies wasn't an underwriter of the Fireman's Fund issue, his case highlights an area that affects a wide range of large and small investors. It is an area where the line between legality and illegality is unusually thin.    And it is also an area where a few investment bankers privately admit that they routinely break the law when they see problems looming in an offering. For example, they say they may ask another securities firm or institution to make trades to manipulate the price of a stock.    &quot;The people making the rules aren't familiar with all the contingencies,&quot; says one underwriter, who admits that he often violates SEC rules by secretly bringing in outside investors to help smooth out a difficult offering.    Under SEC rules, all traders participating in an offering -- issuers, underwriters, syndicates and others acting on their behalf -- are forbidden to trade in the stock immediately before the offering and while it is taking place.    But the rule has an important exception: As a safeguard against price volatility that could hurt an offering, underwriters are allowed to make &quot;stabilizing&quot; trades. Those trades, however, aren't allowed to raise the price of the stock, and they must be disclosed.    &quot;It's probably the clearest situation where the maintenance of what under other circumstances might be deemed to be an artificial market is explicitly sanctioned,&quot; says Larry Bergmann, who is in charge of monitoring trading practices in the SEC's division of market regulation.    (The rules that permit stabilizing trades don't apply to circumstances like those described in the SEC allegations against Mr. Jefferies. For one thing, the sanctions apply to traders working on behalf of an underwriter; the SEC didn't specify any official link between Mr. Jefferies and the stock offering. And even if he were linked to the underwriting, he allegedly went outside the sanctions' bounds by purchases that lifted the stock's price.)    On Wall Street, legal stabilization is a delicate maneuver, and not only because it brushes so near to illegal trading. It also requires balancing the conflicting interests of issuers, who want to see the stock's price as high as possible, and prospective buyers, who want to see it low.    Underwriters say they usually make stabilizing trades after an offering rather than before. That's because investors would be likely to squawk if they thought they could have bought the stock cheaper. Buyers like post-offering stabilizing trades because the underwriter is effectively protecting them against loss.    Do underwriters monkey with offerings outside the stabilization rules? A few Wall Street underwriters, speaking on the condition that they not be identified, describe a variety of illegal maneuvers that they say help grease the public-offering machine.    For instance, underwriters don't like to stage an offering if the previous day's last trade moved the price up in what they think was an aberration. This, they worry, may make the stock look volatile and lead predatory traders to short it, selling borrowed shares and driving the price down. The traders then profit by repurchasing stock and selling it to the underwriters, who are apt to pay a higher price for it.    To avoid inviting that scenario, market professionals say that underwriters sometimes find a friendly institution that will sell a stock at the close of the market just prior to an offering. This illegal tactic is designed to drive the price down.    Some underwriters also tell of illegally &quot;parking&quot; part of an offering with a friendly institution, if demand is weak, in order to get some of the stock out of the market. &quot;If we believe there aren't enough bona fide orders, (parking) gives the impression there are more,&quot; says a syndicate official. He adds that he agrees to buy the stock from the cooperating firm at a price just above what it paid.    One underwriter says he has tried to push down the price of a stock to move issuers and investors closer together on an acceptable price. Say the market price is $35 a share, but the underwriter believes investors won't pay much more than $34 for a big new offering. He may try to push the market price down to, say, $34.50, making it easier for him to talk the issuer in to agreeing to a price of $34.25.    SEC officials concede that some shadowy activities may escape their notice. &quot;There's going to be some market activity you're not going to detect, especially when people are purposely concealing their steps,&quot; says the commission's Mr. Bergmann. It's especially hard to ferret out manipulations by traders who have no apparent connection to an offering, he says.    In general, the SEC maintains, securities firms are cautious about underwriting rules and regularly consult the commission about how to proceed in an offering. Officials at major firms say their rules on the subject are strict.    The few cases the SEC brings against underwriting violators usually involve obscure issues offered by firms out of Wall Street's mainstream. In one of the most prominent recent cases, the SEC charged First Jersey Securities Inc. with illegally bidding up shares of Geosearch Inc., a little oil and gas company, while First Jersey was distributing the stock. First Jersey settled with the SEC in 1984 without admitting or denying the charges.    Securities lawyers and SEC officials also argue that underwriters couldn't get away for long with illegally manipulating stock offerings, because they would alienate investors, particularly big institutions. Says Andrew Klein, a Washington lawyer who used to run the SEC's market-regulation office, &quot;If they buy it at too high a price, and it falls out of bed&quot; soon after the offering, &quot;next time you call them up they'll be very skeptical.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>