<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890929-0138 </DOCNO><DD> = 890929 </DD><AN> 890929-0138. </AN><HL> Letters to the Editor:@  Bennett Fears 'Public Policy Disaster' -- It's AlreadyHere </HL><DD> 09/29/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><GV> FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL) </GV><TEXT>   William Bennett is entirely right (editorial page, Sept. 19) that &quot;there was little, if anything, new in&quot; my open letter to him -- just as there is little, if anything, new in his proposed program to rid this nation of the scourge of drugs. That is why I am so disturbed by that program. It flies in the face of decades of experience. More police, more jails, more-stringent penalties, increased efforts at interception, increased publicity about the evils of drugs -- all this has been accompanied by more, not fewer, drug addicts; more, not fewer, crimes and murders; more, not less, corruption, more, not fewer, innocent victims.    Like Mr. Bennett, his predecessors were &quot;committed to fighting the problem on several fronts through imaginative policies and hard work over a long period of time.&quot; What evidence convinces him that the same policies on a larger scale will end the drug scourge? He offers none in his response to me, only assertion and the conjecture that legalizing drugs would produce &quot;a public policy disaster&quot; -- as if that is not exactly what we already have.    Legalizing drugs is not equivalent to surrender in the fight against drug addiction. On the contrary, I believe that legalizing drugs is a precondition for an effective fight. We might then have a real chance to prevent sales to minors; get drugs out of the schools and playgrounds; save crack babies and reduce their number; launch an effective educational campaign on the personal costs of drug use -- not necessarily conducted, I might add, by government; punish drug users guilty of harming others while &quot;under the influence&quot;; and encourage large numbers of addicts to volunteer for treatment and rehabilitation when they could do so without confessing to criminal actions. Some habitual drug users would, as he says, &quot;continue to rob and steal to get money for clothes, food or shelter.&quot; No doubt also there will be &quot;a black market to undercut the regulated one&quot; -- as there now is bootleg liquor thanks to high taxes on alcoholic beverages. But these would be on a far smaller scale than at present. Perfection is not for this world. Pursuing the unattainable best can prevent achievement of the attainable good.    As Mr. Bennett recognizes, the victims of drugs fall into two classes: those who choose to use drugs and innocent victims -- who in one way or another include almost all the rest of us. Legalization would drastically reduce the number of innocent victims. That is a virtual certainty. The number of self-chosen victims might increase, but it is pure conjecture that the number would, as he asserts, skyrocket. In any event, while both groups of victims are to be pitied, the innocent victims surely have a far greater claim on our sympathy than the self-chosen victims -- or else the concept of personal responsibility has been emptied of all content.    A particular class of innocent victims generally overlooked is foreigners. By what right do we impose our values on the residents of Colombia? Or, by our actions undermine the very foundations of their society and condemn hundreds perhaps thousands of Colombians to violent death? All because the U.S. government is unable to enforce its own laws on its own citizens. I regard such actions as indefensible, entirely aside from the distortions they introduce into our foreign policy.    Finally, he and I interpret the &quot;Founders' view of our system of government&quot; very differently. To him, they believed &quot;that government has a responsibility to . . . help educate citizens about right and wrong.&quot; To me, that is a totalitarian view opening the road to thought control and would have been utterly unacceptable to the Founders. I do not believe, and neither did they, that it is the responsibility of government to tell free citizens what is right and wrong. That is something for them to decide for themselves. Government is a means to enable each of us to pursue our own vision in our own way so long as we do not interfere with the right of others to do the same. In the words of the Declaration of Independence, &quot;all Men are . . . endowed by their Creator with certain unalienable Rights, that among these are Life, Liberty, and the pursuit of Happiness. That to secure these Rights Governments are instituted among Men, deriving their just powers from the consent of the Governed.&quot; In my view, Justice Louis Brandeis was a &quot;true friend of freedom&quot; when he wrote, &quot;Experience should teach us to be most on our guard to protect liberty when the government's purposes are beneficial. Men born to freedom are naturally alert to repel invasions of their liberty by evil-minded rulers. The greater dangers to liberty lurk in insidious encroachment by men of zeal, well meaning, but without understanding.&quot;    Milton Friedman    Hoover Institution    Stanford, Calif.    ---   Mr. Friedman (&quot;An Open Letter to Bill Bennett,&quot; Sept. 7) traces the drug crisis to a decision to continue criminalization of narcotics: &quot;Had drugs been decriminalized 17 years ago, 'crack' would never have been invented (it was invented because the high cost of illegal drugs made it profitable to provide a cheaper version) and there would today be far fewer addicts.&quot;    It's always more profitable for drug producers (or any other producer) to make a substitute that is cheaper to produce. Moreover, the incentive to produce the cheaper substitute is greater in a decriminalized environment in which monopoly profits are absent than in a criminalized environment with its constricted supply and higher prices and profits.    Criminalization, in short, restricts both the supply and demand for narcotics by penalizing drug-related behavior, while raising economic profits to those successful in avoiding prosecution. By restricting supply, both through deterrence and the incarceration of producers, criminalization limited the number of potential producers and no doubt delayed the invention of &quot;crack&quot; rather than accelerating it as Mr. Friedman has contended.    Robert N. Ray    Economist    U.S. Small Business Administration    Washington    ---   It is hard to know what to do about drugs. However, Mr. Bennett's reply to Mr. Friedman convinces me that soon the federal Office of National Drug Control Policy will become another cabinet department with a massive budget. Washington, D.C.'s Mayor Marion Barry says $100 billion wouldn't be enough.    Paul Craig Roberts    Center for Strategic and International Studies    Washington    ---   Mr. Bennett raises the question, &quot;Do you think it was a mistake to repeal Prohibition?&quot; That's not a hypothetical question, but a historical question -- and a question that you have several decades of hindsight with which to answer. If his answer is &quot;Yes, it was a mistake,&quot; the public has a right to know that's where he is coming from. And if his answer is &quot;no, it wasn't a mistake,&quot; well, what does that imply?    I hope he will publicly address this question in the near future.    Paul Dickman    Chicago    ---   In the current state of political hysteria, every politician from Jesse Helms to Jesse Jackson has enlisted in the war on drugs. I have found that whenever so many politicians agree on anything it is generally dangerous to our liberties or our pocketbooks. In this case both are at risk.    Anthony F. Williams    Fredonia, Ariz.    ---   I don't understand why drug deaths will not increase if drugs are legalized.    Mr. Friedman says that after legalization of drugs we should prohibit the sale of drugs to minors, outlaw the advertising of drugs and take measures similar to those taken against alcohol and tobacco. Occasional and even moderate users of tobacco and alcohol can function in society. In fact, a full 20% of adults describe themselves as moderate drinkers. But drugs are more treacherous, more insidiously addictive.    I understand what a moderate smoker or drinker is. I don't understand the concept of a moderate heroin-user or a moderate crack-user -- they seem to be brief stages in a cycle that ends in death.    If drugs are legalized, drug use will increase. If drug use increases then it will be a larger problem in homes, schools and offices. The demand for drug-treatment centers and programs will skyrocket.    Anthony J. Gajda    New York    ---   Mr. Friedman says, &quot;Had drugs been decriminalized . . . 'crack' would never have been invented (it was invented because the high cost of illegal drugs made it profitable to provide a cheaper version) . . . .&quot; This is incorrect.    Crack, or freebase -- smokable cocaine -- was not invented by or for poor users looking for a cheaper substitute, but by rich cocaine users looking for a more intense drug experience. Crack is not cheaper than cocaine, either per gram or per hour; a single dose indeed costs less, but crack users go through many more doses. (Injection is cheaper than either snorting or smoking but remains relatively rare.)    The collapse of black-market cocaine prices in the early 1980s helped create a mass market for crack, which spread slowly across the country as more and more dealers adopted the relevant processing and marketing techniques. Had cocaine been legal, the price would have been lower and the rate of technological diffusion higher.    I do not believe that a convincing case for legalization of cocaine can be made at all. But it certainly cannot be made unless Mr. Friedman and legalization's other advocates are prepared to do the work they have thus far shirked: specifying the details of a policy of legalization and making empirically supportable predictions about that policy's likely consequences.    Mark A.R. Kleiman    Lecturer in Public Policy    Harvard University    Cambridge    ---   Messrs. Friedman and Bennett limited themselves to economic and crime issues and ignored the moral question.    While I agree with Mr. Friedman that re-legalization will reduce the harm stemming from drugs, I fear repeal will be delayed until Christians wake up to a simple fact: We've overrendered to Caesar again. In the Inquisition we rendered unto Caesar the health of the soul. Two centuries ago, Americans saw the mistake and separated Church and State. Now Christians are becoming Inquisitors again by rendering unto Caesar the health of the body.    We Christians call the body the &quot;Temple of the Holy Spirit,&quot; never the &quot;Temple of Congress.&quot; If the body belongs to God, we Christians must call for the separation of Health and State. Period. This includes the re-legalization of drugs (they were legal until 1914).    When the Church stops playing fulcrum to &quot;Kaiser Bill&quot; Bennett, we'll see both political parties come round to the libertarian position.    Marshall Fritz    President    Advocates for Self-Government    Fresno, Calif.    ---   In any war, two early casualties are truth and civility. This is also true of the drug war. How dare Mr. Bennett write such an ugly reply to Mr. Friedman's gracious letter. What has Mr. Bennett accomplished? For one thing, he helped expand federal control over American education. Now he seeks to suppress the rest of our liberties because a tiny minority smokes crack cocaine.    Government officials are urging higher taxes; the abolition of financial privacy; a new currency with bar codes and embedded tracing devices; warrantless searches of homes, cars and people; and IRS audits for everyone with more than $1,000 in bills of $50 or $100.    Oppressive government is the real foe, not drug dealers who are rich and influential only because of prohibition.    Llewellyn H. Rockwell Jr.    President    Ludwig von Mises Institute    Burlingame, Calif. </TEXT></DOC>