<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870107-0097 </DOCNO><HL> The Utilities of the 1990s---By Irwin M. Stelzer</HL><DD> 01/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> UTILITIES (UTI)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK) </IN><TEXT>   As the economy continues to grow, probably at an accelerated rate as the trade deficit falls and tax reform takes hold, electric utilities and some of their customers are beginning to get nervous.    In recent years, utility executives, pressured by shareholders not to invest in an industry whose regulators seemed determined to bankrupt it, decided to diversify into unregulated businesses. Customers, certain that the excess capacity made new plants, and their financing, unnecessary, applauded the utilities' new antipathy to construction. And politicians pressured regulators to retaliate against companies bringing new, expensive plants on line.    Now these various worms seem to be turning. Utility managements have found it not so easy, after all, to make money by diversifying into competitive markets. Management consultants McKinsey andamp; Co. estimate that 70% of such ventures have been losers.    And customers in some parts of the country, as well as serious students of the industry, are getting nervous about the long-term prospects for an adequate supply of reliable, efficient energy. Harvard researchers, after an exhaustive study of the likely course of future demand, have concluded that &quot;there is reasonable cause for concern about the ability of the power industry to satisfy electricity demand in the 1990s without incurring shortages, price increases above and beyond those predicted, or other severe measures to limit demand.&quot; Yet no utility would even consider starting a nuclear plant. Indeed, most are doing all they can to avoid ordering plants of any kind. These companies would rather increase dividends or buy in their stock or begin to play the takeover game -- anything to avoid investments that politically motivated regulators might arbitrarily write down or off.    In short, the consequences of the no-build policy of the recent past will need serious review as GNP grows, along with the need to increase America's international competitiveness by keeping manufacturing costs down. But, absent major reforms by both the industry and its regulators, it is highly unlikely that the question will be resolved in a rational way, or that we will enter the next century with a sufficient supply of low-cost electric power.    That supply must include such conservation devices as are economic and energy from whatever sources are cheapest. The danger seems to be, however, not that conservation, solar energy, wind power and other newer sources will be ignored, but that coal and nuclear powers won't play the role in the supply mix that their economic advantages indicate.    Some of the fault lies with electric-utility managers. In an era in which some regions have excess power that could be &quot;exported,&quot; they still resist arrangements that would let that power flow to needier regions. Instead, they pull up the drawbridges over their moats and fight to protect their monopoly franchises. Many have good reasons: Insane regulatory policies often prevent them from meeting competition or obligate them to remain prepared to meet the future needs of customers who have chosen to be served by a competitor. But in the end, the industry will be unable to prevent competition by repeating its recent disgraceful lobbying success: It persuaded Congress to force the General Services Administration to prevent Defense Department installations from buying power from the lowest bidders.    Instead, it will have to follow the lead of Commonwealth Edison Co. of Chicago, which has just sought permission to start selling power in 1990 from some of its nuclear plants in the open market. More competitive markets, not local monopolies, are the wave of the future.    Just as the industry will have to make changes if we are to have the lowest-cost power, moving around the country in response to economic incentives, so will the regulators. These commissioners have shattered the compact that existed between the regulated utilities and society. This compact had two aspects. First, in return for a monopoly franchise, utilities accepted an obligation to serve all comers. Second, in return for agreeing to commit capital to the business, utilities were assured a fair opportunity to earn a reasonable return on that capital.    That two-faceted bargain was the basis on which the industry operated for most of its history. It no longer exists. Monopoly franchises are being eroded by the entry of new producers of power, ranging from entrepreneurs financing small hydroelectric developments to large chemical companies selling excess power. Many of them are subsidized by artificial prices extracted from utilities and their customers, others by tax breaks that would have embarrassed the old oil barons -- and by the increasing ability of customers to shop around for power from distant suppliers.    And the financial terms of the deal have been changed. Regulators are now refusing utilities an opportunity to earn profits on their investments if subsequent developments provide them with the hindsight to see that a plant should not have been built -- at least not just now or not just there or not just in that way. There can, of course, be no denying that many plants have been built inefficiently, by utilities that let costs get out of hand. But the customary regulatory device of disallowing truly imprudently incurred costs can cope with such inefficiencies. We have, however, seen more than that: overtly political ceilings set on rate increases; refusals to allow companies to earn on investments in plants brought in on time and on budget; disallowances of costs incurred in pursuit of goals -- e.g., less dependence on high-cost Arab oil -- reasonable at one time, less clearly so in circumstances altered by outside events.    Politicians also must share some of the blame. They have whipped up unwarranted fears about nuclear power without at the same time saying where they expect future supplies of energy to come from, and at what cost. Certainly the public should be free to decide that nuclear plants are too risky, coal plants too dirty and oil-burning plants too likely to place our necks in OPEC's ever-ready noose. But our political leaders have an obligation to set forth the costs of the alternatives, one of which sensibly might be to do with less, even at the cost of personal inconvenience.    Forcing energy forecasters to lower demand projections, pressuring state regulators to deny reasonable rates, requiring consumers to pay for high-cost power from solar, wind and other sources without making that explicit -- all may be effective means of pandering to voters' short-term interests. But they are irresponsible.    There is blame enough to go around. But there is also time enough for reasonable men to agree to a set of public-policy initiatives that can assure us of a reliable, efficient energy supply in the future. The industry will have to live with competition between utilities and from other suppliers; regulators will have to adopt rules that are fair and can be relied on when making long-term investments; elected officials will have to take the risk of adopting a long-term view of their constituents' interests. Unattainable, perhaps. But worth a try, especially now, when declining taxes are likely to keep utility rates -- and consumer tempers -- down.    ---   Mr. Stelzer is director of the Harvard University Energy and Environmental Policy Center and U.S. economic correspondent for the London Sunday Times. </TEXT></DOC>