<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861223-0003 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/23/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN DOESN'T PLAN to offer pardons to Poindexter and North.    A White House spokesman said the president didn't favor pardons as a way of inducing the former national security adviser and his one-time aide to testify about the Iran-Contra operation. The spokesman said the issue was raised at an Oval Office meeting last week. He also said that Reagan &quot;retains the right to executive clemency.&quot; Separately, Reagan's designated national security adviser, Frank Carlucci, is moving to tighten the administration's management of covert operations.    Carlucci is proposing the creation of an interagency mechanism to oversee covert operations carried out by U.S. intelligence agencies, sources said.    ---   CHINESE OFFICIALS BANNED unauthorized gatherings in Shanghai.    Authorities issued stern warnings to demonstrators who have participated in rallies for a more democratic society, saying further public disruptions wouldn't be tolerated and police approval would be needed for future gatherings. While hundreds of students assembled for a fourth day in the city's main square, a planned rally never fully materialized. Western diplomats and Reagan officials said the protests almost certainly will increase tension within Peking's top leadership.    The street protests generally have been peaceful, although there were reports of vehicles being overturned and a clash with police Friday.    ---   The aircraft Voyager encountered headwinds off the coast of Mexico as it entered the home stretch of its nonstop flight around the world without refueling. The experimental plane has ample fuel and was expected to land today at Edwards Air Force Base in California, one day ahead of schedule, according to the ground crew.    ---   Israel lifted media censorship rules in the case of former nuclear worker Mordechai Vanunu, who made known Sunday that he was kidnapped in Rome and brought to Jerusalem to face charges related to the release of atomic secrets. Vanunu, held incommunicado, made the disclosure by flashing a message written on the palm of his hand.    ---   Chad's government accused the Libyan army and air force of using napalm and toxic gas in battles with pro-government forces in northern Chad. Libyan forces reportedly are attempting to dislodge Chadian troops and recently allied rebel forces from strongholds in and around Bardai, about 400 miles from the capital of N'Djamena.    ---   The Philippine government rejected communist rebel demands but said it hoped progress could be made in peace talks that are scheduled to begin Jan. 6. The rebels had sought a share of power, the dismantling of U.S. military bases and a merging of armed forces. President Aquino's spokesman said the demands weren't negotiable.    ---   Uruguay's president signed into law a measure granting amnesty to police and soldiers accused of human rights violations during the 1973-85 military rule. The move by President Sanguinetti, which came after an all-night debate in Montevideo's House of Deputies, was met with demonstrations. The Senate passed the bill Sunday.    ---   Prison officials in Turin, Italy, said former intelligence agent Francesco Pazienza, who was linked to a series of crimes and Italian political plots, was freed from prison provisionally. Pazienza, still subject to several inquiries, was extradited from the U.S. last June for questioning about the 1982 collapse of Banco Ambrosiano.    ---   The Church of England said it was unlikely that hostage negotiator Terry Waite would undertake a Christmas mission to win the release of Britons and Americans held in Lebanon. Continued fighting at refugee camps in Beirut was cited.    ---   An accused spy in Nicaragua said he wasn't working for the U.S. government when he was arrested Dec. 12 near a restricted air base. Sam N. Hall said he was in Nicaragua to gather data on Managua's Soviet-made helicopters, but was unclear about who would use the information.    ---   Iran said more than 100 people were killed in an Iraqi air raid on a town in western Iran. It announced an indefinite extension of its reprisal shelling of Iraqi military and economic targets, and Tehran's foreign minister asked the U.N. for action to stop Baghdad's attacks on residential areas.    ---   Solidarity has established a special group to monitor legal abuses by Poland's Communist authorities, opposition sources in Warsaw said. The outlawed union's commission, formed at the urging of Lech Walesa, has representatives in 11 cities and will review the existing legal system for injustice.    ---   Pakistan's prime minister announced a new, smaller cabinet consisting of ministers who had served in the government that resigned Saturday following riots in Karachi. Policy changes aren't expected.    ---   Incendiary bombs ignited fires in four Hamburg department stores, raising to 12 the number of businesses firebombed in two days, West German authorities said. There weren't any injuries, but extensive damage was reported. Responsibility for the firebombings wasn't claimed.    ---   India withdrew its army troops after a show of force to contain violence in Goa territory, state-run radio in Bombay reported. Authorities, however, continued to send paramilitary police into the territory, where at least six people died in weekend violence sparked by a language dispute. </TEXT></DOC>