<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871119-0112 </DOCNO><HL> After the Fall:One Man's ReboundShows There is LifeAfter Insider Trading---But Story of Adrian AntoniuMay Have Second Moral:That Some Traits Persist---A Shaky Sporting-Goods Plan---By James B. StewartStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)RETAILING (RET) </IN><TEXT>      {Second of two articles}   At a glittering Hollywood cocktail party, investment banker Adrian Antoniu -- tanned, handsome, laughing -- is pictured with two beautiful women: Natalie Wood, the film star, and Francesca Stanfill, Mr. Antoniu's fiancee and the daughter of Dennis Stanfill, the chairman of Twentieth Century Fox Film Corp.    The photograph now lies buried in a folder in Mr. Antoniu's high-rise Minneapolis apartment, a fading reminder of the life shattered by his 1982 guilty plea to insider-trading charges. Natalie Wood is dead, Mr. Stanfill is no longer the chairman of Fox, and Mr. Antoniu's marriage to Ms. Stanfill collapsed less than a week after a wedding-eve confession that he was about to be embroiled in scandal.    But the good life, he believes, is again within his reach. The irrepressible Mr. Antoniu is now the president and chief executive of Sport-About Inc., a Minnesota-based company that franchises sporting-goods stores around the country. Despite his own past, Sport-About's rapidly deteriorating financial condition, complaints by angry franchisees and creditors, and investigations of Mr. Antoniu's recent activities, Sport-About is planning a $2.2 million public offering that Mr. Antoniu predicts will succeed.    For sheer audacity -- combined with wit, charm and a penchant for separating investors from their money -- Mr. Antoniu is unrivaled among former insider traders. Bruce Harmon, a wealthy Tampa, Fla., resident who nearly invested $500,000 in Sport-About earlier this year, considers him &quot;one of the best con artists I've ever met.&quot;    Mr. Antoniu's fall and surprising rebound prove there is life after insider trading. But his story also suggests that some character traits that may give rise to insider trading can be hard to change. Insider trading is a form of fraud, and some Sport-About franchisees now claim they have been defrauded by Mr. Antoniu.    They have lodged complaints with regulators. The Florida Division of Consumer Services says it has recently referred three such complaints about Mr. Antoniu and Sport-About to the state attorney general for further investigation. &quot;We felt this might involve possible criminal violations,&quot; says Richard Brown, the Florida consumer official handling the complaints.    Sheldon Zipkin, a lawyer with the Florida attorney general's office, confirms that the matter is under investigation and that his office has referred information to the Minnesota attorney general's office.    Mr. Antoniu denies any wrongdoing. &quot;I don't have anything to worry about,&quot; the former investment banker says. &quot;I have always followed the advice of my lawyer and accountants.&quot; He says that he has cooperated in an inquiry by Florida officials but that he isn't aware the matter has been referred to the attorney general's office. In any case, he says, Sport-About's problems will be cured by the public offering and are commonplace in any rapidly growing franchise business.    As with so many aspects of his life, he believes he is being subjected to greater scrutiny because of his past notoriety. &quot;I'm not complaining, but it's been hell&quot; to overcome the stigma of the insider-trading conviction, he says. &quot;Every day I have to sell myself, to explain what went wrong and how.&quot;    The very glamour of Mr. Antoniu's previous life has made it all the harder to put it behind him. Mr. Antoniu, now 41 years old, is a once-impoverished Romanian immigrant who worked his way through Harvard Business School and into two of Wall Street's most elite firms: Morgan Stanley andamp; Co. and Lehman Brothers Kuhn Loeb Inc. He also thrived in the competitive social worlds of Hollywood, Manhattan and old-money Europe.    In 1978, he was in Venice for his marriage to Ms. Stanfill -- the woman in the photograph. On the eve of their wedding, he confessed that he was the target of an insider-trading investigation. The elaborate ceremony went forward, but the marriage was soon annulled. Ms. Stanfill, who remarried, is now a free-lance journalist and Manhattan socialite.    Mr. Antoniu was fired by Lehman Brothers when he returned from his wedding, and his social life collapsed. He fled to Italy to escape arrest but later negotiated a plea and returned.    He had been the mastermind of an insider stock-trading scheme so sophisticated that it took prosecutors nearly 10 years to wind up the case. In this scheme, he enlisted a co-conspirator, E. Jacques Courtois Jr., an investment banker at Morgan Stanley who had worked there with Mr. Antoniu before Mr. Antoniu moved to Lehman Brothers. Mr. Courtois leaked confidential information about pending mergers and acquisitions to Mr. Antoniu, who in turn traded through a stockbroker, James Newman. Mr. Newman shared in the proceeds.    After appearing as the star witness against Mr. Newman, who was convicted, Mr. Antoniu was fined $5,000 and sentenced to 39 months' probation and a 30-day prison term. The prison sentence was later suspended. Mr. Courtois pleaded guilty and served 4 1/2 months of a six-month sentence. Mr. Newman served 13 months.    Despite the scandal, friends from Mr. Antoniu's days as a rising star on Wall Street helped him rebuild his life. He became a consultant to several companies, including, he says, Hayward, Calif.-based ComputerLand Corp. (ComputerLand couldn't be reached to confirm this.) He says that he wanted to get away from the fast pace of Manhattan and that a friend encouraged him to move to Minneapolis. Mr. Antoniu asked the Securities and Exchange Commission to let him re-enter the securities industry, but he was turned down. The decision is under appeal.    In Minneapolis, a local businessman approached him for advice about selling his business, Sport-About, which sold sporting goods out of franchisees' homes. Mr. Antoniu envisioned a national chain of stores. He persuaded a group of European investors who had been impressed by his earlier career to back him, raised about $500,000 and bought the company.    With his good looks and charm intact, the unmarried Mr. Antoniu took to Minneapolis society as easily as he had to the Manhattan and Hollywood whirl. &quot;He's a master of networking,&quot; says Kermath Ward, formerly a top official at Sport-About. &quot;At cocktail parties, he'd have a beautiful woman with him. He'd always meet 15 or 20 new people.&quot;    Mr. Antoniu has managed to maintain some trappings of the life he once led. Colleagues say he travels widely, often on business, spending time in Aspen, the Caribbean and Acapulco. He bought a large two-story house with swimming pool in Coral Gables, Fla., for $325,000 and hired a decorator to remodel it.    Still, his colleagues say, the comparatively quiet life he leads in Minneapolis is nothing like the fast lane he once occupied. He rents his apartment and leases a four-year-old Audi. His salary, disclosed in the Sport-About prospectus, is $60,000.    Mr. Antoniu has never hidden his insider-trading past, say those who know him, and for the most part he has been readily forgiven. &quot;He doesn't like to talk about it,&quot; says Stephen Sherwood, hired by Mr. Antoniu as Sport-About's director of merchandising. &quot;He gave me some things to read. I asked him why he did it, and he said it was a gray area of the law at the time. I figured he made a mistake and he'd paid for it.&quot;    Others say that while Mr. Antoniu never lied about his insider trading, he glossed over the seriousness of his misdeeds. The Sport-About franchising circular, in a biographical section about the company's officers, notes that Mr. Antoniu was employed in corporate finance at Morgan Stanley and in mergers and acquisitions at Lehman Brothers, but says nothing about why he left those firms and doesn't mention insider trading.    In a section labeled &quot;litigation,&quot; the circular does disclose that he pleaded guilty in 1982 to &quot;misappropriating non-public information&quot; in violation of two provisions of the U.S. Code, but doesn't mention insider trading per se or the underlying facts of his case.    Mr. Antoniu says -- and the SEC supports him -- that the circular contains more information about his offense than is required, and that while SEC rules didn't require him to disclose the offense at all in the prospectus for Sport-About, he nonetheless included the information.    Mr. Harmon, the Tampa investor, says he learned the extent of Mr. Antoniu's activities only by reading a recent magazine article about the case. &quot;He'd always brushed it aside like it was nothing,&quot; Mr. Harmon says.    The disgruntled Mr. Harmon questions Mr. Antoniu on other grounds as well. He says Mr. Antoniu placed an ad in Sports Illustrated magazine listing a Tampa location for a Sport-About outlet ostensibly operated by Mr. Harmon, along with Mr. Harmon's home phone number. There was no such store in operation. Mr. Harmon says he had only tentatively agreed to operate a franchise. &quot;He apologized but offered no explanation&quot; when confronted, Mr. Harmon says.    Mr. Antoniu acknowledges that the franchise wasn't operating, but says he was only trying to help Mr. Harmon by giving him some &quot;pre-opening publicity.&quot;    Several franchisees have complained that Mr. Antoniu misstated Sport-About's finances. For example, the franchise offering circular dated February 1987, distributed to several franchisees, shows an operating loss of $96,000 for the six months ended June 30, 1986. But the Sport-About prospectus filed with the SEC shows an operating loss of $421,000 for that period.    Mr. Antoniu says the discrepancy arose because of a switch to stricter accounting procedures by Sport-About. He says he simply followed his accountants' recommendations.    Mr. Harmon decided not to go forward with a Sport-About franchise, and he asked Mr. Antoniu to return his $20,000 deposit. He says he hasn't heard from him since.    Another prospective franchisee, Jeff Stewart of Longwood, Fla., says he also has backed out and has also sought unsuccessfully to get his $20,000 deposit back. Mr. Stewart is one of those who complained to Florida regulators. He has also filed complaints with regulators in Minnesota and with the Federal Trade Commission in Washington. Scott Hammer, formerly Mr. Antoniu's Florida franchise director, says other franchisees have also complained. He says he resigned out of concern that potential franchisees were being misled.    Mr. Antoniu denies that anyone was misled and says the disputes are contractual matters that should be in arbitration, not in the courts. &quot;I can't work it out,&quot; he says, &quot;until we finish going public.&quot;    The preliminary prospectus for the public offering paints a bleak picture. Sport-About has had two years of operating losses, for a cumulative total of $2.2 million as of last June 30. The prospectus discloses that &quot;the company is delinquent in payments to its suppliers and the company's franchisees are having difficulty obtaining merchandise from suppliers. . . . it is likely that additional suppliers and franchisees may commence legal proceedings against the company.&quot;    Jack Pevy, the president of Brennan Ross Securities, Inc., the Denver-based underwriter for the offering, says that eight lawsuits, mostly by suppliers, are pending against Sport-About; Mr. Antoniu says there are only five. Mr. Pevy says the offering was &quot;put on hold&quot; in the wake of the Oct. 19 stock-market crash. He adds that &quot;the odds aren't good&quot; that the planned $2.2 million offering at 25 cents a share will ever go forward.    It isn't clear just why Sport-About is in such precarious financial shape. Those involved agree that Sport-About met a market need and was a viable concept. Mr. Antoniu was able to hire executives with experience in sporting-goods retailing, and he himself often worked 18-hour days. But despite the money from the European backers, Sport-About was undercapitalized. It couldn't deliver the brand-name inventory promised the franchisees. For example, two big athletic-shoe makers, Reebok International Ltd. and Nike Inc., have refused to sell more merchandise to Sport-About except for cash.    Sport-About became increasingly dependent on revenue from the sale of new franchises even when it was apparent that the company couldn't live up to its promises. Fifty-one franchises have been sold, and 42 stores had opened by August of this year. Mr. Antoniu pursued the sale of new franchises too zealously and too successfully, some franchisees say. Before the market crash, Mr. Pevy said Sport-About expected to sell an additional 30 franchises at about $150,000 each during the coming year. That is now doubtful.    Recent phone calls to Sport-About's headquarters in Coon Rapids, Minn., a suburb of Minneapolis, went unanswered, and Mr. Pevy says the company's operations are now at a &quot;minimal level.&quot; He also says that creditor claims are mounting.    Both Messrs. Sherwood and Ward, described by others as two of Sport-About's most important executives, have recently left the company. Only three directors, one of whom is Mr. Antoniu, remain, and there are no outside directors. Mr. Ward, who was the director of franchising, says he left because &quot;I couldn't look the franchisees straight in the eye and say I thought it would work.&quot;    Mr. Antoniu says that because of the hoped-for public offering, he can't comment on the condition of the company beyond what is stated in the prospectus. Both Mr. Ward and Mr. Sherwood say that Mr. Antoniu's energy and optimism are undiminished and that he remains confident the public offering will raise the $2.2 million. &quot;The word 'can't' doesn't exist for him,&quot; says Mr. Ward.    Others question whether Mr. Antoniu's optimism is too unbounded, blinding him to economic -- and legal -- reality. &quot;What a wonderful thing in this country, to be able just to pick up and move somewhere else,&quot; Mr. Antoniu told Franchise magazine this summer. &quot;It's so mind-blowing. It just seems like a playground where everything is possible.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>