<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880304-0001 </DOCNO><HL> Panama's Noriega Clings to Power... </HL><AUTHOR> Jose de Cordoba (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><DATELINE> PANAMA CITY, Panama  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Faced with escalating U.S. pressure, a financial system in crisis and domestic unrest, military strongman Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega still maintains his grip on power. Indeed, thanks to a well-oiled political machine and skilled manipulation of Panamanian nationalism and class rivalries, Gen. Noriega may well remain in charge for months, even under withering pressure from the U.S.    The disastrous economy, sure to worsen if the U.S. keeps on the heat, remains the general's most vulnerable spot. The country has run out of cash. Last night, strike leaders called a halt to the four-day general work stoppage that had paralyzed much of the capital's business activities. The strike, the leaders said, has been superseded by a financial crisis caused by the national bank's inability to provide liquidity to commercial banks.    But Gen. Noriega doesn't need much popular support to rule this eccentric, strategic little land. Instead of widespread personal popularity, he commands the total loyalty of Panama's 16,000-member armed forces, has a weaker but still powerful hold on the country's 150,000 government workers and can play on the nationalist sentiments and class resentments of people like Rolando Sanchez. Mr. Sanchez, a middle-aged printer, lives in the San Miguelito slums, a short drive from the capital's gleaming office towers. Bent, barechested and sweating over a cantankerous press, Mr. Sanchez says that neither Gen. Noriega's alleged corruption and drug trafficking nor his firing last week of Panama's figurehead president, Eric Arturo Delvalle, are the issue. The issue is the Panama Canal.    And, as far as Mr. Sanchez is concerned, the leaders of the so-far peaceful campaign to topple the strong man are a bunch of white, upper-middle-class traitors in cahoots with the Americans to allow Washington to renege on an agreement to return control of the waterway to Panama at the end of the century.    &quot;I'm going to get into the political thing, not for Noriega, but for Panama,&quot; vows Mr. Sanchez.    Gen. Noriega's main buttress is the Panamanian Defense Forces. &quot;It's the power of the bayonet,&quot; says Roberto Brenes, a leading figure in the Civic Crusade, the largely middle-class movement that is trying to oust the general and get the military back in the barracks.    But it's more than that. The military dominates the country's political life and casts a long shadow over commerce. It has its own political party, Panama's largest. It controls a huge chunk of the media and dozens of businesses ranging from export companies to hotels. Under Gen. Noriega, who was named commander-in-chief in 1983, the military has extended its reach to dozens of government agencies, including customs, immigration and the airports.    The military has hired and fired presidents four times in the past seven years. Top officers are a tightly knit social class united by the general through personal loyalty and legal -- and allegedly not so legal -- business dealings. They haven't any intention of loosening their hold on their exclusive and lucrative position.    &quot;Our wives wouldn't accept it if we had to move from our mansions,&quot; a prominent Panamanian with good military contacts recalls one colonel telling him.    State workers are another constituency. One in four working Panamanians owes his livelihood to the government, and the general expects help from all of them. Down the street from Mr. Sanchez's shop, Carlos, a government mechanic, says he goes to many pro-Noriega demonstrations.    When he goes, he is given free gasoline and food. If he doesn't go, he gets a black mark that could endanger his job. &quot;I back them because I have to,&quot; he says. &quot;There are a lot of poor people working in the government. They don't want to risk their miserable salaries.&quot;    In some ways, U.S. pressure and the underground campaign headed by Mr. Delvalle, the deposed president now in hiding in Panama, play to another of Gen. Noriega's strengths. Mr. Delvalle, maintaining he is still head of state, with U.S. suppport has issued legal challenges to cut off government funds from abroad to the regime appointed by Gen. Noriega.    That has helped isolate Panama in Latin America -- only Cuba and Nicaragua have embraced the new government -- but it has given the general fresh ammunition in his attempt to whip up class hate and nationalist fervor over the canal, both of which the swarthy general mentions every chance he gets. The opposition still is seen as a white, affluent man's movement resented by Panama's impoverished mestizos; many derisively refer to opposition leaders and their class as rabiblancos, or white behinds.    &quot;This is a struggle of the middle and upper classes to reconquer power,&quot; says Lorena Sampson, a relative of a government-party legislator, as she sips water in his office.    The disastrous economy, sure to worsen if the U.S. keeps on the heat, remains the general's most vulnerable spot. And a general strike called Monday by the Civic Crusade has been building up steam. But unless the military turns against the general, U.S. pressure and street disturbances aren't likely to bring Gen. Noriega down anytime soon, even the most optimistic opposition leaders concede.    The military remains key. Unless it turns against the general, U.S. pressure and street disturbances aren't likely to bring Gen. Noriega down soon, even the most optimistic opposition leaders concede.    &quot;We believe in political jujitsu,&quot; says opposition leader Brenes, meaning an accumulation of blows will eventually do the general in.    (See related story: &quot;...As U.S. Fears Drug Dealings, Graft Will Linger Once He's Gone&quot; -- WSJ March 4, 1988)</TEXT></DOC>