<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880502-0074 </DOCNO><HL> Canceled Skit: Why Johnny Carson, 'Bombastic' Bushkin Are Pals No Longer --- Entertainer and Lawyer Part Over Business Questions; Was Land Deal Involved? --- Neil Simon Had Trouble, Too </HL><AUTHOR> Daniel Akst (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GE </CO><IN> TEL REL BNK </IN><DATELINE> LOS ANGELES  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A Club Med in Beirut. A tattoo parlor in the Vatican. A doggie-bag factory in Bangladesh.    The list goes on and on. For years Johnny Carson joked about the hilarious investment schemes supposedly foisted on him by &quot;Bombastic&quot; Bushkin, his longtime friend and attorney. A few of the real investments weren't much better: a down-and-out Spanish-language TV station in Albuquerque, N.M.; a small bank that catered to a mobster; and DeLorean Motor Co.    Mr. Bushkin -- his real first name is Henry -- never much liked the jokes. Now he and Mr. Carson don't much like each other. The falling-out between the two erstwhile business partners and bosom buddies is one of the more unpleasant Hollywood splits since Lewis left Martin. One result: Mr. Bushkin's law firm here plans to dissolve; much of its business was Carson-related.    Messrs. Carson and Bushkin declined to comment for this story, but lawyers familiar with their rift say Mr. Carson fired Mr. Bushkin late last year after an accumulation of investment and business disputes.    The same people say Mr. Carson has filed legal-malpractice claims with the Bushkin law firm's insurers. These claims, they say, arise from the firm's simultaneous representation of Mr. Carson and the general partner in an ill-fated Houston land deal -- in which Mr. Bushkin also invested. The firm, Bushkin, Gaims, Gaines andamp; Jonas, which is expected to break up this month, won't comment.    It isn't clear how big a role the soured Houston land deal played in the Carson-Bushkin split. The two men were the closest of friends, and the loquacious, 45-year-old Mr. Bushkin functioned for years as Mr. Carson's chief lawyer, negotiator, business overseer, confidant and tennis partner. &quot;They did everything together and went everywhere together,&quot; says former Bear, Stearns andamp; Co. managing partner Fred Kane, who ran Mr. Carson's securities portfolio for 14 years and now is president of Far West Financial Corp.    The relationship went far beyond the standard symbiosis of star and manager, and despite some bad investments, Mr. Bushkin helped make Mr. Carson rich. He negotiated lucrative television contracts, for example, including a clause giving Mr. Carson ownership of his shows, and he helped arrange the syndication of Mr. Carson's old comedy skits, now broadcast nationwide.    Today Mr. Carson is said to be worth well over $100 million, even after several costly divorces. &quot;The Tonight Show&quot; is now produced by a Carson company, Carson Tonight Inc., which reportedly gets more than $40 million a year for it from the National Broadcasting Co. unit of General Electric Co. Carson Tonight, a unit of Carson Productions Group, in turn pays Mr. Carson an annual salary said to be around $20 million. Although NBC has the right to rerun each show once, Mr. Carson's company owns the programs; they could be syndicated when the entertainer, now 62 years old, retires.    James Mahoney, Mr. Carson's spokesman, says the split with Mr. Bushkin occurred after Mr. Carson decided to sell his television production business. &quot;There aren't any financial irregularities,&quot; he says. &quot;They differed on the manner in which his companies were being sold.&quot; Mr. Carson is said to have decided to sell Carson Productions piecemeal, instead of as a going concern. Mr. Bushkin reportedly favored keeping the company whole rather than auctioning individual assets.    But others say the talk-show host's unhappiness with Mr. Bushkin has deeper roots. They note that Mr. Carson has hired E. Gregory Hookstratten, a lawyer known for his savvy at managing professional athletes and broadcasters, to take charge of his business affairs. (Bear Stearns, however, is handling the sale of Carson Productions Group.) &quot;I've got a big job to do,&quot; says Mr. Hookstratten. Does it involve sorting out matters relating to Mr. Bushkin? &quot;That's part of it,&quot; he says. He won't say more.    Among Mr. Carson's affairs in need of untangling is the Houston land fiasco, consisting of 93 undeveloped acres near one of the city's swankier shopping malls. Messrs. Carson and Bushkin, two Bushkin law partners, playwright Neil Simon and others formed a partnership that acquired the land in 1981, when the Houston market was booming.    It isn't clear what the purchase price was, but public records in Texas indicate the partnership borrowed $23.5 million in connection with the property. The partners planned to build a hotel and sell off adjoining parcels for commercial and residential development. Mr. Carson even made a personal appearance to kick things off.    But there were immediate problems. One partner, who declined to be identified, says no one thought to secure mineral rights, for example, which take precedence in Texas and conceivably could allow the rights holder to punch an oil well through the parking lot. This partner also says the buyers hadn't obtained title insurance, didn't get a deed when they were supposed to, and even had to ransom their own land from the state -- for some $320,000 -- when it was seized in the collapse of a title company handling the transaction. &quot;Every conceivable thing went awry,&quot; says another partner.    By the time things were ironed out, declining oil prices had wrecked the Houston real-estate market, and to this day the land is vacant. According to one partner in Willowbrook West Ltd., as the venture was called, the partners each personally guaranteed an $18.5 million note, meaning that in the event of default, Mr. Carson might have been sued for the entire debt.    Willowbrook did default, but by that time Carson Tonight had acquired the note from the lending bank. Carson Tonight is now foreclosing on the property; when the gavel falls Wednesday, the partners don't expect the land to bring close to what's been invested in it.    Insurance may cover part of the losses. The claims with the Bushkin firm's malpractice insurers, filed by Mr. Carson through Carson Tonight, reportedly allege that the law firm failed to disclose in writing -- or obtain signed consents to -- its representation of both Mr. Carson and Bill Bird, whose company, Bird Development Corp., was the initial general partner of Willowbrook West.    Mr. Bird couldn't be reached for comment. Neil Simon, meanwhile, had other business problems with Mr. Bushkin. On Dec. 30, 1983, the playwright and his then-wife, Marsha Mason, sued the Bushkin law firm in state court here, alleging legal malpractice and violations of California corporate law.    The Simons dropped the suit the following March, and neither they nor their lawyer will comment. But their complaint asserted that Mr. Bushkin and his firm got the couple into investments (aside from Willowbrook) without adequately investigating, documenting or explaining them -- and also without adequately disclosing the lawyers' own interest in the transactions or &quot;the conflicts of interest created thereby.&quot;    Messrs. Bushkin and Carson have been touched by scandal before. Both were embroiled in the collapse of the Commercial Bank of California, which was the subject of lawsuits and a probe by the Federal Bureau of Investigation. The probe was dropped after no wrongdoing was found, the FBI says.    With other investors, they purchased the now-defunct bank about a decade ago. Mr. Carson and Mr. Bushkin together owned 23.7% of its stock and were co-chairmen for a while, although Mr. Carson was never active in the venture. The idea was to get the bank involved in entertainment-industry lending.    Among the bank's best customers was the late Jack M. Catain Jr., a mobster, loan shark and convicted counterfeiter. Mr. Catain, a former divorce client of the Bushkin firm, borrowed at least $370,000 from the bank, and at times had up to $700,000 on deposit. Mr. Catain brought in friends and business associates as new borrowers and secured their loans with his $1 million home in the Encino section of Los Angeles. But the house burned down in the spring of 1981, and the bank was left with bad debts.    Those and other bad loans prompted regulators to close the bank in May 1983. Two former directors of the bank sued Mr. Bushkin in a state court in Los Angeles, saying they invested in the bank only because he promised them Mr. Carson would &quot;actively promote and publicize&quot; it but the entertainer didn't. Mr. Bushkin denied making such a promise, and the suit was later dropped. A second suit, filed in federal court here by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., charged Messrs. Bushkin and Carson and other directors with, among other things, allowing loans to individuals &quot;directly or indirectly associated with organized crime.&quot; It was settled on still-undisclosed terms.    Messrs. Bushkin and Carson were also caught up in the DeLorean Motor debacle. Mr. Carson invested $500,000 in the ill-fated venture, and bought one of John De Lorean's stainless-steel sports cars. Mr. Bushkin served for a time as Mr. Carson's designee on the DeLorean Motor board. Eventually, Mr. DeLorean's company folded in a spectacular bankruptcy. Mr. De Lorean himself was arrested on cocaine trafficking charges but was acquitted.    Mr. Carson succeeded Jack Paar on &quot;The Tonight Show&quot; in 1962, and since then has become embedded in the national consciousness, as familiar a figure as any in the postwar era. Besides providing noncontroversial bedtime entertainment for millions, Mr. Carson's biting and topical monologues have been considered by many pundits a barometer of popular sentiment on subjects ranging from Watergate to the Iran-Contra affair to the sex scandals of TV evangelists.    Mr. Bushkin has known Mr. Carson since 1970. The two men met when the show was based in New York, and Mr. Bushkin handled Mr. Carson's second divorce there. The younger man's professional life has been entwined with Mr. Carson's ever since. When Mr. Carson moved the program to Southern California in 1972, Mr. Bushkin, a New Yorker and member of the bar there, moved west with him.    People who know them say Mr. Bushkin increasingly functioned as Mr. Carson's gatekeeper, so that the lawyer's power and importance grew in proportion to his client's.    Despite his rash of business problems, Mr. Carson is unlikely to starve. His production company makes the hit show &quot;Amen,&quot; which may be worth millions in syndication, and his holdings include real estate, a sizable securities portfolio and, reportedly, substantial deferred compensation from his years with NBC.    That network has profited mightily from Mr. Carson. Counting reruns, top ad agencies say, advertisers pay an average of $60,000 to $65,000 for a network minute on &quot;The Tonight Show&quot; (which currently is all reruns because of a Hollywood writers' strike). At that rate, including NBC's share of local ad revenue, the show probably grosses $100 million or more a year for the network.    Those who know Mr. Carson say he is a profoundly private man with a piercing intellect and wide-ranging interests. But he isn't often described as happy, and he is said to have few close relationships. He was close to Mr. Bushkin. The two men traveled together to Wimbledon and the south of France, commiserated over their marital troubles (Mr. Bushkin is divorced) and were in constant touch.    Despite their deep friendship, Mr. Bushkin apparently wasn't able to voice his resentment of the &quot;Bombastic&quot; jokes -- or feel on an equal footing with Mr. Carson. Yet even after their falling out, the two men remain connected: Among other things, Mr. Bushkin owns 10% of Carson Tonight -- the company that owns &quot;The Tonight Show.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>