<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880923-0140 </DOCNO><HL> Chamberlain's Perspective Lives On </HL><AUTHOR> Seth Cropsey </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><TEXT>   Fifty years ago next week, meeting in Munich, British Prime Minister Neville Chamberlain tried and failed to appease Hitler. Since then, nothing has changed the fact that only strength deters aggression.    But in the intervening years, so much criticism has been poured upon Chamberlain's failed policies that they have dissolved into caricature. Across the political spectrum, we divorce ourselves from Chamberlain's mistakes; the stout anti-Nazi militarism of his great opposite, Winston Churchill, is admired by even the most liberal of today's anti-militarists. In this atmosphere, it is increasingly difficult to recognize the similarities of current opinion in the West to the views that plunged Europe into World War II. Nineteen eighty-eight is assuredly not 1938, in economic or foreign affairs. But the road to war that led through Munich was paved by three specific misjudgments that still threaten to trip us today.    Chamberlain's first mistake was his belief that a new age of chemical weaponry and aerial warfare in the 20th century had changed war so radically that military conflict between great powers was unthinkable.    &quot;War today . . . is a different thing not only in degree, but in kind, from what it used to be,&quot; Chamberlain explained in October 1938. Chemical weapons brought the potential for indiscriminate destruction of civilian life as well as military targets; air warfare erased the security of distance, borders and time. Chamberlain's was a harrowing vision of &quot;people burrowing underground, trying to escape from poison gas, knowing that at any hour of the day or night death or mutilation was ready to come upon them.&quot;    We should not underestimate the emotional impact of such a view, rooted in 1938's still-vivid memory of 1918's chemical warfare. World War I had brought evil, and future war would be worse. In modern war, Chamberlain argued, &quot;whichever side may call itself the victor, there are no winners, but all are losers.&quot;    If today's horror of nuclear warfare makes this perspective familiar, there is something equally familiar about Chamberlain's assumption that other major powers would share his views. Like a moral technocrat weighing his adversary in the balance, he finds the scales even. Germany could not intend to &quot;demand to dominate the world by force,&quot; he noted, &quot;for the consequences of war for the peoples of either side would be so grave.&quot; Thus Chamberlain insisted, well into 1939, that Nazi ambitions could be contained by negotiation, for the new warfare would deter its own use.    Ironically, in one way he was right -- the kind of war he envisioned did not occur. But his vision of war was wrong. The possession of chemical weapons and defenses on both sides proved an effective deterrent to a horrific chemical war. But horrific conventional war did occur, spurred by Hitler's belief that, in the apparent absence of Allied preparedness and will, aggressive military operations could gain Germany the advantage.    Today, in the U.S., politicians question preparations to deter conflict, including strategic defenses, as if we had not learned what Chamberlain failed to grasp: Not everyone may share our view of war's deadly disadvantages -- and absent realistic signs of our determination, rulers whose regimes are based on force may view our respect for law, diplomacy and negotiation as a sign of weakness and not of strength.    Chamberlain was fascinated with the personal touch, something shared by many journalists and many politicians. His belief that misunderstanding, not aggression, causes conflict -- his second great misjudgment -- was reflected in a dogged devotion to the virtues of shuttle summitry and face-to-face assurances of good will and friendship: &quot;The message . . . from Signor Mussolini was of a friendly character.&quot; &quot;Herr Hitler . . . said, again very earnestly, that he wanted to be friends.&quot;    As naive as these remarks now sound, they are based on Chamberlain's belief in the utility of trying to &quot;understand the mentality&quot; of Britain's adversaries. But the outcome of his failed international social work was more than disillusionment and personal betrayal. The outcome was national policy confusion and disaster -- and everywhere a double standard regarding the international behavior the democracies had a right to expect.    Thus, in February 1938, Foreign Minister Anthony Eden resigned his post after insisting that Britain should not engage in talks with Italy until Mussolini took certain specified actions to prove his respect for international agreements. Chamberlain disagreed: British preconditions would signal &quot;a spirit of suspicion,&quot; alienating the Italians. &quot;If there is going to be bad faith, there will be bad faith, and no assurances beforehand are going to alter it.&quot;    But just seven months later, at Munich, when the question was how far Britain and its allies should go to meet totalitarian demands, we find him rising to the bait of Hitler's calculated anguishings by reassuring Germany of British and Allied good faith. &quot;I should tell the House,&quot; Chamberlain reported to the Commons, &quot;how deeply impressed on my mind . . . is {Hitler's} rooted distrust and disbelief in the sincerity of the Czech government.&quot;    Chamberlain's efforts to minimize his adversaries' &quot;suspicions&quot; led him to renounce justified British suspicions; his efforts at &quot;understanding&quot; his adversaries' claims led him to misunderstand their ambitions. Most tragically, both attitudes led Hitler to misunderstand Allied determination to resist. Again, we can learn a profitable lesson: However distasteful cynicism and suspicion may be, tough-minded diplomacy is a precondition to peace.    Chamberlain's view of the impossibility of general war, combined with his belief that mutual understanding would avert conflict, reinforced his fiscal view of the wastefulness of investing in defense -- his third mistake. Although he believed in the necessity of arms as a backup for British diplomacy, he frequently expressed his distaste for the &quot;spectacle of this vast expenditure&quot; as &quot;folly,&quot; a &quot;senseless waste of money,&quot; &quot;hateful and damnable.&quot; Such a view slowed the pace of rearmament in the face of the burgeoning Nazi military machine -- the delays that Churchill so feared and criticized.    Just as corrosive was Chamberlain's reluctance to use force to halt the slow erosion of European liberty. &quot;Everyone knows,&quot; he said, that British forces &quot;are not going to be used for aggression.&quot; That he was reluctant to use them at all must have seemed equally clear. Like today's &quot;anti-war&quot; advocates, who say they support a nuclear deterrent yet seek a U.S. pledge to renounce its use -- assuring any aggressor that he need not fear U.S. power -- Chamberlain repeatedly assured the enemies of freedom of their freedom from British force. By the time of Munich, if Hitler had had any remaining doubts, Chamberlain removed them.    Speaking over British radio, in words that again ring familiar, Chamberlain called the Czech issue &quot;a quarrel in a faraway country between people of whom we know nothing,&quot; and observed that &quot;however much we may sympathize with a small nation confronted by a big and powerful neighbor, we cannot in all circumstances undertake to involve the whole British Empire in war simply on her account. If we have to fight, it must be on larger issues than that. . . . War is a fearful thing.&quot;    In the end, of course, Nazi aggression was understood for the &quot;larger issue&quot; it was, and the &quot;faraway&quot; quarrels came home. The irony of Chamberlain, however, is not that he was a failed idealist but a failed realist. Despite all, he did know that &quot;in any armed world you must be armed yourself&quot;; as prime minister, he presided over a massive peacetime rearmament program. Similarly, if appeasement was later to become synonymous with spineless acquiescence to threats of force, this was far from its original conception. Instead, it was meant as an effort, by the victors of World War I, to end disputes arising from the Treaty of Versailles -- thereby stabilizing Europe as well as ensuring its peace and prosperity.    In the turbulent decades that have followed World War II, the U.S., too, has sought stability, as well as peace and prosperity, on a global level. As the leader of the effort to maintain freedom's defense, we owe ourselves a closer look at Chamberlain's valuable lessons. As he properly observed, war is a fearful thing -- a fact that makes it even more important to ensure that the enemies of liberty fear to wage it. To know that our adversaries may not share our views -- to understand that understanding is not everything -- and to present a strong defense: This clear-eyed grasp of reality and military power remains essential to peace.    As for Chamberlain, he cannot be dismissed like some servile waiter in a Monty Python sketch, carving up Europe to appease Hitler's territorial appetites. The 50 years that have passed since Munich may have fogged the looking glass, but the face that peers out looks eerily like our own.    ---   Mr. Cropsey is deputy undersecretary of the Navy. </TEXT></DOC>