<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870415-0131 </DOCNO><HL> The Overreaching Reagan Doctrine---By Christopher Layne</HL><DD> 04/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST FORGNEXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   The Iran-contra affair doesn't just play into the hands of the foreign-policy left. It rekindles the warnings of traditional conservatives of the Dwight Eisenhower-Robert A. Taft mold by raising serious questions about the affordability or sustainability of the Reagan Doctrine.    Although rivals for the 1952 Republican presidential nomination, Eisenhower and Taft shared a broadly similar outlook. Their anti-communist credentials notwithstanding, they believed the U.S. should selectively contain the expansion of Soviet political and military power; they opposed a global crusade against communist ideology, per se. As Taft said, a policy of blocking communist advances &quot;in every far corner of the world&quot; could impose unacceptable economic and domestic political sacrifices on Americans.    The Reagan Doctrine has never been authoritatively defined, but its content can be inferred from various statements made by President Reagan and Secretary of State Shultz and the writings of such neoconservative foreign-policy theorists as Charles Krauthammer, Irving Kristol and Norman Podhoretz. Although usually thought of as a policy of aiding anti-communist insurgencies and building Western-style democracies in the Third World, the doctrine is much more than that. It aims to cause the Soviet empire's breakup and, ultimately, the collapse of the Soviet state itself by resisting Soviet and Soviet-supported aggression everywhere; engaging the Kremlin in a high-tech arms race; and pressuring Moscow economically.    The Reagan Doctrine seeks to create an ideologically congenial world and assumes American security requires nothing less. It also posits the interdependence of all of America's overseas commitments -- leading to the belief that any setback, failure of resolve or curtailing of commitments will erode U.S. credibility and lead to a world-wide stampede to the Soviet camp. If accepted, the doctrine's assumptions define America's interests and its course of action: The U.S. must resist communism -- and defend democracy -- everywhere.    The inevitable byproduct of the Reagan Doctrine is what Alan Tonelson, formerly of Foreign Policy magazine, calls a &quot;supplicant psychology,&quot; whereby Washington acts as if other nations' security is more important to the U.S. than it is to them. Under the doctrine's reasoning, if the U.S. fails to aid any country or insurgency facing a communist threat, America could be left alone in an ideologically hostile world. The U.S. thus is put in the posture of pleading with, or bribing, others to allow America to defend them. The ill-advised arms-for-hostages deal is a perfect example: Washington tried to bribe strategically important Iran to stay out of the Soviet orbit. However, other states are more immediately threatened by the Soviet Union than America is and few of them want to become Soviet satellites. They need America much more than America needs them; they need to be supplicants, the U.S. does not. Until the U.S. sheds the supplicant psychology imbedded in the Reagan Doctrine, it will remain vulnerable to the free-riding and barely disguised blackmail practiced by its actual and potential security partners.    Contrary to its supporters' assertions, the Reagan Doctrine is not a cheap means of countering communism. It rules out devolving security responsibilities on others and calls for extending U.S. commitments abroad at a time when a strategically and economically overextended America should be looking for ways to reduce them. The doctrine requires undiminished support for traditional alliances, a 600-ship Navy and Rapid Deployment Force, and extended nuclear deterrence.    The Reagan Doctrine's likely ultimate costs are illustrated by the fact that notwithstanding the administration's six-year military buildup, various studies have shown that the gap between America's power and its strategic responsibilities has grown worse. Yet just keeping U.S. strength at its current level already is posing the economic dilemma of printing money, borrowing against future taxpayers' earnings or imposing heavy burdens on present ones.    Traditional conservatives have always worried that the burdens of a globalist foreign policy could impair the nation's economic health. Taft certainly did. Eisenhower put the point in even sharper focus. Economic strength, he said, is the foundation of military power. Americans must be careful, he warned, that their foreign-policy objectives do not become so excessive that pursuing them ends up destroying the vitality and strength of America's economic and political institutions.    Eisenhower and Taft knew that ensuring harmony between America's ambitions and its resources is a moral imperative because states that tolerate a persistent imbalance between the ends and means of policy run the risk of national ruin.    (Though it's true that military spending was a higher percentage of U.S. gross national product during Ike's presidency than it is today, other demands on the Treasury have grown markedly and aren't likely to diminish, and the U.S. no longer has such a pressing interest in nurturing the economic development of Western Europe and Japan with a security blanket.)    In addition to its material costs, a foreign policy as ambitious as the Reagan Doctrine requires the country pursuing it to practice Old World statecraft: To meet the Soviet challenge on its own military terms, the doctrine's advocates believe that the executive branch must be free to respond to international events and to conduct diplomacy and covert operations unhindered by legislative or public oversight. Foreign-policy needs must always be given priority over domestic ones. Doubting that New World America would make the required sacrifices in peacetime merely for the sake of a traditional balance-of-power rivalry between &quot;morally equivalent&quot; superpowers, the doctrine's backers hoped to win public support by portraying the Soviet-American contest as a Manichaean struggle between good and evil.    But Americans did not answer the Reagan Doctrine's call to battle. Its strident rhetoric raised the twin fears of a possible superpower confrontation and indiscriminate U.S. involvement in foreign conflicts where its vital interests were not at stake. Its calls for a &quot;world-wide democratic revolution&quot; made Americans skeptical rather than supportive of the Reagan Doctrine. In Nicaragua, for example, only a handful of naive liberals doubted that the Sandinistas were very bad; but most Americans found it hard to believe the contras were much better -- much less the &quot;moral equivalent&quot; of America's own Founding Fathers.    Around the world, the doctrine seemed to require the U.S. to choose between equally unsavory groups whose brutality was distinguishable only by whether it was used to hold power or seize it. It was hard to see how such choices advanced democratic principles. And while the distinction between totalitarian and authoritarian governments was academically interesting, there was no credibility in a global democratic revolution whose supporters apologized for Chile, South Africa and, nearly to the end, the Marcos-ruled Philippines.    Finally, although anti-communism had mobilized public support during the Cold War years -- when the U.S. was adjusting to its newly inherited global responsibilities -- by the 1980s Americans had a more realistic understanding of the world and saw international politics in shades of gray rather than black and white. Vietnam, Lebanon, Afghanistan, the Persian Gulf war and other upheavals suggested that Third World nationalism had reduced both superpowers' ability to influence the outcome of regional conflicts. Understanding that the U.S. lacked the psychological and material resources to remake the world in its image, Americans had rightfully learned to be wary when summoned by their leaders to an ideological crusade to make the world safe for democracy.    In the final analysis, the Reagan Doctrine runs counter to Americans' desire for peace, their wise and instinctive aversion to overseas adventures, and -- most painfully and paradoxically for the doctrine's architects -- to their most cherished democratic values. The Nicaragua debate made this obvious. Despite having a meritorious case against a regime that even a prudently restrained America must find a way to contain, the administration after six years has been unable to rally public support for the contras' cause and has gained only sporadic and tenuous congressional backing.    Iran-contra happened because the Reagan Doctrine's backers were not willing to live with the outcome of the democratic process. It was not an aberration, it was a scandal waiting to happen. A policy of ultimate ends legitimizes the use of any means, and the doctrine's underlying ideological ethos led its adherents to believe they had a monopoly on defining the true national interest. They thought they were justified in arrogating to themselves the right to ignore political and legal norms in the pursuit of morally transcendant objectives; something as vital as the crusade against communism was not to be hampered by such abstract notions as the popular will or constitutional propriety.    No principle in American political discourse permits the governing elite to claim openly it knows better than the people what is best for the country. Because the doctrine's advocates cannot admit this, they have resorted instead to a series of disingenuous arguments to shield the Reagan Doctrine from attack. There was no Iran-contra crisis, they say -- the news media and liberal Democrats made it up. Or, Iran-contra happened because America's governmental structures -- the &quot;imperial Congress&quot; -- are growing incapable of serving the national interest.    Moralistic, crusading foreign policies like the Reagan Doctrine instill in policy makers a hubris whence disasters like Iran-contra spring. When policy makers place their personal convictions above their constitutional responsibilities, they do more than discredit themselves and their aims. They disturb, as Taft pointed out, the considered allocation of responsibilities among the branches of government that the Founders laid out for the type of nation they had in mind.    ---   Mr. Layne, a Los Angeles lawyer, has written widely on foreign policy. He is an adjunct scholar of the Cato Institute. </TEXT></DOC>