<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871104-0006 </DOCNO><HL> Weinberger Resignation to ResultIn a Cabinet Without Hard-Liners---Departure Could Ease WayFor Soviet Arms Accord,Curb the Star Wars Plan---By John Walcott and Tim CarringtonStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTAEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The resignation of Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger would leave President Reagan's inner circle without the last and most influential of its militant anti-communists and could ease the way toward an agreement with the Soviet Union to cut long-range nuclear arms and curb the president's Strategic Defense Initiative.    Along with the late CIA director William Casey and former United Nations Ambassador Jeane Kirkpatrick, Mr. Weinberger epitomized the deep distrust of the Soviet Union and the eagerness to confront communism which dominated foreign policy in Mr. Reagan's first term. That stance now appears to have been supplanted by efforts to reach agreements with the Soviets on arms control and other issues.    Mr. Weinberger, 70 years old, is expected to step down tomorrow to spend more time with his ailing wife, White House officials said. The president, the officials said, will nominate National Security Adviser Frank Carlucci to succeed Mr. Weinberger and will appoint Army Lt. Gen. Colin Powell, now Mr. Carlucci's deputy, to the top White House foreign policy post.    &quot;Having Carlucci, (CIA Director William) Webster, and (Secretary of State George) Shultz around the cabinet table is very different than having Weinberger, Casey, and Jeane Kirkpatrick,&quot; said Kenneth Adelman, the director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency, who is leaving the administration himself immediately after next month's summit meeting between President Reagan and Mikhail Gorbachev.    The pending shift at the Pentagon isn't likely to win praise from hard-line conservatives, who regard Mr. Carlucci as a centrist. They blame him for supporting the Carter administration's campaign to trim the size of the Central Intelligence Agency, where he served as deputy director from 1978 to 1981.    The new defense secretary probably will be willing to agree to some limits on developing and testing space-based missile defenses, which Mr. Weinberger considers sacrosanct and outside the reach of any U.S.-Soviet arms negotiations, senior administration officials said. Just before opening a meeting with North Atlantic Treaty Organization counterparts in Monterey, Calif., for instance, Mr. Weinberger told reporters that &quot;our goal here is to deploy. Our goal is not to remove an obstacle to a treaty.&quot;    Last year, when Mr. Weinberger pressed the president to commit himself to deploy the first elements of a Strategic Defense Initiative, or &quot;Star Wars,&quot; defense as quickly as possible, Mr. Carlucci circulated a memo questioning whether such a defense would be technologically feasible, effective, and economical.    &quot;Cap's departure probably removes the most anti-arms-control guy in the whole administration,&quot; said former Undersecretary of State Lawrence Eagleburger, now the president of Kissinger Associates in New York. Cap is Mr. Weinberger's nickname.    The president, himself, however, still may ignore the growing sentiment within his own administration to strike a deal with the Soviets that would limit the development of missile defenses.    But in the meantime, a growing perception that the administration is too eager for arms deals with Moscow could stiffen conservative resistance to ratifying the administration's almost-completed treaty eliminating U.S. and Soviet medium-range and short-range nuclear missiles in Europe.    Mr. Weinberger, who has backed the pending treaty, was working this week to assure his nervous European counterparts that the accord won't weaken the Atlantic alliance. But even some moderate conservatives worry that, with Mr. Weinberger gone, the administration may be rushing toward a hasty deal on long-range, or &quot;strategic,&quot; arms that could undercut America's credibility with its European allies.    &quot;Cap has been a pain in the neck for seven years,&quot; said former National Security Adviser Brent Scowcroft. &quot;Now, when it might be useful to have him around, he'll be gone.&quot;    While he has been generally skeptical about the merits of arms control, Mr. Weinberger also has been reluctant to use American military power, except when success seemed assured and the political and military risks seemed minimal. He opposed sending Marines to Lebanon in 1982 and blocked almost every proposal to retaliate for terrorist attacks against Americans.    Mr. Weinberger and Mr. Carlucci, however, both favored a buildup of naval forces in the Persian Gulf to bolster Arab confidence in the U.S., deter Iranian attacks on shipping, and head off Soviet gains in the region. If the Iranians don't step up attacks on Americans, the main problem Mr. Carlucci will inherit in the gulf will be the task of disentangling the U.S. from the conflict.    Although he studied ways of streamlining the weapons-buying process when he served as Mr. Weinberger's deputy, it is unlikely that Mr. Carlucci can do much in a year's time to reshape the Defense Department's sprawling procurement bureaucracy. &quot;I think he'll do what he can to reform, but how much can you do in a year?&quot; said Mr. Scowcroft.    The budget also is likely to be beyond Mr. Carlucci's reach. The administration's $312 billion request for fiscal 1988, which began Oct. 1, has been slashed deeply by Congress and probably will be chopped further in the effort to reduce the federal deficit. The proposed $331 billion budget for fiscal 1989 is unrealistically high, officials concede, but given the short time the Pentagon will have to prepare a new budget, there won't be an opportunity to reshuffle the military's priorities.    Still, Mr. Carlucci and Gen. Powell, the new national security adviser, may have greater success in hammering out budget and arms control compromises with Congress than Mr. Weinberger, whose combativeness left him with few allies on Capitol Hill.    Gen. Powell, who seems likely to become the first black national security adviser, is an even-tempered, self-effacing product of Washington's military and political establishments. While he isn't well known among the members of Congress, he is a skillful operator of the national security bureaucracy and he has worked closely with Mr. Carlucci for 15 years.    ---   Gerald F. Seib contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>