<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880129-0012 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   TALKS BEGAN in Costa Rica between Nicaragua's government and the Contras.    The two sides were far apart at the start of their first direct talks. Managua proposed a cease-fire with international verification of guarantees for rebels returning to politics. The rebels called for a cease-fire within 30 days, constitutional changes, military restructuring and a provisional government. In Washington, Reagan weighed a televised appeal for his $36 million Contra aid package, while congressional Democrats were lining up behind a plan for humanitarian aid only.    Cardinal Obando has briefed Pope John Paul II in preparation for talks today with Nicaraguan President Ortega on Central American peace prospects.    ---   Egypt's President Mubarak made an emotional appeal to Reagan for a new U.S effort to resolve the Palestinian issue but apparently failed to win new commitments. Mubarak, on his first U.S. visit since 1985, apparently gained a favorable response only to his proposal for a six-month cooling-off period between Israelis and Palestinians.    Some Israeli soldiers have been court-martialed and others transferred out of their units for beating Palestinians without cause during recent unrest, the military commander of the West Bank said. Meanwhile, the army said it was lifting the last remaining curfews in the Gaza Strip.    ---   The Senate passed, 74-14, legislation that would broaden the reach of federal civil rights laws. The measure, which now goes to the House, would clarify that federal civil rights protections for women, the handicapped and the elderly apply to entire schools, governments and private firms that receive federal aid.    ---   A convicted drug smuggler told Senate investigators that he gave Gen. Noriega, Panama's military ruler, $300,000 for his help in laundering drug profits. The Reagan administration is pushing for Noriega to step down and permit free elections. Separately, five opposition leaders returned to Panama after four months in exile.    ---   Surgeon General Koop proposed anonymous screening of all students at a U.S. university this spring to determine the incidence of AIDS. Koop, who made the proposal on the final day of an international AIDS conference in London, said the school hasn't been picked but should be one in a big city and have about 25,000 students.    ---   The Pentagon disclosed a Jan. 7 flash fire at a California test site for a Strategic Defense Initiative laser and said the accident will cause unspecified delays in the testing program. The Pentagon said there were no injuries in the accident, which was caused by a worker inadvertently opening a fuel valve in the wrong sequence.    ---   U.S. and allied officials reached general agreement on a U.S. plan to shorten the list of items subject to controls on exports of sensitive technology to Communist countries and to spend more money and time policing the items that remain. The agreement came at a two-day meeting in France of the 16-nation Cocom group.    ---   Canada's Supreme Court ruled that a law restricting abortion is unconstitutional and a violation of a woman's right to have control over her own body. The 5-2 ruling mirrors the U.S. Supreme Court's 1973 Roe vs. Wade decision and apparently opens the way for abortion on demand for Canadian women.    ---   The House Iran-Contra chairman said Vice President Bush's role in the affair remains unclear and that questions about his position on arms sales to Iran will continue to be an issue in his presidential campaign. Rep. Hamilton (D., Ind.) said in a CBS-TV interview that there is &quot;a long list of questions that I don't know the answers to.&quot;    ---   East Germany appears to be adopting a more hard-line stance following recent overtures toward the West. It has expelled 60 protesters and given prison terms to eight others, and this week its border guards shot at East Germans trying to escape to the West, a practice that had been suspended since September.    ---   The Senate will vote Wednesday on the nomination of California appeals court Judge Anthony Kennedy to the Supreme Court, Majority Leader Byrd said.    ---   Police in Colombia arrested two brothers suspected of being members of a Medellin drug gang responsible for the slaying this week of the country's attorney general.    ---   Attorney General Meese said he will review the conduct of investigations by the FBI of opponents of the Reagan administration's policies in Central America.    ---   The Canadian government decided to retain a two-year-old ban on the herbicide alachlor, despite a scientific panel's recommendation that it be lifted. Monsanto makes the herbicide under the trade name Lasso. It is the most widely used herbicide in the U.S., and has been shown to cause cancer in laboratory animals.    ---   Died: Klaus Fuchs, 76, physicist once jailed for giving U.S. and British atom-bomb data to Moscow, in East Germany. </TEXT></DOC>