<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861224-0002 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/24/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   VOYAGER COMPLETED its nonstop flight around the globe without refueling.    The experimental aircraft landed safely at Edwards Air Force Base in California, completing a nine-day trip that was beset by storms, engine problems and worries over fuel consumption. The flight, which set a nonstop, unrefueled distance record, ended about a day ahead of schedule. The pilots, Dick Rutan and Jeana Yeager, were tired but in good condition. Companies involved in Voyager's development have begun looking to commercial applications of the plane's technologies.    A White House spokesman said Reagan will present the Presidential Citizens Medal to the crew and designer of the aircraft Monday in California.    ---   REAGAN AGAIN URGED Congress to file a report on the Iran-Contra scandal.    The president asked the Senate Intelligence panel, which is conducting an inquiry into the Iranian arms sales and diversion of funds to Nicaragua rebels, to submit a report so it can be made public. He made a similar appeal last week. It was unclear if a report would be issued. At a session of the panel, retired Air Force Gen. Secord refused to testify. Meanwhile, the Justice Department said the FBI suspended a probe of suspected arms-smuggling to the Contras for at least 26 days.    Doctors in Washington said that the tumor removed from CIA Director Casey's brain was cancerous, and that further treatment will be needed.    ---   CHINESE STUDENTS DEFIED a ban and held rallies in Shanghai and Peking.    Thousands of students marched in Shanghai in defiance of the government's prohibition against unauthorized pro-democracy demonstrations. In Peking, hundreds of students from Qinghua University took to the streets demanding democracy and freedom. It was the first demonstration in the capital since China's current wave of campus unrest began three weeks ago. Police didn't intervene in either rally.    The students' demands include establishment of a multiparty system of government, the elimination of state corruption and freedom of the press.    ---   Dissident Andrei Sakharov returned to Moscow after nearly seven years of internal exile, and immediately called for the release of all Soviet dissidents. The Soviet physicist's banishment to the closed city of Gorky was revoked last week by the Kremlin, which also pardoned Sakharov's wife, human-rights activist Yelena Bonner.    ---   The World Bank said Indonesia is scaling back a plan to relocate millions of people, and the bank, which has so far committed $600 million to the project, is expected to reduce its lending as a result. Indonesia's plan to move people to its lightly populated outer islands faces budgetary and environmental pressures.    ---   Italy launched an inquiry into the case of Mordechai Vanunu, a former Israeli nuclear worker who said he was abducted in Rome to stand trial in Israel. Vanunu is charged with disclosing atomic secrets. The Israeli government has pledged cooperation.    ---   Thatcher traveled to Northern Ireland for a Christmas visit with British troops in a border area where Irish Republican Army rebels operate. The British prime minister's eight-hour tour, which wasn't announced in advance, was met with protest from hardline Protestants in Belfast.    ---   Rescuers searched the waters off western Puerto Rico for survivors of a capsized boat believed carrying 48 asylum seekers from the Dominican Republic. Thirty-four people were missing. Officials said six bodies were recovered after the boat overturned Monday night, and eight survivors were in custody.    ---   Philippine negotiators exchanged peace offers with the country's communist rebels. The proposals are to be discussed when peace talks to end a 17-year-old insurgency formally open Jan. 6. The Manila government presented a short-term economic recovery plan, and the insurgents demanded a coalition government.    ---   The Air Force has declared its first 10 MX nuclear missiles operational, marking the first time in 16 years that the U.S. has added a new intercontinental ballistic missile to its land-based arsenal, the Pentagon said. Separately, Weinberger authorized the Navy to request funds next year to begin construction of two aircraft carriers.    ---   Pretoria has refused to allow two U.S. congressional delegations to enter South Africa next month. The government reportedly denied visas for the groups because of U.S. sanctions against the country.    ---   Senate Democrats have formed a four-member team to investigate Reagan's future judicial nominees. The unit, which excludes Republican members, will operate as an arm of the Senate Judiciary panel, whose Democratic members have been unable in the past to block the president's conservative candidates for the federal bench.    ---   Railroad workers in France voted to continue with a five-day-old strike that has brought the entire national rail network to a near standstill. A resumption of negotiations to end the walkout, which was prompted by a wage dispute, hasn't been scheduled. The rail strike coincides with disruptions in the Paris Metro subway system and in ports.    ---   A GAO study concluded that the Pentagon is allowing its contractors to make higher profits than are available in the commercial sector. The findings by the accounting office came despite publicized efforts by the Reagan administration to squeeze arms makers' margins.    ---   A pro-Iranian Moslem group said it would free as a Christmas gesture one of the two French hostages it claims to hold in Lebanon. The Revolutionary Justice Organization also urged France to stop selling arms to Iraq, Iran's Persian Gulf foe. </TEXT></DOC>