<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870520-0096 </DOCNO><HL> The Constitution: 1787-1987---Nation's Charter:Two Centuries Later,There Is Hot DebateOver 'Original Intent'---Meese Urges Return to AimsOf Constitution's Signers;View Assailed as Political---Even Madison Could Change---By Stephen WermeilStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SUPREME COURT (SUP) </IN><TEXT>      {First of a series}   PHILADELPHIA -- For more than 50 years after the U.S. Constitution was written, the Supreme Court issued rulings on it without knowing in detail what the framers said or thought.    James Madison's notes of the Constitutional Convention, the only running account of the secret sessions, weren't published until 1840, after his death. And by his own statements, the notes weren't intended to be a definitive record of what the framers had in mind.    Now, 200 years next Monday since work began here on the Constitution, there is heated debate over &quot;original intent&quot; -- what did the framers intend? And how much should interpretations of the Constitution be guided by those intentions?    To Attorney General Edwin Meese, the courts have strayed too far. The Supreme Court, he complains, has made the Constitution &quot;a draft horse that would pull the American people toward some . . . judicially created concept of the ideal world.&quot; This &quot;radical departure,&quot; he says, may be corrected only by returning to the Constitution's &quot;original intention.&quot;    But to many legal experts, Mr. Meese's arguments are aimed more at pushing the Reagan administration's social and political agenda than at promoting constitutional purity. The main targets on his hit list are the court's decisions favoring affirmative action and abortion rights and barring prayer in the public schools.    Those critical of activist judges frequently invoke not only the intent of the Founding Fathers and of constitutional amendments but also the intent of Congress in passing laws. But Mr. Meese's critics say he is concerned with intent only when it suits his purposes. His Justice Department urged the Supreme Court last spring to rule that only intentional violations of voting rights be considered illegal, contrary to the clear intent of Congress. The Supreme Court rejected the argument, 9-0.    The administration's efforts are part of &quot;an extensive campaign to diminish Americans' constitutional rights by weakening the courts' protection of them,&quot; asserts Herman Schwartz, a law professor at the American University Law School. &quot;Except where the protection of individual liberties is concerned, Meese and his right-wing allies are all for judicial activism.&quot;    How the Constitution is interpreted is a vital question with far-reaching practical consequences. Currently, for example, the Supreme Court is considering whether the Constitution permits states to require that the creation theory be taught along with evolution. Meanwhile, Congress and the president debate the legislature's power to prohibit aid to the Nicaraguan rebels.    &quot;What we're fighting about here,&quot; says Stanley Katz, a Princeton University historian, &quot;is not pie-in-the-sky ideology but real outcomes in the political world.&quot;    Liberal judges and academics insist that the Constitution is a set of principles that must change with the times. &quot;It's really wrong to suggest that we are just off on a frolic on our own,&quot; Supreme Court Justice William Brennan said in a recent public-television interview with Bill Moyers. &quot;Of course, we're constrained by the words of the Constitution,&quot; he said, but its &quot;broad principles have to be interpreted in the context of the day and of the problems of the time. . . . This is not a document frozen in time.&quot;    Original intent is a respected legal theory. Many judges and law professors say it is the only legitimate way to interpret the Constitution. But even many supporters of a narrow reading of the Constitution criticize Mr. Meese's use of the philosophy to press the administration's views.    &quot;Today it's original intent. A generation ago the cry was 'strict construction,'&quot; says Philip Kurland, a leading constitutional scholar at the University of Chicago. &quot;A generation before that it was Franklin Roosevelt's argument that it's time we return to the Constitution and abandon the sophistries. All three of these are guises for changing prevailing Supreme Court doctrines.&quot;    Mr. Meese and his supporters in the Justice Department say that their goal in pushing original intent isn't political. &quot;The fact that it does happen to be consistent with our policy goals, that's great,&quot; says Stephen Markman, an assistant attorney general, &quot;. . . but how does that gainsay the validity&quot; of the legal theory?    How would this legal theory work in practice? The attorney general suggested in a speech -- and some other supporters of the original-intent doctrine agree with him -- that contrary to Supreme Court decisions of the last 62 years, the Constitution's Bill of Rights is a check only on the federal government, not on the states. By this argument, the Supreme Court was wrong to strike down state laws making abortion a crime, prohibiting the sale of contraceptives to adults for use in their home, requiring prayer in the public schools and apportioning legislative districts unevenly.    In recent cases, Mr. Meese and the Justice Department stopped short of saying that the Bill of Rights doesn't apply to the states. But they did invoke original intent -- unsuccessfully -- to urge the Supreme Court to leave abortion laws up to state legislatures and allow states to set aside time for silent prayer or meditation in public schools.    &quot;It's a very strange position for him to take,&quot; Prof. Kurland says of Mr. Meese. &quot;A good conservative has got to argue in favor of adherence to precedents. And what he's got here are arguments against precedents. He's got to come up with an excuse for rejecting them. And his excuse is this original-intent theory.&quot;    One problem is that the definition of original intent keeps changing. &quot;It has been a moving target,&quot; says Prof. Laurence Tribe of Harvard Law School.    Increasingly, debate about the intent of the framers isn't limited to the ideas of the 55 men who at various times participated in the Constitutional Convention from May 25, 1787, to Sept. 17 of that year. Some proponents have recently changed their emphasis to the intent of those who ratified the Constitution in 13 separate state conventions, all but two held between November 1787 and July 1788.    But disparities were legion among the total of 1,706 delegates who took part in the ratifying conventions. As a result, &quot;ratifier intent is a slippery thing to hang on to,&quot; says Jack Rakove, a history professor at Stanford University.    At the Constitutional Convention itself, &quot;there was very little discussion of how the Constitution would be used,&quot; says David Kimball, a historian at Independence National Historical Park in Philadelphia, which includes Independence Hall where the Constitution was written. Today, people on both sides of an issue cite subsequent letters, speeches and articles by the same Founding Fathers to support their own views.    Those for strict interpretation quote an article by Alexander Hamilton in The Federalist. He said that of the three branches, the judiciary would be &quot;the least dangerous&quot; because it &quot;has no influence over either the sword or the purse.&quot; The other side cites another of Hamilton's articles in &quot;The Federalist.&quot; In this one he said, &quot;Laws are a dead letter without courts to expound and define their true meaning and operation.&quot;    Disputes over the meaning of the Constitution began scarcely after the ink dried on the 39 signatures. In June 1789 in the first Congress, there was debate about whether the president's power to appoint officials also included the inherent power to remove them. When Abraham Baldwin of Georgia, a signer of the Constitution and then a congressman, said the framers had intended to grant such power, others asked how they could be sure he was right, says Prof. Rakove of Stanford.    Even Madison, the man who took the notes at the Constitutional Convention, could change his view on constitutionality. When Congress created the First Bank of the U.S. in 1791, he opposed it in the House of Representatives on the ground that the Constitution didn't give the federal government the power to charter corporations. In 1816, however, Mr. Madison, then president, signed the Second Bank into law, explaining that public acceptance of the First Bank for 20 years changed the meaning of the Constitution.    In 1857, original intent was discussed at length by Chief Justice Roger Taney in the Dred Scott case. The ruling, that even slaves who fled into free states remained their owners' property, was harshly criticized in 1861 by President Lincoln. In comments that resemble Attorney General Meese's, Lincoln said that if the Supreme Court can, in an individual dispute, decide policy for the country, &quot;the people will have ceased to be their own rulers,&quot; having &quot;practically resigned their government into the hands of that eminent tribunal.&quot;    If original intent is difficult to discern, how are judges and justices supposed to interpret the Constitution? The views differ.    &quot;All theories that do not rest on the concept of original intent,&quot; argues Robert Bork, a Reagan appointee on the U.S. Court of Appeals in Washington, D.C., &quot;are political theories. . . . A judge who applies the morality of our time will end up applying his or her own morality. Original intent takes the values of the framers and applies them to today's changing problems. It's not easy, it's not mechanical, but it's also not impossible.&quot;    Ralph Lerner, a University of Chicago professor and author with Prof. Kurland of a new work called &quot;The Founders' Constitution,&quot; takes a slightly broader view. The value of original intent for judges, he says, is to determine &quot;what kind of a world, with what kind of a people, and what kind of relationship of government to the people, did they envision.&quot;    Justice Brennan goes further. &quot;Our whole constitutional structure and objective,&quot; he told Bill Moyers, &quot;is the protection of the dignity of the human being and a recognition that every individual has fundamental rights which government cannot deny him.&quot;    Original-intent proponents view the 1973 abortion decision, Roe vs. Wade, as the Supreme Court's greatest deviation. Many legal experts agree that the right to privacy on which the pro-abortion ruling was based can't be found or implied in the Constitution. These critics also say that the court shouldn't have disregarded the intent of 50 state laws, but other experts argue that the trend in the states then was toward allowing abortion in certain instances. They stress that a number of federal court rulings just prior to 1973 struck down state anti-abortion laws.    Proponents of original intent say they accept the Supreme Court's 1954 school-desegregation decision as a proper reading of the 14th Amendment guarantee of &quot;equal protection of the laws.&quot; But there is some evidence that the Congress that proposed the 14th Amendment in 1866 didn't envision desegregated schools.    Critics of the original-intent philosophy practiced by the Reagan administration say Mr. Meese realizes it would be a political error to criticize the 1954 Brown vs. Board of Education ruling. &quot;The day he criticizes Brown as being inconsistent with original intent,&quot; says American University's Prof. Schwartz, &quot;I'll believe it's more than just conservative politics.&quot;    (See: &quot;Corrections andamp; Amplifications: The Justice Department&quot; -- WSJ May 21, 1987) </TEXT></DOC>