<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870303-0046 </DOCNO><HL> Lending Imbroglio:Worries Deepen AgainOn Third World DebtAs Brazil Stops Paying---Many U.S. Banks Are BalkingAt New 'Restructurings,'But Politics May Prevail---Impact on the Lenders' Profits---By Charles F. McCoy and Peter TruellStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM FORGN CCI JPM SOVNBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED) </IN><TEXT>   The international debt crisis that erupted in 1982 is flaring up again, and it holds new risks for U.S. banks and debtor countries alike.    A temblor was recorded in Brazil a week and a half ago, when it announced it was suspending payments on about $67 billion of foreign debt and freezing about $15 billion of short-term credits and money-market deposits lent by foreign banks.    Like other Third World nations, from Ecuador and Argentina to the Philippines, Brazil hopes to win a &quot;restructuring&quot; of its debt and possibly get new financing as well. That, for example, was what Mexico was able to negotiate last fall, in a deal expected to be concluded later this month. But unlike the other debtors, Brazil wants to negotiate directly with creditor nations' governments to resolve its debt problems.    In the Mexican and other past negotiations, Federal Reserve Board Chairman Paul Volcker has succeeded in holding the international debt structure together by getting the creditor banks to agree to new terms and new financings.    But this time Mr. Volcker may be losing some of his tight control of the situation. Deep schisms have developed among creditors. New York's Citicorp has differed with other big money-center banks, insisting that the terms in restructurings be as strict as possible. More and more regional banks are refusing to lend money to sickly debtors and are arguing that the debt crisis can't be solved without write-downs and other actions.    For their part, some of the debtors, realizing their economies can't readily support current levels of debt, have become bolder. Peru has gone so far as to essentially default on its $14 billion of debt by limiting interest payments to a fraction of its scant export earnings.    &quot;Frankly, I think the {old} system has had it,&quot; says Pedro-Pablo Kuczynski, a managing director of First Boston Corp. and a former Peruvian government minister.    Ironically, the situation this time is exacerbated by the banks' relatively strong bargaining position. They have built up their reserves so extensively since the 1982 crisis that many of them now feel able to resist further concessions being sought by Third World debtor nations.    But the U.S. banks now are far less united, with most money-center banks preferring a softer approach than Citibank and the big regionals, to help guard against the collapse of the Volcker-built arrangement -- and perhaps the collapse of Third World economies.    In the end, international politics are likely to continue playing a big role in the new round of debt negotiations, analysts say, as the U.S. has a vested interest in stabilizing shaky democratic economies.    Many bankers are gradually conceding that they have little choice but to go along with concessions. Hopes for sustained economic progress in many Third World countries have proved fleeting. Although some debtors have had short-lived bursts of economic vigor -- Brazil six months ago was in fine shape -- many economists fail to see how most of the countries can ever get enough growth to pay the current debt.    Without political interventions, many U.S. banks nevertheless remain reluctant to provide new lending in nations where some have already taken losses. Citibank, the largest bank in the U.S., is just about daring a debtor nation to default, in the words of one banker. But Brazil seems to be calling its bluff by suspending payments on its loans, and some banks may be in for a shock.    Brazil calls the suspension of payments temporary, while it tries to resolve economic problems. Western bankers want Brazil to work out these problems, preferably with the help of the International Monetary Fund or the World Bank, before discussing any restructuring of debt. Brazil says such an economic program is to be announced in two or three weeks, but bankers are skeptical.    Big international banks, hoping to isolate the Brazil situation, have been pushing to conclude their restructuring talks with other nations; agreements in principle with Chile and Venezuela were reached in the past few days.    &quot;It's interesting how fast banks have tied up agreements with Chile and Venezuela. They're rushing to disprove the domino theory that says Brazil's suspension of interest payments might spread,&quot; says James McDermott, senior vice president at Keefe, Bruyette andamp; Woods Inc., a New York securities firm specializing in bank stocks.    Meanwhile, if Brazil's bank debts go unpaid for over 90 days, U.S. banks by law can no longer count the anticipated interest payments on these loans as actual income, affecting their bottom lines. Longer term, some authorities see a more sizable impact from a Brazil default. At the Institute for International Economics in Washington, William R. Cline, an international-debt expert, estimates that if the Brazil problem isn't resolved by the middle of next year, it will &quot;probably knock about 40% off big-bank profits.&quot; He adds, &quot;It'd be a nasty hit, but it'd probably be temporary.&quot; Some analysts consider that estimate too high, although nobody doubts an effect on the bottom line.    Bankers continue to carry most foreign debt on their books at full face value, although some say that its actual value has fallen. They have done so through repeated restructurings that supply new loans to help cover interest on old ones, keeping the credits technically current but piling more debt on the stooped shoulders of Third World economies.    The chairman of a West Coast bank says that the approach amounts to &quot;a legally sanctioned Ponzi scheme.&quot; Now, it is showing signs of unraveling. A growing number of economists and bankers believe this will force lenders and policy makers to adopt new tactics, including broader write-offs and other concessions. Although the actions could hurt bank profits for a time, bankers say, the steps may offer the only way out of the debt crisis.    Pressures are coming from the regional banks, among other sources. Sovran Financial Corp. and 35 to 40 other regional banks have been refusing to cough up their share of new money for the rocky Mexico restructuring begun last fall; many say they don't plan to give funds to Brazil or other wobbly debtors, either. &quot;Why should we when we don't think it will be paid back?&quot; asks James Kirkpatrick, a Sovran senior vice president.    Moreover, as more banks sell off Third World loans or set up reserves for them, the pressure on all to follow increases. Republic Bank of New York recently took $40 million of losses on a mixture of sovereign Mexican, Brazilian and Argentinian debt, a rare admission that even loans to governments there are all but hopeless.    Some debtors are in a combative mood. In the Philippines, where the Aquino government has been fuming over creditors' blunt rejection of its request for concessions on about $12 billion of debt, &quot;people power&quot;-style street demonstrations have broken out at Citicorp's Manila offices.    The past approach survived up to now largely because all parties -- bankers, regulators and debtors -- found it in their interest to ignore huge losses that could have swamped the financial system. They hoped economic turnarounds someday would bail them out. But as many of the participants decide they have less to lose by pulling out than staying in, &quot;you've got a situation where the emperor has no clothes and everyone is saying so,&quot; says Rudiger Dornbusch, an economics professor at Massachusetts Institute of Technology and an adviser to some debtor nations. &quot;Things get shown up for what really are.&quot;    This suggests that unrecognized losses will soon begin to register, many economists say. U.S. banks hold more than $120 billion of Third World debt, including $23.3 billion in Brazil and $23.5 billion in Mexico. Losses on Third World loans ultimately would run into the billions; even a gradual recognition of them would dent bank profits for years.    Not everyone is pessimistic. Some regulators say Brazil's move is only a temporary result of economic mismanagement, not a sign of failed debt strategy. They say Third World debtors still have the wherewithal to pay their debts -- if they stick with the program and take steps to right their economies, as envisioned under the plan put forth by Treasury Secretary James Baker 18 months ago.    So far, in fact, regulators have a good record of skirting disaster on Third World debt and keeping the participants in line. But &quot;a loss of discipline now would be disastrous,&quot; says Manuel Johnson, the Federal Reserve Board vice chairman.    But political considerations may call the tune. A year ago, the U.S., in effect, dictated terms to the banks on their portions of the $14 billion loan package for Mexico, despite resistance by Citicorp and others. &quot;Latin America and its debt is now primarily a governmental issue,&quot; says Robin Monro-Davis, the managing director at IBCA Banking Analysis, based in New York and London.    In 1982, Third World debt to all creditors, including governments and international agencies as well as banks, totaled $752 billion. Since then, because of restructurings, new borrowings and much-reduced principal payments, the total has risen to about $888 billion, according to the International Monetary Fund. However, major money-center and regional banks have been increasing their loan-loss reserves and capital at a pace faster than the growth of their Third World debt over the past five years.    The debt situation has prompted some curious spectacles in the domestic banking industry the past few weeks. When Republic Bank of New York sold millions of dollars of Mexican loans a few months ago, it argued to other banks that the sale rid Republic of its obligation to pitch in new funds in the Mexico restructuring. That touched off what a Texas banker calls a &quot;ludicrous episode of hide-and-seek,&quot; with banks fruitlessly searching for the buyer of Republic's debt to force it to pony up in the Mexico deal. Republic so far has refused to help.    Hardball is in season. Bank of Boston considered Mexico a bad credit risk and decided against lending any new money. But it backed down after receiving pressure from Citicorp, other banks and Fed officials. (All parties involved declined to comment.)    But even pressure tactics don't pack the wallop they once did, with creditors or with debtors. For one thing, the threat of global financial ruin, once a powerful incentive to keep Third World loans current by whatever gimmicks were necessary, has dimmed; many banks, particularly those in Europe and Japan, have built reserves and increased capital, and multilateral agencies and other lenders seem capable of preventing a sudden collapse. Many of the foreign banks have seen their loan reserves increased by the rise of their currencies against the dollar, the currency in which their Third World loans are denominated.    European banks, whose reserves are far greater than those of their U.S. counterparts, are &quot;less inclined than before to throw good money after bad&quot; to keep credits alive, says MIT's Mr. Dornbusch. And for numerous regional banks, reserve building has made pumping fresh funds into the Third World seem foolish.    Centerre Bancorp, a $5.2 billion holding company in St. Louis, took an $11 million gain from a pension-fund restructuring in the fourth quarter and funneled it into its reserve because of concerns about Latin American credits. Centerre didn't pitch in the full amount it was asked for in the Mexico restructuring. Committing a lot of new money to a debtor for whom you have just set up reserves for possible losses &quot;doesn't make much sense, does it?&quot; says Dan Huffer, Centerre's chief financial officer.    Other regional bankers complain that although regulators have apparently agreed to ease reserve-rule enforcement for new Third World loans by big banks, no such quid pro quo exists for them. &quot;I'm asked to lend money to a borrower whose condition looks pretty awful, and then they can turn around and classify that loan as substandard,&quot; says Neal Farrell, the president of the Mercantile National Bank in St. Louis. &quot;They're saying go out and hang yourselves if you want to, but we can come around and call you a bunch of dummies.&quot;    Many regional banks have been disposing of some of their exposure at a loss in a small but growing market for Third World debt. Some banks swap Brazilian loans for Argentinian ones, say, changing the mix of their loan portfolios. And some multinational companies or investors convert their debt into the local currency of the debtor nation, to use it in debt-for-equity investments.    The steep discounts when banks dispose of this debt -- 40% for Mexico, 30% for Brazil -- stand as an embarrassing contrast to other banks' practice of carrying loans to the same customers at full value.    The market was only about $5 billion last year, and big banks steered clear of it. But now J.P. Morgan andamp; Co. has set up a foreign-debt brokerage unit that will sell other banks' Third World loans at sharp discounts for a fee, while Morgan's own loans to many of the same debtors are carried at face value. A Morgan spokesman says he sees &quot;no inconsistency&quot; in this.    The retreat of regional banks from the Mexico refinancing suggests that moneycenter banks will be on the hook for more of each future restructuring. It has taken money-center banks nearly six months to line up enough regionals to complete the Mexico restructuring package, which provides new funds, reschedules maturities and reduces interest rates. The transaction now is set to be closed March 20, three months behind schedule.    Splits are starting to show even among the money-center banks. Citicorp has taken a hard line against concessions for some debtors, notably the Philippines and Chile. It has contended that concessions slow debtors' progress toward being able to finance themselves normally in the markets. But that philosophy has angered Manufacturers Hanover and other banks that favor a softer approach. &quot;Citi doesn't want to discuss concessions or anything else out of the ordinary, even when they might make sense,&quot; says an executive at a top-10 bank. </TEXT></DOC>