<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880621-0134 </DOCNO><HL> Business World: Public Education's Failures Plague Employers </HL><AUTHOR> George Melloan </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Business leaders today rank &quot;human resources&quot; high on their problem lists. Labor shortages have developed in many areas, but that's not all. Those job applicants who do show up often have been badly prepared by schools for the demands of the modern workplace.    Reams have been written about the failures of public schools. One shocking statistic reveals that 30% of high-school students fail to earn a diploma. With that dropout rate, many employers today are having to do what schools once did, teach people basic skills such as reading and writing. Functional illiteracy among adult Americans is shockingly high, by whatever estimate.    The result, quite predictably, is heavy business spending on training. The total cost is hard to estimate because so much is informal, on-the-job instruction. But the American Society for Training and Development (ASTD) recently estimated a $210 billion total annual cost, not far below the $238 billion the U.S. spends on formal elementary, secondary and college education. Some $30 billion in business training can be easily identified because it represents formal programs, either in-house or using outside resources. Employers provide at least 17.6 million formal courses each year to almost 15 million trainees, according to the ASTD.    Not surprisingly, however, corporations and business groups have decided they had better try to improve public education as well. The Business Roundtable is urging its blue-chip chief executive officers to take a direct hand in local education reform through programs and projects that fit the needs of their operating areas. The Committee for Economic Development, supported by business, foundations and individuals, has a similar campaign under way, mainly focused on preschool preparation of disadvantaged youngsters. Procter andamp; Gamble Co. and General Electric Co. are two of many corporate giants that have school-aid programs of their own.    The dismal picture in the public schools comes at a time when skill requirements in the working world are rising. The Hudson Institute has estimated that half of the new jobs that will be created between now and the year 2000 will require post-high-school training.    Curtis E. Plott, a former Los Angeles teacher and now the ASTD's CEO, explains what business is up against as it adopts more complex manufacturing and service techniques. &quot;The need for employees who are broader-based intellectually, even at the entry and bottom level, has gone up tremendously at a time when the education system is essentially failing for the bottom half of our students, the non-college-bound students. It's not higher levels of the old-time religion that are required (reading, writing, arithmetic); it's new interpersonal skills, teamwork skills, logic skills, the ability to learn, problem-solving skills, critical thinking skills. Moreover, demographic patterns mean that there aren't a lot of available entry-level employees to begin with.&quot;    Mr. Plott's own experience with teaching disadvantaged youngsters in Los Angeles and his discussions with employers have led him to the belief that there are basic flaws in educational philosophy, particularly where disadvantaged youngsters are involved. Such youngsters, he believes, can be more easily taught when they can see applications for the fundamental skills they are learning -- reading, writing and arithmetic. He cites European schools, particularly in Sweden, that switch students back and forth between apprentice-type jobs and the classroom, allowing them to develop both job and academic skills simultaneously, ultimately choosing how far to go with their academic work. Some youths with what at first looked like limited prospects go on to careers in engineering and other fields that require further academic advancement.    The U.S., Mr. Plott feels, is still too deeply rooted in a 19th-century educational philosophy, which separates the college-bound from the factory-bound, creating exaggerated expectations for the one and lowered self-esteem for the other.    Moreover, he believes, schools aren't teaching social skills that are becoming increasingly important in the workplace -- teamwork, for example. &quot;There's an increase not only in the level of basic skills required but in the range of skills required. That analogy goes outside manufacturing, the shift from the typist to something you'd call an information systems manager; the shift from bank teller, let's say, to the person who builds a customized financial services plan face to face with the customer.    &quot;One of the issues we have with studies of the nation's education problem is that it is often not viewed from an employer's perspective. Education reform tends to mean more academic preparation and everybody's behind that. We tend to produce white-collar and technical people pretty well but we don't have a formal structure for producing all those other folks. The school system still is created very much like the manufacturing system, put them in classrooms, put them in grades, put them in specialized subjects. But we don't integrate it. The schools say they're not really in business to prepare people for the work force. But business is saying, 'Well, that's what we need.'&quot;    Businesspeople who venture into public education, even when they come bearing money, face numerous obstacles. They quickly learn, if they didn't know already, that the problems of inner-city schools are not merely educational but involve a broad pathology. Welfare psychology, drugs and poverty are part of the web. There is often social disintegration resulting from a lack of community or family standards of conduct. Crime bosses and gangs are the real rulers of some neighborhoods. Moreover, even in less troubled areas, educational administrators often resent advice from &quot;business.&quot; The National Education Association, a powerful force in state legislatures throughout the land, does not welcome innovations such as voucher plans that would introduce competition among schools. All of these things make it difficult to introduce technological and methodological innovation of the type that corporations often employ in their own classrooms.    Indeed, businesses often find that it is easier to do their own training than to try to reform public education. The amount being spent attests to that. A rising number of vendors of educational materials and services are offering to help companies with their training problems. The ASTD's annual conventions attract about double the number of exhibitors that took part a decade ago. It recently added a separate annual gathering devoted strictly to technical and skills training.    &quot;The auto companies particularly send large numbers of people,&quot; says Mr. Plott. &quot;You run into people who say, 'I used to be on the line but now I am a quality trainer.' They come to learn the latest instructional technology.&quot;    But this takes money, which factors into product costs. Employers, through taxes, help pay for a public-school system that does not meet their needs and then must pay again to remedy its failures. That is not very efficient. &quot;I think education is the weak underbelly of American competitiveness,&quot; says Mr. Plott. He could be right. </TEXT></DOC>