<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880419-0129 </DOCNO><HL> Dukakis's 'Murder' Record Is a Crime </HL><AUTHOR> Maura Casey </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   The week before the New Hampshire primary this winter, a policewoman asked Gov. Michael Dukakis about his record on criminal-justice issues.    Gov. Dukakis prefaced his reply by saying, &quot;Well . . . as the folks in Massachusetts know, I'm a very tough guy when it comes to law enforcement.&quot;    The folks in Massachusetts -- at least in the Lawrence area -- know no such thing.    For the past year Massachusetts has been embroiled in controversy concerning a state Department of Correction program granting first-degree murderers furloughs -- unsupervised time off from prison. Gov. Dukakis, while not the program's creator, was its most steadfast and loyal supporter.    The Democratic front-runner's connection to the furloughs has begun to attract campaign criticism. And he, in turn, has distanced himself from the idea.    In 1976, during his first term as Massachusetts governor, Mr. Dukakis vetoed a bill that would have modified the Penal Reform Act of 1972 by banning days off from jail for first-degree murderers. He quashed the legislation despite the fact that first-degree murder involves killing with premeditation or with particular cruelty, such as torture.    Mr. Dukakis said: &quot;This bill would have cut the heart out of efforts at inmate rehabilitation. With 98% of those committed to our institutions eventually returning to society, it is essential that we retain what has proven to be a successful tool for breaking the cycle of crime which our prisons used to encourage.&quot;    Yet his veto set the stage for a tragedy 11 years later that would ruin the lives of a young couple and call Gov. Dukakis's judgment into question.    In June 1986, the Department of Correction announced that killer William Horton had escaped while on a weekend off from prison -- his 10th furlough. &quot;Escaped&quot; was a misnomer; he simply failed to return.    Horton's release horrified Lawrence. He was imprisoned for killing 17-year-old Joseph Fournier of Lawrence during a 1974 gas-station robbery. Horton stabbed him 19 times with a knife at least six inches long and stuffed his body in a garbage can.    No one could understand how Horton -- convicted of first-degree murder and therefore sentenced, as state law requires, to life in prison without parole -- could have been granted one furlough, let alone 10.    Horton surfaced again almost a year later. On April 3, 1987, he broke into the Maryland home of Clifford and Angela Barnes and terrorized them for 12 hours. During that time, Horton tied up Mr. Barnes, slashed his chest 27 times with a knife, and raped Mrs. Barnes twice. Mr. Barnes managed to escape and Horton was finally arrested after a high-speed chase and shoot out with Maryland police.    Massachusetts prison officials would not answer why Horton had been allowed furloughs. They based their refusal on a state law that seals all criminal records. To tell why Horton was released, officials said, would violate his right to privacy.    Furthermore, officials insisted that Horton's behavior was an exception to the rule -- that it was no reflection on the furlough program itself. They even contended that Horton had nine successful furloughs -- before going on a rampage during his 10th pass, of course.    Bit by bit, the Department of Correction released the information that:   --No one in Massachusetts spends life in prison, even though the law requires first-degree murderers to spend life behind bars. Their sentences are commuted and eventually they are paroled.    --Between 1972 and 1985, 11 first-degree murderers escaped while on furlough.    --Between 1980 and 1987, the department granted an average of 388 furloughs a year to killers.    Furloughs are granted with no input or oversight from the public. Everything is decided in secret.    Throughout all this, Gov. Dukakis backed his Department of Correction to the hilt, repeatedly defending the furlough program and the secrecy law that keeps it from public scrutiny. The governor contended that it was essential to give murderers days off from jail so he could decide whether they were ready to have their sentences commuted, even though 45 states in the U.S. have no such program. Mr. Dukakis commuted the sentences of 45 murderers during his first term, 19 of whom were convicted of first-degree murder. Since 1983, he has commuted the sentences of eight murderers.    Under pressure, the Department of Correction agreed last year to minor changes in the program's administration; for example, the department announced it would require murderers to serve 12 years, not 10 years, of their life sentences in prison before granting them furloughs.    Public opposition to the program spread. Outraged residents gathered 70,000 signatures on a petition that put a measure banning furloughs for first-degree murderers on the 1988 ballot. Clifford and Angie Barnes flew in from Maryland to testify in favor of a bill to do likewise.    But throughout, Gov. Dukakis insisted the program was a good thing. Here is a sample of his statements last year:   --June 7: &quot;I am a supporter of the furlough program because I think it is an important part of any modern and any effective correctional system. There is always a risk and our job is to make that furlough program as strong and as well-administered and as responsible as possible.&quot;    --June 30: &quot;Look, we're running a very tough, strong, well-defined furlough program in this state which by and large has been very successful.&quot;    --Nov. 23: &quot;I . . . just don't like the idea of absolutely prohibiting the possibility of a furlough program in these cases.&quot;    --Dec. 17: &quot;I think a good, strong, aggressive corrections system requires a well-managed furlough program.&quot;    Public pressure forced the Department of Correction to suspend days off for first-degree murderers last December. But as recently as this February, Mr. Dukakis said the furlough program &quot;worked effectively until a fella named Horton came along.&quot; On March 22, Mr. Dukakis abruptly announced he would no longer support the furlough program, thus avoiding certain defeat on the issue either by referendum in November or in the state Legislature.    And murderer William Horton? Last October, he was sentenced to two life terms plus 85 years in a Maryland prison for the attacks on the Barneses.    The Maryland judge who sentenced him said he was &quot;not prepared to take the chance that Mr. Horton might again be furloughed or otherwise released.&quot;    ---   Ms. Casey is editorial page editor of the Lawrence (Mass.) Eagle-Tribune, which won this year's Pulitzer Prize for general news reporting for its articles on the furlough program. </TEXT></DOC>