<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871127-0044 </DOCNO><HL> Many Hospitals Replace Traditional ModeOf Maternity Care With One-Room Plan---By Cynthia F. MitchellStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   When Susan Sparrow went to the hospital five years ago to give birth to her son Anthony, she labored for 32 hours in a cramped room within earshot of other mothers-to-be. She was then loaded onto a stretcher, trundled down a hall and strapped into a birthing chair.    After his birth, Anthony was whisked to the hospital's nursery, while Susan was hauled to a second room to recover, and then to a semiprivate room. She was given a pain pill and told to wait to see her new son.    But when she went into labor with her son Timothy a few months ago, Mrs. Sparrow checked into a private peach-and-cream wallpapered room &quot;10 times prettier than my own bedroom.&quot; She remained in the suite, which included a private bath and Jacuzzi, through the whole birth process. And she and Timothy stayed together after he was born.    &quot;It was so nice and calm,&quot; the Salt Lake City woman says. &quot;I feel a lot better about having babies now.&quot;    For years, hospitals have been wheeling expectant mothers through the birth process almost like cars on an assembly line: labor in a sterile room, deliver in another, next into a wheelchair and off to recovery; then on to a fourth room for postnatal care.    &quot;We've been treating babies like gallbladders,&quot; says Loel Fenwick, a Spokane, Wash., obstetrician and consultant.    But now, spurred by competitive pressure and women's demands to be more involved in the birthing process, many hospitals are changing their approach: They are switching to hotel-like rooms or suites where a mother can stay for most or all of her visit, from check-in to delivery to postnatal care. In addition, homey paint, wallpaper and quality furniture previously available to only a handful of upscale mothers are becoming standard, as are gifts, champagne and candlelight dinners for new parents.    A November 1986 survey by Borning Corp., a birthing-bed maker since acquired by Hillenbrand Industries Inc., found that some 500 of the nation's 3,600 obstetrics hospitals already have eliminated the conventional mother-and-baby shuttle in favor of the new approach. And over the next two years, an additional 1,300 hospitals plan to start switching over.    So far, most hospitals making the change have adopted a system in which mothers stay in a single comfortably furnished room for labor, delivery and recovery and then move to a second room for postnatal care. As more hospitals switch, they are expanding that concept to a single room for the entire stay. Specialists tend to lump the two variations together under the label of single-room maternity care.    The idea grew out of token &quot;birthing rooms&quot; for labor, delivery and recovery set up by many hospitals over the past decade. Those often flopped because they lacked anesthesia, monitoring and emergency equipment, and were suited only to low-risk mothers. In contrast, hospitals set up for the single-room format use it for virtually all births except Caesarean sections.    The cushy-looking rooms often give little hint of what goes on when delivery is imminent. For example, at Hospital Corp. of America's West Side Hospital in Nashville, Tenn., oak-shuttered doors hide fetal-monitoring equipment and lights; oak squares flanking each side of the hotel-like bed store oxygen, resuscitation equipment and other gear. In just seconds, the bed -- normally covered with blue and rose comforters -- converts into a delivery bed that can switch to any position.    Many doctors and patients say one-stop birthing has big psychological benefits. &quot;The bonding of baby to mom and the other family members is so critical in those first moments and days after birth,&quot; says Marj Schmitt, director of the Family Maternity Center at Spokane's Holy Family Hospital, a pioneer in single-room care. To that end, hospitals encourage fathers to sleep in fold-out couches in the same quarters, and give special training not only to expectant mothers, but also to siblings, fathers and grandparents.    Another benefit is more personalized attention. The same nurses often care for both mother and child throughout the hospital stay, replacing a system of different nurses for each stage of childbirth and separate nurses for mom and baby. Denise Scollin, who had a son last month in a new birth center at Griffin Hospital in Derby, Conn., says when she had trouble breastfeeding him, the nurses &quot;stuck with me the whole time.&quot;    But some doctors and patients fear infant safety could be overlooked in the rush to new settings. &quot;I'm afraid everyone will forget that the caliber of medical and emergency care is the most important thing,&quot; says Dr. Marvin Rosner, a Chicago obstetrician. &quot;Without that, it doesn't matter what fringes you throw in.&quot;    Sarah Bayne, one of Dr. Rosner's patients and a veteran of two complicated deliveries, says, &quot;When you go through labor, you don't care where you are. You're blind to the opulence that surrounds you. You just want to be in a good hospital with good fetal monitoring and fetal care.&quot;    Still, many hospitals are finding that single-room care boosts business. The number of births at St. Mary's Hospital in Minneapolis fell below 100 a month in 1984. But then it opened the Birthing Place, a single-room facility, and the rate has increased to about 150 deliveries, while births nationally have increased only slightly.    Despite the plush surroundings, the cost of single-room maternity care differs little from the conventional approach. According to the Health Insurance Association of America, the total cost of a birth in a conventional format averages $2,560, compared with $2,450 when labor, delivery and recovery is in one room and the patient moves to a second room for postnatal care. Figures aren't yet available on full-stay maternity rooms, but specialists say their costs won't differ much.    While building or converting to a one-room facility can be costly, health-care specialists say it requires less space -- and allows for more efficient use of staff -- than the conventional method. Moreover, in the new format, mothers are likely to go home nearly a half-day sooner because &quot;they're just much more comfortable with the whole situation,&quot; says Mary Anne Lappin Graf, president of Health Care Innovations Inc., a Salt Lake City health-care planning firm. </TEXT></DOC>