<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880510-0089 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Where's the Investigation? </HL><SO> </SO><CO> LABOR </CO><IN> PUB BNK </IN><G> CNG EXE </G><TEXT>   What if an ex-con who ran a political slush fund for Jimmy Hoffa did almost all the political campaign printing for, say, the vice president of the United States? And what if the same printer put out a book by the vice president, paying him over $60,000 in royalties at a rate of 55% of all proceeds? And what if the book were sold, not primarily through bookstores, but to political supporters and lobbyists? Do you suppose the vice president would be investigated and pilloried in the press? Quicker than you can say &quot;special prosecutor.&quot;    But, of course, the vice president has none of the associations listed above. They belong instead to the next man in the order of presidential succession, House Speaker James C. Wright Jr. And there is no provision for &quot;special prosecutors&quot; or &quot;independent counsels&quot; to probe into the affairs of members of the House. That is left to the House Ethics Committee, appointed by the House leadership, which is to say, principally by Jim Wright.    Speaker Wright's dealings would be a ripe field for investigation, to judge by the total of the fleeting headlines here and there in the press. His finances have never become a sustained day-to-day story like, say, Attorney General Edwin Meese's financial troubles. This is perhaps because there also has been no thorough investigation by a special prosecutor with the power of subpoena and the likelihood of leaks. If the Speaker were in the executive branch, such an investigation would surely be under way.    ---   On March 18, Speaker Wright amended his financial-disclosure forms for the years 1980 to 1986, in effect admitting he was previously out of compliance with the law. He finally listed his underlying holdings in Mallightco, a partnership with Fort Worth developer George Mallick, which became controversial in 1986 when the Speaker pushed through an $11.8 million grant to develop the Fort Worth stockyards at a time when Mr. Mallick had a financial interest in the project.    Last year, the Speaker announced he was putting his share of Mallightco's assets in a blind trust and directing that they be liquidated. He said Mallightco's assets were $104,000 in Florida land, $93,000 in uncut gemstones, $2,309 in cash and $5,000 in stock. His new disclosure forms show that in 1986 someone's estimate of the value of his share of the gemstones was between $50,000 and $100,000.    The Speaker is also embroiled in the spectacular collapse of several Texas savings and loans. In 1986 and 1987, Mr. Wright intervened with federal regulators on behalf of several of the Sandamp;Ls, and subsequently four executives running these concerns have been indicted. The Speaker has become testy over news accounts of his role in the matter. Early this year, his press secretary sent inflammatory letters of complaint to several newspapers, an action the Speaker later apologized for. Last month he had Washington lawyer Robert Strauss demand that Bankers Monthly magazine not reprint an article exploring his links with the Sandamp;L officials. In a letter to Bankers Monthly, a spokesman for the Speaker says his only contact with the most publicized of the indicted executives, Donald Dixon, was one phone call. However, Thomas Gaubert, also indicted, was finance chairman of the Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee during 1986.    ---   Of all the colorful personalities surrounding the Speaker, perhaps the most interesting is Fort Worth printer William Carlos Moore. Mr. Moore is head of Madison Systems Corp., Madison Printing Co., Madison Publishing Co. and National Ballot Computers Co. According to filings with the Federal Election Commission, since 1976 the Speaker's campaign committees have paid Mr. Moore's businesses $634,262, or 19% of the $3,344,352 they disbursed over the period. The money was spent on a variety of services, from polling to bumper stickers. Until last year, the Washington Times reported, all of Mr. Moore's companies operated out of a single, 600-square-foot storefront. Mr. Moore claims he used other offices.    Mr. Moore rose out of political and union activity in Texas to head the Teamsters Union political fund under Teamsters President Hoffa. In 1975, he pleaded guilty to income-tax evasion in Federal District Court in Baltimore, under a plea bargain stipulating six months in jail. According to press reports at the time, the IRS charged Mr. Moore with failing to report $90,000 received from the Teamsters fund. He said the money in question was not income, but was distributed in what a 1975 Washington Post article described as &quot;illegal political contributions.&quot; However, Mr. Moore refused to disclose the identity of the recipients, choosing instead to take the jail term.    An affadavit from Jimmy Hoffa supported Mr. Moore's story, though Frank Fitzsimmons, then president of the Teamsters, denied it. Mr. Hoffa disappeared in July 1975, while Mr. Moore was serving his sentence.    Court files from the case include a letter to the sentencing judge from Rep. James C. Wright Jr. Speaker Wright first met Mr. Moore from political work in the 1950s. In the 1975 letter, he explained that he employed Mr. Moore through the National Water Quality Commission, and asked the judge &quot;to take into consideration the obvious value to us all of Mr. Moore's continued presence in our communities.&quot;    After Mr. Moore's release from prison he returned to Fort Worth and incorporated Madison Systems in September 1976. The first payment to Madison from Jim Wright's campaign was in October of that year. Mr. Wright has since shunned advice to distance himself from Mr. Moore. In 1986, Mr. Wright told the Fort Worth Star-Telegram, &quot;The best way to be a friend is to be a friend. You don't desert a friend if he's in difficulty.&quot;    Between the two friends, money flows both ways. While the Speaker's campaign-spending reports show disbursements to Mr. Moore's enterprises, his financial-disclosure statements show receipts from them. The limitations on outside income by congressmen exclude book royalties, and Speaker Wright receives royalties from the only book Madison Publishing has ever released, &quot;Reflections of a Public Man,&quot; a 117-page, 75-chapter collection of anecdotes by Speaker Wright.    Last September, the Washington Post quoted the Speaker as saying he received $3.25 for each book sold at $5.95, and reported his total receipts at $55,000. This would represent some 17,000 copies, but the Post could find only one Fort Worth bookstore that stocks the volume. It reported sales of &quot;around 100&quot; copies. Mr. Moore reports that current sales total 20,000 copies, and says most of the books have been sold at Wright political rallies. The Teamsters' PAC bought 1,000 copies in 1986. Mr. Moore says other lobbyists have also made purchases, but not many, saying, &quot;I'd be happy if we sold boxcars of them like that.&quot;    ---   Now, the Jim Wright book doesn't strike us as a smoking gun, merely as a sleazy little thing. But obviously the whole project can be seen as a dodge inviting lobbyists to put money in the Speaker's personal pocket, not to mention an evasion of congressional earnings limitations. The income limitations are after all the law, and the Speaker is in a position of high trust. What might be made of it if a special prosecutor were turned loose on the Speaker's finances? If Ollie North's aid to the Contras is a conspiracy to defraud, what are sales of Jim Wright's book to lobbyists?    And, of course, a special prosecutor would have the power of subpoena and a phalanx of lawyers to find out whether the Speaker somehow got a dollar from the Texas savings and loans he tried to protect. Who knows, perhaps a special prosecutor waving some kind of indictment could persuade Mr. Moore to reveal who got the suspect contributions in the 1970s. And, of course, lawyers would fan out interviewing each of Mallightco's gemstone purchasers to see if they felt they got full value. It's doubtful, in short, that Speaker Wright's affairs could withstand this kind of scrutiny any better than Mr. Meese's.    Such scrutiny of high officials may or may not be a good thing. In recent years, the Caesar's wife crowd has given us a new apparatus of restrictions and reporting requirements. If morality in public life has improved, we haven't noticed. We fear these preoccupations have the ironic result of driving the best and most moral people out of public life into safer and saner pursuits.    What is clearly wrong, though, is to apply such scrutiny to some but not to others, making the Caesar's wife standard a political weapon. If executive-branch officials are destroyed by special prosecutors, then powerful congressmen with affairs as messy as Jim Wright's ought to be subjected to the same kind of investigation.    Clearly, Congress can't police itself and refuses to subject itself to anything like special prosecutors. If it's unwilling to do either, then the honorable course is to dismantle pretenses such as the Ethics Committee, the felony penalty for reporting violations, the special prosecutors and the whole Caesar's wife assault on members of the executive branch. Ending the ethical double standard that is now in effect is not merely a matter of honor, but of allowing the Republic to be effectively governed. </TEXT></DOC>