<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881108-0160 </DOCNO><HL> Business World: Restructuring With an Eye Out for Raiders </HL><AUTHOR> George Melloan </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GR </CO><IN> TNM </IN><TEXT>   Any number of defenses against hostile raiders are being attempted by American corporations, including, of course, the recent spectacular leveraged buy-out offer by the management of RJR Nabisco. But some companies are restructuring without benefit of LBOs or other forms of financial reorganization, with some prospect that they ultimately will become less vulnerable to raiders merely because of changes in the nature of their business. One of the best examples is B.F. Goodrich Co.    Goodrich is well along in converting itself from making consumer goods to supplying customized goods and services to other industries. It has removed itself from the road vehicle tire and industrial rubber products businesses, shifting toward specialty chemicals, aerospace components and polyvinyl chloride (PVC) plastics, of which it is the nation's largest supplier. As it focuses more on research and development and engineered products, it presumably will be less attractive to LBO specialists, who like companies in mature, nontechnical markets with a reasonably steady cash flow.    The only problem for Goodrich, however, is that it currently has a certain vulnerability as it sets about to reinvest the proceeds from its divestitures. Its debt load is only 25% of total capital, which means that it has a lot of unused leverage that a buy-out team could employ to finance a takeover. Moreover, with low-profit operations sold off, its cash flow is humming. Earnings are projected at some $7.50 a share this year, about double the 1987 level.    Indeed, rumors were floating around some weeks ago that both Sir James Goldsmith and his fellow Brits at Hanson PLC had their eyes on the company. So far, no open bidding has surfaced despite some intense activity in the company's stock on several trading days this fall. Goodrich Chairman and Chief Executive John D. Ong says he hasn't been able to substantiate any of the rumors.    Being the corporate equivalent of a staked-out lamb in a tiger hunt has its problems for management. &quot;I'm not going to say I'm not concerned,&quot; says Mr. Ong. &quot;Obviously we are. We live in a world in which certainty about corporate control doesn't exist anymore. But I don't spend a lot of time worrying about it. The whole stock market is so rumor driven today. The only play in the market has been deal activity.    &quot;We've arrived at a state where we can't be too sensitive to rumors. If you look at the price of our shares, I would admit that they have been as high as they have in part because we've been a rumored deal stock. It's not a good way to get your share price up, but the important thing is to get your share price up. We look at what we know about the company, and we say to ourselves at the current level of $56 a share and if you add a control premium onto that and then to add a safety margin, which any breakup raider has to have, you get up to price-per-share figures that are probably pretty daunting.&quot;    Goodrich has resisted the temptation to end the suspense with a management buy-out, or an auction to find the highest bidder for its shares, or some other dramatic move. Mr. Ong is focusing instead on making good use of that latent leverage to pursue the company's own strategic plan. You would think that it's always easy to invest great gobs of money, but not necessarily, in the current environment, if you want to do it responsibly.    &quot;We have that self-financing quality you don't want to have,&quot; says Mr. Ong. &quot;But we got there on purpose. I don't think a company like mine, with the kind of businesses we have, ought to have a 25% debt ratio. I think it ought to be more like 30% to 35%. We need to be more leveraged to take advantage of the growth opportunities in our businesses. We just happen to be where we are now because we got busy and pulled our socks up and got rid of businesses. Now we are gearing up to reinvest that money.    &quot;The thing we are desperately trying not to do -- it's a tension, week-to-week -- is to throw money at the first deal we can find, in terms of an acquisition, or buy back our shares. We've been working like hell to push back up the value of our equity. In 1985, we took a write-off to finance all this restructuring that knocked a third of our equity away. We've now regained that in three years, which is faster than any of us thought we would do it. Now we want to put that capital to work.    &quot;I like to use the word amplify the company because we are trying to find other businesses that fit within the strategic framework. We've got opportunities to do that. But the question of fit is very important. The prices for companies in the industries we're interested in, such as specialty chemicals and aerospace, are very, very high in terms of multiples. You can't afford to be very reckless because you know you are going to have to pay a very high price for the opportunities and assets available.    &quot;What that means is that for a period of time we have this kind of balance-sheet vulnerability. That worries me. I wish our stock price were 10 points higher. But even where it is I think provides some element of cover.    &quot;A couple of times we have become involved in auction processes. When we become interested we find other people interested as well, including some of our friends from Europe. Our preference is to stay away from auctions and to try to target companies on the basis of either existing relationships or relationships cultivated for that purpose, to be able to approach the company before it gets in the auction mode and try to convince them of the soundness of putting the two businesses together.&quot;    The company is seeking internal growth as well. It has boosted research and development and capital spending. From an oldline Akron tire firm with a big centralized plant it now has become highly decentralized, with relatively small and highly autonomous divisions scattered around northern Ohio and other parts of the country. Mr. Ong notes that there are 25 general accounting ledgers in the company, which gives some idea of the degree of decentralization. That makes it harder for headquarters to maintain control but it also has an important plus side.    &quot;You unleash this tremendous amount of human energy that is astounding. People do things that surprise you and display capabilities that you didn't know they had. We place very heavy emphasis on the fact that the first line of control of the company is the judgment, discretion and sense of responsibility of the individual manager.    &quot;In that sense, it is perhaps easier to manage the company. It's easy when people are enthusiastic, are motivated and have a sense of ownership. When they want to succeed and have this tremendous desire to get some place, you don't feel as though you are engaged in some Sisyphean task, pulling the company behind you with a rope over your shoulder. You sometimes feel the whole company is running ahead of you and you're struggling to catch up and know what the hell's going on. But of the two problems I guess I would rather have the latter.&quot;    For more reasons than one, obviously. The sooner that decentralized aggressiveness translates into further advancement of the Goodrich strategy, and shifts that tempting balance sheet to less cash and more debt, the safer Goodrich will be from restructuring at the hands of raiders. </TEXT></DOC>