<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871030-0014 </DOCNO><HL> Resolute London:Britain, Defying U.S.,Decides to Go AheadWith Big Stock Offer---But British Petroleum IssueNow Contains SafeguardsTo Ease Fears of Brokers---Echoes of the Falklands War---This article was prepared byWall Street Journal staff reportersCraig Forman, John Marcom Jr. and Peter Norman in London,And James B. Stewart and Steve Swartz in New York</HL><DD> 10/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MS SHE AXP SB EUROP BPSECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)PETROLEUM (PET)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><TEXT>   With the world's economic health said to be hanging in the balance, Britain announced that it would proceed with its huge offering of British Petroleum Co. shares, but with safeguards designed to prevent the stock price from collapsing.    Never has a single stock offering so galvanized the attention of Wall Street, world capitals and investors. The record $12.33 billion offering of Britain's nearly one-third stake in British Petroleum originally shaped up as a symbol of the power of the stock market and of renewed international infatuation with capitalism. But in the wake of the Oct. 19 market crash, the offering threatens to inflict big losses on already-reeling underwriters and to hit an already-weakened market with a flood of new stock. The securities industry in the U.S. had warned of dire consequences.    Britain's decision is a compromise that attempts to minimize any doomsday potential while going forward with the offering, which underwriters have already committed to buy at $65 a share, far above yesterday's closing price of $55.75 in the U.S. market. (The shares widely traded in the U.S. actually are American depositary receipts, representing the equivalent of 12 British shares.)    Britain agreed that the Bank of England will buy back the shares at any time during the next one to two months for a price roughly equivalent to yesterday's closing price and hold the shares for at least six months. The move is intended to build a floor under the stock price and prevent any collapse, but it could also mean that Britain will end up owning again much of the stake it is selling today.    Despite the British promise to buy back the shares, some on Wall Street reacted with shock. &quot;We {helped the British} during the Falklands War, and we can't even get them to stop an underwriting,&quot; moaned a major Wall Street money manager.    Any decision to scrap the offering -- as the underwriters had sought -- could have been a political catastrophe for the British government of Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. The offering could have been scrapped only at a large cost to the British treasury, which stands to gain what now looks like a very handsome price for its stake in the oil giant, which owns Standard Oil of Ohio. The loss of the proceeds threatened to upset the government's budget for the next three years.    Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's government might have been accused of bowing to privileged and wealthy financial interests at the expense of her citizens had the offer been withdrawn. Indeed, Chancellor of the Exchequer Nigel Lawson said in announcing the decision that &quot;it is not my objective in any way to bail out the underwriters&quot; of the offering, who are still likely to absorb large losses. And Mrs. Thatcher's record of privatization might have been irreparably tarnished.    But the risk of failing to reach some compromise also could have been enormous. According to people familiar with the lobbying, the British government was warned that dumping the BP shares into a fragile market could cause holders to sell the shares to avoid the risk of further declines. That, in turn, could have led to a downward spiral among other oil issues in London, triggering margin calls and a broad-based decline as holders rushed to cover their oil losses by selling other issues.    In this scenario, London could have become the shock that would unleash chaos in the increasingly interdependent world markets, as trading continued around the globe in New York and Tokyo. Some investment bankers feared in particular that the Japanese might need very little provocation before pulling their investments out of London and New York in order to help stabilize Japanese markets.    A further risk was the financial health of the underwriting firms, a risk that remains despite the British offer to buy shares. While the four U.S. firms have said they can absorb any losses from the offering without seriously depleting their capital, the thinly capitalized Canadian firms involved could be seriously shaken, further roiling the volatile Toronto market. &quot;They're drowning in this,&quot; said one U.S. underwriter of the Canadians.    &quot;We know what kind of shape Hong Kong is in, and Australia is heading in the same direction,&quot; says a British banker involved in the underwriting. &quot;Tokyo is extremely fragile. Does a deal like this significantly add to the fragility of the system as a whole?&quot;    In the wake of Britain's decision to go forward, the answer will soon be known. Others have argued that the dangers to the system weren't so great even if Britain had done nothing to support the share prices. Indeed, the doomsday scenario has been articulated most forcefully by the offering's underwriters, and they are hardly disinterested observers. The four U.S. investment-banking firms -- Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co., the lead U.S. underwriter, Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., Morgan Stanley andamp; Co., and Salomon Inc. -- stood to lose a total estimated at $600 million. To put the enormous size of the loss in perspective, one investment banker says the loss to his firm alone would wipe out 20 years of underwriting profits.    Faced with these losses on top of enormous losses already incurred from the market's collapse, as well as the uncertainty of possible losses from millions of dollars in bridge loans in deals that now seem shaky, the investment banks took the extraordinary step of asking Mr. Lawson to back down. On Monday afternoon, the British underwriters delivered a letter to the chancellor of the exchequer's office seeking cancellation or postponement of the offer.    The request did not fall on sympathetic ears. &quot;There's a feeling that Americans cheat in these circumstances,&quot; says Lord Bruce-Gardyne, a former Conservative treasury minister. &quot;You've got to watch the colonials. The Americans always try and rewrite the rules.&quot;    The lack of sympathy stemmed not just from the fact that the underwriters were trying to welsh on a contract. There was already considerable resentment in Britain, and among some rival investment banks, that underwriters had siphoned off such enormous fees in other successful privatization efforts. &quot;It's absolutely audacious for firms like Goldman to complain after they gouged the U.K. in British Telecom and British Gas,&quot; says another investment banker uninvolved in BP. A Goldman spokesman declined comment.    There was also the sense that the plight of the American investment banks was entirely their own fault. It stems at its broadest from their growing willingness in recent years to take ever-increasing risks in search of profits and prestige -- a strategy that worked as long as the stock market boomed. In the BP deal, the four U.S. investment banks agreed to terms that would have been unthinkable in a more cautious era of investment banking.    In return for the enormous fees and the prestige of history's largest offering, they agreed to pay $65 a share for the stock a full month before it would come to market -- exposing themselves to the risk that the price might drop in the interim. Moreover, in the underwriting agreement, the underwriters specifically disclaimed certain legal defenses -- such as force majeure -- that might have been invoked in the wake of the extraordinary market collapse to get out of their underwriting obligations.    This risk stemmed in part from the nature of British underwriting. In Britain, underwriters agree weeks in advance to buy the securities being issued. They then pre-sell the offering to big institutions with which they share a commitment fee paid by the issuer. Pre-selling largely protects them from subsequent price fluctuations in the stock.    In the U.S., pre-selling isn't legal, and so underwriters usually don't commit to a price until the night before the offer is sold. They further spread what little risk remains by putting together a team of sub-underwriters, other securities firms that agree to sell allotments of the shares once they become available.    Despite the huge risks inherent in the BP underwriting, the four U.S. firms chose not to include any other firms as sub-underwriters, thereby reserving all the shares -- and the profits -- for themselves. &quot;The word 'greed' comes to mind,&quot; says the head of one major Wall Street firm that wasn't asked to join the underwriting group.    Some British banks argued that the Americans needed to be taught a lesson. &quot;If the only reason to pull it is to let the American underwriters off, then it should go through,&quot; says a British banker at a U.K. merchant bank involved in the offering. &quot;It's perfectly good for the system for them to get a bit of a stick now and again.&quot; Others argued that the American investment banks should stand by their client, as Lloyds of London did after the 1906 San Francisco earthquake.    None of this, of course, was anticipated when the British government geared up earlier this year to sell its stake in BP, originally acquired in 1914. A slick publicity campaign drew huge popular interest. Everyone had happy memories of handsome opening-day profits from a yearlong string of successful public offerings of Britain's holdings in British Gas PLC, British Airways, and others.    Although public sentiment continued to support the offer even after the market's collapse, as a result of the formal request from the underwriters Mr. Lawson agreed to reconsider the offer but gave no indication he was likely to back off.    Lobbying immediately went into high gear. The firms recognized that they needed high-level allies with greater claims to objectivity in order to prevail.    Eventually joining in the international lobbying was U.S. Treasury Secretary James Baker, who warned of economic repercussions while stopping short of an outright request that Britain scrap the issue. The Federal Reserve is understood to have urged caution, and the Canadian finance minister urged Britain to back down.    Yesterday, the Bank of England was asked for its final assessment. Bank officials talked to Federal Reserve officials and Canadian central bankers to assess the threat to world markets. The bank isolated its officials from other outside contacts to preserve impartiality. Indeed, the matter was deemed so sensitive that other British officials invoked the Official Secrets Act in refusing to even guess which way the Treasury was leaning.    Meanwhile, the American investment banks trying to place the BP shares were finding their worst fears realized. Clients who had earlier committed to taking huge allotments now backed off. Many of them had already swallowed big issues underwritten just before the collapse for which they now had big losses. Many of the big mutual funds, faced with large redemption calls, were in no position to go on a buying spree, even at fire-sale prices.    One money manager says he was inundated with calls from three of the four U.S. underwriters, some of whom called two and three times yesterday morning alone. &quot;They're pretty desperate,&quot; the money manager says. Another says he agreed to take 10,000 shares after arm-twisting by one of the underwriters -- far fewer than the 50,000 he had earlier said he wanted. Even now, he says &quot;this had better be a bargain or I won't take the 10,000.&quot;    Some prospective buyers said they weren't given any price indication, but others indicated that the underwriters have no intention of selling the stock at a bargain. Two money managers say they were quoted prices in the range of $58 to $60 a share, or about $5 above the current market price of BP.    Some money managers were highly dubious that such prices could be achieved. &quot;There's absolutely no market for this stuff in the U.S.&quot; at these prices, says one official at one of the firms involved, prior to Britain's announcement. The market prospect for the shares seemed so bleak that while the official estimate of the total losses was about $600 million, investment bankers involved were talking privately yesterday afternoon about losses that could mount to $900 million.    Britain's announcement that it will buy back shares makes losses of that magnitude unlikely, since the underwriters can afford to hold the shares without fear that their value will plunge beneath $55. Still, officials estimated that the four U.S. firms would incur pretax losses of about $100 million each, and some of them continued to complain that the deal was going through. &quot;Margaret Thatcher has not helped herself in the U.S. financial community,&quot; says an official at one of the four firms.    The heads of the four firms have been meeting throughout the week, continuing last night, trying to agree on pricing strategy and on how many of the shares to hold and how many to sell immediately. &quot;There has been slight disagreement,&quot; acknowledged a senior official of one of the four firms involved. There have been disagreements even within firms, with some officials arguing for holding large positions in the hope the market for the stock will rally and others urging that the risks be made finite by dumping the stock now.    By late yesterday afternoon, the firms continued to phone clients trying to assess the market for an issue they had to assume would go through today. But there were signs that the doomsday scenario was beginning to be taken seriously within the ranks of the British government. Mr. Lawson told a jeering House of Commons that he wouldn't announce his decision until late yesterday evening, prompting immediate speculation on Wall Street that the offer might be abandoned. Oil stocks rallied on the rumors in New York, and the ADRs representing 12 shares closed at $55.75, up $2.50.    Mr. Lawson made his dramatic announcement to the contrary at 10 p.m. before Mrs. Thatcher and a House of Commons chamber packed with members, many in black tie from earlier evening social engagements. Government benches exploded with shouts of &quot;Hear! Hear!&quot; and supporters waved their papers joyfully. The opposition gave its biggest cheers to Mr. Lawson's announcement that he wasn't bailing out the underwriters.    Despite the enthusiastic response in the House of Commons, the implications of Britain's decision are far from clear. While paying lip service to the time-honored notion that &quot;a deal is a deal,&quot; Britain could still end up owning much of the BP stock it is selling if forced to buy it back at $55 a share. That pledge could end up costing British taxpayers if BP shares plunge below $55. And despite Mr. Lawson's rhetoric, Britain did give the underwriters special treatment, substantially reducing the risk accepted by the underwriters when they accepted the offering and the resulting losses.    Still, Britain's compromise seems likely to avert the immediate crisis that might have been triggered by a collapse of BP's share price. Despite the potential loss to his firm, &quot;we view this as a very constructive move,&quot; says Peter A. Cohen, the chairman of Shearson and a spokesman for the underwriting group.    ---   Paul Hemp, Barbara Toman and Peter Torday also contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>