<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861224-0200 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> EUROP </IN><DATELINE> KIEL, West Germany  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Ludwig Erhard, although he died in 1977, is still a controversial figure. As an economist he won acclaim from many of his contemporaries for introducing the 1948 currency reform that paved the way to the Wirtschaftswunder, the German economic miracle. Later, from 1963 to 1966 he served as chancellor. But to Germans my age -- those belonging to the generation of the 1968 revolt -- the word &quot;Erhard&quot; long had a negative connotation. His antipathy to government planning and controls made him unattractive. We were convinced that Erhard's ideas were outdated, and that economies and societies could be &quot;managed.&quot;    Now the experience of the 1970s has convinced younger Germans, too, that the economic successes of the postwar period were due to more than just luck. Erhard's own words explain the accomplishment: &quot;The outcome of the 1950s and early 1960s was nothing but the natural consequence of the (honest) effort of the German people, acting once they had the chance to live and decide according to individual preferences.&quot; This statement could also apply to my country in the 1980s. To look at Erhard's achievements is to realize the economic possibilities available to West Germany today.    Erhard's contribution to the German economic miracle started during the Allied occupation when he became head of the office for &quot;Money and Credit.&quot; In this function he participated in the currency reform and development of the monetary system.    As administrative director for the economy of the Bi-Zone -- the British-American sector of Germany -- Erhard constructed the basis for economic policy in his nation. He implemented the rigorous 1948 currency reform, under which the country's financial assets were written down and the deutsche mark reduced to one-tenth of its value. He simultaneously abolished a number of regulations and canceled price controls. He dispelled the objections of the occupying powers, countered savage attacks by opposition parties and quelled resistance in one wing of his own party, the conservative Christian Democrats.    To understand the magnitude of this feat, it's important to remember that at that point hardly anyone believed a market economy could be established in war-torn Germany. Refugees from the east had flooded the nation; basic needs weren't being met and people were going hungry. A barter economy based on currencies of cigarettes and other black-market items flourished. Germany in 1947 had the standard of living of Turkey today.    Most politicians felt the implementation of a laissez-faire system would be entirely inappropriate. The opposition Social Democratic Party leader, for example, stated: &quot;If the United States had to take recourse to rather extensive controls and regulations of its economy, how much greater is the need for such measures in an impoverished Europe. . . . Economic freedom today is either illusionary or irresponsible.&quot; Parts of Erhard's own party -- Christian Socialist strains -- also opposed his action.    And the politician got no support from the Allies. They, too, criticized his decision to lift price controls. He was censured, first of all, for his decision to move without their prior consent. But Erhard reacted with brash conviction. He is said to have stated: &quot;I did not change the controls -- this would have made advance consent necessary. I abolished the price controls.&quot;    The success of Erhard's gamble earned him the position of secretary of economics in West Germany's first government. There he served under Konrad Adenauer, who himself was an amateur in economics but an astute politician.    But the fight for the market economy wasn't over. The Social Democrats, and the nation's new unions, attacked Erhard's policies in the early days after the currency reform when many people still had to scrounge to get the bare necessities. They complained the initial high prices that followed the lifting of the price controls were intolerable. When -- as early as late 1949 and early 1950 -- the supply of goods increased and prices declined, Erhard still had problems. This time, criticisms came from the producers' side. Entrepreneurs argued that Erhard should stop new and &quot;ruinous&quot; competition, a result in part of the establishment of firms by refugees from eastern Germany. Erhard didn't give in. He asked both parties for patience. He declared that only the market system would help balance divergent interests and preferences.    What can we learn from Erhard? The most important lesson is that the liberal approach should not be limited to fair weather conditions. The system is better suited than any other to overcoming difficult situations in an efficent and social manner.    The second lesson is that a market economy functions only if individuals are prepared to involve themselves and to be held responsible. A market economy is the proper economic order for free and responsible citizens. The system needs citizens who feel prepared to accept an active political role. Erhard is a personal example of this preparedness. Politicians, academics, businessmen and trade unions must be open-minded -- if they are not, a market solution won't survive.    Erhard's commitment to the market was rooted in part in a Protestant opposition to any form of mastery over responsible citizens. He fought every form of coercion, be it from counts and kings, pope and church, party nomenclature or organized economic powers. An opponent of guilds, &quot;orders,&quot; union and employer associations, he was a dedicated enemy of government policies that attempt to steer, plan and control.    Erhard, hated and derided by many of his contemporaries, ridiculed by the postwar generation, has good chances today for rediscovery. His economic model seems attractive once again. German society in the middle of the 1980s is not so inflexible that the potential for correction doesn't exist. Change is part of historical experience in Germany. When an emergency faces the country, Germans rise to the occasion, usually succeeding in overcoming problems that had previously seemed insurmountable. There is already evidence now that today's defensive attitude -- the &quot;no-future&quot; mentality -- is in recess. In the U.S., the Reagan-and-baby-boomer coalition of grandfathers and grandchildren prepared a revitalization of society and economy. Why shouldn't West Germany do the same thing? Erhard himself pointed out that the economic achievement of the 1940s and 1950s &quot;was the result of freeing man's initiative and energy.&quot; The Wirtschaftswunder, he noted, was a result of human effort -- &quot;anything else but a miracle.&quot;    ---   Mr. Walter, a professor at the Kiel Institute for World Economics, is currently a McCloy distinguished research fellow at the American Institute for Contemporary German Studies in Washington. </TEXT></DOC>