<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861202-0017 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/02/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN SAID he would welcome a special prosecutor to study U.S.-Iran dealings.    The president, pledging a &quot;complete airing of all the facts,&quot; said he would endorse a request by Meese for such a counsel to investigate the transfer of Iranian arms payments to Nicaraguan rebels. Reagan's comments came as he met with a three-member panel that he appointed to &quot;conduct a comprehensive study&quot; of the National Security Council's operations. Meanwhile, the Justice Department is preparing documents to request that an independent prosecutor probe whether former National Security Adviser Poindexter illegally diverted funds or military equipment.    Former National Security Adviser McFarlane and Lt. Col. North testified before the Senate Intelligence panel about their knowledge of the Iran-Contra dealings. Details weren't disclosed.    ---   Hindus rioted in New Delhi to protest the killing of 24 Hindus by Sikh extremists during a bus hijacking Sunday in Punjab state. Police fired warning shots to disperse about 3,000 demonstrators. In Punjab, police said Sikh militants killed eight more people. Prime Minister Gandhi pledged &quot;tough and strong action&quot; to combat Sikh violence.    ---   The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether the Constitution permits Congress to require that states adopt a minimum drinking age of 21 years or risk losing some federal highway aid. The justices will hear South Dakota's arguments that the 1984 law encroaches on the power of states to establish drinking ages.    ---   Manila's new defense minister said the Philippine government's cease-fire agreement with communist rebels should be given a chance and he urged the military to support it. Rafael Ileto also said that the 60-day truce, which is to begin next week, could &quot;lead us to ruin&quot; unless the armed forces remained &quot;cautious and vigilant.&quot;    ---   South Korea's opposition party said it would boycott Parliament until the government apologized for blocking a huge opposition rally over the weekend. The rally was thwarted by thousands of riot police who barricaded streets and clashed with those demanding direct presidential elections. The U.S. criticized Seoul's moves.    ---   Black activists in South Africa launched a Christmas boycott of white-owned businesses in and around Johannesburg. The anti-apartheid boycott is intended to protest the country's state of emergency and to call for Soweto and neighboring black townships to be merged with Johannesburg under a single, multiracial municipal council.    ---   Students in France voted to continue mass demonstrations despite a government pledge to modify legislation that the protesters say would make university entrance more expensive and difficult. Student leaders in Paris, Marseille, Grenoble and elsewhere said protests would continue until the bill is withdrawn from Parliament.    ---   Christie's said a painting by Edouard Manet, &quot;La Rue Mosnier aux Paveurs,&quot; sold at auction for more than $11 million, the highest price ever for an Impressionist painting. The buyer, whose bid was received by telephone in London, wasn't disclosed.    ---   Iran reiterated a threat to retaliate against Arab countries assisting Iraq in the Persian Gulf war. Tehran said it had received reports that several gulf states, including Saudi Arabia, had allowed Iraqi jets to use their airports after last week's raid on Iran's Larak Island oil terminal.    ---   Environmental experts called for urgent steps to avert depletion of the ozone layer, which shields the earth against harmful levels of ultraviolet radiation and has been damaged by the release of certain chemicals. The appeal came at the opening of a weeklong discussion by experts from 45 nations meeting in Geneva.    ---   U.S. officials said National Guardsmen began exercises Sunday with Honduran troops in a province near Nicaragua. The officials, however, said the Americans wouldn't go near the fighting between Nicaraguan rebels and Managua's troops.    ---   Pope John Paul II returned to Rome following a two-week, six-nation tour of Asia and the South Pacific. During his final stop, in the Seychelles, the pope praised marriage and the close-knit family, which he said keeps society from unraveling.    ---   Shiite Moslem militiamen pounded two Palestinian refugee camps in Beirut with rockets and mortars, as the two sides battled in the hills overlooking a camp in the southern Lebanese port city of Sidon. Meanwhile, a general strike was staged in Sidon to protest the fighting that has killed about 500 people in the past month.    ---   The Basque Socialists were faced with finding coalition partners among four main parties after emerging as the largest party in Sunday's regional elections. The Socialists, who fell short of a parliamentary majority, haven't indicated which party in Spain's three-province Basque region they will approach first.    ---   The Soviet Union has completed the first launch pad tests of its space shuttle and plans to begin manned flights in early 1988, the same time U.S. shuttle flights are to resume, an aerospace magazine reported. Aviation Week cited photographs taken by U.S. reconnaissance satellites and quoted intelligence sources for the report.    ---   Snow drifted across the western Plains in the wake of a storm that has been blamed for at least four deaths. About two feet of snow was dumped in the Rocky Mountain region. More than 360 miles of interstate highway was closed and thousands of travelers were stranded.    ---   Died: Harold Spear, 88, a founding partner of Spear, Leeds andamp; Kellogg, Friday in Boca Raton, Fla. </TEXT></DOC>