<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870225-0036 </DOCNO><HL> North WroteNote on ContrasTo Poindexter---Memo on Profit DiversionReported to Be MissingFrom Ex-Adviser's Files---By Andy Pasztor and John WalcottStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A 1986 memo detailing proposed diversion of profits from secret arms sales to Iran to help Nicaraguan insurgents was written by Lt. Col. Oliver North to his boss, then-National Security Adviser John Poindexter, law enforcement and Reagan administration officials said.    The Federal Bureau of Investigation and independent counsel Lawrence Walsh now want to determine why they haven't found any trace of the memo, which investigators are calling a &quot;smoking gun,&quot; in Adm. Poindexter's files. They also are trying to learn why other material also appears to be missing from the former national security adviser's records, these officials said.    &quot;Some of Poindexter's records appear to be have disappeared, or else haven't been made available&quot; to investigators, asserted one official familiar with the investigation.    Separately, Col. North yesterday filed a surprise lawsuit challenging the constitutionality of the law authorizing Mr. Walsh's investigation.    Justice Department officials discovered a copy of the memo in Col. North's office files last Nov. 22. They confronted him with it the next day, and two days later they launched a full-scale criminal probe. Details of the memo's contents were disclosed last month in the Senate Intelligence Committee's report on the Iran-Contra scandal, but the committee said it wasn't clear to whom it was addressed or &quot;who, if anyone, saw it.&quot;    Now, law enforcement officials and others familiar with the investigation say there is new information indicating that the memo was meant to be read by Adm. Poindexter, and that Col. North may have inadvertently left a copy of it in his files after shredding, removing or altering other classified documents involving the administration's secret dealings with Iran or aid to the Nicarguan rebels.    Both Col. North and Adm. Poindexter have declined to comment on the memo or any other aspect of Mr. Walsh's investigation. A spokeswoman for the independent counsel also declined to comment.    Col. North's lawsuit, filed in U.S. district court here, challenges the independent counsel's right to determine who will be prosecuted, alleging that such activities infringe on the powers of the executive branch. It also asserts that Mr. Walsh's investigators don't have the power to unilaterally &quot;determine whether a particular prosecution will damage this nation's foreign affairs.&quot;    The suit also contends that all of the investigators appointed by Mr. Walsh are serving without authority, and it seeks an injunction blocking all further investigation by the independent counsel.    Through a spokeswoman, Mr. Walsh said, &quot;The independent-counsel statute has received extensive and careful study, and we are satisfied of its constitutionality.&quot;    A number of Justice Department and private attorneys familiar with the 1978 Ethics in Government Act, which provides for appointment of independent counsels such as Mr. Walsh, said they don't expect Col. North to succeed in obtaining such an injunction. Mr. Walsh, the Justice Department and some congressional committees are likely to appeal or file briefs objecting to any adverse ruling, officials said.    Law-enforcement officials said allegations that certain White House documents were altered or destroyed have raised new questions about why Attorney General Edwin Meese waited several days after he first became suspicious that arms-sale funds were being diverted to the Contras before launching a full-scale criminal probe of the matter.    Questions about Mr. Meese's handling of the preliminary inquiry, and whether Col. North, Adm. Poindexter or other administration officials used the several-day delay to try to destroy evidence or disguise their role in the scandal, have emerged as important strands in separate investigations by Congress and Mr. Walsh.    Administration officials said Adm. Poindexter kept some sensitive documents, including the only copy of a January 1986 presidential directive authorizing U.S. arms sales to Iran, in a safe in his office. The officials said they believe Paul Thompson, a lawyer on the NSC staff, also had access to the safe, which they said Adm. Poindexter cleaned out after he resigned last Nov. 25.    Mr. Thompson has declined to comment on his role in the affair.    Mr. Meese has said that when he began looking into the arms-sales operation four days earlier, he didn't think it was necessary to take steps to safeguard documents or try to keep witnesses from comparing versions of their stories because &quot;there was no indication or suggestion of any criminality.&quot;    According to law-enforcement officials, Mr. Walsh and congressional investigators are now delving into the details of some of the early interviews conducted by Mr. Meese's aides, and comparing them with documents and other evidence. Justice Department officials said Mr. Meese hasn't been interviewed by Mr. Walsh's investigators, but his aides have been questioned about their role in the initial inquiry.    The Tower Commission, appointed by the president to investigate the NSC's role in the Iran-Contra affair, also is expected to delve into how Mr. Meese handled the initial inquiry. In its report, which is expected to be released this week, the panel is also expected to conclude that Adm. Poindexter at least tacitly approved the diversion of funds to the Contras.    Meanwhile, Swiss government officials said they are considering two new Justice Department requests for information about bank accounts involving companies and individuals suspected of being involved in the Iran-Contra affair. The department made the requests on behalf of Mr. Walsh and congressional investigators.    The Swiss Ministry of Justice and Police didn't identify specific companies or individuals named in the request. Law-enforcement officials, however, said they include Cie. des Services Fiduciares SA, a Swiss company that has previously surfaced in the affair; Southern Air Transport, a Miami-based cargo airline; and at least four other companies that may have had dealings with the airline.    Meanwhile, the House Democratic leadership is considering forcing a showdown with President Reagan over whether to release to the Contras $40 million in aid that Congress had previously approved.    The House may vote as soon as next week on a resolution that would prevent the president from releasing the funds to the Nicaraguan insurgents until he makes a full accounting of several sources of money to them. These include funds diverted from other uses to help the Contras, private monies funneled to the Contras by federal officials and the $27 million in so-called humanitarian aid Congress approved for the Contras in fiscal 1986, which ended last Sept. 30.    Democratic aides conceded the measure probably couldn't survive a likely presidential veto. But they said the resolution would signal that lawmakers aren't likely to approve further aid to the Contras. </TEXT></DOC>