<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870911-0112 </DOCNO><HL> Battle Over Bork's Supreme Court ConfirmationWill Turn on How the Senate Reads His Record---By Stephen WermielStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)SUPREME COURT (SUP) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When confirmation hearings get under way Tuesday on the Supreme Court nomination of Judge Robert Bork, both sides agree that the debate will focus on his record. But they vehemently disagree about how to read that record, assuring a bitter confrontation.    The White House wants the Senate to look more narrowly at Mr. Bork's five years as a federal appeals court judge. But Sen. Joseph Biden (D., Del.) says the Senate Judiciary Committee, of which he is chairman, must scrutinize his entire career as both a judge and law professor. The hearings are expected to last at least until Sept. 25.    The stakes are enormous. President Reagan must succeed with the Bork nomination, both to achieve his goal of tilting the court to the conservative side and to retain some semblance of clout in his final year as president. Senate Democrats desperately want to defeat the nomination to demonstrate their new majority control and to preserve the court's moderate bent. The stakes are especially high for Sen. Biden, whose campaign for the Democratic presidential nomination probably hangs in the balance.    President Reagan has made the nomination his top priority, defending Judge Bork against &quot;attack for being some kind of right-wing ideologue.&quot; Judge Bork &quot;believes in judicial restraint, and this means reading laws the way intended by elected officials,&quot; the president said this week.    But Sen. Biden said in an interview with The Wall Street Journal yesterday that he has serious concerns about Judge Bork's approach to freedom of speech, privacy and other individual rights.    &quot;I think he's basically a constitutional nihilist,&quot; Sen. Biden said. &quot;He has a very narrow and almost dehumanizing view of the rights of individuals as a consequence of the way he reads the Constitution.&quot;    Sen. Biden said he gives Judge Bork the benefit of the doubt that his legal philosophy is consistent, but said it leads him to &quot;conclusions that are bizarre.&quot;    A vote in committee is likely by Oct. 7 at the latest, before the nomination is sent to the full Senate for what is widely expected to be a close and contentious fight.    &quot;If the vote were taken immediately, I think it's 50-50 leaning against Bork,&quot; Sen. Biden said, &quot;but I just don't discount . . . the power of a president.&quot; That means, he said, &quot;it's 50-50 leaning toward Bork as of right now.&quot;    Senators face probably the most exhaustive file ever compiled on a Supreme Court nominee. Judge Bork's records list 84 speeches in the past decade, 79 law review, newspaper and magazine articles since 1954, and more than 150 appeals court decisions since 1982.    The record holds no easy answers. The basic tension is between Judge Bork's personal and scholarly views, often punctuated by sharp language, and his actions as a judge. Here is a look at a part of the record:    Privacy and abortion. As a law professor, Mr. Bork criticized the Supreme Court's 1965 decision finding that a right to privacy implicit in the Constitution invalidated a Connecticut law barring use of contraceptives by married couples. The right to privacy, he wrote in 1968, is &quot;one more slogan&quot; justices cite while &quot;writing their own tastes into law.&quot;    The Supreme Court built on its privacy decision in declaring the right to an abortion in 1973; and Mr. Bork built on his criticism, declaring the abortion decision an &quot;unconstitutional&quot; one in 1981. But at the same time, he testified against proposed legislation to prohibit abortions by defining a fetus as a living person.    As a judge, Mr. Bork hasn't ruled on abortion, but he wrote a majority opinion in 1984 refusing to extend the privacy right to a man ousted from the Navy for homosexual conduct. He said the Supreme Court had never guaranteed privacy for homosexuals, a view regarded as a plausible legal argument even by some who disagree with it.    But in the same opinion, he stirred controversy, reiterating his criticism of the privacy decisions for giving &quot;little guidance for lower courts.&quot; This drew a sharp response from liberal judges on the appeals court that he was conducting &quot;a general spring cleaning of constitutional law.&quot;    On Judge Bork's views on privacy, Sen. Biden says the nominee reaches &quot;conclusions on matters of principle that the vast majority of America disagrees with.&quot;    Civil-rights groups say the ferocity of Judge Bork's attacks on the privacy and abortion decisions leaves no doubt that he would vote to overturn them if he could. But as a vocal disciple of &quot;judicial restraint,&quot; he must also be cautious in overruling precedents.    Precedents. The question of when Judge Bork would honor past Supreme Court decisions is at the heart of the debate, cutting across different issues. His critics warn that he will paint a landscape filled with overruled precedents of the court's liberal era under Chief Justice Earl Warren.    He said in a speech last January that some precedents are so well-settled in the way the country functions, it would &quot;create chaos&quot; to change them. But at the same time, he said there would be &quot;no problem&quot; with a justice overruling decisions that aren't based on the original intent of the framers of the Constitution.    Access to courts. Another question that cuts across many issues is the principle that federal courts should only handle live controversies involving persons with a genuine stake in the outcome. Judge Bork has taken a restrictive view of this principle, setting tough standards for interest groups to be able to sue and arguing that members of Congress may almost never challenge the president's actions in court.    Freedom of speech and press. In a 1971 law review article, Mr. Bork, then a professor, took a narrow view of the kinds of speech protected by the First Amendment, arguing that only political speech was covered. He has since modified that view, but it is unclear how much. Opponents of the nomination charge that Judge Bork would still afford no First Amendment protection to literary and artistic works, to speech advocating civil disobedience, or to obscenity and pornography.    As a judge, however, he offered a broad definition of the First Amendment's protection for the press against libel lawsuits by public figures. He also ruled that the District of Columbia subway system was a public forum and couldn't bar a poster that had a message critical of President Reagan.    Discrimination. Before becoming a judge, Mr. Bork criticized the Supreme Court's approval of affirmative action, and repeatedly said the court had expanded the 14th Amendment guarantee of &quot;equal protection of the laws&quot; beyond reason, even where racial bias is at issue. More recently, he has questioned whether the equal-protection clause really prohibits sex discrimination, as the Supreme Court has ruled. He has also repeated his decade-old opposition to the unsuccessful equal-rights amendment.    The White House says Judge Bork has never been overruled by the Supreme Court. But he urged the full appeals court to reject a three-judge panel's finding that sexual harassment of an employee may be illegal sex discrimination. The Supreme Court later ruled, 9-0, that federal law makes sexual harassment on the job illegal.    Freedom of religion. In speeches since becoming a judge, he has challenged the &quot;breadth and severity&quot; of the Supreme Court's view that church and state must remain separate. Judge Bork hasn't ruled on any freedom-of-religion cases.    Business and consumers. Public Citizen Litigation Group, a consumer-oriented organization, studied 56 cases in which Judge Bork has taken part since 1982, in which the appeals court was divided. In split decisions in which individuals, workers or consumer groups challenged executive-branch regulatory actions, the study said Judge Bork voted for the executive 16 times and against it only twice. But in split decisions in which business challenged executive-branch measures, Judge Bork voted with business and against the executive all eight times.    The study excludes the majority of appeals court rulings that are decided unanimously by three-judge panels. And the White House maintains that Judge Bork's record is balanced on regulatory and labor issues.    Sen. Biden said he is concerned that Judge Bork has &quot;a very statist view of the world.&quot; While acknowledging Judge Bork's votes for business against the executive branch, he said Mr. Bork sees legal disputes as &quot;big government versus the individual.&quot; Judge Bork's view, he said, is that &quot;government is almost always right.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>