<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880502-0002 </DOCNO><HL> U.S. Orders Altitude Curbs, Inspections Of Older 737s After Aloha Air Accident --- A Wall Street Journal News Roundup </HL><SO> </SO><CO> BA AMR U GOVMT </CO><IN> AIR ARO </IN><G> TRN </G><TEXT>   Federal officials investigating the crippling of an Aloha Airlines' Boeing 737 aimed their initial corrective actions at the possibility that maintenance by airlines can overlook structural problems developing on older, heavily used planes.    The accident in Hawaii came at a difficult time for Boeing Co., which in recent weeks has received complaints from several major customers on the workmanship of two of its other models, the jumbo 747 and mid-sized 767. A spokesman for Seattle-based Boeing said there hasn't been any record of company design problems with the 737 model.    The 19-year-old Boeing 737-200 that landed Thursday in Maui -- after the top of its fuselage was ripped off and a flight attendant was swept to her death from the plane -- had had a punishing life of frequent, short Hawaiian commuter flights. It also had been among the scores of older 737s covered by a Federal Aviation Administration airworthiness directive last Nov. 2, ordering airlines to inspect aircraft for possible skin cracking and corrosion.    Over the weekend, the FAA imposed an emergency order restricting older Boeing 737s to an altitude of 23,000 feet until they can be inspected for possible structural flaws. The order covers 36 737-100 and 737-200 jets owned by Aloha, American Airlines and Piedmont Airlines that have made more than 55,000 landings each. Aloha went beyond the FAA directive, grounding its three other older 737s. Foreign carriers have an additional 30 such jetliners in their fleets.    The FAA directed the U.S. carriers to inspect their aircraft for cracking, corrosion and delamination of the fuselage, particularly in the upper part of the passenger cabin where the Aloha 737's skin suddenly peeled back. The inspections must be made within the time the planes make their next 500 landings.    Federal investigators yesterday, led by National Transportation Safety Board member Joseph Nall, were on Maui, interviewing passengers and flight crew members and going over the disabled aircraft, according to safety board spokesman Michael Benson.    Safety board officials in Honolulu also are inspecting Aloha's maintenance records to determine, among other things, if the airline complied with the FAA's November order requiring inspection for possible cracking of all older aircraft with more than 30,000 landings.    At the board's request, the Coast Guard has begun searching a 200-square-mile area off Maui for the 18-foot section missing from the fuselage. &quot;That plane was very badly crippled,&quot; he said. &quot;Not only did it lose an 18-foot section of the roof but more than half of the floor beams were severely cracked or broken in that section.    &quot;We don't see any evidence of fire or explosion,&quot; Mr. Benson added in a telephone interview from Maui. &quot;An explosion hasn't yet been ruled out, but it's basically been discounted.&quot;    Boeing, meanwhile, said that at Aloha's request it had sent an accident investigator, a structural engineer and a customer support representative to help with the investigation.    Boeing has been on the defensive in recent weeks after reports that Japan Air Lines and British Airways, two of its biggest customers, had complained to the Seattle-based aerospace giant about Boeing's workmanship. The British Airways letter asserted that production employees at one plant &quot;seem oblivious that they are building aircraft where any mistake not properly corrected, or hidden, represents a direct compromise with safety.&quot;    And JAL's recent complaints, focusing on fire-prevention equipment on the Boeing 767 model and an engine-overheating detector on the jumbo 747, recalled memories of a 1985 JAL disaster in which Boeing has conceded a major role. It was then that a 747 crash killed 520 people, the worst single-aircraft accident in aviation history. The investigation report blamed a faulty cabin bulkhead repair job by Boeing.    Yesterday, a Boeing spokesman said that the company hadn't done any repair work itself on the Aloha fleet, and noted that the repairs Boeing had made on the Japan Air 747 had been part of a special maintenance contract between JAL and Boeing.    The spokesman said that Boeing had sent out numerous bulletins since 1972 suggesting special inspections of older 737s, concentrating on the &quot;lap joints, bonding agents, epoxy and looking for the possibility of cracking and signs of corrosion&quot; that can result from heavy use and aging. Aircraft pressurization and depressurization are especially wearing on aircraft fuselages after long periods.    In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Boeing closed Friday at $48 a share, down 25 cents.    Of the fuselage area where the break occurred last week, the Boeing spokesman said: &quot;It appears to be at Station 360, which is a major rib at the point directly aft of the front passenger entry.&quot; Station 360, he said, was one of the points singled out for airline inspection in the FAA's November directive.    That directive, the Boeing spokesman added, reflected maintenance work that Boeing had requested all airlines to do on older 737s earlier last year, and again as recently as two weeks ago.    The Boeing spokesman added that &quot;there's not been any record of problems as far as we can tell inherent in (737) design.&quot; The Aloha plane in last week's accident was the 152nd Boeing produced of a total 737 production that currently exceeds 1,500.    One previous 737 crash, a 1981 disaster in Taiwan, involved a similar breakaway of a portion of a lower fuselage section on an older 737. That investigation showed unusual corrosion had resulted from the hauling of fish in the cargo hold, the Boeing spokesman said.    Aloha Air, a 42-year-old interisland airline that was taken private last year in a leveraged buy-out, declined to comment on speculation that frequent landings and takeoffs could damage the aircraft structurally. &quot;We would choose not to speculate as to airworthiness,&quot; a spokesman said. &quot;It is really the subject of investigation, and it is inappropriate to comment.&quot;    The spokesman said, however, that &quot;we have complied fully with the service bulletins from Boeing and the FAA directives concerning any inspections and the records will show that.&quot; He declined to discuss the specific maintenance record of the damaged aircraft, but acknowledged that it had completed about 88,000 landings.    Aloha went beyond the latest FAA order and grounded indefinitely all four planes covered in the FAA flight restrictions, including the one severely damaged in the incident. Lately, it has operated 11 planes, routinely keeping one plane down for maintenance. Coincidentally, American Air is returning a leased jet to Aloha this week, giving the Hawaiian carrier eight planes to fly during its grounding period.    The Maui accident, in which 61 of the 94 survivors were injured, was Aloha's first fatal flying mishap.    However, John B. Galipault, director of the independent Aviation Safety Institute, said Aloha has a reputation for seeking extensions on the time limit for replacing and inspecting aircraft parts. He said, for example, that Aloha recently asked Boeing for an extension of the limit for replacing the landing gear on its 737s, and said Boeing refused.    A Boeing spokesman said over the weekend that it couldn't confirm that an extension had been sought or refused.    Mr. Galipault also said that one insurance underwriter recently declined Aloha some coverage in part because of the airline's tendency to defer maintenance on non-critical aircraft items, and in part because of its shaky financial picture.    An Aloha official strongly denied that the company had a reputation for requesting extensions for required maintenance. He called such a statement &quot;the worst kind of sensationalism.&quot; Responding to the landing-gear issue, he said &quot;an occasional extension when parts aren't available is standard industry practice.&quot;    The official also strongly defended the company's financial position, noting that it has been profitable for the past 13 quarters.    In addition, the official said: &quot;Aloha isn't aware of anyone who has refused us insurance. On the contrary, Aloha is considered to be an attractive insured and has had no difficulty whatever in obtaining adequate insurance at competitive rates.&quot;    Mr. Galipault said many FAA-required inspections are of the &quot;non-destructive&quot; type, meaning they are visual or done with X-rays or magnetic detectors. Often, he said, such procedures make it difficult to gauge the condition of the aircraft accurately. </TEXT></DOC>