<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880406-0048 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Creature Feature </HL><SO> </SO><CO> LABOR JAPAN FORGN </CO><IN> MON SCR </IN><G> CNG EXE </G><TEXT>   The Great Congressional Omnibus Trade Bill Conference of 1988 -- all 200 members and 17 subconferences -- has huffed and puffed and transformed what would have been truly awful into something that is . . . merely bad. For this, we are supposed to be grateful. What would be cause for gratitude is if President Reagan announced his intention to do to this bill what the nation's voters did to protectionist candidates Richard Gephardt and Pat Robertson.    Even Congress has noticed the fading political allure of protectionism. At the prodding of the Reagan administration, the congressional leadership has removed some of the trade bill's loudest echoes of Smoot-Hawley. But the bill remains some 1,000 pages long, room enough to hide all sorts of mayhem. So let's open the cellar door and see what scatters:   Plant closings. This populist sop to big labor is advertised as a way to give workers 60 days' notice before a plant can close. In practice it would usually just speed up the closing, since creditors and customers aren't likely to stick around once a company announces it's going out of business. By adding another burden at the margin, the provision would also cost jobs by making it even less likely that anyone might attempt to buy and revive a struggling plant.    Japan bashing. Various Members of Congress from the right and left have retained a provision banning imports from Japan's Toshiba Machine Co. for three years, an estimated $300 million penalty for having sold milling machines to the Soviets. Toshiba Corp., the parent company of its offending subsidiary, would be banned from U.S. government procurement for three years. This is probably unconstitutional -- for one thing, the company didn't violate any American laws, and the Japanese government itself has punished Toshiba.    More Japan bashing. Rep. Charles Schumer (D., N.Y.), who carries water for U.S. securities firms, has lobbied for a provision that could bar foreign companies from serving as primary dealers in U.S. government securities. The foreign firms -- mainly three large Japanese securities houses -- would be barred unless their countries offered U.S. firms similar national treatment. So the same Congress that runs a budget deficit so that foreigners have to lend us money wants to make it more difficult for foreigners to lend us money.    General xenophobia. The conferees adjourned at an impasse on the socalled Bryant amendment that would require foreigners to publicly register their investments. But, by jingo, Rep. John Bryant (D., Tex.) and Rep. John Dingell (D., Mich.) hope to push it through after the Easter recess. They want to make sure they have access to the details of any foreign investment so they can raise a big fuss about investment they don't like. This is the kind of anti-foreign provision that has turned countries such as India into such great economic powers.    Son of Gephardt. This provision would require the U.S. trade representative, over the next two years, to identify countries with trade barriers that affect U.S. exports. What a spectacle to have the world's leading country regularly attacking allies as bad actors. Worse, if mandatory negotiations on the barriers failed, the provision would make it politically difficult for any administration not to retaliate. This is Gephardt by a thousand cuts.    A new entitlement. Conferees approved a new retraining entitlement program that would add to the budget deficit, and Senator Lloyd Bentsen (D., Tex.) made sure it has a provision that covers oil and gas workers laid off as far back as 1985.    Congressional power grab. The conferees want to strip from the President the power both to determine an unfair foreign trade practice and to decide whether to retaliate. The power would go to the U.S. trade representative, which we guess makes the trade rep the Chief Executive in this area.    And these are just the highlights. The congressional line is that much of this has been &quot;watered down,&quot; but even modified it will have the effect of reducing trade, raising prices for consumers or angering our trading partners. The bill is so open-ended and vague that nobody really knows when or how some part will explode under some unsuspecting business or President.    The White House says it still wants a bill it can sign, though the President will veto it if he has to. We'd say if the administration can't veto this mess, it might as well fold up its tent and go somewhere safe for the next nine months. Signing the trade bill will only tell the creatures in the congressional cellar that they're free now to run wild. </TEXT></DOC>