<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870123-0134 </DOCNO><HL> The Dollar 'Crisis' Changes Its Spots---By Paul Craig Roberts</HL><DD> 01/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX) </IN><TEXT>   The crisis of the strong dollar has become the crisis of the weak dollar -- to the confusion of the public but the delight of the crisis managers, who can now change the subject without having to explain why they were so wrong about the strong dollar.    President Reagan's &quot;excessive&quot; tax cuts are now being blamed for the weak dollar. In case you don't remember, the strong dollar was due to tax cuts, which caused large budget deficits and forced up interest rates. Hot foreign money, lusting after attractive American interest rates, overwhelmed the supply of dollars available for exchange and drove up the value of our currency, which both crippled our export industries and flooded the country with imports. The pundits assured us that nothing could be done about the strong dollar that was deindustrializing America until we bit the bullet and raised taxes to reduce the budget deficit.    That was the story until last week, when it dramatically changed. The budget deficits didn't suddenly go away. They are as large as ever, and their prime dramatist, former budget director David A. Stockman, had just refueled the crisis with a postscript to his book denouncing President Reagan for his &quot;awesome stubbornness&quot; in refusing to raise taxes. In the midst of all this, the crisis changed its spots. A new emergency arose -- that of the plunging dollar. &quot;How far will the dollar fall?&quot; asked the same experts who had assured us that the dollar couldn't fall until the deficit did. Amid all the confusion, no one noticed that the formerly desirable goal of a falling dollar has been transformed into a new crisis.    What's going on here is the maintenance of a crisis atmosphere in order to raise our taxes. A goodly number of pundits and politicians obviously believe that consistency is no virtue in the pursuit of higher taxes.    The story of the dollar's rise and fall is a simple one for an economist to tell. There is really no excuse for the nonsensical explanations that policy makers have made fashionable. The factual story, shorn of drama and hidden agendas, is as follows:    In 1979-80, inflation reached double-digit levels in the U.S., driving the dollar to historic lows against other major currencies such as the German mark and the Swiss franc. The year 1981 opened with dire predictions that more inflation would follow from President Reagan's proposed tax cut. However, between 1980 and 1982 inflation unexpectedly collapsed from double-digit levels to 3.9%, far below even the Reagan administration's &quot;optimistic&quot; and &quot;rosy&quot; forecast of 8.2%.    The unexpected and dramatic change in the dollar inflation rate forced a change in the dollar exchange rate. Obviously, a dollar with a low and falling inflation rate is worth more than one with a high and rising inflation rate. Moreover, the same tight monetary policy that drove down inflation and made the dollar more desirable also curtailed the supply of dollars. The result was a steep rise in the dollar's price, or exchange value. Over the next few years, the Federal Reserve refused to accommodate the higher world demand for dollars, keeping upward pressure on the dollar's value. In 1984, the Federal Reserve again tightened, driving the dollar higher.    In the face of the abrupt change in U.S. inflation and monetary policy, nothing could have prevented the rise in the dollar. Indeed, not even large budget deficits, which normally depress a currency's value, could prevent the dollar from rising. Smaller deficits would have added to the confidence factor and driven the dollar even higher.    The dollar had to remain high until a new liability materialized to take the place of a high and rising inflation rate. To any economist worth his salt, it was obvious in advance that the new liability would be the buildup in debt owed to foreigners as a result of the trade deficit caused by the sharp rise in the dollar's value. As our debtor status deepened, the dollar turned around and began falling.    It got some ill-advised help along the way. At a meeting at New York's Plaza Hotel in September 1985, Japan and West Germany agreed to help reduce their trade surpluses with the U.S. The agreement itself was fine, but the way it was implemented was terrible. They drove down the value of the dollar by tightening their domestic monetary policies to drive up the value of the yen and the mark. Consequently, the Japanese economy went into recession, and West German economic growth slowed. The result was a weaker dollar but also weaker markets overseas for our exports. To work our way out of our trade deficit requires not just a weaker dollar but an expanding world economy.    We may not get one, despite the West Germans' long overdue cut in their discount rate yesterday. Now that the dollar's decline is the focus of attention, the Federal Reserve is feeling pressures to raise interest rates &quot;to save the dollar&quot; and forestall a renewal of inflation. If they keep working at it, the policy makers will eventually create a real crisis.    ---   Mr. Roberts, an early Reagan Treasury official, holds the Simon chair in political economy at Georgetown's Center for Strategic and International Studies. </TEXT></DOC>