<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870925-0128 </DOCNO><HL> TECHNOLOGY:Scientists Seeking to Put LifeInto Body Replacement Parts---By David StippStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ORGS LLYPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   ARTIFICIAL HEARTS, joints and other high-technology prosthetics are working a medical revolution. But a more profound revolution is taking shape as scientists begin to fabricate more natural body parts from living human cells.    The creation of living replacements for complex internal organs is a long way off. But living prosthetics for simpler tissues, such as skin, may be available in a few years. For example:    --Clinical tests of a &quot;living skin equivalent&quot; developed by Organogenesis Inc. in Cambridge, Mass., are expected to begin at a Pittsburgh burn center within a few months.    --Clonetics Corp., a closely held San Diego company, says it is planning to license and develop a somewhat different living skin replacement invented by researchers at the University of California in San Diego. Clonetics already is selling human skin cells for testing toxic substances.    --At least one other start-up company, BioSurface Technology Inc. of Cambridge, Mass., and several academic researchers are developing similar skin substitutes.    SCIENTISTS ALSO ARE exploring the use of laboratory-grown replacements for arteries, insulin-producing cells needed by diabetics, thyroid cells and other cells. With recently developed techniques, &quot;we could meet the design characteristics desired for replacing almost any kind of tissue,&quot; says Steven Boyce, a University of California researcher working with Clonetics.    In theory, living tissue replacements have big advantages over existing alternatives. Use of laboratory-grown tissues wouldn't be limited by donor availability, as transplants are. Human cells used as seeds for growing organs can be obtained from umbilical cords and other discarded tissue. Cells in tissue replacements such as skin might be genetically altered to continually secrete certain drugs, such as those needed to correct hormone deficiencies. Indeed, a group including BioSurface founder Howard Green says it has developed a way to transfer desired genes into skin cells.    And unlike synthetic implants, living prosthetics should mesh with the body's intricate system of chemical checks and balances. Implanted insulin-producing cells, for example, might respond to the chemical signals that normally regulate blood sugar.    Living skin substitutes, moreover, are expected to grow into surrounding tissue with little scarring. Organogenesis may even add pigment cells to its version, enabling it to get a tan, says Eugene Bell, chairman and founder of the two-year-old company.    RESEARCHERS ACKNOWLEDGE that experimental living skin substitutes aren't as good as the real thing; they don't include sweat glands, hair follicles and nerve endings. More important, the substitutes might be rejected by recipients' immune systems.    Rejection -- the main problem with organ transplants -- occurs when the immune system attacks foreign immune cells present in transplanted tissue. To hinder such attacks, transplant recipients must take immune-suppressing drugs that can leave them open to dangerous infections.    Scientists working on laboratory-grown tissues hope to circumvent such problems by fabricating replacement parts without immune cells that provoke rejection. In effect, &quot;we are learning to suppress the immune system in a transplanted organ rather than in a whole patient,&quot; says John Hefton, who is researching a living skin substitute at Cornell Medical Center in New York City.    At Organogenesis, a month-long process of making skin begins when scientists cull cells from the inner, or dermal, layer of tiny skin samples, leaving behind immune and other kinds of cells. As the cells multiply, they are combined with collagen, a protein found in skin that acts as a kind of cement to hold cells together.    The cells and collagen gradually form a structure organized like natural skin's dermal layer. Finally, epidermal cells are sprinkled on top to form a two-layer skin much like the real thing.    IT SOUNDS AS SIMPLE as making pizza. But much of the technology involved, such as genetically engineered hormones that promote growth of specific kinds of cells, is complex and only recently developed. &quot;There are thousands of molecules in skin we don't know about yet,&quot; says Organogenesis's Mr. Bell.    Moreover, many tissue elements can't yet be made in the test tube. Hence, &quot;hybrid&quot; living organs, which combine cells with artificial substances, are likely to be developed before wholly natural replacements are available for most body parts. Organogenesis researchers, for example, have developed an experimental artery replacement incorporating three kinds of cells with a synthetic substance that acts as an elastic support.    The artery is still several years away from clinical trials but already is attracting interest as a potential weapon in the war against heart disease and other vascular diseases. Eli Lilly andamp; Co. recently licensed marketing rights to it.    Veins taken from the leg are now typically used to replace coronary arteries in the nation's 200,000 heart-bypass operations annually. But up to 30% of patients needing a bypass don't have usable veins, says Organogenesis researcher Crispin Weinberg.    Unfortunately, synthetic tubes small enough to replace coronary arteries won't work because blood clots form in them. But the Organogenesis artery is lined with naturally occurring blood-vessel cells that secrete anti-clotting chemicals. Says Mr. Weinberg, &quot;We really are trying to imitate nature.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>