<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871209-0116 </DOCNO><HL> Nobel Peace Prize:Tragic Memories,New Nominations---By Robert L. </HL><DATELINE> PARIS </DATELINE><TEXT>   &quot;When I keep getting asked questions I think Ihave already answered, I am reminded of previous experienceswith other Vietnamese in this hall 15 years ago,&quot; HenryKissinger, exasperated by charges of betrayal, told a youngVietnamese questioner. &quot;As for the Nobel Prize, I donatedwhat I received to children of American servicemen killed inVietnam.&quot;   The former secretary of state had returned, bravelyenough, to the International Conference Center on AvenueKleber, where he and Le Duc Tho negotiated their Agreement onthe Cessation of War and Restoration of Peace in Vietnam.Last week, French, American and Vietnamese anti-communistsrented the same hall to advance a budding reassessment ofwhat went wrong. This week, the joint prize to SecretaryKissinger and Le Duc Tho, who turned down his half, has aspecial pertinence: It's perfectly obvious that another jointNobel Peace Prize is being won in Washington by PresidentReagan and Chairman Gorbachev.   The bitter tone of the dozens of Vietnamese refugees cameas no surprise to Mr. Kissinger, who admitted to &quot;manyhesitations&quot; about appearing. He had come precisely to tellthem, &quot;If we had wanted to abandon South Vietnam there were alot less painful ways to do it.&quot;   &quot;I believe it was not a glorious agreement, but it was onethat could have been maintained.&quot; While the settlement didnot require the North Vietnamese to remove their units fromthe south, it did prohibit reinforcing those units throughLaos or Cambodia. &quot;We who signed the agreement thought thatSouth Vietnam could handle whatever forces stayed in thecountry, and if forces from outside the country intervened wewere determined to resist.&quot;   The Nixon administration had &quot;no illusions&quot; about whetherthe North Vietnamese would comply, and indeed they violatedthe infiltration ban from the first day. By April 1973, Mr.Kissinger said, the administration had developed an&quot;intention&quot; to resume bombing North Vietnam, and stepped upits rhetoric on the violations accordingly. But by the timebombing was to resume it was &quot;the week John Dean went to theprosecutor.&quot; Watergate, and Mr. Nixon's resignation, sealedVietnam's fate. &quot;If President Nixon had stayed in office withunimpaired power there would have been no offensive in 1975.&quot;   This is one man's version of the events, of course, thoughothers at last week's conference shared the battlefieldassessment. &quot;If we look back at 1972, I think we willconclude that the war was won,&quot; said former CIA chief WilliamColby. The guerrilla force in the south had been destroyed,and the South Vietnamese turned back a major conventionalinvasion with the help of U.S. logistics and air power. Mr.Colby listed as the three errors of the war the abandonmentof 1975, the Americanization of the war from 1964-1968, andthe overthrow of Vietnamese President Ngo Dinh Diem in 1963,which left the choice of defeat or Americanization.   Col. Harry Summers, the Army's historian of the war, citedthe 1962 Laos agreements, which secured the North Vietnameseinfiltration routes, and the failure to mobilize U.S. publicopinion. During the final invasion, he added, he wasevacuated to the carrier Coral Sea, to hear pilots tell ofNorth Vietnamese convoys 100 miles long. &quot;What those pilotscould have done.&quot;   But in 1975, no bombs stopped North Vietnamese tanks. InParis last week, Vietnamese expatriates agonized over thesubsequent results: the boat people, one of whom appeared togive the invocation; political executions, 65,000, or maybe100,000, not counting deaths from neglect or malnutrition;re-education camps and block committees; the sale of slavelaborers to build Soviet and Eastern European pipelines; inCambodia, the conscription of 120,000 to 140,000 people ayear to work in remote wilderness to construct a 500-mileBerlin Wall on the Thai border. In short, the usual resultsof revolutions promoted by the political system and ideologyMr. Gorbachev represents as he is being toasted in Washingtonthis week.   With that purpose so obviously failed, Mr. Kissingeradmitted one error in calculation. &quot;I suffered from theillusion that this would unify the American people; that thepeace movement would be gratified that we had reachedsettlement and that the others would be gratified that we hadmaintained honor.   &quot;It did not occur to me that the people who opposed thewar would have an interest in proving peace could not bemaintained,&quot; he continued. But after settlement was reachedand U.S. prisoners returned, Congress cut aid to SouthVietnam from $2 billion a year to $750 million at a time ofsoaring oil prices, legislated against any U.S. militaryactivity, and by the time South Vietnamese resistancecollapsed, was discussing a &quot;terminal grant.&quot; Publicopposition of the war did not diminish; instead, criticspressed to prove that nothing good could come of the effort.   Mr. Kissinger was defended by David Horowitz, during thewar an editor of Ramparts magazine and now organizing aproject named Second Thoughts. &quot;I would just like to say tothe Vietnamese here that it's Americans like me you have toblame if you want to blame somebody. Dr. Kissinger was yourfriend.&quot;   Watching the summit festivities unfold in Washington thisweek, a visitor to Avenue Kleber wonders whether PresidentReagan is making the same mistake, not in his assessment ofthe Communists but in his assessment of the Americans. Nodoubt Mr. Reagan's administration believes that arms-controlagreements will repair his tarnished standing with the publicand smooth his relations with Congress. But for ratificationof his new treaty he is putting himself in the hands ofopponents who have ravaged his appointees, held his armsbuildup hostage to a tax increase and taken every opportunityto diminish the powers of his office. After the summitcelebrations fade, the returning visitor suspects, Mr. Reaganwill learn what their price will be.   ---   Mr. Bartley is editor of the Journal.</TEXT></DOC>