<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870316-0067 </DOCNO><HL> ATandamp;T Stops Opposing Bell Firms' BidTo Provide Computerized Data Services---By Johnnie L. Roberts and Bob DavisStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> T NYN BEL BLS SBC USW PAC AITTELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)PUBLISHING (PUB) </IN><TEXT>   The long battle that is expected over further deregulation of the regional Bell companies has formally begun with the companies drawing limited support from a surprising source, American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co.    ATandamp;T is a major opponent of fewer restrictions on the seven regional Bells and continues to strongly oppose their entry into markets for long-distance service and equipment manufacturing. But in a court filing on Friday with U.S. District Judge Harold Greene, the company said for the first time it doesn't oppose allowing the Bells to provide computerized information services. Judge Greene, in Washington, D.C., presided over the 1984 breakup of the Bell system, in which New York-based ATandamp;T divested itself of the seven companies. He continues to enforce the terms of the divestiture.    While ATandamp;T is the leading equipment maker and long-distance carrier, it currently doesn't offer computerized information services.    In separate filings, the regional Bells asked Judge Greene to remove various restrictions, while more than 100 industry and consumer groups joined ATandamp;T in asking that all or most of the restrictions be retained.    &quot;We're absolutely convinced that lifting the bans in (the) three areas would spur competition in the telecommunications industry and benefit American consumers,&quot; said Zane E. Barnes, chairman and chief executive officer of Southwestern Bell Corp., St. Louis.    Last month, the regional Bells' position was given a boost when the Justice Department recommended that the judge permit their entry into equipment manufacturing, computerized information services and, under certain conditions, long-distance service. Under terms of the Bell system breakup, they were barred from those businesses.    Friday was the first date set for deregulation proponents and opponents to begin arguing their positions in formal filings with Judge Greene. He is expected to reach a decision later this year.    The regional Bells were restricted from the three fields because of concern that they might use their monopoly of the local phone networks to impede competition in those fields. Although ATandamp;T said in its filing that it won't oppose permitting the regional Bells into computerized information services, it added there must be protection for &quot;the legitimate interest of information services providers&quot; that might compete against the seven.    An ATandamp;T spokesman said yesterday that &quot;there are information services that we feel may never come to the market unless this restriction is modified.&quot; He said ATandamp;T hadn't ruled out its own entry into that market.    Robert B. Morris III, an analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., noted that the market for information services is still unformed. He said, &quot;It is easy for ATandamp;T to give something away when there isn't anything to give away.&quot; He added that with ATandamp;T itself seeking deregulation on pricing of long-distance service and removal of the regulatory cap on its earnings level, it wants to look consistent by allowing certain restrictions on the Bells to be lifted.    With respect to long-distance services and manufacturing, however, ATandamp;T noted it continues to believe the Bells should be barred because of the monopoly they already enjoy over local phone service.    In their filings, the Bells argued that ending the various restrictions would enable them to better serve consumers and increase their competitiveness in the U.S. telecommunications industry against foreign concerns. The restrictions, they argued, have been made obsolete by rapid changes in telecommunications technology and markets, including greater competition. The seven also said they would continue their commitment to the basic local telephone business, if allowed into other markets.    &quot;The artificial constraints . . . must be removed,&quot; declared Thomas E. Bolger, Bell Atlantic Corp.'s chairman and chief executive officer.    The Philadelphia-based company said the seven Bell concerns should be permitted immediately to offer long-distance calling outside of their regions. It also said the Bells should be permitted to provide certain types of long-distance services, including toll-free 800 numbers and private phone networks, within their regions.    Southwestern Bell said the Bells' entry into equipment manufacturing wouldn't hinder competition because the company &quot;would face strong competition from large companies, such as ATandamp;T, Northern Telecom Ltd. and foreign manufacturers now entering the U.S. market.&quot;    San Francisco-based Pacific Telesis Group argued that the position of some deregulation opponents &quot;is understandable, since they stand to gain the most from keeping the (Bell companies) out of their markets.&quot;    In its filing, the Consumer Federation of America attacked the Justice Department for failing to consider whether its recommendations would raise local service prices, forcing some consumers to give up their phones. The consumer group said the regional companies should first get approval from the Federal Communications Commission for new computerized information services, before approval by Judge Greene.    The International Communications Association, a group of telephone users, said that before the regional companies offer new services, the FCC should demonstrate it has effective safeguards to prevent the phone companies from subsidizing new ventures with profits from local telephone service. </TEXT></DOC>