<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881103-0111 </DOCNO><HL> Population Bomb: North Africa's Cities, Full of Jobless Youths, Cast Shadow on Europe --- Rioting Already Hits Algeria; Emigration to Find Work Is Likely to Keep Rising --- The 'Mexico' of the Continent </HL><AUTHOR> Philip Revzin (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> AFRIC EUROP </CO><DATELINE> ALGIERS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   They hang out in clumps of three, five, 10 on every street corner in Algiers, in Tunis, in Casablanca -- young men with nothing to do all day, every day. By the tens of thousands, they smoke, they talk soccer, they move to another corner, swirling about the streets like the dust in the hot wind. They bustle in and out of mosques in response to the muezzins' calls to prayer. They roam past tiny shops selling sickly-sweet-smelling pastries.    The constant honking of car horns as the young men spill off the sidewalks gives North Africa's cities a feeling of ceaseless, noisy turbulence, of being in a giant cauldron just as it starts to bubble.    North Africa's burgeoning population and economic stagnation make it Europe's Mexico, seething with tensions that periodically erupt as they did last month in Algeria, ripe for religious radicalization and full of people anxious to leave. More than three million North Africans have already spilled into Europe.    Over the next 30 years, the United Nations predicts, the populations of Algeria, Morocco, Tunisia and Egypt will double to a total of 180 million, while those of Italy and France will remain stable and that of West Germany will fall. More than 75% of the population of Algeria, Morocco and Tunisia is under 25 years old, the mirror image of aging America and Europe.    With crossing the Mediterranean into Europe so easy, says Michel Grenon, the director of a U.N. study project on the area, &quot;The rich countries have got to help the poor develop, or the poor will explode in their faces.&quot;    Last month in Algiers and other Algerian cities, tens of thousands of restless young men with nothing to do went on a five-day rampage, breaking windows and looting state-owned supermarkets, trashing the Ministry of Sports and Youth, burning state-owned buses, destroying a bar called the Blue Note where the &quot;nouveau riche&quot; youth relaxed after work.    The young men denounced government officials who, a quarter of a century ago, won independence from France but who, today, wear Pierre Cardin suits. The young men demanded jobs. They also wanted the water turned on in parched Bab-el-Oued, a poor neighborhood, as often as in Hydra, the fashionable neighborhood of many ruling-party functionaries. One youth threw his kitchen sink out a second-floor window because it was useless without water.    The riots were a warning to Europe as much as a shock to Algeria. &quot;The more trouble there is in Algeria, the bigger the wave of immigration to France,&quot; says Gilles Kepel, a political-science professor in Paris whose book, &quot;The Suburbs of Islam,&quot; documents the increasing pressure of immigration on Europe. &quot;The massive arrival of immigrants poses social, political and religious problems, with an aging and childless Europe facing a young and multiplying North Africa,&quot; he comments.    Adds a French government official: &quot;We think that in 20 years an additional 25 million people in North Africa will be looking for jobs in Europe. Will Europe be ready to accept this? Obviously not.&quot;    Immigration is already a major political issue in France. Jean-Marie Le Pen, an extreme right-wing candidate running on an anti-immigrant platform, scored a surprisingly high 14.4% of the vote in the presidential election last April. He is expected to run for mayor of Marseille next year and could win; some sections of that port city resemble Algiers more than Paris, to the resentment of many Frenchmen. The new Socialist government shows no signs of lifting tough new visa rules aimed largely at North Africans and instituted by the former conservative government.    But if Europe keeps the North Africans out, it may face an even worse problem: a surge of Islamic fundamentalism fueled by discontent and rejection of Western values. After the riots, Algerian fundamentalists issued a 12-point program calling for cheaper food, better housing, more jobs and the adoption of Shariah-Islamic law. That could turn a problem into a nightmare: a string of Iran-like Islamic states clear across the top of Africa, a direct threat to the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's southern flank. &quot;It's the same nightmare we have of a Communist takeover in Mexico,&quot; an American diplomat says. &quot;Only worse.&quot;    A close look at Algeria's economic and political troubles suggests that someday Europe's nightmare could become reality. After the poor exploded in Algeria, the army cracked down with brutal force: Officially 176 youths, and probably more than 500, were killed as troops fired on unarmed demonstrators. The Bab-el-Oued neighborhood got water, and army trucks shifted cooking oil and semolina (the basic ingredient in &quot;couscous,&quot; the national dish) from special depots for the well-connected to supermarket shelves for the masses.    After President Chadli Benjedid promised political reforms, which Algerians are expected to approve in a referendum today, a fragile calm returned. But three tanks remain on the Post Office Square, and three policemen guard the shattered facade of the main office of state-owned Banque Nationale d'Algerie.    Algerians know, moreover, that the problem hasn't been solved. They know that in the 26 years of independence from the French, the tired, closed socialist system has squandered an oil bonanza on Soviet-style heavy industries that today produce low-quality steel and high-priced refrigerators. They know that botched collective farming turned what had been France's breadbasket into an importer of more than half its food, and that Algeria recently got an emergency loan from Saudi Arabia to import 1,000 tons of butter.    Above all, they know that the system holds no hope for young men on the streets who have nothing to do but wait until another spark ignites their rage.    Algeria's problems stem from a combustible combination of ideological rigidity, economic mismanagement and bad luck. During the oil boom of the 1970s, Algeria could afford to pour money into education, buy foreign equipment for steel mills and refrigerator factories, and import enough cars, TV sets and vegetables to keep people quiet. It also launched an aid program that won it much respect in the rest of Africa and gave it enough diplomatic clout to play a key role in releasing the American hostages in Iran in 1980.    But then, the 1985 oil-price plunge cost Algeria 15% of its gross national product in lost revenue. Foreign debt soared to $20 billion, about 35% of GNP. The African aid programs ended, and the Algerian clout eroded. Imports stopped cold. People used to the highest purchasing power in North Africa suddenly had nothing to buy. And just as the government returned most farm land to private hands last year, drought and locusts struck. But people accepted austerity -- until a few weeks ago.    What went wrong in Algeria comes through clearly in the stories of ordinary people struggling to survive. They are the stories of people willing to give their government a chance to make things better but unable to give it much time.    One such person is a 27-year-old doctor who makes 7,000 dinars a month ($1,075 at the official exchange rate) at a big hospital near Algiers. The doctor, who, fearing reprisals, asks not to be named, is a product of the remarkable Algerian education system. That system turned a population 90% illiterate at independence in 1962 into a society where 90% of the people can read and write Arabic and French. But that system also produces thousands of bureaucrats and doctors but few plumbers and few people who make much money legally.    On his salary, the young doctor says, he can't afford to marry, and he and his six brothers and sisters (his parents live elsewhere) are squeezed into a dirty two-room apartment they borrow from a friend.    &quot;The system doesn't respect its professionals,&quot; he says bitterly, nibbling on a grilled shrimp in a fish restaurant. He didn't join in the riots, but he understands the causes: &quot;Riots are inevitable when ordinary people for weeks on end can't buy semolina or have water in their homes, while rich people have all the food and water they want.&quot; Nobody starves, he adds, picking up another shrimp, but he resents a system that makes people scheme and rely on influence to get ahead -- in stark contrast to the egalitarian rhetoric spouted by the state propaganda machine.    A few months ago, he says, he called Air Algerie to book a flight to Paris. All full for the next three months, a clerk said. The doctor finally called a friend who works at the state-owned airline. The friend got him a ticket but demanded a favor in return: treatment at a crowded hospital for an ailing grandfather. &quot;It makes me sick to have to depend on people like that for favors and to have to do favors for them in return,&quot; the doctor says.    However, he thinks he has a way out: He is flying to Paris for more training, and he doesn't plan to return. France will get another immigrant. (Some Algerians have immigration rights, others can get them, and many enter allegedly to visit a relative and stay illegally.)    Those who stay fiddle the system, often in ways that do little to help lift the economy out of its stagnation. The doctor's 29-year-old brother is a trained mechanic who spent three years repairing motors on oil derricks in the Sahara, for 3,000 dinars a month. He quit two months ago to join Algeria's flourishing underground economy.    Now, he wears dirty Levis, a streaked black T-shirt and sells grapes out of a minivan. He makes 10,000 dinars a month and pays no taxes. Now, he says, he can save enough to get himself and his brothers and sisters out of the two-room flat.    Because of the huge families, housing is everybody's preoccupation. Sociologists say poorer North Africans have lots of babies because they like them, because of a misreading of Islam, which in fact doesn't bar birth control, and because of the lack of recreation. There are only 11 movie houses, two swimming pools and one discotheque for the three million people in Algiers. &quot;In New York, you had a population boom nine months after the big electricity blackout,&quot; the doctor says. &quot;Here, we've got a blackout every night.&quot;    The director of a tire factory says his 800 workers average nine children each. A government messenger who stopped at 10 kids got tired of waiting for a state apartment bigger than his three rooms and last year hired black-market laborers to build a five-room house about 30 miles outside Algiers. He spent 90,000 dinars on it. When local housing authorities found out, they levied a 13,000-dinar fine. A bribe of considerably less settled the matter.    Development experts say the only long-term solution for Algeria, and for Europe, is to create a viable Algerian industry providing jobs, consumer goods and exports to let the country buy what it can't grow or make. Brahim Benaouag is in the front line of this battle, and his task isn't easy. As a manager of the state-owned Anabib factory in Rouiba, 25 miles from Algiers, he employs 1,000 men making steel sheeting for buildings, square steel tubes for furniture and big steel water pipes.    Anabib opened in 1975 and, like most Algerian factories, bought its French, Italian and German equipment with oil revenues. It gets its rolled steel from the El-Hadjar mill at Annaba. El-Hadjar, built with Soviet equipment 20 years ago, still operates below capacity and reportedly has never made a profit. Anabib's yard houses hundreds of rolls of poor-quality El-Hadjar steel, steel not good enough to be made into finished products.    Among Mr. Benaouag's, and Algeria's, problems are a chronic shortage of spare parts for his aging machines, and constantly changing government priorities. Anabib recently installed a new machine to rapidly dip its steel tubes, destined for export, into the galvanizing bath and take them out to dry. It worked well, the manager says, until the government ordered 300 massive irrigation derricks to help increase farm production. The tubes for the derricks are too big for the new machine; it had to be dismantled, and it sits forlornly in a corner. The derrick tubes are slowly and laboriously lifted in and out of the bath of molten metal by three young men wielding improvised hooks.    The future depends on Algeria's finding more efficient ways to run its factories and farms, perhaps with the help of foreign companies it has largely rejected since independence. The government now says it welcomes joint ventures and is negotiating for an automobile plant with Fiat of Italy. But the same economic problems that cry out for such help also caused the recent riots, which will probably scare off most foreign investment. &quot;It's a vicious circle,&quot; a European diplomat says. &quot;But if we don't break out of it, there's going to be a lot more riots and a lot more trouble for them and for us.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>