<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871014-0095 </DOCNO><HL> London Carnage:Britain's DeregulationLeaves a Casualty TrailIn Securities Industry---A Year After the 'Big Bang,'Firms Are ShellshockedBy Virulent Rate Cutting---Salomon and Shearson on Run---By Craig FormanStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROPSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><DATELINE> LONDON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The British called it Big Bang, Oct. 27, 1986. On that day life in the City was to change dramatically -- and, it was hoped, for the better. Financial markets were deregulated, fixed commissions abolished, and barriers between brokers and other financial concerns torn down once and for all. There was culture shock, too. Bowler hats, three-hour lunches and six-hour days became fond memories.    Today, after slightly less than a year, life may not be that much better after all. Three types of players generally remain in the market here: the bruised, the badly bloodied and those in a body bag. Lured by visions of huge profits in a rapidly growing market, the Americans, Japanese and Swiss set off a barroom brawl and a frenzy of mergers among bankers, brokers and securities firms.    The resulting damage is everywhere. On Monday, Salomon Inc., as part of a major corporate restructuring, announced plans to slash 150 jobs in London. Chemical Bank also said it would cut its U.K. staff, by 18%. Last month, Shearson Lehman Brothers International Inc. dismissed 150 staffers, nearly 11% of its London work force, and nearly halved its equity marketmaking.    British banks have cut back, too. Midland Bank PLC stopped making markets in British equities in March. Lloyds Bank PLC pulled out of the British government bond and Eurobond markets in June, and Morgan Grenfell Group PLC fired a dozen bond staffers in July.    Why the carnage?    Trading volume quadrupled amid the biggest bull market here in recent memory, but the competitive free-for-all slashed commission rates, raised overhead and decimated profits. Some traders do as much as half their business for no commission at all, and when commissions are paid, they run about 200 pounds sterling for a 100,000-pound transaction -- 50% of pre-Big Bang levels. Meanwhile, at many firms, including American houses, overhead quadrupled.    As a result, few firms here are reporting much profit from operations, analysts say. And if you count in the substantial start-up costs, profits disappear at many of them. Even those now making money face a long wait before Big Bang pays off.    &quot;While a lot of people have gained in increased turnover, it actually has cost them money,&quot; says Keith Brown, who resigned in July as managing director of Midland's Greenwell Montagu securities unit to join Morgan Stanley International.    In a few cases, whole investment banks -- unable to compete on their own -- have been sold to bigger, better-capitalized concerns or have been broken up. The rush to enter the markets over the past year &quot;has created excess capacity,&quot; says David Band, managing director of Morgan Guaranty Ltd. in London. &quot;There has to be some rationalization.&quot;    However, Big Bang has helped ensure London's prominence as the freest trading center in the European time zone. American and Japanese securities houses have made London their headquarters for the eight hours each day that trading books pass to Europe on their Tokyo-London-New York circuit. That's good for Her Majesty's government, which reckons that the City, as London's financial district is called, now contributes more to gross national product than North Sea oil does.    Deregulation also has benefited investors, who pay lower commissions. It is helping British companies expand their role in the international takeover game by cutting their cost of new capital -- a record 19.7 billion pounds has been raised so far this year. It has sparked development of innovative financial instruments that are drawing even more business to London. It has facilitated the government's campaign to turn some state-owned companies private; nearly nine million Britons now own shares, triple the number in the early 1980s. And in securities firms' trading rooms, some high-school dropouts in their 20s have tripled their incomes -- to as much as 100,000 pounds ($164,600) a year.    &quot;It's been a revolution,&quot; says Roger Jospe, senior executive vice president of Drexel Burnham Lambert International Inc. in London.    And, to some extent, the revolution is spreading. Big Bang has set off a chain of &quot;little bangs&quot; across Europe, as France, Germany and even Spain try to copy London's success.    But the tougher competition in London has put a premium on finding new business. To get it, some firms have resorted to such financial acrobatics as offering to match any competitor's price, whether the transaction is profitable or not. Such gymnastics raise the financial risks while cutting the potential profits. &quot;You can win small and lose big,&quot; Mr. Band says.    The result is the shakeout that many observers think has only begun. &quot;Over the next three to five years, there will be a lot of change. It will make what has happened over the past year seem minor,&quot; says Archibald Cox Jr., managing director of Morgan Stanley International in London. &quot;We haven't seen the downturn in the equity markets yet. If that coincides with the downturn in the bond markets, the {shakeout} will really start.&quot;    Even so, many observers are surprised by the speed of the shakeout. They say it confirms London's new focus on short-term profits and away from cradle-to-grave relationships. Securities trading here, says Alan Bartlett, research director at Morgan Grenfell, has become &quot;a commodities business.&quot;    Moreover, the cutbacks have been occurring during the bull market. What happens when the market turns down? &quot;We are all starting to look over our shoulders a bit,&quot; says Peter Meinertzhagen, the head of equities at Hoare Govett, a London stockbrokerage unit of Security Pacific Corp., of Los Angeles. Mr. Brown expects to see a lot of &quot;secondhand Mercedes in the showrooms.&quot;    Before last Oct. 27, trading commissions were fixed, foreigners couldn't own brokerage firms, and access to the London equity and government bond markets was reserved for stock-exchange members and a clubbish group of bond-trading firms. As part of an antitrust settlement, London's stock exchange eliminated its restrictive trading practices. And the government promised to fill the void with new securities laws.    In much of the 1987 first quarter, the City was preoccupied by the Guinness PLC share-buying scandal, which -- though unrelated to Big Bang -- increased the pressure for tougher securities regulations. Now, economists estimate that compliance with the new rules will add 100 million pounds to City firms' overheads. And headhunters are scrambling to find lawyers and accountants rather than brokers and traders.    But the basic problem is the intense competition. After the huge expansion of staff and overhead, 23 firms are chasing only 20% of the business in the U.K. domestic equity market, according to the Stock Exchange. The rest -- 80% of the 2.39 billion pounds' worth of shares traded daily -- is in the hands of the top 10 firms, about the same as before Big Bang.    The harsh lesson: Firms that had good market share before Big Bang -- such as S.G. Warburg andamp; Co.'s securities business and Barclays Bank PLC's Barclays de Zoete Wedd unit -- are still doing well. Those that didn't -- such as American Express Co.'s Shearson and the Alexanders Laing andamp; Cruickshank brokerage unit of Mercantile House Holdings PLC -- ran into heavy going.    In the market for gilts, British government bonds, the change is even sharper. Before Big Bang, only a handful of firms made markets in gilts. Now, 27 houses slug it out, and they have racked up total losses estimated at 75 million pounds since Big Bang. Also lackluster have been operations in the Euromarkets, the international markets in which borrowers and lenders trade securities outside their home countries; the Euromarkets have been hobbled by rising interest rates and tough competition.    The changes of the past year have been disastrous for some. Among the hardest hit have been the British firms lacking the capital of bigger international rivals. Unwilling or unable to sustain the losses, such firms are realizing there is &quot;no point in doing business if it is always going to cost you money,&quot; says Mr. Meinertzhagen of Hoare Govett.    Some strategies were faulty from the start. Midland Bank, for example, was one of those that offered to match any competitor's price in equities. Midland -- now the target of takeover rumors -- is expected to write off an estimated 10 million to 12 million pounds because of its retreat, analysts say.    Not all British firms are troubled, however. S.G. Warburg and Barclays de Zoete Wedd have reported growing profits this year, largely because they got a jump on their rivals in preparing for Big Bang. They settled personality conflicts and their strategies early, well before last October. In addition, each bought one of the three strongest equity market-making firms.    Those less fortunate include some of last year's now-weakened predators, who are themselves being stalked in the new wave of consolidation here. Hill Samuel Group PLC agreed earlier this month to be bought by TSB Group PLC for 777 million pounds. Under the acquisition terms, Hill Samuel is divesting itself of its Wood Mackenzie brokerage unit, bought shortly before Big Bang. Merchant bank Guinness Peat Group PLC is the target of a takeover offer, and Mercantile House Holdings is being bought and broken up.    Some of the acquisitions of stockbrokers haven't worked out. An example is Shearson, which bought L. Messel andamp; Co., a small but respected house outside the top 10. Shearson wanted to expand Messel to cover all sectors of the U.K. equity market, trading 450 issues. Shearson &quot;had no idea what it was buying, and neither did we,&quot; a Messel partner says. Messel, adds a former employee, was an &quot;old-style, slap-you-on-the-back type of British house. It clashed with the go-go Americans.&quot; Shearson now has cut its losses by dismissals and reducing market-making.    Shearson rejects the talk of a culture clash. &quot;We haven't viewed people as 'old Messel' people or 'Shearson' people, but as either good ones or bad ones,&quot; says Shearson's general counsel, Laurie Adams. Events since Big Bang, he adds, have &quot;gone according to plan.&quot;    The current shakeout also is attributable to rapid expansion. Shearson increased its London payroll by more than one-third in the past year; Salomon's staff in London has more than quadrupled since 1985 to 900. &quot;You can't grow that rapidly without picking up a few people who don't meet your standards,&quot; says Charles S. McVeigh III, Salomon Brothers managing director. For Chemical and others trying to bolster their capital ratios, cutbacks -- especially in currently strong pounds -- free more capital for loan-loss reserves.    Other American firms, such as Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co., and Morgan Stanley andamp; Co., have moved more quietly, making markets in a small number of equities and carefully watching their trading. The lesson of Shearson's experience hasn't been lost on them or on the Japanese firms here that haven't bought a securities house.    Over time, however, the role of the overseas firms will grow. In the past year, the Japanese have consolidated their position in the Eurobond markets and now occupy three of the top four positions. People wonder when they will seriously turn their attention to the U.K. equity and gilts markets. Firms such as Japan's giant Nomura International Ltd. and its American rivals are never far from people's minds. &quot;The thing to watch out for is the foreign houses that haven't made their presence felt yet,&quot; Mr. Brown says. &quot;That's the factor for 1988.&quot; Says Keith Clarke, a British-born Nomura executive director in London: &quot;We expect to move slowly at first. We want to start small.&quot;    Meanwhile, almost everyone is swamped with a mounting pile of unsettled share transactions, currently running at about six billion pounds. A computerized solution is still two years off. Costs will rise as firms try to add back-office staff to deal with growing volume and new securities regulations.    Much of the expense is catch-up. No one was prepared technologically for Big Bang. The exchange's electronic trading system broke the first day and wasn't operating at full speed for a couple of weeks. Back rooms, understaffed and inefficient, became more bogged down because of the antiquated settlement system and increased volume.    Today, as the trading has fled to screens, the exchange plans to turn its once-busy trading floor into spare back-office space, filled with fax machines and accountants to sort out the backlog.    And costs &quot;have exploded for settlements people, compliance officers and accountants,&quot; Morgan Guaranty's Mr. Band says. A securities lawyer now can make as much as a seasoned trader. </TEXT></DOC>