<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870107-0009 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 01/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   CONGRESS CONVENED and began focusing on the Iran-Contra affair.    The Senate voted to empower a select committee to investigate the arms sales to Iran and diversion of funds to Nicaraguan rebels. Senate leaders agreed to give the panel a confidential Senate Intelligence Committee report on the affair. The House is expected to form a similar panel as early as today. Meanwhile, the independent counsel appointed to study the affair informed the Justice Department that he intends to take over three pending criminal inquiries, law enforcement officials said.    Weinberger said the Army apparently charged the CIA an improperly low price for some of the TOW missiles sent to Iran last year. The defense secretary also expressed doubts that proceeds from the arms sales to Iran actually had been provided to the Contras.    A Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll indicates that 64% of Americans believe the Iran affair has hurt Reagan's ability to be an effective president.    ---   Reagan underwent a CAT scan of his abdomen at Bethesda Naval Hospital, the final check for a possible recurrence of cancer. Results are expected today. Earlier, the president said he felt &quot;fine&quot; a day after surgery on an enlarged prostate. Doctors reported that the tissue removed from Reagan's prostate was free of cancer.    ---   Casey is experiencing difficulty speaking and has weakness on his right side, according to officials at Georgetown University Hospital. The CIA director, who underwent surgery Dec. 18 for the removal of a cancerous brain tumor, also has begun radiation therapy, the officials said. The hospital said Casey is &quot;slowly improving.&quot;    ---   Amtrak restored limited service as crews worked to rebuild the track where a train collided Sunday with three Conrail locomotives that officials said had run a stop signal. At least 15 people were killed and 176 injured in the crash near Baltimore. Authorities said the Conrail engineer saw the signal but didn't have time to stop.    ---   Puerto Rico's governor said &quot;significant progress&quot; had been made in the investigation of a Dec. 31 fire at the Dupont Plaza Hotel in which 96 people died. He said &quot;all parties&quot; in a labor dispute at the beachfront hotel in San Juan were being questioned. Meanwhile, fire officials said all hotels would be inspected for safety.    ---   China's official newspaper blamed recent pro-democracy demonstrations on &quot;the unchecked spread of bourgeois liberal ideas.&quot; The editorial in the People's Daily, which Western diplomats said appeared to reflect the position of Peking's leadership, also accused some Communist Party members of ignoring an anti-socialist trend.    ---   A clean-water bill was reintroduced in the Senate, with three-quarters of the chamber co-sponsoring the measure. The bill is the same as the one Reagan vetoed last year, and its backers predicted they will pass it promptly over White House opposition.    ---   Public sector employees marched through Paris as telephone, postal and electrical workers lent their support to a three-week-old strike by France's rail workers. Premier Chirac, following a cabinet meeting, said the government was committed to holding down pay increases as a means of fighting inflation and unemployment.    ---   The Soviet Union pledged support for Afghan leader Najibullah's proposed peace talks with Afghanistan's Moslem rebels. In a speech Monday in Kabul, Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze urged all Afghan guerrilla groups to observe a cease-fire so Moscow's troops could be withdrawn.    ---   Shultz left for a six-nation tour of sub-Saharan Africa. The secretary of state is expected to urge the region to proceed with free-market growth to deal with widespread economic problems. Officials said he also would discuss &quot;Libyan aggression.&quot;    ---   Libya admitted for the first time that its forces struck targets in Chad south of the interdiction line established by France. Libya's Embassy in Paris said two air raids Sunday were a &quot;reprisal action&quot; against interference in Chad by the U.S. and France. It said the action wouldn't be repeated unless there is &quot;new aggression.&quot;    ---   Anti-apartheid groups have urged black students to end school boycotts, and officials said they expect nearly two million pupils to report for today's start of the academic year. Separately, residents of a black ghetto near Port Elizabeth said police allowed more than 1,000 black conservatives to beat black radicals. Two youths were killed.    ---   Philippine government envoys met with representatives of the country's communist rebels for two hours, agreeing to limit initial negotiations to basic problems such as poverty and unemployment. The talks, aimed at ending the 17-year-old insurgency in the Philippines, adjourned until next week.    ---   Hanoi said its troops killed nearly 500 Chinese soldiers in fighting inside Vietnam's northern border, British Broadcasting Corp. reported. Hanoi said that the Chinese troops had attacked a number of Vietnamese hillside positions near the border, but that the advances were repulsed, BBC said.    ---   Died: Sigurd S. Larmon, 95, former chairman of Young andamp; Rubicam Inc., last Thursday, in Stamford, Conn. </TEXT></DOC>