<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861230-0121 </DOCNO><HL> Moscow Missions:U.S. Small BusinessesAre Trying, and Doing,More Soviet Trading---Sheep Rancher Imports WoolFor a 'Peace Fleece' Blend;Faberge Jewels Are Back---Some Barriers in Washington---By Jonathan KwitnyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/30/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   Peter Hagerty, a sheep rancher and wool marketer in Kezar Falls, Maine, says he came up with the idea for his most successful business venture while watching &quot;The Day After,&quot; a November 1983 television drama of a nuclear war between the United States and the Soviet Union.    &quot;I really couldn't deal with the despair&quot; the program engendered, he says, &quot;until the idea of trading with the Soviet Union came up.&quot; So Mr. Hagerty stopped thinking war and started thinking fleece. The U.S.S.R. was the world's biggest producer of wool but wasn't exporting any to the U.S. In the summer of 1985, Mr. Hagerty finally hopped a plane. &quot;I arrived in Moscow on a Thursday,&quot; he says, &quot;and by Friday afternoon I had a trade deal.&quot;    His first bales of Soviet wool arrived last February, and Mr. Hagerty and his wife set about blending it with equal portions of their own Maine crop. By June, they were marketing their yarn by mail under the trademark &quot;Peace Fleece.&quot; Mr. Hagerty, who has also tried logging and farming and says his pre-tax income has long been stuck in the low five figures, has been swamped with orders. &quot;This is the first time we've ever done anything that looks like it's going to bring in substantial income,&quot; he marvels.    It hasn't been so easy for every American businessman who has tried to deal with the Soviets. But more small-business people are trying these days, and more are succeeding. In some ways, the stirrings of trade are similar to those aroused by President Nixon's 1972 opening to China, although the economic potential of Soviet trade is greater because the Soviet economy is bigger.    A change in Soviet regulations, scheduled to take effect in January, will allow many Soviet production organizations to talk trade with outsiders without going through the Ministry of Foreign Trade. This decentralization is expected to help small-business people.    The volume of small-business trade still doesn't rival the occasional big wheat or machinery deals between the countries. But James Giffen, the president of the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Trade and Economic Council (a joint governmental effort to facilitate trade), says &quot;thousands&quot; of small-business men are hustling Soviet deals.    Christopher Stowell, a Commerce Department official in the Nixon administration who now runs a consulting firm in McLean, Va., is gambling that at least some of these small traders will succeed. In a joint venture with an Italian concern, he says, he is reopening a Moscow office that he closed when President Reagan embargoed U.S. exports that might help construction of a Soviet gas pipeline.    &quot;We rolled the dice about nine months ago and figured the summit was going to happen, and that would open up the gates again,&quot; Mr. Stowell says. Though Mr. Reagan and Soviet Premier Mikhail S. Gorbachev failed to reach an arms agreement in Iceland last October, Mr. Stowell sees the meeting as &quot;positive -- the door is ajar but not open yet.&quot; And he sees opportunities for &quot;a lot of very good {American} companies, scientist-run, that have very little idea of how to market their products&quot; -- not to mention opportunities for him.    As in the early China trade, most successful Soviet deals seem to come through experienced middlemen. On arriving in Moscow, Mr. Hagerty, the sheep rancher, went to the office of Chilewich Sons andamp; Co., a New York firm whose late founder began trading with the Soviets in the 1920s. The Chilewich representative rang up the right official at the foreign-trade ministry and got a fast appointment -- though both Chilewich and Mr. Hagerty note that such speed is rare.    Mr. Hagerty says the Soviet official at first turned him down because he wanted to order only 1,300 pounds of wool for his first shipment. But, he says, &quot;We started talking about our families, and he said, 'What is your real reason for doing this?' I said, 'If business people are able to deal with one another regardless of our differences, then there's hope for the world.' He pulled out some samples. Once the wool hit the table, we were home free.&quot;    Kelley Phillips, the principal owner of Gems of the World Inc., a jewelry store in Gainesville, Fla., was less idealistic but just as successful. He had dealt with the Soviets 15 years ago while working for an Israeli company. When he opened his Gainesville store in 1977, he says, he &quot;always had it in the back of my mind&quot; to approach the Soviets because of &quot;the quality of their diamonds. They're acknowledged in our industry to be among the best of the diamond cutters, particularly in small stones.&quot;    In 1984, as sales of the Phillips company neared $1 million a year, a Gainesville contingent, including Mr. Phillips, visited a &quot;sister city&quot; in the Soviet Union. He says he went to the U.S.-U.S.S.R. Trade and Economic Council and was referred to its affiliate in Moscow, which then arranged an appointment for him.    As far as diamonds were concerned, he says, &quot;on the very first trip we didn't accomplish anything except talk.&quot; But, he says, he did manage to pick up amethysts and synthetic stones valued at $5,000. He returned in February 1985 and bought $500,000 of diamonds, the minimum amount the Soviets would sell.    Mr. Phillips also learned that they were reopening the venerable Faberge jewelry works, closed in the 1917 Revolution. After more trips, he wound up with an exclusive contract to buy certain items from the factory. The first, a Viking horn made of quartz and decorated with gold, diamonds and antique garnets, arrived recently. Mr. Phillips won't divulge what he paid, but he says he expects to sell it for $100,000 and to get 10 to 15 such pieces a year.    &quot;Just to make something like this is quite a turnaround for the Soviet Union,&quot; Mr. Phillips says. &quot;The quality is equal to anything made in any country in the world at this point. I think they were a little apprehensive to make major pieces like this. I think our being small was an advantage because if it hadn't worked out, it wouldn't have been a major embarrassment.&quot;    Mr. Phillips advises other prospective traders to plan meetings well before arriving in Moscow and to be prepared to deposit substantial good-faith sums in a Soviet bank to prove that they are serious. If purchases aren't made, the money is always returned, he says.    As has happened with China trade, the more the business community learns the ropes, the less the need for professional middlemen. Mr. Hagerty, who not long ago needed the Chilewich introduction, helped ease the way for his neighbor, John Markovich. Mr. Markovich designs and builds automated equipment that, for example, assembles automobile turn signals and fuses.    Mr. Hagerty gave him a book listing the Soviet officials he needed to contact. Although Mr. Markovich's Quaker Brook Engineering Co. has only seven employees and sales in the low seven figures, it was relatively easy for him to propose a deal to help the Soviets produce goods in the automotive and lighting-fixture industries.    An unexpected problem arose, however. Quaker Brook is situated in Cumberland County, Maine, which years ago was arbitrarily ruled off-limits to Soviet officials in retaliation for travel restrictions on Americans in the U.S.S.R. Mr. Markovich says he is making a videotape to show Soviet commercial agents in New York what his company does.    Robert Estes, a Chicago film producer whose company, Five-Star International, now does most of its business with the Soviet Union, has become expert enough to represent other companies. Among them are large ones such as Revlon and Minnesota Mining andamp; Manufacturing.    Mr. Estes's first visit to Moscow, 15 years ago, got off to an unpromising start. He went there to propose a one-hour TV special on life in the U.S.S.R. for broadcast in the U.S. He says he arrived late at night, there weren't any taxis, and he had to hitch a ride to his hotel in the back of a pickup truck from a driver who didn't have any room in his cab. The hotel refused to rent him a room until he produced the business card of a Soviet official whom he had met in Chicago.    In the morning, he visited the U.S. embassy, as the State Department had advised him. There, he says, a cultural attache told him that the Soviet official he was to meet &quot;is KGB. You'll have nothing but trouble with him.&quot;    Mr. Estes says he later told that to the Soviet official, who &quot;laughed and said I was the first American that ever told him the truth. And from then on, I had no problems.&quot; He made his film and later wound up distributing Soviet films and cartoons in the U.S. Last fall, he says, he got a contract to install a TV studio in the Soviet embassy in Washington; the studio will allow news interviews to be relayed by satellite to the Soviet Union.    Mr. Estes says he has made 101 trips to Russia. &quot;You have to figure $15,000 to $18,000 for two people to spend 25 or 30 days,&quot; he says. &quot;You're always taking the Soviets out and entertaining them. They like to eat and go to nice places.&quot;    However, other American business travelers complain about restrictions on them. U.S. engineers who went to the U.S.S.R. to install machine tools were &quot;treated cordially, but they all had complaints about pretty strict surveillance&quot; and curfews, according to Donald Ball, the president of Anocut Inc., which sold the tools.    Mr. Ball also gripes that the Soviets lacked enough flexibility to allow substitution of a superior part for one originally specified. &quot;They honored their contracts to the letter,&quot; he says, &quot;but once you got into it, you couldn't change anything.&quot;    He also notes the political risks. This year, he was approached by the Soviets about some mechanical rollers made by Anocut, and a team was scheduled to go to Moscow to discuss a sale. But when Soviet-American relations soured over the seizure of U.S. correspondent Nicholas Daniloff last fall, the Soviets telexed Mr. Ball to delay the trip, and he still is waiting for further word. Then, he says, he will be worrying, &quot;Will we get through this before there's another Daniloff situation?&quot;    Anocut, with total sales varying from $2 million to $8 million a year, sold $1.5 million in transmission manufacturing tools to the Soviets from 1978 to 1983.    Other machine-tool manufacturers complain that their worst problems come not from Moscow but from Washington, which wants to prevent the export of exclusive technology to the U.S.S.R. The tool makers say the U.S. has restricted sales of many basic machines readily available from West German, French, Swiss and other suppliers.    James Farley, the president and major owner of SpeedFam Corp. of Des Plaines, Ill., says that in the late 1970s a multimillion-dollar Soviet order for silicon-polishing machines was an important part of his business. &quot;As of Afghanistan, we could not accept a duplicate of that order,&quot; he says. The 1979 Soviet invasion of Afghanistan sparked many of the restrictions.    Besides the ban on exporting certain technological goods, there are punitive tariffs. For example, Mr. Hagerty thought that he had made a bargain, buying Soviet wool for 38 cents a pound below his normal Boston prices. But, he says, &quot;When the wool got to Boston, we were immediately hit with a 38-cent import duty. {The U.S. government} knew exactly what was going on.&quot; He says the tariff on New Zealand wool is only six cents a pound.    However, the U.S. may ease some restrictions. Next May, the Department of Housing and Urban Development -- which led the way in encouraging Soviet trade in construction goods in the 1970s -- will co-sponsor a trade exhibition in the Soviet Union; 150 U.S. companies are expected to participate. And the Commerce Department says interagency discussions are under way about whether to substitute modified restrictions on the export of oil and gas equipment and technology when the current curbs expire Jan. 20. </TEXT></DOC>