<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870724-0019 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Secretary of State George Shultz testified that the Reagan administration's arms sales to Iran provoked a &quot;battle royal&quot; that matched him against deceptive White House advisers and a president reluctant to see the policy as one of arms for hostages.    &quot;When you get down into the dirt of the operational details, it always comes out arms for hostages,&quot; said Mr. Shultz. The secretary portrayed President Reagan as having been isolated by advisers who wanted him to &quot;bail them out&quot; as the secret operation unraveled last November.    The secretary characterized early White House information to the press on the sales as &quot;tricky and misleading,&quot; and said he waged a behind-the-scenes struggle as late as last December with former Central Intelligence Agency Director William Casey over the initiative.    Mr. Shultz said it was only when he informed the president Dec. 14 of a White House-backed offer to formulate a plan to help Iran free 17 convicted terrorists imprisoned in Kuwait that he finally felt Mr. Reagan understood &quot;that something is radically wrong here.&quot;    &quot;His jaw set, and his eyes flashed,&quot; Mr. Shultz testified. &quot;He reacted like he'd been kicked in the belly.&quot;    Appearing before House and Senate committees investigating the Iran-Contra affair, Mr. Shultz's testimony combined emotion with details from the extensive personal notes he and a top aide kept of high-level exchanges within the administration.    Along with White House documents from the same period, this record indicates Mr. Shultz was repeatedly misled by former National Security Advisers Robert McFarlane and John Poindexter, and poses new questions for Attorney General Edwin Meese and former White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan.    Secretary Shultz painted a portrait of administration infighting that matched him against both the National Security Council staff and the late Mr. Casey, whom the secretary said advanced faulty intelligence in order to support his intrusions into foreign policy. Mr. Shultz also revealed that since becoming secretary in 1982, he had tendered his resignation three times, and that he was viewed with resentment by the intelligence community because of his opposition in late 1985 to mandatory lie-detector tests in the administration.    Mr. Shultz said that because of this sensitive situation, he didn't ask to be told of operational details of the Iran initiative. However, he denied ever intending to bow out of the picture entirely. He cited a series of exchanges with Adm. Poindexter and Mr. Casey last year that led him to believe that the arms sales weren't proceeding, and said the State Department was excluded from classified cable traffic relevant to the initiative.    He said Adm. Poindexter initially understated the scope of the arms sales when briefing cabinet secretaries last November. And Mr. Shultz said he was told by Mr. Regan as late as last Nov. 15 that the White House couldn't support turning over the policy to the State Department.    From the outset of the initiative, Mr. Shultz said Mr. Reagan was motivated by concern for the hostages and didn't hide his frustration with the opposition raised by the secretary and Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger. According to Mr. Shultz, Mr. Weinberger told the president in a December 1985 meeting that &quot;there are legal problems here . . . in addition to all of the policy problems.&quot; Mr. Shultz said the president responded: &quot;Well, the American people will never forgive me if I fail to get these hostages out over this legal question.&quot;    Mr. Meese wasn't present at the December meeting, but Mr. Shultz said the attorney general sided with Mr. Casey at a January 1986 meeting when the balance shifted against himself and Mr. Weinberger. Mr. Shultz's testimony and the documents cited yesterday also indicate that Mr. Meese knew more than he has admitted about 1985 arms sales to Iran through Israel. Mr. Shultz said he told the attorney general last November that the president recalled a 1985 shipment of Hawk anti-aircraft missiles to Iran.    Mr. Regan, who will testify after Mr. Meese next week, appears to have been more ambivalent on the issue. Mr. Shultz said the former chief of staff had joined in opposing the sales in December 1985, but weeks later sided with the president and Mr. Casey. As the operation unraveled, Mr. Regan appeared sympathetic but non-committal toward the State Department, Mr. Shultz said, implicitly criticizing the former chief of staff for the position the secretary found himself in last fall.    &quot;This was a very traumatic period for me because everybody was saying I'm disloyal to the president,&quot; Mr. Shultz said. &quot;I frankly felt I was loyal to the president because I was the one trying to get him the facts so he could make a decision.&quot;    Though his most telling remarks dealt with the Iran initiative, Mr. Shultz testified about a pattern of deception regarding the NSC's role in assisting Nicaraguan insurgents during the two-year ban on U.S. military aid to the insurgents. The secretary said he opposed plans in 1984 to solicit contributions from other countries. And it appears Mr. McFarlane, Adm. Poindexter's predecessor at the NSC, misled Mr. Shultz about an unsuccessful solicitation of Israel in spring 1984 and later about donations of $1 million a month from Saudi Arabia.    Among the documents released by the committees is a notation indicating that Mr. McFarlane later complained that the U.S. ambassador to Israel had blown &quot;the whistle&quot; on him by telling Mr. Shultz of the NSC's activities in Jerusalem. When Mr. Shultz later proposed that the Justice Department be asked to prepare a written opinion on the legality of solicitations, then-White House counselor Meese cautioned that a check be made first to see what the outcome would be, according to an investigative source.    Mr. Shultz's isolation in the administration left him unaware of the later diversion of arms-sales profits to the Contras, and he used this freedom to criticize both the operation's legality and effectiveness. &quot;You can't spend funds the Congress doesn't authorize you to obtain or appropriate,&quot; said the secretary, who belittled the small amount of the millions in profits that eventually went to the Contras. &quot;They got practically nothing,&quot; he said.    The details provided by Mr. Shultz contrasted with the often vague testimony of Adm. Poindexter, and reflected the extensive personal notes that were kept by the secretary and his executive assistant Charles Hill, a veteran expert on the Mideast.    &quot;We have been deceived and lied to,&quot; Mr. Shultz is recorded as telling the president before a news conference last Nov. 19, in which Mr. Reagan discussed the Iran initiative. The president, according to the notes, responded that the secretary was &quot;telling me things I don't know.&quot;    A day later, the two men met in what the secretary described as a blunt exchange over factual errors in Mr. Reagan's answers the previous evening. The president told Mr. Shultz that he recalled the November 1985 Hawk shipment, the secretary said. On that same day, however, prior testimony has shown there were efforts in the White House to prepare false testimony to Congress concealing the U.S. role in that shipment.    On Nov. 22, Mr. Shultz said he told Mr. Meese that the president was aware of the November 1985 shipment, and the secretary expressed his fear that the Iran initiative might be linked to the Contras because of the involvement of a Miami-based freight carrier, Southern Air Transport, in both operations. That same day, Justice Department attorneys, who were going through NSC files, found a memo outlining the diversion of arms-sale profits to the Contras.    Mr. Shultz appeared more comfortable with the committees than he often has been within the administration. Sen. Warren Rudman, a New Hampshire Republican and vice chairman of the Senate committee, said Mr. Shultz -- in contrast to former NSC aide Lt. Col. Oliver North -- was the real hero of the hearings because he was willing to &quot;stand up&quot; to the president.    Asked how he felt about the intrusions on his foreign policy turf, the secretary, mimicking the late comedian Jimmy Durante, answered: &quot;Everybody wants to get into the act.&quot;    Secretary Shultz also recounted three resignation letters he delivered to the president and the &quot;guerrilla warfare&quot; he said some in the White House and CIA had waged against him &quot;on all sorts of small things.&quot;    His first resignation letter was delivered in mid-1983, when he heard that Mr. McFarlane, then NSC staff deputy director, had made a secret trip to the Middle East without telling him. He offered to resign again in late 1985 over his opposition to plans to require lie-detector tests for administration officials.    His third resignation letter came in August 1986, when he said it had been clear that White House and CIA officials were no longer &quot;comfortable&quot; with him. He said his letter was unrelated to the Iran arms-sale plan, which he thought had been dropped.    Mr. Shultz said a major lesson of the Iran-Contra affair was that the intelligence community should be separated from policy-making responsibility. He suggested Mr. Casey's role in the Iran-Contra affair caused the CIA to distort intelligence to help promote Mr. Casey's policy goals, which in turn misled the president.    Another major lesson, Mr. Shultz said, is that only officials accountable to Congress or the American electorate should be allowed to carry out the types of operations that Mr. Reagan's national security staff apparently executed independently. </TEXT></DOC>