<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870714-0054 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> MDEST LATAMMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In October 1985, as the Navy prepared to hunt down the plane carrying the hijackers of the cruise ship Achille Lauro, Lt. Col. Oliver North manned his battle station in the White House situation room with a telephone at each ear, juggling incoming intelligence data and outgoing orders to the Sixth Fleet.    Upstairs, his boss, then-Vice Adm. John Poindexter, munched on a sandwich and waited stoically to see whether the high-stakes gamble would pay off or collapse into political disaster.    If Col. North is fire, Adm. Poindexter is ice. This week, when the balding, pipepuffing, professorial former national security adviser replaces his passionate former subordinate before the congressional panels investigating the Iran-Contra affair, the fever in the hearing room and on television screens across the nation is likely to break.    But if Adm. Poindexter is a less magnetic personality than Col. North, he may prove to be a far more important witness to how the Reagan administration went about secretly selling arms to Iran and reinforcing the Nicaraguan Contras. &quot;Although Adm. Poindexter will not be as glamorous as Col. North, he is by far the most important witness this committee will hear,&quot; says Sen. Warren Rudman (R., N.H.), the vice chairman of the Senate panel.    Neither congressional investigators nor his former colleagues in the administration expect Adm. Poindexter, who has been silent on the affair since he resigned last Nov. 25, to produce conclusive evidence that President Reagan knew profits from the Iran arms sales were being diverted to the Contras. Even so, his testimony could prove damaging to the president, and White House officials are bracing for new and potentially embarrassing questions about whether the president knew what his subordinates were doing in his name.    Col. North has testified that he sent Adm. Poindexter five memorandums seeking presidential approval for arms sales to Iran, and noting that some of the proceeds from the sales would be made available to the Contras. Adm. Poindexter will be asked what he did with those memos and whether Col. North was correct in assuming that the president knew of and approved his role in helping arm the rebels while official U.S. aid to them was prohibited.    If, as Col. North said, he and other top officials assumed their actions were legal and believed that diverting arms profits from Iran to the Contras was &quot;a neat idea,&quot; it isn't clear why none of them ever told Mr. Reagan about the unique way they had found to help keep the Nicaraguan insurgents in business.    If they didn't, one possibility is that Adm. Poindexter never forwarded Col. North's memos to the president but did tell Mr. Reagan that the secret Iran arms sales were providing some unspecified benefits for other covert operations. The president, who isn't noted for his appetite for detail, may never have asked Adm. Poindexter what he meant and may even have expressed his approval without knowing all the details.    Another possibility is that Adm. Poindexter deliberately never told the president about the secret link between the Iran and Contra programs, or about all of Col. North's work for the Nicaraguan insurgents, so Mr. Reagan truthfully could deny any knowledge of the controversial programs. The secret Contra-aid operation, which Col. North testified was engineered largely by the late Central Intelligence Agency Director William Casey, bears many of the trademarks of what is called a &quot;deniable operation,&quot; one that top political leaders can disavow if it is exposed.    An Oct. 2, 1986, memo from Col. North to Adm. Poindexter on &quot;Next Steps with Iran,&quot; sent outside the normal National Security Council channels, noted that: &quot;A memo from you to the president has not been prepared for obvious reasons. It is hoped that . . . you will have an opportunity to privately discuss this with the president and obtain his approvals/signatures on the steps indicated above.&quot;    The third and least likely possibility, say congressional investigators, friends, and former colleagues of Adm. Poindexter, is that the former national security adviser simply took it upon himself to approve -- at least tacitly -- Col. North's actions without telling the president or anybody else.    Despite his rank and his authority as national security adviser, Adm. Poindexter is no more believable as a fall guy than Col. North. &quot;Oliver North, the lone wolf, fits the image, whether true or not,&quot; says one congressional investigator. &quot;Adm. Poindexter operating as a lone wolf is beyond comprehension.&quot;    Indeed, throughout his tour as President Reagan's closest foreign policy and defense adviser, Adm. Poindexter was bedeviled by the opposite reputation as being too weak to resolve disputes within the Reagan administration.    From the moment he was chosen to succeed Robert McFarlane as national security adviser in December 1985, he was subordinate to the powerful former White House chief of staff, Donald Regan, who he knew had helped to force Mr. McFarlane out of the administration. At last autumn's Iceland summit meeting between Mr. Reagan and Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev, senior officials who were present say, Adm. Poindexter was &quot;very deferential&quot; to the chief of staff and took care to be sure his positions didn't conflict with Mr. Regan's.    According to present and former NSC staff members, Adm. Poindexter, though a very disciplined man himself, ran a surprisingly loose ship.&quot;Critical intelligence is not the kind of intelligence he had,&quot; says a former White House official. &quot;If you went to the trouble of working up a paper and suggesting that he check the box, he'd go along.&quot;    Adm. Poindexter tried several times to remove members of the NSC staff but he never succeeded. Last summer, when he tried to replace Col. North as the NSC staff's chief liaison to the Contras, he was beaten back by a wave of criticism from conservative newspaper columnists and members of Congress. &quot;He doesn't have any meanness in him, any nastiness, and in his line of work that can be a liability,&quot; says Maj. Gen. Richard Secord, who ran the private Iran-Contra network with Col. North.    As he faces the congressional committees and the American public, however, Adm. Poindexter's liability may prove to be the fact that he cultivated few allies in Congress and none in the media.    Eager to get the job done but unwilling or unable to manage the forces that constantly threaten to undo policy in a democracy, Adm. Poindexter occasionally voiced frustrations and sometimes tried to rely on high-handedness or deception.    He withheld information from Secretary of State George Shultz, Mr. Regan, and the U.S. ambassador to Britain; and in one case even ordered Col. North to stop talking to Mr. Casey.    A year ago, instead of assembling the president's top foreign policy advisers to hammer out an arms-control letter to Mr. Gorbachev, Adm. Poindexter talked separately with Mr. Shultz, Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger and other top officials, then drafted a letter containing a controversial Pentagon proposal to ban all ballistic missiles. &quot;He wanted to do it one-by-one, so nobody knew anybody else's position,&quot; recalls one senior official who participated.    At a NSC meeting after the Reykjavik, Iceland, summit last October, Adm. Poindexter repeatedly but unsuccessfully tried to silence two top officials who wanted to scrap the suggested ban on ballistic missiles -- Adm. William Crowe, the chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, and Kenneth Adelman, director of the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. Later, when he learned the Joint Chiefs had invited Mr. Adelman to a Pentagon meeting to discuss the issue further, he ordered the arms-control director not to go.    Now, in the unaccustomed glare of the television lights, Adm. Poindexter is wielding far more power than he ever had as national security adviser. Col. North's testimony &quot;has made Poindexter the key man,&quot; says Rep. Louis Stokes (D., Ohio), chairman of the House Intelligence Committee. </TEXT></DOC>