<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870504-0090 </DOCNO><HL> Your Money Matters:Evaluating a Bank or Thrift Isn't Easy --But It Can Prevent Hassles for Depositors---By Leonard M. ApcarStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><TEXT>   When customers enter the First National Bank of Ada in southeastern Oklahoma intent on switching deposits to a savings and loan or bank paying a higher interest rate, they are escorted to the bank's library.    There, heaped on tables, are bound volumes that rate banks and thrifts in Oklahoma and Texas. Other books are jammed with news clippings about the ups and downs of rival institutions and the dire financial straits of the Federal Savings and Loan Deposit Corp., which insures thrift deposits.    It's a hard sell, but for E. Wilson Roberts, First National's president, it's worth it. Although he never directly criticizes a competitor, more than half the time he keeps the deposit. He opened the library to help customers understand that if a bank or thrift is paying an attractive interest rate, there's a good bet the institution is swimming in financial hot water.    But it's also a good bet that Mr. Roberts's customers walked out more confused than when they walked in. For most people, trying to determine whether a financial institution is sound is as frustrating as trying to decipher a foreign language. The most revealing information -- individual bank and thrift ratings set by government examiners -- isn't available to the public. And the numbers that are available are often eye-straining materials assembled by bankers for bank experts.    &quot;For the average depositor, it's very difficult to make an evaluation of an institution,&quot; says William L. Callender, president and chief executive of California Federal Savings andamp; Loan Association.    Still, such evaluations are hardly irrelevant. Federal insurance isn't always the salve that depositors believe it to be, and the number of troubled institutions is steadily rising. Last year, a record 138 banks failed, and 21 thrifts were liquidated; this year, banks are failing at double the 1986 pace.    Each quarter, banks and thrifts must file financial data with their principal regulators. Typically, a quarterly &quot;call report&quot; runs nearly 30 pages and covers everything from an institution's profitability to its levels of capital, deposits and problem loans. Bank reports are generally available from the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp., while thrift reports are at the Federal Home Loan Bank Board.    By themselves, those reports don't give customers a full picture. But both the federal government and independent companies collect individual bank and thrift data quarterly and make side-by-side comparisons of similar-sized institutions.    The Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council, comprised of the federal bank regulators, sells the &quot;Uniformed Bank Performance Report&quot; each quarter by mail. And Sheshunoff andamp; Co. in Austin, Texas, and Veribanc Inc. in Wakefield, Mass., both analyze and rank bank and thrift performance.    From such reports, depositors can glean the following data:    Return on assets. This is defined as net income, including securities transactions and nonrecurring items, as a percentage of total assets. It is considered a basic yardstick of an institution's profitability. The national averages are 0.63% for banks and 0.17% for thrifts.    Bankers generally use a 1% yield on assets as a standard that separates highly profitable institutions from weaker ones.    Nonperforming assets. Mostly loans where interest is past due 90 days or isn't being paid on schedule. It includes repossessed real estate. A bank's level of nonperforming loans can be a sign of trouble, though the government doesn't set a ceiling. Generally, regulators compare the institution's loan troubles with those of similar-sized institutions with comparable loan portfolios to catch irregularities. The national average is 1.94% of total assets. Nonperforming loan levels range from an average 0.48% of total assets in North Carolina to 6.51% in Alaska, which is badly bruised by the oil slump.    Primary capital. The total of a bank's equity capital and the reserve for loan losses, usually expressed as a percentage of assets. Nationally, the average is 7.6% of total assets. A bank is required to maintain a primary capital level of at least 5.5% to 6% depending on the types of stock and debt it has issued. But lately, regulators have been relaxing that standard on a case-by-case basis when they believe an institution is particularly hard hit by the energy, agricultural and real-estate slumps but isn't likely to fail.    Thrift net worth. Assets minus liabilities, expressed as a percentage of total liabilities. The national average was 4.63% in December 1986. Thrifts must maintain a level of net worth that is at least 3% of their liabilities. New federal rules require thrifts to gradually raise that level depending on the profitability of the industry.    None of these numbers alone can accurately measure how stable an institution might be. But together, they may spare a depositor the consequences of a bank or thrift's failure: Checking accounts may be suspended, checks may be returned unpaid and interest rates promised by one institution can be voided by another.    For some depositors, &quot;all they care about is the sticker on the window,&quot; says James Chaffee, president of Professional Asset Securities Inc., a Solana Beach, Calif. money broker, referring to the FDIC and FSLIC labels in banks and thrifts. Federal insurance guarantees deposits up to $100,000 -- but interest accrued on a $100,000 deposit isn't insured. If accounts are properly structured, both FDIC and FSLIC insurance fully protects up to $500,000 for a husband and wife and up to $1.4 million for a family of four. Accounts held by single individuals are combined, and insurance is limited to $100,000.    Savers with amounts that exceed the insurance limits may get all or part of the money back depending on how regulators handle the failure. If another institution takes over the closed bank or thrift -- the usual course -- all deposits are transferred to the new institution, and no one loses any of their principal or interest.    But if another institution isn't interested in taking over the failed bank or thrift, regulators may pay off the federally insured amounts or transfer them to a nearby institution. Uninsured depositors usually must wait to recover part of their funds as the FDIC or the FSLIC liquidates the institution's assets. Sometimes, the FDIC makes advance payments, but generally, uninsured bank depositors receive about 65% of their savings in interim payments -- though it may take up to 10 years. Thrift depositors may receive less.    Recently, however, the FDIC was ordered to pay off some uninsured Penn Square Bank depositors after an Oklahoma City federal court ruled that depositors relied on financial statements made by the failed bank that later proved fraudulent. Thomas S. Dann, a Washington lawyer in the case, says that bank customers should also get the institution's audited statements just in case the bank later fails. &quot;You get some additional protection,&quot; he says, &quot;because you rely on the accounting firm as well as the bank.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>