<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870122-0101 </DOCNO><HL> Curbing Growth Controls---By Christopher B. Leinberger</HL><DD> 01/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL) </IN><TEXT>   In last November's election, Los Angeles residents overwhelmingly approved a measure halving the maximum permissible density on 85% of Los Angeles's commercial and industrial land. After decades of real-estate boosterism, Los Angeles has joined the no-growth/slow-growth movement, as have dozens of other towns and cities across America recently.    Business can no longer overlook this movement. Corporations that want to construct new office buildings and industrial facilities will find their choice of locations severely narrowed. Notwithstanding frequent reports of high vacancy rates in major U.S. cities, many office and retail tenants will face a shortage of space and, hence, higher rents in desirable but restricted areas.    Why has the long-simmering no-growth/slow-growth movement suddenly become a powerful nationwide force for business to contend with? It is primarily because millions of jobs are now being created at the outskirts of our metropolitan areas, and politically savvy middle-class suburbanites don't want office buildings and business parks rising near their neighborhoods and attracting traffic to their once-tranquil streets.    This surge in suburban office construction is the result of a radical transformation in the structure and appearance of our metropolitan areas, one being carried out by business and private developers in a series of rapid and uncoordinated actions.    Our cities and suburbs have become collections of interdependent &quot;urban villages,&quot; which are office, industrial, retail, housing and entertainment focal points amid the low-density cityscape. Each urban village has its core -- a new kind of downtown -- where the buildings are tallest, daytime population is largest, and traffic congestion is most severe. And each urban village has its outlying districts, which may stretch as far as 10 miles from the core.    And this transformation is taking place with remarkable swiftness. South of Los Angeles, Orange County's Costa Mesa/Irvine/Newport Beach complex -- which was mostly farmland 20 years ago -- is now California's third-largest downtown as measured by office and business-park space, and it will soon surpass downtown San Francisco because of that city's recently enacted growth restrictions.    Or consider Boston. In 1982, downtown and Back Bay accounted for just under 75% of the metropolitan area's office space. By 1986, the Boston office market was very different, with 58% of the metropolitan area's total office space located in the suburbs. Metropolitan Boston has increased its total office space by more than 1 1/2 times in just four years, and nearly 80% of that growth has occurred in the suburbs.    What can be done to permit growth that balances the needs of business with the very real concerns of citizens about the quality of life in their communities?    Business must play an active role with government to create practical metropolitan-wide growth strategies. Of course, the trade-offs must be carefully weighed in such a process. If one area encourages office and business-park construction, for instance, local residents might gain additional tax revenues and shorter commutes to work. But they must also be prepared for additional noise and traffic.    We must also form more effective government structures. Our local governments are fragmented, 19th-century entities trying to deal with contemporary issues beyond any single municipality's boundaries or capabilities. Today's government entities were formed when the Industrial Revolution was just gathering steam. Today's post-industrial service economy is changing how we live and work. Government jurisdictions must change with them.    We need two new levels of government, created from existing entities. One level would serve the new urban village cores; the other would cover the actual economic and psychological boundaries of entire metropolitan areas.    Reorganizing government along urban village and metropolitan-wide lines wouldn't be easy, because it involves jealously competing towns, townships, cities, counties, and states. Another challenge would be finding new roles in the new jurisdictions and agencies for all the surplus mayors, city council members and department heads. This reorganization and consolidation is feasible, just as the number of school districts nationwide has shrunk to 15,000 today from 100,000 in 1940.    Perhaps the most practical first step toward the creation of more effectual local governments is urban village and metropolitan-wide planning boards that have real clout with zoning approvals and the allocation of infrastructure improvements such as new water and sewer lines. Orlando, Fla., and Phoenix, Ariz., have recently set up metropolitan area plans that have the power to direct growth to urban village cores that the marketplace has already determined to be appropriately sited.    To reduce suburban residents' fears of new development, business must initiate traffic-mitigation efforts. This is already happening, for instance, in Fairfax County, Va., where a client of my firm, developer Hazel/Peterson, spent $23 million to build 1 1/2 miles of four-lane highway and added on and off ramps from Interstate 66 to service a 620-acre mixed-use Fair Lakes office, hotel and apartment development.    Business can also help form transportation management associations (TMAs), a concept now implemented in Baltimore's congested airport area; Warner Center in Los Angeles's western San Fernando Valley; North Dallas; and Tyson's Corner, Va., among other sites. TMAs conduct ride sharing and vanpools, organize staggered work hours, and lobby for governmentfunded capital improvements, beyond the confines of often-illogical existing government boundaries. Today's TMAs could conceivably become the urban village government entities of the future.    Finally, business and developers must formulate a more satisfying vision of what the newly created urban village cores should be. Who can blame suburban residents for fighting nearby commercial construction when they see that many urban village cores are little more than could-be-anywhere tall buildings surrounded by surface parking lots?    Wouldn't nearby residents feel differently about the urban village cores if their proximity offered cultural benefits or a genuine pedestrian-oriented center, much like the traditional downtowns? To create that urban excitement, business and developers should attract high-density shopping, entertainment and housing to the office-dominated urban village cores. Plenty of land is available on the vast surface parking lots, which can be redeveloped into high-density housing and entertainment uses, putting the cars into aboveground or underground structures.    However, this vision must be conveyed to residents in order to quell opposition to development. Near California's Newport Center, the commercial core of the Irvine Co.'s vast land holdings, voters late last year overwhelmingly turned down a request for greater office, retail and residential density in exchange for parks, a new library, expansion of an art museum and significant roadway improvements. It appears the company lost because it was seen as distant and highhanded.    Yet, despite a problem case such as that one, the business community must act as a catalyst in defining and designing our 21st-century metropolitan areas. Either business takes the lead or slow-growth/no-growth citizens' revolts will be the only thing growing rapidly in our metropolitan areas.    ---   Mr. Leinberger is a California-based real-estate consultant. He first wrote for the Journal on urban villages in 1984. </TEXT></DOC>