<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870114-0041 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Sugar ContractsRise as Traders'Outlook Improves---By John ValentineStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PETROLEUM (PET)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS) </IN><TEXT>   The growing perception of improving fundamentals in the sugar market spurred buying of futures contracts, and prices closed higher yesterday.    The March contract closed up 18 points at 6.74 cents a pound; a point is 1/100 of a cent. That's a gain of almost a cent a pound since last week, when the March price hovered near the life-of-contract low of 5.75 cents.    &quot;Traders are viewing both the supply and demand sides as becoming more supportive (of higher prices), and this is leading to a gradual strengthening of the market,&quot; said William O'Neill, research director for Elders Futures Inc., New York.    On the supply side, analysts cited crop problems, including a reported late start in harvesting the Cuban crop, and the prospect that a pickup in internal demand for alcohol made from sugar in Brazil will trim that nation's exports. In addition, Australia, which has harvested between 3.2 million and 3.5 million metric tons of sugar annually in recent years, is having a prolonged drought that may cut production, Mr. O'Neill said.    The Australian Sugar Producers Association reported yesterday that the lack of rain along the coast of Queensland, the major producing area, was causing severe stress to the crop, according to Mr. O'Neill. Australia had been expected to produce about 3.6 million tons this year.    On the demand side, the analyst cited persistent rumors that the Soviet Union and China may buy sugar. Soviet purchases long have been expected, but haven't materialized, Mr. O'Neill said. If the Soviets do buy, it's expected to be a substantial quantity, &quot;possibly as much as a million tons,&quot; he said.    In other futures markets yesterday:    ENERGY: Oil futures prices fell on profit-taking after gains in five consecutive sessions. &quot;We needed a little bit of a breather,&quot; said Edward Dellamonte, oil analyst for Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., New York. Many traders ignored an announcement by Norway, a major non-OPEC producer, that it would cut output 7.5% for the first half of the year. Analysts said the move was widely expected, and noted that Britain, another major producer outside the cartel, remains opposed to production cuts. At the same time, some selling was spurred by reports that the United Arab Emirates appears to be producing nearly one-third more than the recent quota alloted by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, traders said. Some analysts discounted the reports, however, suggesting that many market participants had expected the small OPEC nation to ignore quotas. Crude oil contracts for February delivery on the New York Mercantile Exchange fell 12 cents a barrel, to $18.89. Heating oil and unleaded gasoline skidded, too. Nonetheless, crude oil futures prices have risen $2.68, or about 17%, since late December, when the oil cartel agreed to cut production and return to fixed prices. And many market analysts expect further gains. &quot;Even though the market may have come too far, too fast, it will continue to move up,&quot; said Peter Beutel, assistant director of the energy group at Elders Futures.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: A flurry of export business boosted wheat futures prices for near-term delivery. In the week ended Jan. 8, the U.S. exported 21.8 million bushels of wheat, nearly double the amount exported the previous week and 31% above the year-earlier figure. Continuing Arctic temperatures in Europe and the Soviet Union sparked concern that the winter wheat crop there will be damaged. Corn futures tumbled after a recent price run-up; rumors of corn sales to China and the Soviet Union fueled the recent rally, but there was no evidence that the sales had occurred. Also, traders again focused on the trade dispute between the U.S. and the Common Market, said Richard Loewy, an analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., New York. Soybean and soybean oil futures and wheat futures for more distant delivery also slid. Soybean meal futures were little changed.    FOREIGN CURRENCIES: Futures prices rose sharply for the second consecutive day, leaving analysts questioning how much higher prices can go without at least a temporary pullback. &quot;The odds on a temporary setback increase with the extent of the move,&quot; said Anne Mills, an analyst with Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. in New York. She noted that both West German mark and Swiss franc futures closed at life-of-contract highs and that nearly $2.5 billion spent by the Bank of Japan to buy dollars failed to halt the dollar's slide against the yen. Trading sources said that intervention by major central banks to smooth out the European currency markets, largely fruitless so far, has totaled nearly 36 billion West German marks since Dec. 1. Ms. Mills said that it may take a statement from the Reagan administration voicing its concern about the dollar's drop, or a move by West Germany to abandon its money supply targets, to reverse the foreign currencies' rise.    PRECIOUS METALS: Futures prices were mixed in moderate trading. Gold and platinum crept higher, bolstered by a weaker U.S. dollar, while silver fell. The gold and platinum gains were a &quot;follow through&quot; from recent rallies, said John Norris, director of precious metals trading at Citibank, New York. Platinum prices, for example, have posted gains the past five sessions, rising $52.90, or 11%, in that time. &quot;It's been more of the same,&quot; Mr. Norris said. Brokers said most of yesterday's slight rally stemmed from buying by commodity pools, or accounts of money managed by professionals. Buying back contracts to offset earlier sales contributed to a late flurry of activity, traders said. On the Commodity Exchange in New York, February gold contracts rose $2.10 an ounce, to $412.30, while March silver prices slipped 1.5 cents, to $5.585 an ounce. Meanwhile, platinum futures prices for January delivery on the New York Mercantile Exchange rose 70 cents an ounce, to $530.70.    LIVESTOCK AND MEAT: Pork belly futures prices rose as cash market prices remained steady. Anticipation of a cold front that is expected to hit much of the Midwest tomorrow helped hog prices close higher and gave strength to pork belly prices, analysts said. Cold weather limits weight gains and slows the movement of animals to market. Cattle futures were mixed as traders waited to see if consumer demand would match the record purchases of boxed beef, or frozen slabs of meat ready for shipping to retailers, made last week, analysts said.    COCOA: Futures contracts traded in a narrow range and ended slightly higher. West African producers, principally the Ivory Coast, along with Nigeria and Ghana, have been offering and selling cocoa during the past month in Europe, according to one analyst. Supplies, both on ships at sea, as well as in these producing countries, have been absorbed to some degree and with substantial sales already completed, African producing countries may slow their offerings and give the market a breathing spell, he said. </TEXT></DOC>