<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870803-0112 </DOCNO><HL> Toward Open Skies World-Wide---By Daniel M. Kasper</HL><DD> 08/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGNAIRLINES (AIR)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><TEXT>   By the year 2000 most of the world's air services are likely to be provided by a score or so large, multinational airlines. As the world's leading civil aviation power with, by far, the largest air-services market, the U.S. will have a key in determining both the pace and shape of the evolution toward a global airline industry. The question is whether it will play the role of protagonist or antagonist.    In the face of strong protectionist sentiments in Congress and the opposition of U.S. airlines, the Reagan administration so far has resisted expanding foreign access to the domestic market in exchange for expanded access by U.S. carriers abroad. But this approach is ultimately self-defeating because it imperils U.S. carrier access to rapidly growing foreign markets and deprives the U.S. of the opportunity to shape a more open, competitive world-wide market for air services, a market in which U.S. airlines would surely prosper.    The U.S., with its large and efficient airlines, could benefit substantially from expanded access to world-wide markets. Thanks to deregulation of the airline industry in 1978, U.S. airlines have established comprehensive domestic route networks and pursued new international routes. Deregulation has greatly strengthened American carriers vis-a-vis foreign airlines, particularly in the competition for the huge U.S. international market, which accounts for 40% of the world's airline passengers.    These changes in the U.S. airline industry have already spurred significant changes abroad, including acceptance by other governments of market-opening measures in their own domestic and international markets. Plagued by small domestic markets, restrictive international agreements, and often-inefficient airlines, many do so not because they believe in the virtues of competition, but because they view liberalization as essential to the viability of their airlines in an increasingly competitive marketplace.    Scandinavia is a case in point. After almost a decade of vigorously resisting U.S. efforts to liberalize the existing air-services agreement, the three Scandinavian governments reversed position and, early this year proposed an &quot;open-skies&quot; agreement to an incredulous -- and reluctant -- U.S. delegation. Since 1978, Britain, Canada, New Zealand, Australia, Japan, the European Community and even China have undertaken significant liberalizations.    The world-wide move toward more open markets has been accompanied by an increased willingness to privatize state-owned airlines. British Airways is the leading -- but not the only -- example of this phenomenon. Japan, for example, is quietly privatizing Japan Air Lines, while Canada (Air Canada) and Germany (Lufthansa) are seriously considering full or partial privatization.    European airlines are looking for ways to offset the advantages enjoyed by large U.S. carriers. The chairman of British Caledonian, for example, cited &quot;the strength of U.S. mega-carriers&quot; as a primary reason for the merger of British Caledonian with British Airways, which was announced last month. SAS and Sabena are negotiating an agreement to merge their airline operations, while the chairman of Alitalia openly discusses his desire to acquire or merge with another European carrier &quot;in order to match the U.S. carrier strengths.&quot; Similar reasons were given by by Air France, Lufthansa, SAS and Iberia when they announced this month the establishment of a computerized reservation system. Similar concerns have also increased in the Pacific Basin in recent years as U.S. mega-carriers, including Delta, United, American and Continental, have entered Asian markets in force.    To offset the competitive edge enjoyed by deregulated U.S. airlines, foreign governments are putting greater pressure on the U.S. to open its domestic market. Canada, for example, has proposed an exchange of rights to permit each country's airlines to carry domestic traffic, known as cabotage, in the other country. The issue is under consideration in the current U.S.-Canada free-trade talks. In another case, Britain's transport minister has publicly indicated Britain's desire to permit British airlines to own U.S. carriers and vice versa.    If the U.S. fails to respond positively to such initiatives, foreign goverments could terminate existing air-service agreements, a step taken by Britain in 1976 when it renounced its 30-year-old agreement with the U.S. Some Europeans have suggested that the rights of U.S. airlines to carry traffic within Europe should be eliminated if the U.S. market is not opened to European airlines. Since most air-service agreements were negotiated during the period of U.S. economic and political dominance after World War II, they contain favorable provisions that would be difficult for U.S. negotiators to replicate today. U.S. carriers are likely to find their growth prospects abroad increasingly constrained unless the U.S. government is willing to trade cabotage rights. Within the past year, Britain, France and Australia, for example, each have sought to limit the capacity offered by U.S. airlines.    The erosion of existing barriers to trade and investment in air services is likely to be accompanied by a major restructuring of the world airline industry. The U.S. experience since deregulation suggests that the restructuring will result in a relatively small (15 to 20) group of multinational airlines that will compete in markets around the globe. These airlines will operate far-flung networks of hubs, each supported by extensive services to a wide array of destinations. The nerve centers of these airlines will be highly sophisticated computer systems that handle reservations, price and seating, schedule aircraft and crews, track operations, monitor maintenance, and generally provide management with the timely financial and operational information required to control a global enterprise.    It is also safe to predict that some airline managements will fail to devise successful strategies for survival. Others will fail to develop the necessary systems and management skills to successfully implement their strategies. Airline economics, international politics and the desire to obtain favorable positions in developed markets all point to the conclusion that global airlines are more likely to result from mergers rather than from internal expansion; in other words, most of the losers will be bought out -- not run out -- of existence.    The restructuring of the global airline industry will pose difficult choices for investors and lenders. Informed investment decisions will become more complex and more risky than in today's relatively controlled environment. As globalization breaks down the protective barriers that shield national airlines, competition will lead both to greater industry concentration and to greater uncertainty about the financial performance of individual airlines.    For major suppliers such as airframe and engine manufacturers and leasing companies, globalization will add yet another dimension to their already &quot;sporty game.&quot; Transnational airline mergers will result in the disappearance of some existing customers and heightened competition for orders from fewer, more powerful airline customers. Major changes in aircraft fleets are also likely as airlines seek to streamline fleets to fit world-wide operations. Finally, demand for new aircraft and engines may suffer a temporary setback if airlines make more productive use of existing aircraft, as they did in the deregulated U.S. market. The U.S. experience also shows, however, that deregulation soon leads to rapid increases in traffic and, eventually, in the demand for aircraft.    For travelers, the emergence of a score of global airlines should provide wider and more convenient access to markets around the globe. Travelers prefer to journey on a single carrier rather than to make intercarrier connections (one study estimates that travelers would pay a premium of 18% for single-carrier service), and global airlines should improve this important aspect of airline service. Travelers in domestic and intraregional markets also stand to benefit from competitive services by foreign airlines, particularly in such areas as pricing, scheduling and in-flight services.    The importance of the U.S. in civil aviation makes it the logical, if not the only, candidate capable of playing the lead role in building a durable, competitive regime for world-wide air services, one in which privately owned airlines can grow and prosper. The key is to capitalize on the pressures created by deregulation and to press ahead quickly for the creation of a market-based system in air services. It remains to be seen whether the U.S. will answer the casting call.    ---   Mr. Kasper, director of international aviation for the U.S. Civil Aeronautics Board from 1979 to 1983, is author of &quot;Trade in International Air Services,&quot; due out this year from Ballinger. </TEXT></DOC>