<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880223-0014 </DOCNO><HL> Getting Together: Despite Difficulties, Moves to Strengthen Common Market Gain --- Companies Begin to Gear Up For Open Borders in 1992; French Are Most Worried --- One Ploy: Copy U.S. Firms </HL><AUTHOR> Philip Revzin (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><IN> MON </IN><DATELINE> PARIS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Building a better Europe can be painful.    At 2 a.m. on Feb. 13, leaders of the European Community's 12 member countries struggled out of a marathon negotiating session in Brussels after finally compromising on farm subsidies. During the meeting, British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher called the French &quot;crazy.&quot; French Prime Minister Jacques Chirac called Mrs. Thatcher a vulgar name that British diplomats couldn't even find in their French-English dictionaries.    Italian financier Carlo De Benedetti has been fighting for three weeks to buy Societe Generale de Belgique, a Belgian holding company. The battle has widened to involve French-speaking Belgians, Dutch-speaking Belgians, two rival French merchant banks and, to hear the Belgians tell it, their nation's very soul.    Behind the public disarray lie less publicized facts: The squabbling leaders eventually did agree, and Mr. De Benedetti may well succeed in buying a company accounting for nearly a fifth of Belgium's economy. Europe is inexorably getting together, with major consequences for European and American companies.    The EC may never become the United States of Europe that its founders dreamed of in the 1950s. The Europe of 1992 will continue to differ significantly from the United States of 1988. The 12 nations will still speak nine different languages, spend 12 different currencies in different ways and be governed by different laws.    But as the EC enacts some 300 new rules aimed at dismantling virtually all intra-European trade barriers by the end of 1992, nearly every major European company is rushing to adjust to a future market of 320 million consumers. Although nobody can predict all the winners and losers, it's clear that bigger, more powerful companies will arise in Europe and then move into world markets. At the same time, multinational companies, be they European, American or Japanese, should find it simpler and cheaper to manufacture and sell in Europe.    By the end of 1992, European countries will no longer be able to keep out, for protectionist reasons, people and products from their neighbors. Anything or anybody meeting standards of one member country must be accepted in all. A Belgian dentist will be able to drill Danish teeth. A Danish bank will be able to take the savings of a German hausfrau. German appliance makers will be able to sell the same telephone-answering machine in Milan as in Munich. A truck carrying Dutch tulips will be able to drive all the way to Greece unhampered by long border delays.    Many European companies have already started quiet internal revolutions. Jean-Francois Dehecq, the chairman of Sanofi S.A., has been thinking nonstop for a year and a half about 1992. The pharmaceuticals maker has been redrafting budgets, reorganizing its sales force, rethinking its product mix.    Paradoxically, one of the things Mr. Dehecq did to prepare for 1992 was to try to buy A.H. Robins Co. of the U.S. And even though Sanofi lost Robins to a higher bid from American Home Products Co., Mr. Dehecq says the U.S. remains vital to his plans to conquer Europe.    &quot;We absolutely must be in the U.S. market by 1992,&quot; he says, &quot;to sell the new drugs our research labs will be producing.&quot; A strong U.S. presence would also help teach Sanofi salesmen how to tailor their pitches according to regional needs. &quot;In the U.S., they know that customers are different in New York, Los Angeles and Chicago. Here, a consumer in Paris has more in common with one in Brussels than with one in Marseilles. But we're organized nationally, not regionally.&quot;    The most visible form of shake-up, hostile takeovers such as Mr. De Benedetti's move on Generale de Belgique, could quickly create pan-European companies big enough and broadly based enough to compete with U.S. and Japanese rivals long used to selling in huge markets.    For U.S. multinationals, competition may become tougher, but they will also benefit from the freer movement of goods and people within Europe. Companies such as International Business Machines Corp. and Ford Motor Co. have, for decades, successfully treated Europe as a single market, coordinating manufacturing and distribution from many factories through a single headquarters. They aren't afraid. &quot;We see {1992} as an opportunity for strengthening Europe's competitiveness,&quot; says C. Michael Armstrong, the chief executive of Paris-based IBM/Europe.    IBM makes one product at each of its 15 European plants -- personal computers in Greenock, Scotland, and mainframes in Montpellier, France, for example -- and ships them around the Continent. After barriers at the borders are lowered, widely differing sales-tax rates harmonized and technical standards better coordinated, IBM should save money. Many European companies are copying IBM's strategy.    The danger of a more unified Europe, particularly for U.S. companies, is that the newly powerful trade bloc might be better able to keep out everyone else through protectionist measures. &quot;Not all the advantages Europe accords to itself will automatically be available to outsiders,&quot; warns Regis Astier of the French employers' association. &quot;If Europe can't get at, say, the U.S. public-procurement market, they won't get at ours.&quot;    Good or bad, the movement toward a unified market appears unstoppable. In part, the increase in activity by European companies emulating IBM and other multinationals reflects how much ground Europe needs to make up. Last year, the EC countries ran a high-technology trade deficit estimated at $10 billion, compared with surpluses in such products of $1.3 billion in the U.S. and $8.6 billion in Japan.    &quot;Europe has no choice but to become a third pole of equivalent weight,&quot; says Alain Madelin, France's minister of industry. &quot;Or else, poor in raw materials, politically divided, technologically dependent, it will fast become nothing more than a subcontractor for the other two.&quot;    A unified Europe could capitalize during the 1990s on potential weaknesses in the U.S. and Japan, the French Bureau of Economic Forecasting and Information believes. The U.S., the group says in a report, has let its manufacturing base deteriorate too much, and Japan could suffer because of an overvalued currency and U.S. and European protectionism. &quot;Europe will see big gains in productivity, economies of scale and much faster new-product development because of the vast restructuring now taking place,&quot; the group adds.    Changes have started all over. Christie's International PLC, the London auction house, recently hired as its chairman Lord Carrington, who is retiring as secretary general of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization. Christie's is eyeing the Continent's lucrative auction markets that it will be free to enter after 1992, and Lord Carrington, it figures, knows everybody everywhere. Italian broadcaster Silvio Berlusconi has spread his empire to France and is looking at Spain. British publisher Robert Maxwell owns a small French news agency and wants to buy or start a French daily newspaper. France's Compagnie Generale d'Electricite last year bought ITT Corp.'s European telephone operations and formed Alcatel N.V., a French-run company registered in the Netherlands with headquarters in Belgium.    Nowhere has the realization of Europe's problems and potential hit home harder than in France. A survey by a major labor union found that 79% of French managers questioned knew and cared about the 1992 changes, compared with only 18% in West Germany and a scant 5% in Britain. According to another poll for the French employers' federation, 71% of French businessmen see 1992 as a good opportunity rather than a handicap; 73% intend to restructure their companies because of the removal of trade barriers; and 62% think that West Germany will be helped most (only 22% say France will be).    France seems transfixed by 1992, in fact. Three small French mushroom producers cite the date as they band together to resist an expected influx of mushrooms from the Netherlands, Spain and Ireland and to sell to Europe's mushroom-gobbling champion, West Germany. A recent convention of songwriters, music publishers and recording companies in Cannes is dominated by copyright questions in the Europe of 1992. The French government establishes a &quot;Commission of Economic Reflection&quot; to reflect on 1992. All three major presidential candidates harp on it.    &quot;France fears 1992 more than anybody else,&quot; says Bruno Husson, a professor of finance at HEC, a French business school. &quot;Our companies are less competitive, and their foreign distribution networks aren't as good as those of German companies, for example.&quot;    As a result, he explains, many French companies want to see from the inside how continent-wide distribution works in the U.S. Air Liquide, a maker of industrial gases, has been increasing its U.S. presence for more than a decade, most recently by buying Big 3 Corp. of Houston. The U.S. is &quot;the perfect marketing observatory,&quot; an Air Liquide spokesman says. He adds that new uses for the company's eight gases have been found by U.S. electronics companies and paper makers, and Air Liquide has brought back the ideas to European customers.    European companies are also refining their strategies at home. France's Saint-Gobain SA recently bought all or part of two glassmakers in Portugal, the last European market where it hadn't been represented. Jacques-Henri David, the company's director general, says it wants factories or subsidiaries making most of its products in all the EC countries, in order to meet local specifications. &quot;As 1992 approaches, we want to specialize more and more,&quot; Mr. David says. He adds that it is cheaper to have many specialized factories, coordinated from Paris, than to retool giant assembly lines for small orders and ship the products around Europe.    Other French companies are seeking partners. Havas SA, a recently privatized communications company, wants to find partners in Spain, Belgium, West Germany, Britain, Italy and non-EC member Switzerland. Pierre Dauzier, Havas's chairman, says he soon will sign an agreement with a Spanish partner to bring Canal Plus, a successful pay-TV channel 24% owned by Havas, to Spain by early next year. Belgium, Switzerland and West Germany should follow. Mr. Dauzier also has four other target areas: technical journals, free newspapers, billboards and Yellow Pages telephone directories. &quot;Making alliances in these five areas is our job for the next two years,&quot; he says.    Matra SA, a French defense and electronics group privatized last month, sold small stakes to a government-ordered &quot;core group&quot; of shareholders including General Electric Co. of Britain (which isn't related to the U.S. company), Daimler-Benz AG of West Germany and Wallenberg Group of Sweden. All these companies say they see their Matra stakes, which they can't sell for two years, increasing European cooperation in weapons development.    &quot;The only way to compete in the Europe of 1992 will be through durable corporate alliances,&quot; says Jean-Louis Gergorin, Matra's director of strategy. &quot;And the only way to compete in the world will be through the unified Europe of 1992.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>