<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880519-0147 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Bush and the Presidency </HL><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   Polls this week show George Bush running 10 points or more behind Michael Dukakis. Anyone in the Bush campaign still arguing that the vice president can overcome this deficit with a quiet campaign should be shipped off to Kennebunkport to play croquet for the next six months. The question is no longer whether it's wise for the vice president to run for the presidency on a slate of concrete issues; the debate now is what those issues should be.    There's some evidence that Mr. Bush himself is arriving at the same conclusion. He is reportedly thinking of hiring speech writers Josh Gilder and Christopher Buckley, whose instincts are to shape issues rather than shovel Pablum. We'd like to be able to feel good about this turn, but we worry more about the Republican tendency, under pressure from the Democrats or the press, to play defense. Somehow for Republicans, life is always a goal-line stand.    The Republican Party has never been able to outgrow a generation of being the congressional minority. Its habit is to believe the road to victory is to be more like the Democrats, to slip into the center, to be better at following the public-opinion polls, to seize some tactical advantage like presidential coattails and to avoid making waves. This has time and again failed, most recently in the Republican loss of the Senate in 1986, which we summarized in a two-sentence editorial: &quot;Issueless elections are not good for Republicans. Maybe they can remember that in 1988.&quot;    The polls are often misleading, because they measure what voters think before the issues are debated, while elections measure the outcome of the campaign. But the current polls certainly ought to dispatch the notion that the vice president can simply slide into the presidency. This is a no-win prescription. The route to a Bush victory, quite conceivably a big one, is to take the issues to the people.    By this we have in mind something more than quick bursts, such as beating up on Dan Rather, blurting out a series of disconnected &quot;commitments&quot; at the end of a debate, or of coming up with &quot;moderate alternatives&quot; to such Democratic pies in the sky as plant-closing laws or universal health insurance. We certainly do not have in mind dredging up a wish list from some pollster's focus groups. What Candidate Bush needs is a diagnosis of what's ailing the Republic, a prescription for a cure, and a request for a mandate from voters. What we'd suggest is a unifying theme of the American presidency itself, of restoring the proper role for the office Mr. Bush is seeking.    The modern American presidency is a paradox. It remains the world's most powerful institution and commands vast resources. But because of the political and legal depredations presidential authority has absorbed the past 20 years -- Vietnam, Watergate, the War Powers Act, the Budget Reform Act, the Ethics in Government Act, Iranamok -- there is now a sense in which the office is barely worth having. This year four substantial Democrats -- Nunn, Cuomo, Bradley and Robb -- turned their backs on candidacy.    Michael Dukakis as president would necessarily be less his own man than a creature of his constituencies. This is why Democratic presidential candidates talk less about foreign policy or the traditional functions of the presidency than about long-term health care, day care, job retraining, and on and on. Mr. Bush's alternative vision of what he is trying to do would come clearer if he fixed in his mind that he is running to become the country's president, not its packhorse. Mr. Bush himself obviously sensed the tendency of these efforts to descend into nonpresidential babble when he remarked during the Republican-Democratic debate that the average viewer might be better off watching &quot;Jake and the Fatman.&quot;    There is time enough to draw up a final, comprehensive list of policy initiatives that would emerge from the central matrix of a restored presidency. But three important areas of presidential concern flow out naturally -- foreign policy, the Congress and the economy.    Why is the speaker of the House running U.S. foreign policy in Central America? Why has Congress been allowed to wreck the budgeting process and eviscerate the veto authority with a succession of continuing resolutions? The economy is strong because a president acted decisively, driving Congress -- and his own economic advisers -- to reduce the burden of taxation on productive citizens.    If we have learned anything the past 20 years it is that winning the modern presidency is a mixed blessing. The forces arrayed against the office are large. Mr. Bush should seek his mandate for a strong presidency now so that if he succeeds in November, he has some prospect of succeeding in the next four years. </TEXT></DOC>