<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870505-0119 </DOCNO><HL> Arabs Doubt U.S. Mideast Commitment---As Peres Initiative Founders,Soviets Expand Role---By Gerald F. Seib and Barbara RosewiczStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST FRESTEXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   Bold maneuvering by Israeli Foreign Minister Shimon Peres is raising faint hopes for a revival of Middle East peace negotiations, but the underlying mood in the Arab world is pessimism and skepticism that the U.S. is willing to push the peace process along.    Recent travels around the Middle East show that the Reagan administration's credibility has plummeted -- not just because of its secret arms deals with Iran, but also because of its diplomatic retreat from the region.    With the U.S. taking such a low profile, the Soviet Union has emerged as the superpower making the most important strides in the region, and Arab radicals are also fast gaining strength.    Arab leaders had been saying that, with the Americans seemingly out of the picture, the only hope they saw for a breakthrough was for Mr. Peres to take the initiative in Israel. In recent days he has shown signs of doing just that -- yet the Middle East is still far from embarking upon a new peace process.    Mr. Peres has pushed a proposal for an international conference on Arab-Israeli peace to the top of the political debate in Israel, threatening a breakup of the coalition government that his Labor Party shares with a Likud bloc strongly opposed to such a conference. Israeli officials say diplomatic overtures, conducted with American help, have produced a broad agreement between Mr. Peres and Jordan's King Hussein over how such a conference would be conducted.    Mr. Peres may be making his move now out of a desire to seize &quot;his moment in history,&quot; some associates say. And he realizes time is running short if he is to arrange an international conference to discuss the Palestinian issue; most observers think that if there is to be one, it will have to take place before the U.S. becomes engrossed in the 1988 presidential election. &quot;Realistically, I think it should be decided this year; 1988 is a year of elections all over the place,&quot; Mr. Peres said in a recent interview.    But the only players who seem optimistic that progress is being made are in the Peres camp in Israel. Secretary of State George Shultz was momentarily tempted to make a quick trip to the region to capitalize on the opening Mr. Peres is trying to create, U.S. officials say. But Mr. Shultz reconsidered after receiving messages showing how deeply the Likud half of Israel's government opposes a conference.    Further complicating matters, the Palestine Liberation Organization has turned more radical, reducing the chances that an acceptable Palestinian negotiating team can be formed.    At a just-concluded meeting of the Palestine National Council, the PLO's parliament-in-exile, PLO moderates reunited with Syrian-backed radicals, and the PLO's Executive Committee was expanded to include communists and other leftists. The organization adopted a statement demanding that Egypt renounce its Camp David peace treaties with Israel, and Egypt promptly retaliated by closing down PLO offices in Cairo and Alexandria. In addition, PLO leader Yasser Arafat abandoned an agreement he reached in 1985 to work jointly with Jordan to try to launch Arab-Israeli peace negotiations.    (In a conciliatory gesture last night, Mr. Arafat said he was &quot;proud&quot; of Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak and indicated Cairo had a vital role to play in the Palestinian cause. &quot;There is no peace and no war without Egypt,&quot; he told supporters in Kuwait.)    Without Jordan and Egypt to vouch for it anymore, the PLO is even farther away from getting a seat at the same peace table with the U.S. and Israel. And as much as King Hussein might want to write off the PLO and forge ahead to peace talks without it, pressures from hard-line Arabs would likely hold him back.    Not even the U.S. appears able to make the big commitment to shepherding new peace talks. The Reagan administration is preoccupied by nuclear-arms negotiations and investigations into the Iran arms scandal.    The mere talk of an international conference over lands Israel captured in the 1967 war has accomplished one thing, though: It has expanded the Soviets' role in the Middle East. Plans now being discussed call for a meeting attended by Israel, Jordan, Syria, Egypt, the Palestinians and the five permanent members of the United Nations Security Council, which is where the Soviet Union comes in.    In general, the Soviets under the deft leadership of Mikhail Gorbachev are slowly improving relations with both Arabs and Israel and are gaining a greater role in shaping decisions in the Middle East.    Since Mr. Gorbachev took over, Moscow has opened diplomatic relations with two Arab countries in the Persian Gulf: Oman and the United Arab Emirates. Saudi Arabia, while still shying away from full ties with communist Moscow, sent its oil minister there seeking Soviet agreement on global oil policy.    Also, the Kremlin is leasing tankers to Kuwait and holding out the possibility that Soviet naval vessels might enter Persian Gulf waters as an escort. And the Soviets recently rescheduled old military debts with Egypt and agreed to resume sending military spare parts to Cairo, resolving issues that have been sticking points for more than a decade.    In another sign of Moscow's increased diplomatic presence, several press reports yesterday said the leaders of feuding Iraq and Syria met secretly last week -- and that Moscow had been instrumental in getting them together.    The Soviets also are making overtures to Israel, which rejects the Soviet Union as a peace mediator until it restores its diplomatic ties with Jerusalem and eases restrictions on Soviet Jewish emigration. Just last month, Moscow offered to allow 15,000 Soviet Jews to emigrate to Israel and to exchange consular delegations. The moves suggest the Kremlin is &quot;meeting us half way,&quot; says Mr. Peres, and seem to be &quot;part of their overall reassessment of their foreign policy. . . to create more goodwill&quot; with the U.S.    Moscow also played a hand in the PLO's reunification. And the addition of a communist representative to the PLO's policy-making board gives it greater leverage in the Palestinian issue.    &quot;We have to consider the dynamic new leadership in the Soviet Union,&quot; says one Arab official. &quot;Gorbachev is really changing a lot of things. He is cornering the aging leadership in the U.S.&quot;    Mr. Peres seems to be taking into account fears of Soviet inroads into the Middle East. He also says he's won agreement from Secretary of State Shultz to join Israel if at any time it should feel compelled to walk out of the proposed conference.    There's deep disagreement over whether the conference should be limited to supervising direct Arab-Israeli talks, as Israel and the U.S. want, or take on an active mediating role, as Jordan would like. Likud officials question whether Mr. Peres understands the full implications of bringing the Soviets into talks.    &quot;Can one really believe that the Soviet foreign minister will come (to such a conference), raise his glass and then go home again?&quot; asks Gideon Patt, Israel's minister of science.    Certainly, America's friends want it to start playing a more ambitious role in the Middle East. If the Reagan administration continues its passive stance in its final two years, warns Boutros Boutros Ghali, Egypt's minister of state for foreign affairs, &quot;you will have further deterioration and instability, the position of radical forces will be strengthened and partisans of dialogue will be on the defensive.&quot;    The Arabs are still waiting for the U.S. to patch up the damage wreaked by its secret arms sales to Iran's revolutionary government. The affair particularly stung Egypt and Jordan, America's best Arab friends, who back Iraq in the Persian Gulf war. It may have also bolstered the stature of Islamic radicals throughout the region.    They now will argue that &quot;when religious movements are victorious, superpowers have no choice but to deal with them,&quot; says Mohammed H. el-Zayyat, a former Egyptian foreign minister and now member of the country's national legislature.    Moderate Arab goverments also are irked over what they consider lukewarm American help on important financial matters, like easing the 14.4% interest rate on Egypt's $4.6 billion military debt to the U.S. and contributing more to a Jordanian plan to improve the lot of Palestinians living in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. </TEXT></DOC>