<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870115-0106 </DOCNO><HL> Owens-Illinois Officers, Outside DirectorsSaid to Be Split Over Kohlberg Kravis Bid---By James B. StewartStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> OITENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)PULP, PAPER, PACKAGING (ALL TYPES) (PUL) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Despite an outward show of unanimity, a growing split between Owens-Illinois Inc.'s management directors and some of the company's outside directors threatens to erupt when the board considers a bid for the company by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts Inc., Wall Street sources said.    According to the sources, who are familiar with the board's deliberations so far, top managers of Owens-Illinois, four of whom also sit on the 15-member board, favor accepting the Kohlberg Kravis bid of $60 a share in cash and securities, or $3.6 billion. However, the sources said, some outside directors remain bitterly opposed to any transaction under which Owens-Illinois would cease to be an independent public company.    The proposal by Kohlberg Kravis, a New York-based investment banking concern, would take Owens-Illinois private in a leveraged buyout. The sweetened bid was announced Monday, hours after Owens-Illinois rejected an earlier $55-a-share leveraged-buyout bid by Kohlberg Kravis.    Owens-Illinois has said its board would consider the new bid, but hasn't yet said when. Wall Street sources predict the board meeting will take place early next week. Based in Toledo, Ohio, the company makes containers and packages, and owns nursing homes and a mortgage banking company.    Owens-Illinois shares closed yesterday at $54.50, up 25 cents, in New York Stock Exchange composite trading. Volume totaled 1.4 million shares.    The roots of the board conflict apparently predate Kohlberg Kravis's first bid. It was top management who encouraged the New York investment firm to submit that bid after a series of conversations between Owens-Illinois management and partners at Kohlberg Kravis, who have known each other well since Owens-Illinois sold its Lily-Tulip division in a Kohlberg Kravis-led buyout, the sources said.    Nonetheless, sources said, a number of outside directors reacted angrily when they learned of the Kohlberg Kravis bid on Dec. 11, the day the bid was announced publicly. &quot;They felt betrayed that management had gone behind their backs,&quot; one source said.    Because Kohlberg Kravis's original proposal said that Owens-Illinois management would be offered equity participation in the buyout, the board concluded that a special committee of the board that excluded management should be convened to consider the bid, thus eliminating any possibility of a conflict of interest. The committee chairman was Robert Anderson, chairman of Rockwell International Corp., and it consisted of most of the board's standing committee chairmen, the sources said.    Owens-Illinois's financial advisers, Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co. and Lazard Freres andamp; Co., concluded that the Kohlberg Kravis $55-a-share bid couldn't be rejected outright as inadequate. But the special committee hired its own investment adviser, Dillon, Read andamp; Co., which had no previous ties to the company.    Dillon Read and the committee's lawyers took the position that the board had no legal obligation to talk to Kohlberg Kravis, despite its public willingness to negotiate. The committee recommended that the bid be rejected and urged adoption of the restructuring plan the company unveiled earlier this week. The committee also rebuffed suggestions from the company's financial advisers that the advisers put out feelers to see if any other potential bidders might top the Kohlberg Kravis bid, according to the sources.    When the restructuring was announced, the board said its acceptance of the committee's recommendation was unanimous. The sources, however, said that the management directors abstained.    In its latest bid, Kohlberg Kravis also dropped the language that management will be invited to become equity participants. A Kohlberg Kravis spokesman declined to comment on why the language was dropped, but legal experts said the move might mean that Owens-Illinois's board no longer has a legal obligation to convene a special committee that excludes management, thus freeing management to campaign and vote for the Kohlberg Kravis proposal.    Shortly after the latest Kohlberg Kravis offer, a Dillon Read spokesman said the special committee had been dissolved and Dillon Read was no longer involved. Dillon Read officials couldn't be reached for comment yesterday.    The outside directors, however, remain the key to the outcome. Several are retired, value their jobs as directors and take their duties seriously, the sources said. Some have strong ties to the state of Ohio, and are concerned about the proposed buyout's impact on the state, even though Kohlberg Kravis has said the company's headquarters will remain in Toledo. And &quot;some directors feel like Owens-Illinois is their personal property,&quot; said one source involved in the negotiations.    Mr. Anderson, the special committee chairman, declined to comment, and said board members have been instructed not to comment. Members of Owens-Illinois management and other outside board members couldn't be reached for comment.    Whatever the outcome, &quot;it's safe to say that the relationship between this management and this board will never be the same,&quot; said one participant in the negotiations. </TEXT></DOC>