<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880927-0014 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   REAGAN CALLED for an international conference on chemical warfare.    In his final address to the General Assembly, the president cited the use of poison gas in the Iran-Iraq war and urged the U.N. to convene a parley to reverse the &quot;serious erosion&quot; of a 1925 treaty banning chemical weapons. Reagan also told the world body that this was &quot;a moment of hope&quot; for peace in the world and that there is &quot;more than a possibility&quot; that a new U.S.-Soviet treaty to reduce long-range nuclear arms will be concluded next year.    Reagan, citing recent successes and budget changes at the U.N., said the international body was &quot;a better place than it was eight years ago.&quot;    ---   POLAND NAMED the Communist Party propaganda chief as the next premier.    The party's Central Committee met in Warsaw and recommended that the 61-year-old Mieczyslaw Rakowski become the country's ninth prime minister since World War II. Rakowski, considered a fierce opponent of the banned Solidarity trade union, would succeed Zbigniew Messner, who resigned. The protege of Polish leader Jaruzelski joined the Politburo last December. The Sejm, or parliament, is to meet today to formally approve Rakowski's selection.    Warsaw's policy-making Central Committee also discussed the government's strategy for talks next month with Walesa and Solidarity officials.    ---   Bush and Dukakis returned to the campaign trail following Sunday's presidential debate. Both claimed victory. Separately, Bush's campaign manager said the GOP candidate, who stressed anti-abortion views during the debate, decided that women obtaining abortions shouldn't face criminal penalties.    ---   The U.S. has decided to end Navy convoys of American-flagged ships in the Persian Gulf, but will maintain a military presence there to aid vessels. The change, apparently prompted by a month-old truce in the Iran-Iraq conflict, harbingers a return to normalcy in the region, after 14 months of U.S.-led convoys.    ---   Congressional leaders reached agreement on a welfare-overhaul measure aimed at taking people from public assistance and moving them into the labor force. House-Senate conferees are to meet today to attempt to ratify the accord over the $3.34 billion, five-year plan.    ---   The U.S. rejected Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze's suggestion for a four-nation conference in New York to discuss alleged violations of Afghan peace accords. In Afghanistan, rebels fired rockets into Kabul, killing as many as 21 people, Tass reported. The assault came despite U.S. appeals to halt attacks on departing Soviet troops.    ---   Moscow began withdrawing most Soviet troops sent to Armenia's capital to quell ethnic unrest over the disputed Nagorno-Karabakh region in Azerbaijan, a local official reported. The pullout began Saturday. The Tass news agency, however, reported continuing strikes and protests in Yerevan.    ---   The five Discovery astronauts arrived at Cape Canaveral to begin final preparations for Thursday's scheduled lift-off of the space shuttle. After an eight-hour delay, NASA began the countdown for the launch, the first since the 1986 Challenger explosion.    ---   The archbishop of Canterbury urged unity in the Anglican Communion following the weekend election of a woman as the next suffragan bishop of Massachusetts. The naming of Barbara Harris, 58, has prompted a dispute in the 70 million-member Christian community, the world's second largest. The black divorcee must still be consecrated.    ---   Lebanon's new premier failed to win Arab recognition for his Christian military cabinet, which was installed last week by President Gemayel before his term expired. The new government is currently in a struggle for power with a Syrian-backed regime declared last week by Lebanese Moslems.    ---   China's Communist leaders convened a five-day meeting in Beijing of the Central Committee, which was expected to seek a slowdown in further liberalization of the economy. The official Xinhua News Agency said party General Secretary Zhao delivered a speech stressing a more cautious stance in the country's market-oriented changes.    ---   Gunmen in Sri Lanka killed a cabinet minister involved with the reconstruction of two provinces damaged during five years of ethnic violence. Responsibility wasn't claimed for the slaying, which occurred about 40 miles north of Colombo. It came shortly after President Jaywardene ordered police to crush a Sinhalese rebel group.    ---   Burmese officials appealed to parents and teachers to help prevent dissident students from joining ethnic insurgents to fight the military-led government of Gen. Saw Maung, who seized power in a Sept. 18 coup. The governing party also changed its name ahead of general elections. A date for the balloting hasn't been scheduled.    ---   Runner Ben Johnson was stripped of the gold medal he won in the 100-meter dash at the Seoul Olympics. The International Olympic Committee took the action after the Canadian sprinter tested positive for banned anabolic steroids. Carl Lewis of the U.S., the second-place finisher in the race, was almost certain to be awarded the medal. </TEXT></DOC>