<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880210-0073 </DOCNO><HL> LAB NOTES </HL><AUTHOR> David Stipp </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MYCO PGEN </CO><IN> ELE PHA CMD </IN><TEXT>      Advances in Search   For Superconductors   RESEARCHERS are trying more complex compounds in their quest for improved superconductor materials.    During the past year, they have focused on the so-called 1-2-3 compound, which contains yttrium, barium, copper and oxygen. The compound, discovered last spring, carries electricity without resistance at about minus 290 degrees Fahrenheit, a surprisingly high temperature that opens up new applications.    Hoping for further advances, scientists have been working feverishly to get the 1-2-3 compound to work at even higher temperatures and conduct more electricity. But recently, reports have surfaced about findings with new, more complex materials.    During a visit last month to Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Koichi Kitazawa, a University of Tokyo scientist, reported work at several Japanese laboratories with a five-element superconductor, says Kent Bowen, an MIT ceramics specialist. The material, containing bismuth, strontium, calcium, copper and oxygen, works at about minus 243 degrees Fahrenheit. And Paul C.W. Chu, a University of Houston physicist who led in the discovery of the 1-2-3 compound, has reported a similar compound that includes aluminum and works at about the same temperature.    Because of the new materials' complexity, &quot;people are calling them fruit salads,&quot; says Mr. Bowen. But more work is required before scientists know whether they'll displace the 1-2-3 compound from the spotlight.    AIDS Concerns Spawn   Medical Workers' Gear   FEARS ABOUT AIDS spur products to minimize medical workers' risks of getting the disease from patients.    Medical workers chances of getting AIDS are low, but the disease can be transmitted in blood and other bodily fluids through accidental needle sticks, scalpel cuts and other slips. To ward off accidental cuts, Whiting andamp; Davis Co., a Plainville, Mass., concern known mainly for its accessories for women, recently introduced metal-mesh hospital gloves.    The $279-a-pair gloves are designed to be worn over rubber surgical gloves, but their small nickel-plated, brass rings -- about one-twentieth of an inch in diameter -- won't stop needles. To deflect at least some needle sticks, the company is developing an even finer metal mesh that resembles cloth, a spokesman says.    Another company, ICU Medical Inc. of Mission Viejo, Calif., last year introduced needles with movable plastic sheaths that lock over the needles as they are withdrawn from patients. And Meditrend Inc., an Albuquerque, N.M., concern, recently introduced a plastic face shield to guard against blood splashes.    Hospital-supply companies emphasize that although AIDS is driving the market for such products, the protection they provide against hepatitis B, a virus that also can be transmitted in bodily fluids, may be just as important. Hepatitis B can be fatal, and the chances of getting it from accidents like needle sticks is much higher than the chance of getting AIDS the same way, they say.    A New Way to Identify   Types of Cancer Cells   SCIENTISTS have found a new way to differentiate cells that may improve cancer diagnosis.    Biologists at Massachusetts Institute of Technology recently discovered that each cell type has its own &quot;nuclear matrix proteins,&quot; substances found in a cell's DNA-containing nucleus. Determining the particular mix of such proteins may enable scientists to identify a cell's organ of origin, says Sheldon Penman, one of the MIT researchers. Until now, identifying cell types by analyzing their proteins has been a &quot;Holy Grail&quot; in biology, he adds.    The discovery could help cancer specialists distinguish some tumors that, in a process called metastasis, grow from cancer cells that have migrated from their place of origin in the body. In perhaps 5% of cancer patients, doctors can't identify the origin of such tumors and hence aren't sure what treatment to prescribe. And in a larger proportion of patients with metastasizing cancer, identifying tumor type requires time-consuming tests.    The finding may yield quick, simple tests to identify tumor types. A new company, Matritech Inc., recently was formed in Boston to develop commercial products from the MIT research. Experiments also suggest &quot;the matrix proteins may indicate the degree and nature of malignancy&quot; in cancer, says Mr. Penman.    Thwarting Advances   Of Crop-Raiding Insects   POISON-PILL defenses are being developed against crop takeovers by insects.    The pills are microscopic gelatin-like capsules designed to be sprayed on crops and eaten by harmful insects. They contain organisms that produce substances toxic to the bugs.    Mycogen Corp., San Diego, begins with bacteria that have been genetically engineered to spew more insect toxins than their natural kin. The bacteria are killed and encapsulated with their toxins, naturally occurring chemicals that won't hurt beneficial insects or animals, Mycogen says.    The capsules help prevent the toxins from breaking down before they are eaten. The company says that because its bacteria are dead, it already has cleared regulatory hurdles for conducting field tests with the technology and hopes to market it by 1990.    Meanwhile, Plant Genetics Inc., Davis, Calif., is developing similar capsules containing nematodes, tiny worms on which corn rootworms, fire ants, termites and other pests dine. When eaten, the worms release bacteria that kill the insects. Plant Genetics' pills may be available in two to five years, a spokesman says. </TEXT></DOC>