<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880816-0027 </DOCNO><HL> Cajun Convention: A Confederacy of Doozies </HL><AUTHOR> Manuela Hoelterhoff </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>      New Orleans, Wednesday evening:   Streets! Pedestrians! History! Fun! What a change from Atlanta, city of parking lots, which hosted a convention so boring you hoped Ollie North would foment military counterinsurgent action to prevent a reprise. But who could object to New Orleans? Their oil rigs in the Delta have stopped pumping cash, but New Orleanians still know how to party.    A Cajun hot dog in one hand, Hurricane Slush in the other, I wander along Bourbon Street in the raffish French Quarter, just another media hound among 15,000 unleashed here to hunt down non-stories about the Crescent City -- eat some gumbo, listen to great jazz, buy souvenirs.    Hard to resist for instance, are hats emblazoned with a talking oyster saying in the first person what you should do to him, none of which my editors allow me to print. And here's a winning T-shirt with a familiar face on the front -- old shovel-nose, clearly not only my favorite choice for v.p. &quot;Nixon in '88!&quot; Why not? &quot;He's tan, rested and ready.&quot;    To celebrate my happy state, I patronize a skinny guy who's standing in front of a dilapidated easel on Decatur Street. He does caricatures. He'll do mine for $5. Half of New Orleans gathers staring. This is embarrassing. But not as embarrassing as this man's lack of talent. I look like the front end of a large car with its headlights on and a grate for teeth. Why isn't this man skinnier? He should be starving.    Bedtime TV shows well-fed, waltzing cockroaches. Two roaches today, 400,000 in a year. The roach is New Orleans's mascot, I am told. New Yorkers know of roaches. I feel quite at home.    Thursday morning   A literary tour with Kenneth Holditch. He's a specialist on the French Quarter's writers: Mark Twain, Kate Chopin, George Washington Cable and particularly William Faulkner and Tennessee Williams -- the books they wrote here and the booze they consumed. Here's Galatoire's restaurant on Bourbon, where Blanche Du Bois, no stranger to demon drink herself, had dinner with Stella, leaving sullen Stanley at home with a plate of cold cuts.    And here's the D.H. Holmes department store, where John Kennedy Toole's hero, Ignatius, a gargantuan slob with gastrointestinal problems, is first seen in the novel &quot;A Confederacy of Dunces&quot; dressed in his hunting cap with big ear flaps, the remains of potato chips in his beard, explaining himself to the local police. (&quot;I am at the moment writing a lengthy indictment against our century. When my brain begins to reel from my literary labors, I make an occasional cheese dip.&quot;)    Maybe Ignatius wouldn't be so chatty today. Just in time for the convention, the New Orleans Police Department has outfitted itself with an official new sidearm, the Beretta 92F 9mm, double-action, semi-automatic pistol used by the U.S. Army.    Thursday afternoon   The Fairmont Hotel, where the cleanest man in America toils as public-relations director for the oldest hotel in New Orleans. &quot;Want some shampoo?&quot; asks John DeMers, pointing to 95,000 packets of shampoo, conditioner and body gel stuffed haphazardly into boxes stacked high in his office. The hotel has just switched to upscale little bottles so an upscale guest like Jeane Kirkpatrick won't get suds in her mouth standing in the tub ripping packages open with her teeth.    More boxes contain some 2,000 letters responding to the hotel's request for ideas on how to unload the tacky packets, letters from poor people, smelly people (a Burger King employee who complains she reeks of pickles, cheese and onions), prisoners, stupid children. &quot;Please send me 312 packages, one for each day in the year,&quot; writes a 10-year-old.    &quot;Some of these letters don't give you much confidence in the educational system,&quot; frowns Mr. DeMers, as he puts that one away, only to puzzle over a request from the &quot;bush communities&quot; in Alaska. People for George Bush? People who live in the bush? In Alaska??    In the Fairmont kitchen, specially prepared goodies for guests are popping out of ovens and refrigerators: a sugar chariot crafted especially for Charlton Heston and marzipan rifles for the National Rifle Association. Ms. Kirkpatrick's nighttime nibble has yet to be decided. (How about her bete noir Jim Baker on a crunchie stick?)    Thursday early evening   A visit to the convention site, the gigantic Superdome, whose shape is so fitting to the hot climate. It looks like the top part of a roll-on deodorant.    My last ghastly memory of the ghastly Democratic Convention is of angry vendors lying down in the lobby to the ghastly Convention Center, yelling they weren't gonna move until they got better visibility for their ghastly wares. The vendors here can't complain and neither can I. Look at this! The complete tapes of Ollie North. Show them to your friends!    A medical station catches my eye. Fit or Fat? asks its brochure. God, which am I? I still feel the Cajun dog biting my insides. For $8, a technician pricks my finger and runs the blood through a little machine. Will I have to eat roughage for the rest of this trip?    Jackie Joyner Kersee isn't in better shape. A mere count of 151 when 200 is OK. &quot;Cholesterol-wise, you're incredible,&quot; beams the technician.    No reason in the world not to eat dinner with one of George Bush's minions. He's a depressed case, beaten down by absurd platform battles and pompous pollsters who just won't let George be George. Confronted with the restaurant specialty, a blob of white quivering goo called a Mile High Pie, the man spoons most of it down by himself, ignoring pleading eyes from across the table. Republicans, they're just not into sharing.    Friday morning   Waking up, I browse through &quot;Generation of Swine,&quot; the new book by mad-dog &quot;gonzo&quot; journalist Hunter Thompson. It is filled with humorous, human anecdotes that could help sell George to all kinds of doubters. Minions and aleurophiles, did you know George once found a dead cat on Pennsylvania Avenue and tried mouth-to-mouth resuscitation? He loves animals.    Despite devoted, even desperate, supporters wearing &quot;I'll do anything for BUSH&quot; T-shirts, poor George still trails in the U.S., according to the papers. He can take comfort that the British bookies are still with him. In London, where they bet on everything, the odds are even for Bush; 8 to 11 against the midget.    A local takes me to brunch at Brennan's, because as guide books tell you, &quot;You haven't been in New Orleans if you haven't had breakfast at Brennans.&quot; A pretty, green-shuttered building on Royal Street, it was built by Edgar Degas's grandfather in the early 1800s (the artist's famous picture of cotton merchants commemorates his visit to New Orleans decades later). Between the two of us we consume four eggs in some slushy tomato-ish sauce, two glasses of frozen juice and one coffee for an appalling total of $49.    Worse, while we were eating this, my press credential has disappeared from my hotel room. These pink tags worn around the neck with a piece of string are virtually impossible to replace. But the tragedy of having to go home early is averted when we find the credential on top of the maid's cart. A black person for Bush! Or a pro-Dukakis counterinsurgent trying to undermine press coverage of the GOP convention?    Friday afternoon   A hungry duo cabs out to Chez Helene on North Robertson, the same restaurant that inspired the TV series, &quot;Frank's Place.&quot; Quantities of gumbo, chicken, blackened redfish arrive at our table along with chef Austin Leslie, the nephew of Helene (now retired). His apron is attractively accented by a Mont Blanc pen in his shirt pocket and a golden crab with diamonds around his neck. Much nicer than any press credential! The redfish, by the way, isn't redfish, not at Chez Helene and very likely not anywhere else. Fished into near extinction hereabouts, it's now protected and brought in iced. We were really chewing on drum fish.    Friday evening   Look who else is ready and rested over at the Orpheum Theater: Populist Huey Long, assassinated 53 years ago, but livelier than most redfish in this revisionist play, &quot;The Kingfish,&quot; about a rustic some called a born leader and others a sleazeball. As Louisiana governor and senator, Huey had some quaint ideas about fundraising, but heck, the man didn't need political consultants to put words in his mouth or mewling babies in his arms.    Next stop. Can't put it off any longer. Haven't seen really good female wrestling since the old days in Hamburg. In mud pits.    &quot;Any volunteers? One hundred dollars to the winner!&quot; yells a sweaty barker from the doorway of the Cajun swamp-style female wrestling establishment on Bourbon Street. I was about to step forth on a dare from my editor when a spaced-out blonde weaved out of the crowd. &quot;Look! we have a challenger!&quot; yells the bozo, feigning surprise.    Inside, Angel, another semi-conscious blonde, is attempting warm-up exercises against the ropes. A toothless crone brings us a couple of beers. Time passes. &quot;Hey, what's holding us up? Where's the challenger?&quot;    &quot;Her nipples have to be taped, so she will not be exposed to any nudity!&quot; he yells back into the microphone. Implants have been done in shorter time. Finally, the challenger staggers out of a dressing room wearing thongs and a beach top. She can't seem to keep it on. In fact, she can't seem to stand up. I think Angel's gonna win, but we got to go. The competition across the street is beckoning. Haven't seen any good female impersonators since my days in Berlin.    Dancing around a pole inside a dark dive on a stage as big as my laptop {computer}, a curvy cross-dresser is putting on quite a convincing performance, until &quot;she&quot; throws her &quot;Welcome Republicans&quot; button and then her wig at a slackjawed oldster in a green pants suit.    Saturday morning   The humidity is 100%. I am not. I just about have enough energy to stroll along the river listening to a great duo, the Ketchens, on concert tuba and clarinet, before investing in a voodoo kit: a donkey complete with pins and candle. They used to have a voodoo queen in New Orleans who could resurrect the dead. Too bad she can't do something for Republicans.    Saturday evening   The press bash of the convention and maybe all time thrown by the Times Picayune paper, the local rag. Seven thousand people are stuffed inside the cavernous Convention Center by chefs from several dozen restaurants who are cooking their specialties underneath mardi gras floats. There's Austin and there's Paul &quot;Cajun Magic&quot; Prudhomme, who helped kill off redfish with his recipes and, from the looks of him, from eating a fair number of them himself. This is probably the biggest food giveaway since Patty Hearst's dad filled the mouths of San Francisco's poor to try to get her out of the closet.    Later yet, Dan Rather does an up-close and personal interview with the Bushes. Is it ever embarrassing. George and Barbara nearly have to stand up and do a comedy routine to prove they're a laugh a minute, like the Dukes. Pretty soon the guy will be chewing pork rinds to prove he's a regular guy to a whining nation of fictively traditional families who want to be taken care of from cradle to grave.    We escape to the streetcar named St. Charles and shuttle through the Garden District past some of the most splendiferous mansions ever built.    Sunday morning   &quot;Jesus wants to give you a change of garments, sinner.&quot; Thank you. I really shouldn't be putting on the T-shirt with the elephants one more day. Swaying and singing, TV evangelist Jimmy Swaggart preaches to the converted as his congregation weeps tears of joy.    Is this a rerun? No, seems not. Send a check, he adds after the show. &quot;We're fighting for our lives. It's been rough this summer.&quot; Shouldn't have gone to that motel, Jimmy!    Even though it's so divinely cheap. We can hardly believe it, turning off Airline Highway -- the hooker strip -- into the dilapidated motel where the reverend popped his eyeballs watching a bought woman display herself. &quot;Positively no refunds after 15 minutes&quot; warns the sign at the Travel Inn's check-in. But at a mere $10 for the first hour (plus key deposit), what's to lose?    Decorated in orange and green, room No. 1 -- the Swaggart Suite perhaps? -- has everything you might want, like a bed and a Bible and dirty movies. And look, a little souvenir, an opened condom package left behind by the last guest.    Other events of the day include a special appearance by the convention's mascot, Ellie, a seductive 1,200-pound female elephant, who lifts her foot at the sight of a camera. Where was George then? What a missed photo opportunity to help close the gender gap and woo the animal-rights lobby at the same time.    Where was George? Chanting gays wouldn't mind an answer, either, as they total up the 40,000 dead from AIDS in a quiet demonstration in front of St. Louis Cathedral. &quot;Repent!&quot; screams a passerby in a pork pie hat.    Sunday evening   A dinner at old-time Antoine's, hosted by short zillionaire publisher and real-estate biggie Mort Zuckerman for hundreds of us media types. There's plaster-grinned Tom Brokaw, and look who's pushing a fork into the shrimp, Bill Safire, the Times's language referee. Hey Bill, what's the etymology of &quot;cutting in line&quot;?    Monday morning   Second-string politicians orate into the ozone of the nearly empty Superdome, as delegates rest up for the full menu of entertainment starting tonight. For starters, there's the gathering of the fetus folks with their leader Phyllis Schlafly. Then there's the promised barn-burning speech by Ms. Kirkpatrick and the promised snoozer of a keynote by Gov. Kean of New Jersey tomorrow night. (&quot;I'm not a great speaker.&quot;)    No sign yet whom George will pick for v.p. But with 26.8% of the adult male population 5 feet 8 inches and under -- that's a really powerful voting bloc. I hope the Mile High Pie minion has suggested a short candidate for the short list. Anybody ready for another great actor? Anybody ready for Pee Wee Herman? </TEXT></DOC>