<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870114-0110 </DOCNO><HL> Taking Religion -- and Common Sense -- Out of Foster Care---By William Armstrong</HL><DD> 01/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Every Christmas has its Scrooge. My nominee for the one just past is whoever is responsible for the sad state of foster care in New York City. It's not a joyful story; and despite the holiday admonition to &quot;let nothing you dismay,&quot; most Americans will indeed be dismayed, or worse, when they learn about it.    Healthy infants, for want of proper foster homes, have been kept for months in New York City hospitals. Confined in beds, they have received such personal care as can be provided by loving nurses with other duties. Private citizens have volunteered to take infants into their homes but have been put off by city officials.    The hospitalization of healthy babies is only the tip of an iceberg. Worse will come in June when the city will have on its hands at least 4,000 more youngsters currently in the care of religious foster-care organizations. This will happen not because the children are unplaceable, but because a new city policy will then terminate current contracts with many private providers.    The genesis of this fiasco goes a long way back, to 1973, when the American Civil Liberties Union filed suit to force the assignment of foster children to private providers on a nondenominational basis. That sounds unobjectionable, but it raises serious questions. At what point does a Jewish agency, if swamped with foster-care children of other faiths, lose its identity and original purpose? How far can a church agency adapt to government rules without becoming indistinguishable from a public bureaucracy? Such questions never trouble the ACLU. Nor, it seems, did they bother the city officials who recently entered into an agreement with the ACLU.    Rather than fight the case through the federal courts -- which would surely have forced a landmark Supreme Court decision -- the city elders capitulated to a court settlement that can only harm the children they are supposed to protect. One provision of the agreement stipulates that Protestant, Roman Catholic and Jewish organizations are prohibited from requiring children in their care to attend religious services of their own choice. In millions of households across America, parents require children to attend church or synagogue. When a foster-care agency steps in to act as parents, isn't it equally responsible for all aspects of the child's welfare, including moral development?    To top it all off, the city has agreed with the ACLU that foster-care providers must give children &quot;meaningful access to the full range of family-planning information, services and counseling.&quot; That means youngsters who want contraceptives, regardless of their age, must have them.    Some 4,000 children will have to find other homes. The city will doubtless demand more money in order to handle this unnecessary crisis.    Religious groups are considering ways to fight the deal between the city and the ACLU. State and federal legislation may be required to overturn it. However this incident turns out, its implications reach beyond New York City and beyond the foster-care question. The New York case is part of a larger pattern. In Fairfax County, Va., health inspectors are threatening to shut church-run soup kitchens that prepare meals in homes instead of at a regulated, centralized location. In Baltimore, St. Agnes Hospital, which last year gave free medical care to more than 6,000 low-income women, is threatened with the loss of accreditation of its obstetrics and gynecology program because the hospital will not provide abortions. In each case the real interests of the unfortunate are subordinated to blind ideology.    The root cause of all this is a radical distortion of the constitutional separation of church and state. Instead of it meaning that government must treat all religions alike, extremists of bench and bar have twisted it to mean that religious belief can have no place in any action sponsored by government. That was unthinkable when the Constitution was drafted in 1787. To most Americans, it's still a bizarre misreading of their Constitution.    The irony of this mistake is that the institutions most successful in dealing with social problems are those that foster a religious system of ethics. Alcoholics Anonymous has probably the world's best track record in dealing with alcoholism, and its mission is in part spiritual. The Salvation Army is famous for its works of charity, and its service is a religious mission. America's church-related charities -- orphanages, hospitals, homes for the elderly -- are this country's most important social safety net. They were helping the afflicted long before government got involved, and they do it much better than the public sector ever will.    To exclude those institutions from participating in public programs is a kind of policy vandalism. It flies in the face of everything we have learned, through painful trial and error, about what makes a real difference in the lives of the unfortunate.    We have learned the hard way that no amount of money can transform the lives of the poor or get wayward youth back on the right track or hold together fragmenting households, unless it is backed up by a framework of values. A new consensus is forming, across the political spectrum, that the most pressing social ills -- particularly the expansion of the welfare culture -- require a return to some traditional approaches, especially a sense of right and wrong, and clear standards of behavior.    Consider New York City's foster-care policy in light of a study by the National Bureau of Economic Research, in Cambridge, Mass. Researchers there found a definite correlation between church attendance by youngsters from low-income homes and their later prospects for escaping poverty and moving into the mainstream of American life.    If the ACLU is really interested in the long-range welfare of foster children -- and if the officials of New York City really care about saving these young lives -- then it should actively encourage religious observance among its charges. It should cooperate with the institutions, in this case religious ones, that have actually made a difference in the lives of people in need. Instead, the futures of some 4,000 children are at stake in this legal game. Clever lawyers have scored points at the expense of common sense. Boys and girls who need special care will be less likely to receive it. There is also the danger that federal judges elsewhere will impose the New York foster-care settlement on their jurisdictions.    On the other hand, countervailing forces -- state legislators, members of Congress and an outraged public -- may turn the balance back in favor of common sense. If so, 4,000 youngsters will have a brighter future and America will be able to preserve its vital charitable institutions.    ---   Mr. Armstrong, a U.S. senator from Colorado, is chairman of the Senate Republican Policy Committee. </TEXT></DOC>