<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880420-0001 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88: Dukakis Is Winner of New York Primary, Clearning Path to Democratic Nomination --- Victor Adds to Momentum As Jackson Falls Short, Gore Runs Far Behind </HL><AUTHOR> David Shribman and Rich Jaroslovsky (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> CNG </G><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Michael Dukakis scored a decisive victory in the New York primary that clears the way for him to win the Democratic presidential nomination.    With more than 90% of the precincts reporting, Mr. Dukakis was winning a little more that 51% of the vote, beating the Rev. Jesse Jackson, who was capturing 37%. Sen. Albert Gore, in a last-ditch effort here, finished a distant third with only about 10%.    The Dukakis victory was critical on several grounds, permitting the Massachusetts governor to continue the momentum he began with wins in Connecticut and Wisconsin, eliminating Sen. Gore as a serious candidate and setting the stage for Mr. Dukakis to go head-to-head with Mr. Jackson in states where the conditions heavily favor him.    &quot;If we can make it here,&quot; said the triumphant Mr. Dukakis last night, &quot;we can make it anywhere.&quot;    Mr. Dukakis's scope of victory, as he scored well with all categories of voters other than blacks, will give him at least 150 delegates, or well over half the state's 255 convention delegates selected yesterday. Mr. Jackson captured about 75 delegates, giving Gov. Dukakis an overall lead of more than about 200 delegates.    Moreover, with the selection of congressional &quot;super-delegates&quot; and next week's Pennsylvania primary, where he could sweep most of the delegates, Mr. Dukakis could by the end of the month have 60% of the 2,081 delegates he needs to win the nomination and enjoy a lead of as many as 400 delegates over Mr. Jackson.    Mr. Dukakis's strong showing was fueled by the failure of either Mr. Jackson or Sen. Gore to make significant dents in his support among the state's white voters, according to an NBC News election-day poll of voters.    But Mr. Dukakis's win in this bitter, sometimes ugly primary, may have come with many voters regarding him as the best in a poor field. The NBC survey showed soft support and little enthusiasm for Mr. Dukakis in general, especially among black voters. Even most of his voters would have preferred New York Gov. Mario Cuomo, according to the survey.    Though the Dukakis victory doesn't remove Mr. Jackson as a powerful political force, it cripples his hopes of winning the nomination. The distant third-place showing of Sen. Gore leaves his effort so weak politically and financially that he will be unable to be a factor in the remaining primaries and last night sounded like a candidate ready to end, or suspend, his campaign. He scheduled an announcement for tomorrow.    &quot;If he's out,&quot; says Gov. Cuomo, &quot;certainly Dukakis gets stronger.&quot;    Mr. Jackson won the black vote, but Gov. Dukakis won the Jewish vote and performed strongly in almost every category of white voters. Although the result permits Mr. Dukakis to campaign in the coming weeks as the presumptive nominee, he still must persuade hundreds of uncommitted delegates to embrace his candidacy if he is to win the nomination in Atlanta free and clear.    Although voters in later primaries have a history of frustrating frontrunners, it appears the only way Mr. Dukakis could be denied the nomination is to make a series of blunders -- and that isn't characteristic of the exceedingly cautious governor.    The victory over Mr. Jackson at this critical juncture of the campaign will increase attention on the relationship between the two men and their camps. As he works to consolidate his position atop the Democratic field and work for unity in the party, Mr. Dukakis now must fashion a plan to deal with Mr. Jackson, whom he has avoided confronting throughout the campaign.    Vice President George Bush, who faced no serious opposition in yesterday's New York primary, is fast approaching the 1,139 delegates he needs to clinch the Republican presidential nomination.    The NBC survey showed that Mr. Dukakis won the support of about two-thirds of the state's white Democrats. Despite Mr. Jackson's overwhelming support among the state's black voters, he won only about one in six white votes -- far less than he has done in some previous contests. And Mr. Gore won only about as much support among whites as Mr. Jackson did, despite the vociferous support of New York Mayor Ed Koch.    The survey showed Mr. Dukakis with broad support. He carried six in 10 white Protestants, seven in 10 Catholics and about an equal proportion of the state's Jewish voters. Sen. Gore, who made a strong pitch for Jewish support during the campaign by stressing his support for Israel, won fewer than one in five Jewish votes.    Mr. Dukakis scored well in all economic categories of white voters, winning seven in 10 votes among white-collar voters and six in 10 among professional and managerial workers. Even among white blue-collar voters, who haven't been enthusiastic about the buttoned-down governor in some earlier contests, seven in 10 voted for him in New York.    Unlike many previous winners of the New York primary, Mr. Dukakis emerged with the biggest prize thus far in the political season without having succumbed to the entreaties of the special interests -- labor, liberals, friends of Israel -- of New York. The Dukakis forces are convinced that very little he said in the course of the two-week campaign here can be used against him effectively by Republicans in the fall.    Mr. Dukakis now is poised to continue his streak as the campaign moves to Pennsylvania, which selects 178 delegates next Tuesday and has rules that are peculiarly suited to assist a candidate with swelling momentum.    Most of the state's delegates are chosen in congressional districts with rules that often ensure that the winner of the district captures all of the delegates being contested. Mr. Jackson is rated a strong contender only in three of the state's 23 congressional districts. He has, moreover, assembled delegate slates in less than half the districts, meaning that he will win no delegates in those districts regardless of his popularity.    The Jackson forces hoped Mr. Gore would survive as a formidable force to break up the white vote. But the Tennessee Democrat continued his poor third-place showing, as he has done in every primary since his successes in the southern Super Tuesday contest six weeks ago.    He fell well short of the 20% necessary to preserve his eligibility for federal matching funds. Because of his string of poor showings, his eligibility is set to expire April 28. After then, he will be able to receive the federal subsidies only to extinguish existing debts and for costs associated with winding down his campaign.    He could continue campaigning, but his efforts would have to be financed only by private contributions, which are expected to dry up as a result of his poor showings.    Mr. Jackson, who has routinely been winning the support of 90% of black voters in previous contests, did even better here. The NBC surveys indicated that he won more than 95% of black votes, compared with the 70% he won in the 1984 primary, when Walter Mondale competed with him for black support. The poll indicated that perhaps more than 25% of yesterday's Democratic voters were black, compared with about 20% four years ago.    Mr. Jackson also swept New York's Hispanic community, winning three-fifths of its votes. But he was unsuccessful in his attempts to woo significant white support, which he had hoped to do with his emphasis on economic-populist issues and his promise of a get-tough approach on drugs. The NBC survey showed that more than half of all white Democratic voters -- and two-thirds of the state's Jewish voters -- had an unfavorable view of him.    Moreover, what white votes Mr. Jackson drew came disproportionately from the well-educated and liberal. Almost half of the whites who voted for him had more than a college education.    Tuesday's results were also a stinging rejection of Mayor Koch, who endorsed Sen. Gore and conducted a bitter verbal battle with Mr. Jackson throughout the campaign, particularly over such issues as economics, defense and the security of Israel. But Mr. Jackson carried the city, according to the NBC election day poll, and Mr. Gore did worse in Mayor Koch's home town than he did in the rest of the state, winning less than one in 10 of the city's votes.    Mr. Gore's poor performance may portend difficulties for Mr. Koch when he seeks next year to become the first New York City mayor to win four four-year terms. Six in 10 of New York City's Democratic voters said he shouldn't seek re-election when his third term expires next year, and only four in 10 said they approved of the mayor's performance in office, according to the NBC survey.    Messrs. Dukakis and Jackson were locked in a seesaw struggle in the presidential caucuses in Vermont which, with only 19 delegates, was overshadowed by New York yesterday. With almost three-quarters of the vote counted in the sparsely attended caucuses, Mr. Jackson held a slim lead. Gov. Dukakis won the Vermont primary last month, but that was only a beauty contest and had nothing to do with the actual selection of delegates.    ---   David Rogers in Washington contributed to this artcle. </TEXT></DOC>