<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870501-0101 </DOCNO><HL> ---Vote Was Decisive 290-137,Despite Threat of a VetoBy the Administration---By Monica LangleyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN FORGN LABORMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)MARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The House easily passed legislation designed to toughen the U.S. stance toward some trading partners while attempting to boost U.S. exports.    The House adopted the trade package by a decisive 290-137 vote, despite threats from the Reagan administration that it would veto the legislation. The trade measure, which has been a top priority of the Democratic-controlled Congress, is intended to force the president to take stronger and more frequent action in response to the nation's trade woes.    The 896-page bill now goes to the Senate, which is expected to pass its own stern measure by this summer. &quot;It isn't a perfect bill, but on balance it is a bipartisan bill,&quot; House Speaker Jim Wright (D., Texas) told lawmakers. &quot;We all want action on trade.&quot;    Voting for the measure were 43 of the House's Republicans, and all but six of the Democrats.    Aimed largely at Japan, the bill was approved just as Japanese Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone was arriving on Capitol Hill to visit with lawmakers. It included the amendment sponsored by Rep. Richard Gephardt (D., Mo.) that would require the president to retaliate against countries that are deemed to have built huge trade surpluses with the U.S. through unfair trading practices.    But White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said President Reagan told Mr. Nakasone he will veto the trade bill if the final version of the legislation contains the Gephardt provision. Mr. Fitzwater said the administration believes that Wednesday's close 218-214 House vote approving the Gephardt amendment makes it less likely that the Senate will go along with the amendment, and harder for House sponsors to override a veto.    Even without the Gephardt amendment, the bill would require the president to retaliate against certain specific unfair trade practices by foreign countries and to take other action to open foreign markets to U.S. exports. It also would expand programs to aid workers displaced by imports, and would enable import-battered industries to obtain relief in some circumstances more quickly than they now can.    The bill would set a goal of eliminating the U.S. trade deficit by 1992, and it would establish regulatory and enforcement mechanisms designed to ensure better treatment of U.S. businesses in international commerce.    Several leading Republicans attacked the legislation as partisan and protectionist. &quot;It will cause trade wars, and will scare up interest rates,&quot; said Rep. Bill Frenzel (R., Minn.). But Rep. Frenzel, who had supported the trade bill before the Gephardt amendment was attached to it, added: &quot;I hope clearer heads will prevail through the rest of the process and eventually produce a bill that we can vote for and the president can sign.&quot;    During yesterday's action, the House rejected, on a 230-190 vote, an attempt by Rep. Norman Lent (R., N.Y.) to water down a provision requiring disclosures of foreign investment in the U.S.    The provision would require foreign investors to report to the government any significant interest they hold in a U.S. business or in real estate, as well as holdings of large blocks of corporate securities. Rep. Lent argued that the disclosure amendment would discourage foreign investment in the U.S. His defeated amendment would have permitted the U.S. to exempt foreign investors if the registration requirement would &quot;harm the flow of foreign investment into the country.&quot;    While requiring the president to retaliate against certain unfair trade practices, the bill approved by the House would give the president discretion in deciding the form of retaliation. It also would allow him to waive retaliation if it &quot;is not in the U.S. national economic interest.&quot;    The package would make foreign violations of workers' rights an unfair trade practice against which the president could order trade retaliation. Violations of workers' rights would include denying workers the right to associate, to organize and to bargain collectively.    The measure also would increase retraining benefits for workers whose jobs are lost because of imports. It would set up a voucher system for payment of these benefits.    In addition, the bill would toughen provisions for dealing with foreign companies that repeatedly &quot;dump&quot; goods -- that is, sell them at prices below those in their home market or below the cost of production -- in the U.S. Specifically, it would provide for expedited action on dumping complaints against foreign companies, and make it easier for U.S. companies to bring civil suits against foreign manufacturers for dumping.    Clarifying current law, the House bill would authorize the administration to provide temporary protection from imports even for dying industries. The Reagan administration had proposed limiting such protection to industries that could show a reasonable likelihood they would be fully competitive after receiving such relief.    In addition, the House bill would permit the administration to provide emergency import protection for industries hit by sudden, rapid increases in imports.    The House measure would give the president authority to restrict foreign acquisitions of U.S. businesses if such acquisitions would &quot;threaten national security or impair essential commerce.&quot; That provision was aimed at situations similar to the recent proposed merger of Fujitsu Ltd. and Schlumberger Ltd.'s Fairchild Semiconductor Corp. unit. The proposed merger eventually was called off.    Also included in the package are provisions that would authorize the U.S. to negotiate to gain greater access for U.S. telecommunications equipment in foreign markets, ease export controls on high-technology goods, and improve protection for U.S. patents, trademarks and copyrights against foreign violations. Another provision would increase federal export subsidies for American farm products.    To promote economic development and help reduce the burden of debt on developing nations, the measure would call for negotiations to set up a new international financial institution that would buy Third World loans from private banks at a discount and then sell these loans in a secondary market.    It also would bar foreign companies from becoming primary dealers in U.S. government securities unless their governments give U.S. companies the same right in their countries. It is aimed at Japan. The Federal Reserve Board recently accepted two Japanese firms as primary dealers.    Before approving the bill, the House voted 268-156 to defeat the Republican alternative offered by Minority Leader Robert Michel (R., Ill.). It would have excluded several provisions, among them the Gephardt amendment. </TEXT></DOC>