<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870112-0037 </DOCNO><HL> White House's Push to Disclose ReportsOn Iran May Be Damaging for Reagan---By Ellen Hume and Andy PasztorStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The White House, trying to regain the political offensive on the Iran crisis by calling for the release of more information, is finding that some of the information that's coming out may be more damaging than helpful.    Two documents the White House released Friday -- the Jan. 17, 1986, legal authorization for arms sales to Iran and a memo by departed White House aides John Poindexter and Oliver North explaining the policy -- have undermined the White House's argument that President Reagan wasn't trading arms for hostages. And the memo raises new questions about Mr. Reagan's level of involvement in running his own administration.    Similarly, the White House's demand that the Senate Intelligence Committee release a draft report on the Iran-Contra affair hasn't paid off as Mr. Reagan's aides had hoped. A version of the report, which was leaked last week to NBC News, suggests that Central Intelligence Agency Director William Casey and other top CIA officials had evidence of the diversion of profits from the arms sales to the Nicaragua insurgents more than two months before the administration disclosed them.    The White House staff has been seeking to take pressure off the president by calling on Congress to release information it has uncovered, and by blaming departed staff members, weapons-trade middlemen and Israeli officials for actions the White House says Mr. Reagan may not have known about. While this approach may protect the president from legal culpability for questionable acts by his subordinates, it may be compounding the damage to Mr. Reagan's credibility as a leader.    President Reagan didn't actually read the memo from Vice Adm. Poindexter and Lt. Col. North, and therefore he can't be held accountable for every part of it, according to the senior White House official who released the documents.    Mr. Reagan's initials, which appear at the bottom of the memo, were written there by Mr. Poindexter, who also handwrote at the bottom: &quot;President was briefed verbally from this paper. VP (Vice President George Bush), (White House Chief of Staff) Don Regan and Don Fortier (a former White House aide who since has died of cancer) were present.&quot;    The memo, directly contradicting the president's continued insistence that he didn't authorize swapping arms for hostages, says, &quot;If all the hostages are not released after the first shipment of 1,000 weapons, further transfers would cease.&quot;    But the White House official who released the documents Friday contended that the memo actually supports Mr. Reagan's assertion that there wasn't a direct swap. He pointed to a portion of the memo suggesting that the hostage release &quot;is in some respects a byproduct of a larger effort to develop ties to potentially moderate forces in Iran.&quot;    The Jan. 17 memo also suggests that the arms-sale policy was just beginning, even though the president and his staff knew it was already underway. &quot;To achieve the strategic goal of a more moderate Iranian government, the Israelis are prepared to unilaterally commence selling military materiel to Western-oriented Iranian factions,&quot; the Jan. 17 memo says.    In fact, the president and his top aides knew that Israel had begun selling U.S. arms to Iran on Sept. 1, 1985. And former National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane has testified under oath that Mr. Reagan told him after a high-level meeting in August to assure the Israelis that the U.S. would replace TOW antitank missiles they sold to Iran.    &quot;I'm not saying that the president didn't know about the earlier shipments of arms,&quot; said the senior White House official who released the documents. But he offered no further explanation of the inconsistency.    The memo also says that Israeli officials came up with the idea of selling arms to the Iranians in order to establish ties to moderates in Tehran and winning the hostages' release. &quot;Prime Minister (Shimon) Peres of Israel secretly dispatched his special advisor on terrorism with instructions to propose a plan by which Israel, with limited assistance from the U.S., can create conditions to help bring about a more moderate government in Iran,&quot; the memo begins.    Israeli officials, as they have in the past, sharply disputed this over the weekend. Asserting that he didn't want to get into a &quot;war of memos&quot; over conflicting versions of how the idea behind the arms sales originated, Mr. Peres -- who is now Israel's foreign minister -- said that Israel's &quot;clear and categorical position&quot; remains that the U.S. asked for its assistance to help free the hostages and that Israelis &quot;didn't play any role&quot; in diverting funds to the Contras.    The Israeli government has barred U.S. investigators from interrogating most of the Israeli participants in the arms sales, according to federal law enforcement officials and Israeli news reports. The Israelis have been told to supply written statements, but to refuse to be interviewed by Federal Bureau of Investigation agents or other U.S. investigators, officials said.    An Israeli arms dealer, Jaacov Nimrodi, one of the middlemen involved in the initial efforts to sell arms to the Iranians, said that Israeli officials advised him to limit his cooperation to written responses to questions U.S. investigators posed.    Congressional investigators and the independent counsel, Lawrence Walsh, are expected to protest the Israeli stance. Some U.S. investigators worry that Israel's approach could preclude them from fully understanding the sequence of events that led up to the arms sales to Iran and suspected diversion of profits to Nicaragua insurgents.    Separately, White House aides have been trying to focus the blame for the Iran-Contra scandal on the departed National Security Council officials, Messrs. McFarlane, Poindexter and North.    The presidential spokesman, Larry Speakes, and others in the administration have stressed, for instance, that Lt. Col. North wrote an incomplete and -- in some instances false -- chronology of the Iran arms sales. Yet other White House and CIA officials assisted Lt. Col. North in preparing the chronology, which was reviewed by a number of other officials and revised several times before finally being accepted by top administration aides.    &quot;When a document is scrubbed as thoroughly as that one was, its author has lost control of it,&quot; says one administration official.    ---   Also contributing to this article was John Walcott. </TEXT></DOC>