<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881109-0007 </DOCNO><HL> Nobody's Tool: RJR Nabisco Board Asserts Independence In Buy-Out Decisions --- Deal-Making by the President Rankles Some Directors Who Once Backed Him --- 'We Feel Used and Abused' </HL><AUTHOR> John Helyar and Bryan Burrough (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> RJR SLH AXP RAL CKE PG SB </CO><IN> TNM TOB FOD PRO </IN><TEXT>   Until recently, a seat on RJR Nabisco's board was almost like Easy Street: lucrative directors' fees, fat consulting contracts and the constant tender loving care of the company's president and chief executive, F. Ross Johnson. &quot;I sometimes feel like the director of transportation,&quot; he once remarked, after ordering up a corporate jet for a board member. &quot;But if I'm there for them, they'll be there for me.&quot;    And they were at first, when Mr. Johnson astonished Wall Street three weeks ago by announcing he was considering the biggest leveraged buy-out in history. But that overture wasn't to be the last, not even Mr. Johnson's last. The RJR Nabisco case has turned into an auction of staggering scale and one of bickering and bitterness. Lawsuits and lawsuit-threats are flying. Conflict-of-interest charges are proliferating. Investors in the buy-out funds are grumbling. And now the directors of RJR Nabisco are on the hot seat.    Abruptly, Mr. Johnson's relationship with them has gone from cozy to strained. For him, their growing defection is ominous, turning the contest into one he could well lose. But the directors' shifting sentiments -- and evolving views of their legal duties -- are crucial, too, for every other army on this widening battlefield.    By taking matters into their own hands, the RJR directors may rewrite the books on how boards should respond to bids and on what the very definition of &quot;shareholder value&quot; is. They see their task not as just getting the best immediate price for RJR but as ensuring that shareholders don't get cut out of possible future gains for the company. They may also define their fiduciary duty broadly, looking after not only shareholders but also &quot;stakeholders&quot;: the company's employees and its communities.    &quot;This transaction will break ground not only on financial matters but on public policy as well,&quot; predicts a senior adviser to a special directors' committee in charge of RJR's response. &quot;I'm reasonably sure this will be a transaction that will be judged not only by public opinion and the courts but by Congress. That's something you have to think about.&quot;    The transformation of the once-passive RJR board became abundantly clear this week, when the special committee laid down the law. Once scoffed at as a pushover &quot;kangaroo court&quot; for Mr. Johnson, the five-member committee served notice that any sale or breakup of the tobacco and food giant would be done on its terms, telling bidders they have until a week from Friday to put up or shut up. Not only did it give no breaks to the group headed by its own president and chief executive, it solicited other offers.    What happened here? Normally the master corporate politician, Mr. Johnson appears to have made some miscalculations. Directors didn't object when he put the company in play in mid-October, but they grew ever more restive as he delayed actually making an offer and dickered with potential rival bidder Kohlberg Kravis Roberts andamp; Co. Now directors are concerned that business history's biggest transaction may become its biggest spectacle. In what has turned into a Wall Street donnybrook, directors are privately embarrassed to find their chief executive throwing roundhouse punches.    None of this was evident the night of Wednesday, Oct. 19, when Mr. Johnson, as was his custom, took his outside directors out to dinner the night before a board meeting in Atlanta. This time, he had a surprise for them: He told them he had tried everything he could for nearly two years to get the stock price up -- selling businesses, repurchasing stock, accelerating earnings -- and it just wasn't working. So, Mr. Johnson went on, he was considering leading a leveraged buy-out, though he wouldn't pursue one if they objected.    The directors were stunned, but by all accounts voiced no significant objections. &quot;We came to the conclusion that shareholders would be best served by a short-term gain,&quot; recounted Charles E. Hugel, head of the special board committee, in an interview afterward.    Mr. Hugel was not surprised, however, having been alerted by Mr. Johnson to the LBO possibility about a week earlier. He had brought with him Peter Atkins, counsel to the law firm of Skadden, Arps Slate Meagher andamp; Flom. Mr. Atkins quickly noted that Mr. Johnson's plan was material, and a press release would have to be put out. Mr. Johnson called an aide in the wee hours of Thursday, saying, &quot;This thing is going to happen even faster than we thought.&quot;    Because of that first ruling, by the board's counsel, it all probably happened too fast for Mr. Johnson. Though he had been consulting for more than a month with Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., the investment firm majority-owned by American Express, financing wasn't in place and specifics hadn't been nailed down. About the only detail he offered was that the price would be in the $75-a-share range, worth over $17 billion. The board responded by naming its special committee of outside directors.    They are an odd mix, including a takeover enthusiast, an anti-takeover crusader, a globe-trotting former telephone executive and a Southern gentleman described as a novice to Wall Street's megamergers.    Two strong personalities on the committee soon made themselves felt. They are Martin S. Davis, the 61-year-old chief of Gulf andamp; Western Inc., and William S. Anderson, the 69-year-old retired chairman of NCR Corp. Mr. Davis is a savvy New York dealmaker who has not only helped shape Gandamp;W through both acquisitions and divestitures but also has successfully warded off takeover threats from the likes of Carl Lindner, Irwin Jacobs, Carl Icahn and Ivan Boesky. He is a friend of Mr. Johnson's who loves nothing better than sallying forth into the eye of a corporate hurricane.    That is not where Mr. Anderson is coming from. He is described by an adviser as &quot;very anti-raider, anti-LBO, anti-junkbond, very big on the obligation of a corporation to its various constituencies.&quot; Mr. Anderson champions the concept of the &quot;stakeholder,&quot; the idea that a company should be responsive not only to shareholders but also to suppliers, employees and business partners. So high is he on this notion that he even handed out literature promoting it to colleagues working with the committee.    Heading the committee is Mr. Hugel, president of Combustion Engineering and also the &quot;non-executive&quot; chairman of RJR itself. Mr. Hugel, who spent much of his career as a line executive at American Telephone andamp; Telegraph, is close to Mr. Johnson and is keen on running a clean and fast auction. &quot;Hugel strikes us as a no-nonsense guy who, in my judgment, doesn't want to spend the rest of his life doing this deal,&quot; says an attorney for one of the bidding groups. &quot;He has a company to run. His view is, 'Let's do it, and let's go on with it.'&quot;    Of the two other committee members, John D. Macomber, the 60-year-old former chairman of Celanese Corp., is described as a detail-oriented corporate traditionalist. Originally impressed with the Johnson buy-out bid, he has increasingly emphasized directors' fiduciary duty to obtain maximum value for shareholders, regardless of management's wishes. Mr. Macomber helped engineer the sale of Celanese to American Hoechst last year. The fifth member is Albert L. Butler Jr., the board's link to its Winston-Salem roots. The 70-year-old head of a North Carolina real-estate company, he is described as a &quot;typical Southern gentleman.&quot; Mr. Butler has said little during committee meetings held at Skadden Arps' midtown Manhattan offices.    As RJR board members, all of these men have been recipients of an unusual level of management stroking. Mr. Johnson, shortly after taking over less than two years ago, got their pay nearly doubled to a lofty $50,000 per year. And for some there have been other perks: Mr. Hugel -- like Mr. Johnson a Nabisco alumnus -- has a $150,000 consulting contract for his board work. Mr. Anderson has a $78,000-a-year consulting contract to head the company's International Advisory Council. Another director, Robert Schaeberle, gets $180,000 a year for some trade-relations work. Director Andrew G.C. Sage II, a former Shearson managing director, gets $250,000 a year as an all-purpose adviser to Mr. Johnson.    Mr. Johnson has been generous to his board in other ways. RJR donated $2 million to Duke University to endow a Juanita Kreps Chair and another distinguished-professor post, in honor of the board member by that name. And, as with the pre-board-meeting dinners, he has wined and dined the outside directors, charming them with his humor and candor. &quot;Ross keeps you posted,&quot; an admiring Mr. Butler said last August. &quot;He has an ungodly ability to size up situations and the guts to move quickly.&quot;    But the good will thus earned has proved remarkably transient amid the turmoil of the brash Mr. Johnson's bid for control. Though board members are reluctant to speak on the record, the signs of their displeasure with Mr. Johnson are evident. Some directors who were squarely in Mr. Johnson's corner at the outset and sympathetic to his aim of increasing &quot;shareholder value&quot; have done a slow boil as they learn more about how long he had been plotting an LBO without telling them. They have had to learn through the press about the sweet terms he had struck for himself and his small management group. &quot;We feel used and abused,&quot; says one director.    A number are also peeved that it took Mr. Johnson and his investment-banker partners nearly two weeks to mount a bid after he put the company in play -- though his hand seemingly was forced by the lawyer's advice to put out a press release. In any case, other potential buyers swirled around, and normal business operations became all but impossible. Before Mr. Johnson even made a formal offer, one came in from Kohlberg Kravis Roberts. Now the buy-out firm of Forstmann Little andamp; Co. is talking of bidding, in a group that includes Ralston Purina, Castle andamp; Cooke and Procter andamp; Gamble.    &quot;There's a great deal of irritability that the process has taken so long,&quot; says one person who has talked with three directors. &quot;They feel it's left the organization hung out to dry.&quot;    Mr. Hugel has twice demanded explanations from Mr. Johnson on important points: whether he has been making advance commitments to sell RJR businesses -- which wouldn't sit well with the board -- and whether he would make an outsized personal fortune in a buy-out (the management group would put up only $20 million but get an 8.5% stake in the private company that could rise to 20%). Mr. Johnson has denied both suggestions, and said many managers would share in the equity, but his credibility with directors is frayed. Says one person familiar with their thinking, &quot;I think Mr. Johnson has lost the board.&quot;    An aide to Mr. Johnson expresses surprise at the adverse board reaction, but concedes, &quot;This has become an unpredictable and difficult process for all concerned. In the end, though, you'll see that Ross's ultimate goal of shareholder value will have been achieved.&quot;    In trying to sort out their fiduciary duties, the directors not only want to avoid winding up in a lawsuit but also want to acquit themselves well in the court of public opinion. Increasingly weighing on them are notions of directors' obligations to &quot;stakeholders.&quot;    If the latter idea seem old-fashioned in this frenzied era of mega-billion-dollar deals, the board's special committee has retained some old-fashioned advisers: Lazard Freres andamp; Co. and Dillon Read andamp; Co. Felix Rohatyn, a managing director of the former, has bemoaned the &quot;casino society&quot; of today's financial world. John Mullen, a managing director of the latter, was a leading adviser to RJR for more than 20 years, in its slower, steadier days. Dillon Read was supplanted by Shearson as RJR's lead investment banker when Mr. Johnson took over. (Dillon and Lazard will each receive at least $14 million -- steep but not extraordinary fees -- for their advice, according to an RJR filing yesterday with the Securities and Exchange Commission.)    Besides Messrs. Rohatyn, Mullen and Atkins (of Skadden Arps), the committee had a fertile deal-making mind to draw on in Ira Harris of Lazard Freres. He had been a legend in Chicago business circles for masterminding the mergers of some of that city's major companies.    So, pushed by the special committee, the RJR board soon began coming up with its own ideas for valuing the company, or restructuring or selling it. A recurring theme through their meetings has been concern that they might sell the company at what looks like a good premium now, but that might later look like a giveaway. Some recalled the case of Gibson Greetings Inc., a company taken private and later brought back public at a huge profit. They began looking at ways that a &quot;stub&quot; of RJR, or parts of it, could remain in public shareholders' hands in order for them to share in any appreciation, according to sources close to the board.    They also looked at the merits and drawbacks of liquidating RJR, brand by brand. But the committee has had to weigh the goal of getting a maximum price against the risk of missing a &quot;window of opportunity&quot; to sell. A weakening stock market or a cooling of the buying frenzy for food companies could leave the directors holding the bag.    Despite that peril, the committee is keeping its options open as long as possible, in part by the way it is structuring the auction. It is asking that the interested parties actually submit two bids: one for the whole company and one for just the tobacco business. That could give it more flexibility and fetch the price directors think RJR is worth: well over the $92 a share, or $21.16 billion, now on the table.    Though it is still in the midst of evaluating all the alternatives, the committee is already seen as an activist model for future such situations. And it has come to be seen as a thorn in its side by the Johnson-led management group. While that group endeavored to strike a deal with KKR, the committee sent signals to Forstmann Little that another bidder in the picture would be welcomed. &quot;They're doing everything to encourage Teddy (Forstmann),&quot; grouses one RJR aide.    Faced with this feisty board, Mr. Johnson himself might reflect on some prophetic words from an interview two months ago. Asked about allegations he was ingratiating himself with the board to keep his job secure, he disagreed. &quot;You can't bribe your directors,&quot; he said. </TEXT></DOC>