<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880418-0023 </DOCNO><HL> Nicaraguans Fight A Battle of Symbols During Peace Talks --- Contras Win Hotel Skirmish Before They Even Arrive, But Sandinistas Score Too </HL><AUTHOR> Michael Allen (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><DATELINE> MANAGUA, Nicaragua  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Even before Contra leaders left Costa Rica for peace talks with the Sandinistas in Managua, they were fighting yet another skirmish with their adversaries -- this one for territory in a hotel. Contra operative Roberto Ferrey reported victory to the rest of the 42-member rebel team: &quot;The bar is ours, and the pool is ours -- both will be under our absolute control.&quot;    This was no ordinary battle in the Nicaraguan civil war. This was diplomacy -- the final preparations for the U.S.-backed Contra leadership's historic trip last Friday to Managua. With the signing of a temporary truce last month, victories in the seven-year-old conflict no longer are measured in dead and wounded, but in symbols. Which is why it mattered who controlled the bar in the hotel where the talks were held.    The trip marked the Contra leaders' first return to the Nicaraguan capital since the war began. The Contras were expected to return home today after meeting with church leaders and visiting the opposition newspaper La Prensa.    Yesterday afternoon, Nicaraguan Defense Minister Humberto Ortega presented a new peace proposal that he said could result in an agreement to end the civil war, but the rebel leaders rejected the offer and called it a setback that raised doubts about the chances for a settlement. They want a separate agreement on unresolved technical issues before discussion begins on how to advance toward forging an armistice.    Whatever the outcome of the peace negotiations, both sides scored points in the war of symbols. The initial Contra delegation was met at the airport by the Nicaraguan tourism minister, a clear dig at the men and women who have lived for so long in exile. But thanks to the groundwork laid by Mr. Ferrey, they stayed in the nicest wing of the Camino Real Hotel in Managua -- far from the center of town, where they wanted to hold court, but in better position than the second-rate bungalows originally reserved for them by the government. The bungalows finally fell to the hordes of reporters covering the talks.    The Sandinistas agreed that the Contras could have two short trips from the hotel -- and possibly more &quot;if we behave ourselves,&quot; said Mr. Ferrey. Nicaraguan officials said they feared the rebels' presence in the street might provoke attacks. According to one Sandinista, several hot-headed army officers were banished from the capital during the talks to avert confrontation. The Contras' retort was that their appearance in public might provoke displays of support instead of hostility.    The potential for friction was obvious at a Contra press gathering Saturday that degenerated into a shouting match between a Contra delegate and a state radio reporter; each accused the other of being loyal to former dictator Anastasio Somoza.    As the Contra negotiators waited by the pool of a posh Costa Rican hotel late last week, on the eve of their trip, some of them didn't bother to hide their skepticism, however. &quot;I don't like dialogue -- I like to speak in one language,&quot; said a 27-year-old Contra military leader by the nom de guerre of Commander Franklin, pulling the trigger of an imaginary gun.    Other Contras were focusing on more mundane concerns. Spokeswoman Marta Sacasa, for example, received word the Sandinistas might tell her to share a Managua hotel room with her younger sister. She thought the report was a joke, but if it wasn't, she feared the repercussions: Her sister, Rosa Pasos, is a major in the Sandinista army and a top military spokeswoman. The two have been offering the press conflicting versions of the truth for years now, while cutting off all communications between themselves.    In private, the Contras and Sandinistas sometimes do joke with each other. At one of the technical sessions that led to the Managua meeting, Lenin Cerna, the notorious former state security chief and now vice-minister of the Interior Ministry, learned that a commercial jet carrying several Contras to Costa Rica from Honduras had touched down briefly in Managua. &quot;You should have called me,&quot; he joked, scribbling his phone number on a slip of paper for future reference.    Much of the repartee centers on real estate. After the Contras left the country to take up the armed struggle, the Sandinistas snapped up all their houses. President Daniel Ortega lives in the house of Contra stalwart Jaime Morales, a former peace negotiator. The president's brother, Humberto, recently invited another Contra delegate, Fernando Arguero, to his beach house, knowing full well that it had once belonged to Mr. Arguero. &quot;It's being well looked after,&quot; Mr. Ortega assured the former owner, according to several Contras.    The negotiating team last week found it nearly as hard to get to Nicaragua through official channels as it is for soldiers to sneak across the border. First came word that their commercial flight had been delayed 3 1/2 hours. Then, once it seemed to be leaving, the pilot aborted his takeoff and taxied back to the terminal &quot;for security reasons,&quot; after discovering that the boxes of office supplies the Contras are toting weren't cleared by airline security.    The flight itself was uneventful and curiously short on emotion. In Managua, Mrs. Sacasa's reunion with her sister wasn't strained at all. They shared coffee and family gossip at the Camino Real. They didn't, it turned out, have to share a room. </TEXT></DOC>