<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870211-0052 </DOCNO><HL> Tax Report:A Special Summary and ForecastOf Federal and State TaxDevelopments---By Scott R. Schmedel</HL><DD> 02/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXES LATAM GOVMT LABORREAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE (IRS)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   YOU THOUGHT YOU KNEW all the bad news about home-mortgage interest?    IRS rule writers are wrestling with several issues raised by new restrictions on interest deductions. Main-home and second-home mortgages issued by last Aug. 16 are exempt from the limits, but what if you refinance such a loan just to cut the interest rate? Fearing that the IRS will say the exemption is lost, Rep. Matsui (D., Calif.) plans to enter a bill to preserve it in such cases. Another unresolved question: Do &quot;yachts and Winnebagos&quot; qualify for second-home deductions? A finding that they do is likely to prompt moves to counter it.    The law doesn't specify just when loan proceeds must be used for educational or medical costs to qualify for interest deductions; IRS rules on spending that comes before a loan or much later may prove to be among the most controversial, a knowledgeable source says. Other pending questions: Do lots bought for homes and homes in construction qualify for interest deductions before they are occupied? How do you handle deductions when you sell one second home and buy another during the year?    The new rules are sure to place a greater records-keeping burden on homeowners.    FISCAL YEARS will benefit few taxpayers under new IRS rules.    Last fall, the IRS suspended rules for electing fiscal years and said it would issue new ones under the tax act to keep partnerships, S corporations (taxed like partnerships), and certain others from using fiscal years to manipulate tax-act effects. Now the rules are out. To qualify for a fiscal year, such a business generally must show that it had at least 25% of annual gross receipts in the final two months of the 12-month period for three straight periods.    Very few affected concerns are likely to qualify under this &quot;mechanical test&quot; for a &quot;substantial business purposes,&quot; IRS official Irwin Leib said recently. The IRS generally won't consider a request for a change to a fiscal year unless the concern has had a major acquisition or divestiture or meets other terms. But the rules don't restrict changing to the calendar year.    THE SHELTER CASELOAD has the IRS looking for new ways to dissolve it.    The backlog is enormous: 43,433 shelter cases (many involving multiple years) in the Tax Court, 25,311 in administrative appeals, 422,832 returns under audit. Decisions in 266 test cases could dispose of 30,000 court cases; but overall, disposition will take years. Yet past victories and a new anti-shelter law make the IRS less concerned about setting precedents in court. &quot;The substantive issues have been pretty well resolved,&quot; says Chief Counsel Nelson.    So the IRS is trying to develop more efficient ways to settle shelter cases, especially those under audit. &quot;We won't have any fire sale,&quot; Nelson cautions; the IRS won't offer deductions of out-of-pocket expenses or a percentage of assessments or deals of that sort. But it is working on a plan to achieve earlier settlements by focusing sooner on the merits of the cases.    Nelson declines to indicate how soon a program could be announced.    NO BROTHERLIER LOVE hath a citizen than to help lay down $20 million in delinquent taxes, as 30,000 personal and business taxpayers did during Philadelphia's three-onth amnesty, ended Jan. 31. A $1.3 million payment settled one overdue commercial real-estate obligation.    AN EXEMPT STATE LEAGUE of independent agents, Professional Insurance Agents of Washington, is taxable on profits from fees it got for helping to promote sales of liability insurance to agents, the Tax Court held. The group was engaged in a business unrelated to its exempt aims.    VOICING A CHOICE: Many people must file elections to get certain tax-act treatment of such matters as asset depreciation and alien residency. Now temporary IRS rules prescribe the time and manner for making 52 of these elections.    THE FORGED SIGNATURE signaled theft, the art collector said.    Two of 50 paintings that Wolf Krahmer bought from an art dealer turned out to be misattributed. Krahmer sold one, which wasn't by Nicholas Poussin, at a $28,000 loss, and the other, bearing the forged signature of W.M. Chase, at a $4,700 loss. Seeking theft-loss deductions after the dealer died, Krahmer sued for tax refunds. The Claims Court denied a deduction for the purported Poussin, saying Krahmer didn't prove the dealer intentionally defrauded him.    But the court upheld a deduction for the other work, likening the sale of a forgery to passing counterfeit money. Both sides appealed their defeats; now the federal-circuit appeals court has brushed aside all of Krahmer's claims. &quot;The mere existence of the forged signature&quot; didn't prove fraudulent intent, the appeals panel said, and Krahmer didn't prove it otherwise. The panel reversed the lower court and denied a theft deduction for the painting.    But the appeals judges affirmed the lower court's denial of a deduction for the alleged Poussin.    BRIEFS: A university's payments to buy out tenured professors to reduce staff were wages for past services, not consideration for yielding contract rights, IRS private ruling 8648027 says; thus the payments are subject to Social Security tax. . . . The U.S. and St. Lucia signed an agreement to exchange tax information, subject to the Caribbean nation's passing a related law. </TEXT></DOC>