<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880104-0069 </DOCNO><HL> Office Glut: Binge of Overbuilding Keeps Values Falling In Commercial Realty --- Distressed Properties Increase Along With Loan Losses; Rents and Returns Drop --- Still, Some Signs of Discipline </HL><AUTHOR> Richard B. Schmitt (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT BKB GFC </CO><IN> REL CON FIN BNK </IN><TEXT>   The plunge in commercial real-estate values that began with the early-1980s energy bust was supposed to hit bottom in early 1987. It didn't.    In many parts of the country, the deterioration continues with no early upturn in sight. In some other sections, a bad situation isn't getting any worse but isn't improving, either.    The main culprit: continued overbuilding. The main results: more lender losses, more troubled properties and a fall in rents.    Some distressed property is selling for 35% to 40% of costs, compared with 50% to 70% a year ago. The sharpest deterioration continues in the Southwest energy belt and the West, but problems are creeping up in sections of the East.    Investors' returns on even premium office buildings are declining in nearly every region of the country, according to a survey by Frank Russell Co. of Tacoma, Wash., a consultant to pension funds. In the second quarter of 1987, the overall return for investors in such buildings was actually negative. One reason was large write-downs by such investors as insurance companies and pension funds.    In the past two years, property values in California's Silicon Valley, home of the U.S. semiconductor industry, crashed so hard that Ford Motor Co. last May picked up a four-building complex just north of San Jose, the valley's biggest town, for only 75% of cost. The area's economy is now on the rebound, but in downtown San Jose some 29% of the office space stands vacant and brokers are offering huge discounts on long-term leases.    What's more, as part of a downtown revival plan, four major office towers are being added there, and they will expand the city's office space by one-fourth. The plan is &quot;a very precarious experiment,&quot; concedes Dan Orloff, a real-estate agent who is trying to lease one of the towers. So far, he has some promising leads but no firm tenants.    The situation in Silicon Valley and elsewhere around the country is hurting many banks and savings and loan associations. Real-estate loan losses at banks grew 38% in the first nine months of 1987, to $1.6 billion, while such losses at thrifts soared 43%, to $7.2 billion. The debacle extends to many types of commercial property, including hotels, shopping malls, and apartment and condominium projects.    Banks' real-estate losses since 1984, when they began breaking out such results, amount to $5.7 billion. Thrifts' loan losses in the past five years total $22.9 billion, exceeding those of the previous five years by about $21 billion.    The commercial-property glut almost certainly means that the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp. will eventually need another huge capital infusion on top of the industry-financed $10.8 billion recapitalization approved by Congress last August. This time, however, taxpayers may finance part of the bailout.    Why all the overbuilding? Back in the '70s and early '80s, banks lent much of their money to energy companies and the Third World. When those two areas soured, the banks looked around for other borrowers, and, with a big increase in white-collar employment getting under way, real estate looked like a good bet. Banks and thrifts --and real-estate syndicators spurred by tax incentives later repealed --freely lent money to builders. And though the demand for office space materialized, construction outpaced it.    &quot;Where is the discipline&quot; to stop overbuilding? wonders Blake Eagle, a real-estate specialist for Frank Russell. &quot;The user and the investor market aren't in sync at all.&quot;    The bust has grown so bad that it may finally be generating that discipline. According to a report by Salomon Brothers Inc., the value of nonresidential projects coming on stream declined about 13% in the first eight months of 1987, and new loan commitments were down about 10% through June. The securities firm expects commercial-construction loan volume to drop 20% in 1988, after running at record levels in 1986 and 1987. Banks --but not Sandamp;Ls --have been able to reduce their delinquent real-estate loans from a year ago, although they have accomplished that partly through accelerated charge-offs and foreclosures.    Developers in some economically robust areas of the country have hopes that new demand for office space will absorb some of the excess, stabilizing or raising prices and rents. But the stock-market crash and a possible economic slowdown this year could delay any broad-based improvement. The finance, insurance and real-estate sectors of the economy account for nearly half of office employment --and securities firms and investment banks have been hurt by the market collapse. Banks and real-estate companies, meanwhile, are battling slumps in their markets.    &quot;Evidence is now accumulating that office-employment growth is about to slow dramatically,&quot; the Salomon report says. Salomon itself is laying off hundreds of workers and has pulled out of plans to develop a new Manhattan office complex with real-estate magnate Mortimer Zuckerman.    Another bad sign: the growth of an important drag on property values and rents. The overhang of real estate that has been repossessed or is delinquent on loan payments rose to $96 billion among banks, thrifts and the federal deposit insurance agencies at the end of the 1987 third quarter. That was a 26% increase from $76.1 billion a year earlier (about half of the increase resulted from a new regulation forcing more detailed disclosure of delinquent loans by thrifts). Many of these institutions are increasingly willing to dump distressed property, depressing prices further.    &quot;The times are perilous,&quot; says John R. White, the honorary chairman of Landauer Associates, a New York real-estate consulting firm. &quot;The vibrancy in financial and insurance sectors will not be there, and office performance in general will continue on a disappointing basis.&quot;    The growing problems in commercial real estate haven't been helped by financial institutions' chronic underreporting of the problems. Even though property backing real-estate loans declines in value, banks needn't set aside reserves or take losses if they consider the decline to be &quot;temporary.&quot; Other lenders and developers overstate the value of real estate by manipulating appraisals or lease terms, abuses that federal regulators are cracking down on.    &quot;People continue to appraise at basically unrealistic values,&quot; asserts a financial executive who is considering purchasing one or more thrifts.    Gibraltar Financial Corp., a major Sandamp;L holding company based in Beverly Hills, Calif., wrote off $147 million in real-estate investments in the third quarter of 1987, or about 25% of their value. The company cited the fact that it was putting the properties up for sale, but some of them had been in trouble for two years before the write-off.    The RREEF Fund, a real-estate investment manager based in San Francisco, wrote down the value of nine office buildings in Dallas, Denver and Houston by $100 million during 1987's second quarter --an admission, analysts say, of longstanding difficulties. Texas banks are &quot;waiting to the last minute&quot; to admit their mistakes, says Donald Thomas, a partner in Dallas with Price Waterhouse, the accounting firm.    This past November, Allied Bancshares Inc. of Houston disclosed that the comptroller of the currency had rebuked it for &quot;highly questionable&quot; loss reserves, including those for real-estate loans. Allied denied understating its problems, but it increased its loan-loss reserves by 44% after the comptroller acted. In May the company had written down the value of a $378 million group of loans, including real estate and repossessed property, to $250 million. Recently it announced plans to write the loans down further to $84 million, or 22 cents on the dollar.    Last month, First RepublicBank Corp. of Dallas announced an anticipated $325 million to $350 million net loss for the fourth quarter. Back in late June, bank officials had expected to be profitable in the fourth period. First RepublicBank said that suddenly deteriorating real-estate prices in Dallas caused the reversal. Some bankers agree. &quot;We used to joke around here that the standard lease was six years' free rent on a five-year lease,&quot; says a Houston banker. &quot;That joke has spread to Dallas.&quot;    Ostensibly healthy regions, meanwhile, are starting to show some surprising weakness:   --Bank of Boston's nonperforming assets jumped 49% in the third quarter of 1987, mostly because of growing commercial real-estate problems. Now Moody's Investors Service is reviewing the bank's debt rating for possible downgrading.    --Most of Gibraltar's problems, which caused a $154.6 million third-quarter net loss, are in California.    --Real-estate syndicator Consolidated Capital Equities Corp. recently foreclosed on an apartment project in Philadelphia.    Such regions continue to absorb record numbers of new tenants, but overbuilding has kept vacancy rates high. &quot;Underlying demand hasn't been that bad,&quot; says Daniel Platt, an executive vice president at Union Bank, a major California construction lender. &quot;The problem was that real estate was treated like a commodity, too much money chasing too few good projects.&quot;    Gluts in a fifth of the cities surveyed last September by Coldwell Banker had worsened since September 1986. Cities where that proved true included Austin, Texas, whose vacancy rate for downtown offices jumped to 35.8% from 19.1%, and Kansas City, where the rate rose to 25.4% from 18.9%. Dallas's increased to 24.6% from 20.4%, while Houston's increased to 21.9% from 18.4%. Some markets, including San Diego and Los Angeles, improved moderately, but the national rate hardly budged.    In fact, banks nationwide increased their real-estate loans by 19% through Sept. 30, compared with a year earlier, according to the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. Such growth, which partly reflects spurting residential lending, &quot;brings back memories of the Southwest during the latter stages of the oil boom,&quot; quips Alex Sheshunoff, an Austin bank consultant.    The glut has been good news for tenants, however. San Jose's new downtown developers are offering up to 30% discounts on 10-year leases. Tumbling rents there are enabling many companies to move to posher surroundings for less money, and most developers will help out with the moving bills. Last fall the rate war became so intense that it drove the owners of a year-old $52 million building into bankruptcy-law proceedings.    Dallas rents have been halved in two years. In Atlanta, concessions persist even though the vacancy rate has fallen below the national average in the past year. The tallest building in Missouri opens in Kansas City early this year with major tenants receiving up to 20% discounts.    For investors, the glut has brought bargains, but the best --or worst --may be yet to come. Texas banks are increasingly giving discounted financing to investors who take troubled buildings off their books. Other banks, including First Interstate Bancorp, based in Los Angeles, have recently set up SWAT teams to dispose of problem real estate as rapidly as possible.    Managing the overhang is controversial, however, particularly among federal regulators, who control about $15 billion in troubled property or real-estate loans. Many are concerned that reducing the overhang quickly will wreck already shaken markets, but there is pressure on the regulators from Congress and developers to sell as much as they can as soon as they can, and the pace seems to be quickening.    &quot;You walk a very fine line between fulfilling your mandate of winding up the affairs of the institution, and not creating disruptions in the marketplace,&quot; says Thomas Procopio, the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp.'s Southern regional director for receivership activities. FSLIC's troubled real-estate assets in his region have mushroomed to $3 billion from less than $1 billion a year ago.    Last September, Mr. Procopio's office opened a new &quot;marketing center,&quot; equipped with videotaped sales pitches, to lure buyers. Since establishing the center, Mr. Procopio's office has concluded deals worth about $40 million, and others are pending. The office has tentatively agreed to sell a 2,000-unit Dallas apartment development to a group of Canadian investors for $50 million. That is $100 million below cost.    There are other bargains in Dallas. The Federal Asset Disposition Association, an agency that tries to restructure troubled thrift loans or sell the property, recently agreed to sell a Dallas office building for about half the $21 million mortgage. Foreign investors claim to have bought two other Dallas buildings from a unit of First Bank System Inc., a Minneapolis-based bank holding company, at a 60% discount.    The bargains aren't all in Texas, either. Ford Aerospace Corp. purchased four buildings and 65 acres in north San Jose for $60 million --or 25% less than cost, estimates Robert Engles, the broker for Warner Communications Inc., the seller. And in San Francisco, a partnership including Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. and Chicago investor Samuel Zell acquired a foreclosed office building at about a 50% discount.    Mr. Zell, who made a fortune buying distressed property in the mid-1970s, says the bargains are just developing. &quot;You are beginning to see that stuff come out of the woodwork,&quot; he says. </TEXT></DOC>