<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870227-0006 </DOCNO><HL> Personal Taxes (A Special Report): Work Sheets---Setting the Records Straight:Taxpayers Should Pay Close AttentionTo the Documents They Keep in '87---By Ron Iori</HL><DD> 02/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXES </IN><TEXT>   Guidelines on what records taxpayers should keep to document their federal returns don't change much under the new tax law.    Tax returns and records of income and expenses still must be retained for three years, although most accountants suggest keeping them longer. The statute of limitations on prosecution for failure to report taxable income in some cases is six years; certain tax fraud cases can be prosecuted any time.    Here is a list of records to hold on to in 1987:    INCOME: Keep all income statements, including W-2s, dividend and interest statements, Social Security check stubs, alimony and unemployment records. Taxable distributions from pension funds, annuities or individual retirement accounts also should be documented.    Even though preferential treatment of long-term capital gains is being phased out, taxpayers who sell stock during the year should keep records of the initial purchase, any dividends reinvested, and the sale price.    Recipients of scholarships, grants and other educational aid should record both the money they receive and the way they spend it in order to determine what portion of the aid may be taxable.    ADJUSTMENTS TO INCOME: Keep records relating to contributions to IRAs and Keogh retirement plans, even if your contributions aren't tax-exempt any longer. The date and amounts of these contributions can figure in your tax liability when you begin to withdraw money from these plans.    MEDICAL PAYMENTS: The threshold for deductibility has been raised, but taxpayers should keep all records in case unexpected expenses arise. You can always throw the records out at year's end if your medical costs haven't exceeded 7.5% of your 1987 adjusted gross income.    TAXES: Keep proof of state income tax payments and property tax payments. But stop saving sales tax receipts; the sales tax deduction has been eliminated.    CHARITABLE CONTRIBUTIONS: Keep records, even though non-itemizers may no longer claim the deduction. Once again, some people may unexpectedly qualify before the year is out.    INTEREST CHARGES: The consumer-interest deduction will be phased out over the next four years, but continue to collect records of loan and charge-card interest until then.    Mortgage interest on first and second homes is still fully deductible. Taxpayers should also keep records on home-equity loans, along with proof of whether the money was spent on home improvements, medical care, education or personal expenses. The use of the money may affect the deduction allowed.    Business interest and interest on loans for investment are still fully deductible. Full records should be kept.    ENTERTAINMENT: Deductibility of meals and entertainment has been reduced, but with records some deduction may still be claimed.    TAX SHELTERS: With passive investments, taxpayers must document the amount of their losses and segregate them according to each investment. Under the new law, losses that can't be deducted in a year can be carried over until the sale of the passive investment; at that point, the losses are fully deductible.    MISCELLANEOUS DEDUCTIONS: Keep records of miscellaneous deductions -- tax preparation fees, work uniforms, union dues, subscriptions to professional publications, professional organization memberships, and certain unreimbursed employee expenses -- if there's a chance that they will exceed 2% of your adjusted gross income, which is the new threshold for such deductions. There isn't any threshold on several other items now in this category, including unreimbursed moving expenses and early withdrawal penalties on deposit certificates; records should be retained for them.    TAX CREDITS: When both spouses work, parents should keep records of how much they pay for child care.    SMALL BUSINESSES: Business owners and farmers should, of course, keep all records of income and expenses. They should also keep records that show whether or not they helped manage the business; examples include minutes of meetings and notes on who is making decisions for the company.    These records help determine whether losses or profit from a business are active or passive, an important distinction for purposes of claiming proper deductions under the new law.    ---   Mr. Iori is a news editor in The Wall Street Journal's Chicago bureau. </TEXT></DOC>