<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871229-0036 </DOCNO><HL> Washington Heartened by Tokyo's PlansTo Boost Defense Outlays, Buy From U.S.---This article is based on reports fromEduardo Lachica in WashingtonAnd Damon Darlin and Masayoshi Kanabayashi in Tokyo</HL><DD> 12/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN GE UTX ALD RTNAEROSPACE (ARO)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   The Japanese government plans to increase defense spending 5.2% in the coming fiscal year, to 3.7 trillion yen, or almost $30 billion, and to purchase a number of new weapons systems from the U.S., heartening the Reagan administration.    The planned weapons purchases include Aegis destroyers and anti-submarine helicopters. General Electric Co. stands to be one of the big winners. Its Government Electronics Systems division in Moorestown, N.J., is the prime contractor for the target-acquisition systems installed on Aegis destroyers. GE also builds the engines for these ships. A GE spokesman declined to comment on Japan's plans.    &quot;This shows that they're really serious about their defense goals,&quot; a U.S. State Department official said of the Japanese defense budget. The administration avoids linking defense with trade issues in dealing with Japan, but U.S. defense vendors are predicting that the expected purchases will help whittle down the Japanese trade surplus with the U.S. over the next several years.    The planned defense outlays for the year beginning next April 1 also entail the Japanese government's shouldering a bigger portion of the expenses of the estimated 47,600 U.S. troops stationed in Japan. The government said that it will spend about 120.3 billion yen, or about 11% more than in the current fiscal year, on sharing the cost of labor to support U.S. troops and to improve their facilities. A Foreign Ministry official estimated that Japan will now pay about 35% of labor costs.    In addition, government officials said Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita is expected to announce on Friday that the Japanese government intends to &quot;substantially&quot; increase such support in the year beginning April 1, 1989. These increases may help quiet criticism from U.S. politicians who say that Japan gets a &quot;free ride&quot; from the U.S. on its defense.    The planned defense outlays are contained in the final version of the national budget approved by the Japanese cabinet yesterday. The budget is expected to be approved with little difficulty after it is submitted to the Japanese parliament early next month. As previously reported, overall government spending will be increased 4.8%, to 56.7 trillion yen, which government officials and private economists say will continue to stimulate the domestic economy. The budget envisions a government deficit of 8.841 trillion yen.    The cabinet last week had approved a draft budget that called for a 4.4% increase in defense spending. While the budget approved yesterday contains a bigger defense-spending increase, it still falls short of the 6.2% rise sought by Japan's Defense Agency. The planned defense-spending boost matches the 5.2% increase budgeted for the current fiscal year. But spending this year has increased only 4.2% because government revenues fell short of expectations when a planned sales tax wasn't approved by parliament. No such difficulties are expected in the new year.    The defense outlay will represent 1.013% of Japan's estimated gross national product. Japan's defense spending rose above 1% of GNP last year, an unofficial ceiling that had been in place since 1976. Reaction to the increase last year from neighboring countries and liberals in Japan wasn't as strong as government officials had feared, and Foreign Ministry officials said they expect even less negative reaction this year.    The new budget could put Japan ahead of all but one or two North Atlantic Treaty Organization countries in the dollar amount of defense spending. But in terms of the share of gross national product devoted to defense, Japan's spending is well below that of other nations. Defense spending's share of GNP in the U.S., for example, is 6.4%, while in Britain it is 5.2% and in West Germany 3.2%.    Yet U.S. officials are pleased by the trends in Tokyo's defense spending. &quot;It isn't just the budget in a statistical sense that we're interested in but the contents. And we see good progress there,&quot; a Pentagon aide said.    The budget for the coming fiscal year provides for initial payments for the construction of one of two Aegis warships to be commissioned by the Japanese navy. The ships are designed to shield a battle fleet from air attack with advanced radar tracking and batteries of missiles.    Japan has informed the Pentagon that it intends to build only the hulls of the ships in domestic yards and buy almost everything else from the U.S. The Pentagon estimates that the ships will each cost $1 billion.    The budget request also will cover the purchase of the first batch of the 60 submarine-hunting SH60-J Seahawk helicopters sought by Japan's Maritime Self-Defense Force. The Seahawks are to be manufactured by Kawasaki Heavy Industries Ltd. in Japan under license from United Technologies Corp.'s Sikorsky division. The dipping sonar used by the SH60s to detect the presence of submarines is made by Allied-Signal Inc.'s Bendix division.    The Japanese Defense Agency also asked for funds to study the acquisition of an over-the-horizon radar system to lengthen the range of Japan's air-defense system. Two possible U.S. suppliers for this system are GE and Raytheon Co.    The Defense Agency also sought funds to start the design and construction of a new fighter-bomber, the FSX, based on General Dynamics Corp.'s F-16. This project is being closely watched by Congress. Senate Majority Leader Robert Byrd (D., W.Va.) and Sen. John Danforth (R., Mo.) have urged U.S. Defense Secretary Frank Carlucci to make sure that Japan develops the FSX as a true joint venture, with U.S. vendors getting a fair share of the contracts.    There's also some concern in Congress about the Aegis purchase. Rep. Charles Bennett (D., Fla.), chairman of the House Armed Services Committee's seapower panel, has introduced a bill prohibiting such a transaction.    &quot;This isn't addressed to Japan per se,&quot; Rep. Bennett explained. &quot;All I'm concerned about is every time you share defense secrets with another country you open the door to Soviet espionage.&quot; Mr. Bennett cited the illegal diversion to the Soviet Union of sophisticated milling machines by a Toshiba Corp. unit as one cause of his concern.    The Pentagon has stated that Japan won't acquire the sensitive technology behind the Aegis system, but built-up products based on that technology.&quot;So far the Japanese have taken good care of everything we've sold them,&quot; a Pentagon spokesman said. </TEXT></DOC>