<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880628-0045 </DOCNO><HL> SEC Charges Insider Trading In Morgan Deals --- Agency Links an Analyst, Taiwanese Businessman In $19 Million Scheme </HL><AUTHOR> James B. Stewart and Daniel Hertzberg (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MS </CO><IN> STK SCR </IN><G> SEC </G><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In the second-largest insider-trading case ever, the Securities and Exchange Commission charged Stephen Sui-Kuan Wang Jr., a 24-year-old Morgan Stanley andamp; Co. analyst in the firm's mergers and acquisitions department, and Fred C. Lee, a Taiwanese businessman, with a scheme that allegedly reaped more than $19 million in illegal insider-trading profits.    The case is eclipsed only by the 1986 Ivan F. Boesky insider-trading scandal, in which the now-imprisoned former takeover speculator agreed to disgorge $100 million to settle SEC charges of insider trading.    According to the SEC's complaint, Mr. Wang passed confidential information he gleaned from his work at Morgan Stanley to Mr. Lee, who, using more than 30 accounts, traded in stock and options of at least 25 companies using the information he obtained from Mr. Wang. In return, Mr. Lee, 38, described by the SEC as an international businessman with substantial interests in real estate, importing and exporting, and public utilities, transferred at least $200,000 to Mr. Wang.    The SEC, in papers filed in U.S. District Court, called the matter &quot;an emergency&quot; and yesterday obtained a temporary court order freezing the assets of Messrs. Wang and Lee. The SEC said Mr. Lee was trying to remove his money and assets from the U.S. and transfer them overseas.    SEC officials involved in the case described Mr. Lee's trading as &quot;brazen&quot; and &quot;clumsy.&quot; Noting that the scheme apparently was hatched at least as early as July 1987, the SEC officials professed amazement that Mr. Wang was undeterred by recent highly publicized enforcement actions against Mr. Boesky and against former investment banker Dennis Levine, who made $12.6 million in illegal insider-trading profits and pleaded guilty in 1986 to four felonies. Messrs. Wang and Lee &quot;apparently didn't get the message,&quot; said Gary Lynch, the SEC's head of enforcement.    The SEC said its investigation of the case is continuing, and people familiar with the investigation said the SEC is continuing to look inside Morgan Stanley. In its papers, the SEC noted that Morgan Stanley not only was the source of the confidential information, but also was the firm that handled much of Mr. Lee's illegal trading.    Among the unanswered questions the SEC is said to be investigating are how such trading could have gone undetected within Morgan Stanley, given the correlation of the trading to Morgan Stanley deals, how a 24-year-old analyst would have had access to so many transactions in such a short period of time, and whether Mr. Wang had any accomplices within the firm.    Morgan Stanley, in a statement, said the firm is cooperating with the SEC. But others familiar with the investigation said Morgan Stanley at first resisted cooperating with the SEC and tried to claim that the trading could be explained as something other than insider trading. Mr. Lynch declined comment on the extent of Morgan Stanley's cooperation so far, but added, &quot;we hope we will receive prompt and full cooperation (from Morgan Stanley) in the coming days.&quot; A source at Morgan Stanley said, &quot;We feel strongly we cooperated with the SEC.&quot;    Morgan Stanley said it has suspended Mr. Wang pending resolution of the charges. The firm said it is &quot;considering its legal alternatives&quot; with respect to Messrs. Wang and Lee, holding out the possibility that it may sue the two men. Morgan Stanley could face civil suits from corporate clients and their shareholders as a result of Mr. Wang's breaches of confidentiality, as did Shearson Lehman Hutton after Mr. Levine's insider trading.    Mr. Wang didn't return a message left on his answering machine at his Manhattan apartment. Yesterday morning, his secretary said Mr. Wang was expected at work, but he didn't respond to messages and his secretary later said he didn't appear. Mr. Wang's lawyer, Ira Sorkin, said, &quot;We have read the SEC complaint and we are studying the allegations.&quot; Neither Mr. Lee nor his lawyer, Michael Perlis, could be reached.    The SEC investigators moved with unusual speed after the commission approved a formal order of investigation April 1. Last Thursday, Mr. Lee, in a day and a half of depositions in Hong Kong, testified to SEC officials under oath that he had never met Mr. Wang and hadn't traded on inside information, the SEC said.    But on Friday, shortly after learning that Mr. Wang had been subpoenaed in New York by the SEC, Mr. Lee recanted. Mr. Perlis, Mr. Lee's lawyer, told the SEC officials in Hong Kong that Mr. Lee was guilty of insider trading and that Mr. Wang was Mr. Lee's source of information, the SEC complaint said.    Despite Mr. Lee's change in testimony, the SEC learned the investor was attempting to transfer substantial amounts of his assets out of the U.S. On Friday, Morgan Stanley agreed not to honor Mr. Lee's request to wire $2 million it held in Mr. Lee's accounts to a Hong Kong bank, the SEC said, and yesterday the SEC obtained a court order freezing Mr. Lee's assets in the U.S. as well as those of Mr. Wang.    In addition to injunctive relief, the SEC is seeking the disgorgement of at least $19 million in illegal profits and three times that amount in penalties under the Insider Trading Act.    People familiar with the case said the SEC's findings have been referred to the U.S. attorney's office in Manhattan for criminal investigation. A spokesman for the office declined to comment.    Morgan Stanley officials have touted their strict policies regarding confidential information, and the SEC said that in April 1987, Mr. Wang acknowledged in writing that he had read and understood a Morgan Stanley statement, &quot;The Handling of Sensitive Information,&quot; which described his duties to keep information confidential. He also acknowledged in writing that any violation of Morgan Stanley policies could subject him to dismissal and civil and criminal penalties, the SEC said.    In its charges, the SEC cited in detail four examples of allegedly illegal trading by Messrs. Wang and Lee: Utah Power andamp; Light Co., E.F. Hutton Group Inc., Stop andamp; Shop Cos. Inc., and Impact Systems Inc. Morgan Stanley was active in deals involving all four stocks. It represented Public Service Co. of New Mexico in an unsuccessful bid for Utah Power; it represented Commercial Credit Corp. in connection with a possible merger with Hutton; it represented Kohlberg Kravis Roberts andamp; Co. in a proposed leveraged buy-out of Stop and Shop; and it represented Valmet Corp. in a possible acquisition of Impact.    In each case, Mr. Wang passed confidential information to Mr. Lee, the SEC charged, with Mr. Lee placing phone calls from his residences in McLean, Va., and Hong Kong to Mr. Wang at his home and office in New York. And Mr. Lee traded, sometimes in huge amounts. For example, Mr. Lee purchased about 210,000 shares of Utah Power, 80,000 of them in just two days. The SEC estimated that Mr. Lee gained about $840,000 on the Utah Power trading alone. On the day before and the day that KKR submitted a confidential proposal for a leveraged buy-out of Stop andamp; Shop, Mr. Lee bought 130,000 Stop andamp; Shop shares and 1,900 call options, the SEC alleged. Mr. Lee made about $3 million on his Stop andamp; Shop trading, the SEC alleged.    The timing and size of the trading were such that it immediately triggered surveillance mechanisms at the New York and other stock exchanges and at the SEC, which in turn led to the SEC's formal order of investigation, people familiar with the case said.    The other 21 stocks identified by the SEC as the subject of illegal trading are:   American Standard Inc.; American Brands Inc.; Catalyst Energy Corp.; Chi Chi's Inc.; Dayton Hudson Corp.; Dime Savings Bank of New York; E-II Holdings Inc.; Federated Department Stores; Firestone Tire andamp; Rubber Co.; Gillette Co.; IC Industries Inc.; Kerr-McGee Corp.; Lyphomed Inc.; Manpower Inc.; Outboard Marine Inc.; Richmond Hill Savings Bank; Sabine Corp.; Safecard Services Inc.; Savannah Electric andamp; Power Co.; Staley Continental Inc.; and Stanadyne Inc.    People at Morgan Stanley said Mr. Wang was hired for a two-year analyst program during the summer of 1986 after graduating from the University of Illinois. He began working in the firm's leveraged buy-out area, and early in 1987 moved to mergers and acquisitions. People at Morgan Stanley said that Mr. Wang worked in a &quot;bullpen&quot; with three other analysts and might have gleaned information from them. They said that such analysts, because of their junior status, weren't ordinarily briefed on the full range of deals being worked on by Morgan Stanley.    The people at Morgan Stanley said such employees can earn as much as $60,000 a year; Mr. Wang is said to have earned about half that. The firm said Mr. Wang was scheduled to leave the firm at the end of this week, at the conclusion of the program, and said it didn't know his plans. Graduates of Morgan Stanley's and similar programs often go on to graduate schools in business.    It isn't known how Mr. Wang met Mr. Lee. Mr. Lee was an investor in a Morgan Stanley leveraged buy-out fund while Mr. Wang was at the firm, people at Morgan Stanley said, and Mr. Lee is known to have controlled and traded in five accounts at Morgan Stanley, though the accounts were maintained in other names. The broker for those accounts was Mitchell Hull, said people familiar with the trading, who added that Mr. Hull didn't solicit Mr. Lee's trades. People at Morgan Stanley said the firm looked at Mr. Lee's trading through Mr. Hull even before it was contacted by the SEC, but thought the trading could be explained through news developments. The firm thought Mr. Lee &quot;was an amateur arbitrager,&quot; said one Morgan Stanley official.    Mr. Hull couldn't be reached for comment. </TEXT></DOC>