<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871006-0013 </DOCNO><HL> Supreme Court to Review New York LawThat Bars Bias at Large Private Clubs---By Stephen WermielStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MOB WPOB FREST UK MSU GOVMT TAXES LABOR LATAM DALPUBLISHING (PUB)UTILITIES (UTI)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)PETROLEUM (PET)PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)AIRLINES (AIR)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)SUPREME COURT (SUP)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)EXECUTIVE (EXE)LABOR DEPARTMENT (LBR) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court agreed to review a New York City law intended to bar large private clubs from discriminating against women and minorities.    The case is an important constitutional test of the authority of state and local governments to regulate private activity that may have an impact on business. It pits claims of freedom of association by club members against government policies prohibiting discrimination.    The New York dispute turns on the constitutionality of a local ordinance, passed in 1984, that changed the definition of &quot;private&quot; clubs and organizations so that larger clubs would be covered by laws prohibiting discrimination in public institutions or places.    The ordinance says that a club isn't private if it has more than 400 members, regularly serves meals and is used for business purposes by members and nonmembers. The law exempts charitable and religious clubs.    An association of private clubs and groups challenged the law, but the New York Court of Appeals, the highest state court, upheld it on Feb. 17 of this year. The association argues in its appeal to the Supreme Court that the First Amendment protects the right of private club members to freedom of association.    A number of other cities have recently considered or passed similar laws and will be watching the case closely. These include Detroit, Los Angeles, Philadelphia and the District of Columbia.    Separately, the justices refused to hear an appeal by the Bohemian Club, an exclusive California men's club that employs only men. A state trial court rejected a charge, brought by state officials, of sex discrimination in hiring. But the state court of appeals reinstated it.    Post Libel Case   The justices refused to hear an appeal by former Mobil Corp. President William Tavoulareas, ending his seven-year libel dispute with the Washington Post.    Mr. Tavoulareas sued in 1980 over a 1979 article that reported that he had set up his son, a shipping clerk, as a partner in a London-based company that did substantial business with Mobil. He argued that the article suggested he had misused his position.    Court rulings in the case tipped back and forth. A jury ruled in Mr. Tavoulareas's favor in 1982, awarding him $2.1 million. But in 1983, a federal judge threw out the jury verdict. In 1985, a federal appeals court panel reinstated the verdict by a 2-1 vote, chastizing the Post in unusually sharp terms for having been out to &quot;get&quot; Mr. Tavoulareas and for slanting or ignoring facts. But last March, the full appeals court, by a 7-1 vote, again threw out the verdict and upheld the district judge's ruling against Mr. Tavoulareas.    Bhopal Disaster   The justices left intact court orders that hundreds of lawsuits against Union Carbide Corp., filed after the 1984 Bhopal disaster, be tried in India's courts. The accident involved release of methyl isocyanate gas from a Union Carbide India Ltd. plant, resulting in some 2,000 deaths and 200,000 injuries. Union Carbide's lawyers wanted to move the cases to India. In India, the company would be able to present its case to a judge, because there are no juries, and pretrial exchanges could be far less extensive.    Mississippi Power   The high court agreed to hear an appeal by Middle South Utilities Inc.'s Mississippi Power andamp; Light Co. unit, which is trying to preserve a $326 million rate increase.    The Mississippi Supreme Court ruled Feb. 25 that state regulators improperly approved the rate increase, allowing the company to bill consumers for its share of the costs of Grand Gulf 1, a nuclear plant near Port Gibson, Miss. Mississippi Pandamp;L's share of Grand Gulf costs was set by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, which allocated the costs among Middle South's four operating companies. The Mississippi court said state regulators failed to consider whether Mississippi Pandamp;L's investment in Grand Gulf was prudent.    Nonmember Banks   The justices let stand a federal appeals court ruling upholding Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. regulations, issued in 1984, that permit federally insured, state banks that aren't members of the Federal Reserve System to operate securities subsidiaries. The high court refused to hear an appeal by the Investment Company Institute and the Securities Industry Association, trade associations for mutual funds and broker-dealers, respectively.    Deaver Appeal   The court refused to hear an appeal by former White House Deputy Chief of Staff Michael Deaver, a longtime friend of President Reagan's, who challenged the constitutionality of the independent-counsel law. Mr. Deaver, who left the White House and opened a consulting firm, was indicted in March, charged with perjury before a congressional subcommittee and a federal grand jury. The investigation involved his contacts for clients with administration officials.    Lawyers for Mr. Deaver say the law under which the prosecutor was appointed is unconstitutional. They failed to have the indictment dismissed and a trial is tentatively set for Oct. 19. Similar challenges to the law are pending in other cases, and Mr. Deaver may renew his challenge if he is convicted.    Municipal Bonds   The high court let stand a federal appeals court ruling upholding a 1983 federal law that requires Social Security recipients to include interest on tax-exempt municipal bonds in calculating their adjusted gross income to determine whether they need to pay federal taxes. New York City, which issues tax-exempt bonds to raise revenues, challenged the constitutionality of the law, arguing that the effect was to tax income from municipal bonds, interfering with state and local governments' revenue-raising.    Marcos Contempt   The justices left intact a federal court order holding former Philippine President Ferdinand Marcos and his wife, Imelda, in civil contempt for failing to provide records to a grand jury. The federal grand jury in Alexandria, Va., is investigating possible corruption in arms sales by American companies to the Philippines.    In other action yesterday, the justices agreed to decide:    --Whether federal energy laws prohibit state governments from regulating wholesale gasoline prices. The court will review a challenge to a Puerto Rico law.    --Whether a doctor may sue competing doctors, under federal antitrust laws, for alleged misuse of a hospital's peer review system for evaluating medical personnel. The case involves doctors in Astoria, Ore., who practice at Columbia Memorial Hospital.    --Whether federal antitrust laws bar a company from trying to influence safety standards being adopted by a private group, the National Fire Protection Association, which sets standards for electrical systems. TBG Inc., a conduit manufacturer, sued Allied Tube andamp; Conduit Corp., an Atcor Inc. unit, for trying to make the safety standards exclude TBG's conduit. A jury awarded $3.8 million in damages, which may be tripled under federal law to $11.4 million. A federal judge threw out the award, but a federal appeals court in New York reinstated it in April.    Also, the high court:   --Threw out a federal appeals court ruling requiring arbitration of disputes between two unions and Western Air Lines, which merged with Delta Air Lines in April. The Supreme Court ordered the appeals court to decide whether the case is moot. The unions complained that Western failed to make certain that Delta would be bound by the union contracts with Western.    --Agreed to decide when an employer who violates federal minimum wage and overtime laws has acted &quot;willfully.&quot; If an employer's actions aren't willful, back pay for as many as two years may be awarded by a court, while for willful conduct, back pay of three years is authorized. The Labor Department sued Richland Shoe Co. for back pay for machine mechanics. The Labor Department appealed to the high court after a federal appeals court adopted what federal officials say is too restrictive a definition of &quot;willful&quot; action.    --Agreed to decide the question of whether a court order violated an individual's Fifth Amendment privilege against self-incrimination when it required the individual, who was under investigation by a grand jury, to authorize foreign banks to turn over records. The individual in the case, the target of a grand jury investigation of tax fraud in Houston, hasn't been identified.    --Let stand a court ruling that an Akron, Ohio, right-to-know law that requires disclosure and labeling of hazardous materials in the workplace is invalid because it is pre-empted by federal regulations. But the court also let stand a ruling that a similar Pennsylvania law is valid and isn't pre-empted by federal law. There was no explanation for the apparently conflicting results. </TEXT></DOC>