<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870420-0091 </DOCNO><HL> Yangtze Dam Project, Long A HostageTo the Political Tide, Is Studied Again---By James R. SchiffmanStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST CANDAUTILITIES (UTI) </IN><DATELINE> YICHANG, China  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In 1923, Sun Yat-sen called for a study of the possibility of building a dam across the Yangtze River where it narrows and passes through three scenic gorges upstream from here.    The idea was researched in the 1930s, but disunity, power struggles, a Japanese invasion and, finally, World War II got in the way. After the war, the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation did some studies, but civil war and the Communist revolution intervened. In the 1950s, Soviet engineers made studies, but they left when Beijing and Moscow had their falling out.    Since the mid-1950s, the prospects for building the dam have ebbed and flowed with China's political currents. Now, proponents are preparing to try to get the project going again.    With the backing of the World Bank, Canada is funding an $8.3 million feasibility study, although the project has been studied so much there are documents stacked in warehouses on several continents. The Ottawa government hopes the study will translate into jobs for Canadian companies if the project goes ahead.    The project is mammoth. It calls for building the world's largest hydroelectric-generating capacity and only the second dam across the Yangtze. A wide area in China's midsection would be flooded by the reservoir created behind the dam, and at least 300,000 people would have to be moved. The scenic Three Gorges, a major tourist attraction, would be disturbed.    Proponents say the project would have great economic benefits. The dam would produce power to fuel industrialization in one of China's most populous and important regions. The project would help control flooding of the Yangtze. Navigation on the river would be improved, although controversy rages on this point, according to a major study published last year by Kenneth Lieberthal and Michael Oksenberg, two U.S. academics specializing in China.    But there are big drawbacks, too. Estimates a year ago put the price tag at $12 billion. Opponents argue that the amount is too large for a project that will take at least a decade to begin producing power, Messrs. Lieberthal and Oksenberg say in their study, which was prepared for the U.S. Commerce Department and recounts much of the dam project's history.    Another problem is silt, which the Yangtze picks up in large quantities in its upper reaches. A dam would slow the flow of the river, reducing the amount of silt carried downstream and out to sea by the current. The question is how serious the sedimentation would be. Officials in areas upstream from the dam site worry that the silting could become so severe that navigation would worsen, the U.S. study says.    But the main reason for opposition, according to Wei Tingcheng, commissioner of the Yangtze Valley Planning Office in Wuhan, is that the estimated 300,000 people would be displaced. Opponents don't see the need to resettle so many people when other ways of producing power are available.    The feasibility study is addressing all these concerns, says Jean Gagnon, vice president of Canadian International Project Managers Ltd., the consortium doing the study.    &quot;Of course there will be sedimentation on a river that flows as fast as the Yangtze in the upper reaches,&quot; he says, adding that the dam will be designed to permit ample flow of silt. &quot;We don't see a problem presently,&quot; he says.    Mr. Gagnon also plays down the relocation issue. &quot;Moving 300,000 people in China is a very small thing -- they do that every second year in Beijing,&quot; he says, referring to the movement of people caused by the capital's program to upgrade housing.    Mr. Wei notes that other major hydroelectric projects around the world faced opposition before being built, but now are considered to be highly beneficial.    The crucial variable in the feasibility study is the dam's height. The higher the dam, the more electric power and the greater the benefits for navigation. But a higher dam is costlier. Raising the height by a few yards also greatly increases the area of flooding and therefore the number of people that must be moved.    After the feasibility study is completed, around September, the project must clear a coordinating group headed by Vice Premier Li Peng and be approved by the State Council -- the highest policy-making body -- and the National People's Congress.    Mr. Li is regarded as the chief decision maker for the project, but he also has been rumored to be a leading candidate to succeed Premier Zhao Ziyang. So the Three Gorges project is very much intertwined with high-level political maneuvering.    Mr. Li's position on the project is something of a mystery. Messrs. Lieberthal and Oksenberg say in their study that he was reported to be an opponent in 1981, when he was a vice minister dealing with electric power. But a Canadian diplomat says he has been led to believe that Mr. Li now supports the project.    The project's proponents began to make real headway only with the emergence in 1978 of Deng Xiaoping and his &quot;four modernizations&quot;: industry, agriculture, science and technology, and defense. Electric power became an important national priority, but the debate on Three Gorges continued fierce and unresolved.    By 1984, prospects for the project appeared bright. The idea of building Three Gorges was approved by the State Council, which established the coordinating group under Vice Premier Li.    But economic growth got out of hand in 1984 and 1985, leading to inflation, excessive investment and a serious foreign-exchange drain. The leadership decided to slap on controls, in part by drastically curtailing spending on major projects.    The result: Last year Three Gorges again was put on hold.    The bureaucratic conflicts continue. According to the Lieberthal-Oksenberg study, some important supporters of the project are the water-resources group within the Ministry of Water Resources and Electric Power; the Yangtze Valley Planning Office; and Hunan and Hubei provinces, which would stand to benefit greatly because they are downstream from the dam site.    Many others are concerned about the project, including the city of Shanghai, which frets about environmental changes in the Yangtze. The electric-power group within the water-resources ministry worries about committing so much money to a project that will take 10 years to complete. The Ministry of Communications isn't satisfied that the dam won't aggravate silting on the river and therefore slow navigation.    The issues are highly sensitive. Mr. Gagnon asked a reporter to clear a request for an interview with the water-resources ministry, mentioning that the project had stirred up a lot of opposition and saying, &quot;We wouldn't want to revive that.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>