<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881004-0212 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf: One Man's Decade in Vietnam </HL><AUTHOR> Lee Lescaze </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   In the beginning, John Paul Vann had the keenest lie detector in Vietnam. When other Americans said the war was being won, he knew better. When Americans said the South Vietnamese army could fight, Mr. Vann knew they were wrong. When the Pentagon and the White House said American troops were the answer, Mr. Vann said they were not.    By the time he died 10 years later in 1972, his lie detector was as broken as his country's dreams of victory. Mr. Vann had lost his course in Vietnam as surely as those Americans he earlier had called fools.    But he never lost his courage nor the near superhuman energy that propelled him on a normal quota of four hours of sleep, reduced when necessary. No other American spent so long working so hard to win in Vietnam. He grew famous in the war, becoming a legend with American and South Vietnamese officers, with Washington policy makers and with reporters whom he both educated and used. His death was front-page news in the U.S. It also was a major event for his enemies. The Vietcong radio broadcast the news at length, calling Mr. Vann's death a stunning blow to the U.S.-Saigon forces.    Mr. Vann's life is a stunning story, its surface brilliance concealing sexual compulsions that filled his private life with lies. But &quot;A Bright Shining Lie: John Paul Vann and America in Vietnam&quot; (Random House, 861 pages, $24.95) by Neil Sheehan is more than a biography. It also is a compelling and clear history of U.S. involvement in Vietnam. Mr. Sheehan's book, on which he worked 16 years, is the best answer to give any American who asks: &quot;How could this have happened?&quot;    The biggest lie in this history of lies and delusions is the war itself -- as Mr. Sheehan sees it, a misbegotten effort initiated by Americans who distorted intelligence, ignored history and closed their eyes to fact. Mr. Sheehan, a former New York Times and United Press International reporter, is equally critical of later U.S. leadership, from Gen. William C. Westmoreland, whose search-and-destroy tactics bought valueless terrain at terrible cost, to Washington policy makers who allowed the killing to continue to no end.    &quot;A Bright Shining Lie&quot; will be attacked by those who have trimmed their judgments to this decade's prevailing winds. It will not please those who, like former President Nixon, declare our cause in Vietnam was noble and its opponents immoral.    When Mr. Sheehan first met Mr. Vann shortly after each had arrived in Vietnam in 1962, they were passionate believers in the war. Mr. Vann, then an Army lieutenant colonel and adviser to a South Vietnamese army division, saw himself serving the noble cause of holding back the armies of world communism. And he was confident from the start that he knew how to win.    Instead of winning, however, he ran into the incompetence of South Vietnamese officers and the corruption of their political-military system.    He had recognized early the need for social action to win allegiance for the Saigon government, but by 1965 he was so discouraged by the government that he confessed that &quot;the principles, goals and desires of the {Vietcong} side&quot; were closer to American ideals. The U.S. was coming to stand for colonialism, oppression and social injustice, he feared.    As hard as he worked for victory, the arrogant, ambitious Mr. Vann also sought greater roles for himself. Early on, he proposed that he and Americans like him be given command, rather than remaining frustrated advisers.    His decade in Vietnam gave him larger and larger roles until finally he was the third most powerful American in the war zone after the ambassador and U.S. commander. But, by then the war had captured him, corrupting his judgment as it had warped the vision of so many others. Vietnam defeated him because he came to need the war too much. Mr. Vann had discovered in Korea that he loved war. He loved the danger, and faced it with a reckless nonchalance. Most of all, he loved war because he was good at it and, as Mr. Sheehan writes: &quot;No time had hung on his hands. Nothing had been trivial or dull. Every day had been meaningful, every act important and urgent.&quot;    So, needing what the war gave him, Mr. Vann came to look too hard for signs of success. Two days before his death he declared without much evidence that war had brought the necessary social changes. He spoke of coming victory.    He was optimistic although one coastal province had recently collapsed in a panic that was a miniature preview of the rout that destroyed South Vietnam three years later. He predicted success although defeat had stared him in the face at the Central Highlands city of Kontum only days before. On the eve of that battle the man who had made the Vietnam War his life had said: &quot;Now my career is at stake because I've said we can defend Kontum. If you don't hold it, I no longer have any credibility or career.&quot;    Kontum held. So when Mr. Vann's helicopter crashed four days later, it was on a day that had been filled with celebration, a day long before the war he loved and needed would have run out on him. As his body lay on the ground, South Vietnamese soldiers took his watch, his wallet and his class ring.    ---   Mr. Lescaze, who covered the war in Vietnam from 1967 to 1972 for the Washington Post, is the Journal's deputy foreign editor. </TEXT></DOC>