<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870430-0124 </DOCNO><HL> Gephardt, With Trade Win, Highlights StanceAgainst Reagan and Boosts Presidential Quest---By David ShribmanStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   The drive that led Rep. Richard Gephardt to win House approval yesterday of a tough trade amendment has catapulted him into the front ranks of the contenders for the 1988 Democratic presidential nomination.    With a twin offensive -- one arm wrestling votes in the House in Washington, the other coaxing support in Iowa, site of the first presidential caucuses -- the Missouri lawmaker has become the first candidate to break out of the second tier of Democratic presidential aspirants and now is positioned to challenge former Sen. Gary Hart of Colorado, the leader in the polls, and the Rev. Jesse Jackson, who has the strongest base.    &quot;He's very much a first-tier candidate,&quot; says Bonnie Campbell, Iowa's state Democratic chairman. Majority Whip Tony Coelho of California adds: &quot;Everybody knows Dick has substance. Now he has stature.&quot;    Although it was only by a close 218-214 vote that Rep. Gephardt won approval of the amendment holding out the threat of trade retaliation, his identification with the issue has transformed him from a House figure into a household word. He paraded before network interview shows, was the subject of magazine stories and was portrayed on the front page of USA Today, along with President Reagan and Japanese Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone, as one of the principal figures in the global trade struggle. The Washington Post, the New York Times and The Wall Street Journal mentioned his name in 71 stories in the past month, more than twice as many as such rival contenders as Sen. Joseph Biden of Delaware and former Gov. Bruce Babbitt of Arizona.    Mr. Gephardt was gaining not only publicity but, more important, positioning. He has established himself as the principal opponent of the Reagan administration's trade policies, he has defused feminist opposition by retreating from support of a constitutional amendment banning abortion, and has won backing in Iowa for his support of mandatory crop-production controls.    &quot;His positions on the trade and farm issues are things that open the doors for him in Iowa,&quot; says Frank Alexander, the state vice president of the United Auto Workers, who has joined the Gephardt camp. &quot;They are just the things we want to hear.&quot;    But there may be dangers in the strategy that Rep. Gephardt has mapped with shrewdness and followed with determination. The St. Louis Democrat is running the risk of seeming to pander to interest groups in a fashion reminiscent of the 1984 presidential campaign of former Vice President Walter Mondale.    &quot;After Mondale, no one can afford to cozy up to these groups,&quot; says John Sears, a Republican political consultant. &quot;Most people want a president who they think is free to make the right decision, not one who is bound to honor the special interests of some group. You can't look as if you're mortgaged to someone else. You wall yourself off from middle-of-the-road support if you do.&quot;    Mr. Gephardt, in fact, tailored his legislative tactics to fit his campaign strategy. He fought for his amendment on the House floor, where proceedings are televised, rather than in the Ways and Means Committee, which drafted the trade bill in a closed session and where he was unlikely to prevail. He orchestrated a series of press events in the days leading to the vote and, on Monday, lingered outside his own news conference because an aide had noticed that an NBC camera crew hadn't arrived.    &quot;What sticks in the gut of some of my colleagues on this side is the personal ambition of the sponsor,&quot; says Republican Rep. Sherwood Boehlert of New York, who nevertheless voted for the Gephardt amendment.    Whatever the long-term effect, the Gephardt strategy has had the short-term effect of separating him from the cluster of Democratic presidential aspirants hoping to emerge and establishing him as a major force.    &quot;Trade is a real red button here,&quot; says Democratic state Sen. Patrick Deluhary of Davenport, Iowa, who hasn't endorsed any candidate. &quot;It cuts so deeply here -- there is so much pain and suffering -- that most people aren't worrying that he's stressing the topic too much or pandering to them. He runs no risk talking about it.&quot;    Political analysts believe that Mr. Gephardt's emphasis on the trade issue may produce dividends precisely because of the peculiar procedures inherent in the Iowa precinct caucuses, where the fate of presidential candidates is determined by attendance at meetings on a wintry Monday evening -- just the sort of forum that can be influenced by an interest such as labor. &quot;The trade angle is important because it can establish his credentials within the political elite,&quot; says Warren Miller, an Arizona State University political scientist. &quot;But as a mass movement, that parade isn't going to go anyplace.&quot;    As for the risk that his trade offensive might offend Iowa's farmers, who benefit from agricultural exports, Mr. Gephardt has a proposal to assist them, too. He and Democratic Sen. Tom Harkin of Iowa advocate crop reductions that ultimately would lead to price control. Iowa's farmers, Mr. Gephardt says, &quot;realize that unless we both have exports and get a better price domestically . . . they're all going out of business.&quot;    Mr. Gephardt, however, can be an unfaithful suitor. He championed tax overhaul but when the effort seemed stalled he backed away and played little role in molding the tax bill. A longtime supporter of a constitutional amendment to ban abortion, he now argues that legislation to curb abortions is the best route -- a change that angered foes of abortion but made him less objectionable to the strong feminist wing of the Democratic Party.    Mr. Gephardt built his trade offensive on a strong organizational foundation. He claims the support of 60 House colleagues, many of whom will be Democratic convention delegates. In Iowa, he already has won the hand of a third of the State Democratic Central Committee. He spent 60 days in Iowa since January 1985, was the only candidate who campaigned in every congressional district in 1986 and plans to campaign a week a month in the state before the February caucuses.    &quot;Gephardt is doing a lot of the things Hart did the last time,&quot; says James Reynolds, a former U.S. attorney and Gephardt supporter who was co-chairman of the Iowa effort that won Mr. Hart second place in 1984 and thrust him into position to win the New Hampshire primary. &quot;He's going after people one-on-one, trying to become everybody's second choice, establishing himself as the alternative. He could be the real shocker in Iowa.&quot;    In New Hampshire, which is to hold the first primary eight days after the Iowa caucuses, Mr. Gephardt has recruited veteran political organizer Dudley Dudley, has traveled to every corner of the state and has been an active supporter of electrical workers in a contentious labor dispute in the Seacoast region.    &quot;I don't know what you have to do to break out of the pack,&quot; says Robert Craig, University of New Hampshire specialist in voting behavior, &quot;but you sure have to do what he's been doing to be ready.&quot;    Mr. Gephardt, who has displayed mastery of retail politics, ultimately must prove his skill at wholesale politics and express a broad vision that moves voters and not just special interests.    &quot;He's too slow for us in California,&quot; says Willie Brown, Democratic speaker of the state Assembly, but he adds: &quot;Gephardt was not a face you recognized, but now we know him.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>