<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870205-0074 </DOCNO><HL> Drexel's Michael Milken Called a FocusOf Probe Of Suspected Boesky Scheme---By James B. Stewart and Daniel HertzbergStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The government is studying evidence that Michael R. Milken was a key Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. official involved in a suspected scheme in which Drexel and Ivan F. Boesky sought to profit from corporate takeovers, according to people familiar with the investigation.    They identified at least four other Drexel officials whose roles the government is also studying.    Mr. Milken heads Drexel's high-yield bond operations based in Beverly Hills, Calif., and is regarded as the mastermind of Drexel's phenomenal growth, in part through the use of high-yield junk bonds to finance hostile takeovers. Mr. Milken has been previously identified as a recipient of a government subpoena in the Boesky investigation and also has been named in subpoenas issued to other people.    Others whose roles in the suspected scheme are being examined include Michael Milken's brother Lowell Milken, Charles Thurnher and Donald Balser, all three of whom work in the Beverly Hills office, and Cary Maultasch, a New York employee. The four men have been named in government subpoenas received by others and have received subpoenas themselves, according to people familiar with the investigation.    Although evidence suggests that the Drexel officials being investigated had roles in the suspected scheme, people familiar with the government's investigation said that it doesn't mean that all the officials are suspected of wrongdoing. Some may simply be potential witnesses. If the suspected scheme occurred, it would involve numerous criminal violations of the securities laws, including laws forbidding insider trading.    The government, as previously reported, is examining evidence suggesting that Mr. Boesky and Drexel officials unlawfully agreed to conceal ownership of large blocks of stock, agreed to share profits from their holdings and concealed evidence of their relationship. The government also is studying evidence that Mr. Boesky and Drexel parked stock with each other to conceal ownership of the positions.    As part of the suspected scheme, Mr. Boesky is said to have had secret records kept that gave details of his relationship with Drexel, and the government has obtained copies of the records. People familiar with the government's probe said that Mr. Milken also had secret records kept, which he relied upon to determine the amount of a $5.3 million payment that Mr. Boesky paid to Drexel last March.    The people familiar with the investigation said that Mr. Milken is the Drexel official that evidence suggests was most directly involved with Mr. Boesky in the suspected scheme.    In New York, Drexel declined to comment yesterday on any aspects of the suspected scheme or the identities of anyone who might be involved. However, a Drexel spokesman said that Messrs. Michael and Lowell Milken, Thurnher, Balser and Maultasch all deny any wrongdoing.    Frederick H. Joseph, chief executive officer, said, &quot;We have said in the past that we will fully cooperate with the authorities, and we are doing so. We do not know of any wrongdoing by employees of our firm. When our investigation and those of the regulators are complete, and we have facts, not leaks, rumors, innuendoes or speculation, we will act appropriately.&quot;    Mr. Joseph added: &quot;We think that it is outrageous that in the midst of one of the most intense investigations of our industry's practices, the press is publishing speculation by unnamed sources about the results of such investigations. Such speculation does irreparable harm to the firm and individuals.&quot;    The executive characterized news reports as &quot;leapfrogging the whole investigative and judicial process. We have been told by the investigators that these are confidential investigations, and we are not going to comment on specific allegations publicly.&quot;    Both Gary Lynch, head of enforcement at the Securities and Exchange Commission, and Charles Carberry, the assistant U.S. attorney in charge of the case, declined to comment.    The people close to the probe said that secret records relating to the suspected arrangement were kept for Drexel by Mr. Thurnher in the Beverly Hills office. Other people familiar with the workings of that office said that Mr. Thurnher handles computerized record-keeping for the office and creates computer programs that generate those records. They said that Mr. Thurnher knows the true identities of parties who are identified in Drexel's records only by secret codes.    People familiar with the government's investigation of the suspected scheme said evidence suggests that a key role may have been played by Mr. Maultasch. Mr. Maultasch is a Drexel official who was formerly in Beverly Hills but is now based in New York, according to the people familiar with the Beverly Hills office. They said he handles all of Mr. Milken's personal trading. In addition, they said Mr. Maultasch handles what they described as &quot;special trading&quot; for Mr. Milken, handles all of the office's arbitrage trading, and has handled the accumulation of stock in planned or anticipated takeover targets.    These sources said that within Drexel, Mr. Maultasch's activities were shrouded in secrecy; they said Mr. Milken would allow no one else to execute his trades. At the end of each day, they said, Mr. Maultasch destroyed computer printouts of his trading positions in a paper shredder.    Last year, when Mr. Boesky's auditors questioned the $5.3 million payment and Mr. Boesky couldn't provide any documentation, Lowell Milken and Mr. Balser signed a letter from Drexel representing that the payment was for &quot;consulting and advisory services.&quot; Relying on the letter, the auditors provided a so-called comfort letter for potential investors in the Boesky limited partnership formed last year.    People familiar with the government's investigation, however, have said the government has evidence suggesting that the payment actually represented an amount due to Drexel under the suspected securities-parking arrangement. The government is trying to determine whether any false statements were made to auditors in connection with the offering of Mr. Boesky's limited partnership, the sources said.    The people familiar with the Beverly Hills operations said that the Milken brothers are close and that both are intimately familiar with many activities of the other. However, they said they have no idea whether Lowell Milken knew about any arrangement between Michael Milken and Mr. Boesky. They described Mr. Balser as a back-office official involved with record-keeping. They said they doubt he would have been aware of the nature of any dealings between Michael Milken and Mr. Boesky. </TEXT></DOC>