<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870326-0004 </DOCNO><HL> America's New Cities -- Shallow Roots:New Suburbs TackleCity Ills While LackingA Sense of Community---Mini-Cities Combat Gridlock,Sprawl, Crowded Schools;Quality of Life Damaged?---A Traveling Piano in Georgia---By Betsy MorrisStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>      {First of two articles}   FAIRFAX COUNTY, Va. -- The Sunday real-estate ads make Fairfax County sound like one big hunt club. They promise &quot;history and parkland right at your door&quot; and &quot;a way of life as old as the tall oak trees&quot; in places like Hunter's Square or Fox Ridge or the Carriages of Vienna.    &quot;To read the real-estate section, you think you're going to have foxhounds running through your back yard,&quot; says Thomas M. Davis III, a member of Fairfax County's Board of Supervisors.    But increasingly, chrome and glass office towers sprout from the northern Virginia woods. Fairfax County, near Washington, already has five different skylines, and plans call for the farmland around Dulles International Airport to become a whole new mini-city that will be bigger than Philadelphia in terms of office space. Rush hour on Chain Bridge Road rivals the worst that downtown Washington has to offer. Rents have skyrocketed.    &quot;The people who moved out here to be away from the city find city all around them,&quot; says Mr. Davis. &quot;They wanted to be part of the country gentry, but they feel like they're on the Lower East Side.&quot;    From Plano, Texas, to Middlesex County, N.J., from Aurora, Colo., to Gwinnett County, Ga. -- places once considered rural and idyllic and far from central-city blues -- the scenario is the same. Offices and shopping centers shoot up, subdivisions follow, and it gets harder to tell urban from suburban from rural. Mini-cities seem to be everywhere.    Just as the industrial age spawned cities, the information and service age is decentralizing them. High-tech and service businesses don't need to be near rail spurs or ports. And many other fundamental reasons for cities have also become moot points in an age of cheap truck transport and highly flexible telecommunications. In the past decade, almost as if by centrifugal force, businesses have moved into the suburbs, where rents are cheaper and new campuslike office parks are more pleasant -- and where their well-educated, white-collar workers prefer to live.    &quot;This is a complete transformation of the American city,&quot; says Peter O. Muller, a geography professor at the University of Miami. &quot;It used to be that all roads led to Rome. But now the whole notion of the dominant center city and the ring of subservient suburbs has been stood on its ear.&quot;    Low interest rates and capital-driven building frenzies have brought into sharper relief what many view as the permanent restructuring of metropolis. The 21st-century city, predicts Dennis Champine, the mayor of Aurora, won't be a city at all but a loose agglomeration &quot;of little people-places, self-contained activity centers where people live, work and recreate.&quot;    The change is having a profound effect on society. It is wreaking havoc with roads and transportation and possibly fueling resegregation. And behind all the newly planted azaleas and fresh paint, some believe, the change is damaging rather than improving the quality of life. Barbara Boggs Sigmund, the mayor of Princeton, N.J., refers to the new suburbs -- many of them drastically transformed old suburbs -- as &quot;urbanoid villages&quot; that breed traffic, fail to deliver services, and hinder rather than promote community. &quot;It is life where the sidewalks end -- literally,&quot; she says.    The shift also calls into question the ability of local governments, designed for much simpler times, to deal with it all. Metropolitan Atlanta has 53 separate governments; Denver, about 50. And instead of getting more cooperative, many believe, they are becoming more Balkanized.    The fastest-growing of these new suburbs by the latest count is Gwinnett County outside Atlanta. Like its counterparts across the country, it is but a distant cousin to the stable, sleepy little bedroom communities of the past. Sprung willy-nilly from a patchwork of former cotton fields and peach orchards, it is now a throbbing, self-contained mix of businesses and subdivisions that don't have much to do with downtown Atlanta.    As newcomers have flooded in -- 39% of its 274,400 residents have arrived since 1980 -- Gwinnett has become a haven for a new breed of upscale migrant workers -- corporate gypsies and entrepreneurs who have followed their jobs to Peachtree Corners or Technology Park or the Progress Center. The sense of community has unraveled. For many, Gwinnett is less a home than a way station.    In the new-generation suburbs, change has supplanted stability. Carpenter Road, once just another dusty east-west road cutting through Plano, has been renamed Legacy Drive, more in keeping with the big city that some of the Texas suburb's officials envision. In Gwinnett County, recalls developer Wayne Shackelford, &quot;if something was old, they {developers} blew it off the face of the earth.&quot;    With the change comes a voracious demand for public facilities. In Gwinnett, the Button Gwinnett Landfill -- dubbed Mount Trashmore by residents -- towers 90 feet above the Yellow River flood plain. Because of a lack of other garbage-dump space, its owners are optimistic they will be granted permission to build it 60 feet higher.    Many of the county's schools look like trailer parks, with mobile homes serving as makeshift classrooms alongside school buildings. New children arrive in Gwinnett at the rate of 90 each Monday. The county says it needs to build a new classroom every Monday, Wednesday and Friday just to keep from getting any further behind.    The Five Forks Middle School, for one, is so crowded that Mary Lynn Dennis, the music teacher, lacks a homeroom. So she pushes her record player from class to class on a utility cart while several students follow along behind, pushing a piano on wheels. &quot;I have to keep a sense of humor about this,&quot; she says, &quot;or I would be in tears by the middle of the day.&quot;    But perhaps the most vexing and universal problem of all created by these new sprawling suburbs is traffic. Gridlock, once the exclusive gripe of New Yorkers and Californians, is now a concern in tiny Cranbury, N.J. In Tysons Corner, Va., it can take an excruciating half-hour and a half-dozen light changes to get one mile down Leesburg Pike at rush hour. These and most other places are still locked into highway and mass-transit systems -- built on the old city-suburb relationship -- that radiate out from center cities like spokes of a wheel to carry commuters.    The trouble is that most suburbanites don't commute downtown anymore. Although Fairfax County is pouring $40 million annually into its mass-transit system to Washington, the system transports fewer than 6% of its workers. &quot;At the same time, we're putting nowhere near that much into roads to take care of everybody else,&quot; says Denton Kent, deputy county executive. &quot;The speed of this has caught everybody off guard.&quot;    In tackling such problems, these new suburbs lack an element that was crucial to the building of places like New York or Chicago: a civic establishment. Even in Plano, which is further along and better planned than most, &quot;we don't have any great big benefactors,&quot; says Mayor Jack Harvard. &quot;We have a bunch of real solid middle-class people who make decent salaries. But to raise half a million dollars in Plano, that takes a lot of time.&quot;    Newcomers to these suburbs tend to be more career-oriented and inner-focused than civic-minded. And the high-tech and entrepreneurial businesses moving into them are so intent on the bottom line that they often don't encourage their workers to be civic boosters. As a result, there is a serious leadership void in some of these places. The executive director of Gwinnett County's Council for Quality Growth, Helen Preston Tapp, says she doesn't see any well-heeled movers and shakers &quot;willing to throw it all to the winds and give their soul to Gwinnett County.&quot;    Contributing to the problems of governing these places is a fragmentation of interests. In many of the new suburbs, the driving political party isn't Republican or Democratic; it is the homeowners' association. And the major rallying points tend to be those that hit closest to home. The Twin Mills homeowners' association in Gwinnett turned from a casual group of 25 members to an angry activist crowd of 200 when a proposed apartment building threatened the neighborhood 2 1/2 years ago. The association defeated that, and now, says its founder, Jim Woolen, &quot;we're sort of a machine.&quot;    In Fairfax, the growth and traffic &quot;have whipped up a citizenry that was fairly docile,&quot; says Mr. Davis, the supervisor. Outside Denver, a handful of homeowners' associations have decided to take government into their own hands and are trying to incorporate their own town to be called Centennial.    Flush with new wealth and power, once-docile suburbs are also at each other's throats. In New Jersey, the borough of Princeton, sick of congestion caused by outsiders, unsuccessfully sued its fast-growing neighbors to try to get them to curb their growth. And when Gwinnett County pressed for more cooperation from its 13 municipalities last summer with a resolution asking the municipalities to stop annexing wayward development projects, some of the municipalities thumbed their noses. Eager for their own tax base, they went on an annexing binge.    The threat that these upstart suburbs pose to one another and to traditional cities is evident in the recent Galleria shopping-mall flap between Denver and its ambitious eastern neighbor, Aurora. For years, Denver had hoped to attract the prestigious likes of Saks Fifth Avenue or Lord andamp; Taylor as part of an effort to revitalize its downtown.    But in 1985, here comes nervy Aurora, not only planning a big glitzy shopping mall just across Denver's southeastern border but also implicitly threatening to greet Saks and other big-name retailers with open arms. Denver &quot;went into a panic,&quot; recalls Aurora's mayor, Dennis Champine. Denver sued over a variety of issues, and the two cities finally settled their differences: Aurora agreed to share some of the revenue, scale back the project and delay the opening to 1990, giving Denver a better chance to hook big retailers.    Denver has been damaged by the success of its suburbs in other ways as well. As more and more of its population has moved outside its limits, Denver has asked the suburbs to kick in money to support its public-library and indigent-health-care programs. It suggested that they also pitch in for the zoo, botanical gardens and art museum. &quot;We can't keep asking Denver's 500,000 residents to provide these services for the area's 1.8 million people,&quot; says one city official.    But the efforts have been largely unsuccessful. Suburbs don't feel they should kick in when they are trying to develop similar services of their own.    The sad fact for a lot of old cities is that many of these new suburbanites don't need them much anymore. &quot;I rarely go to Dallas,&quot; says Susan Beckley, a Plano city employee. &quot;I can't imagine why I'd need to. Everything I need I can get here.&quot;    And as the mostly Caucasian workers trek farther out into the suburbs, returning less and less frequently to cities, they are rekindling fears among some urban planners and officials that they are resegregating America; for the most part, blacks and those not rich enough to live in the new cities either stay behind in the old ones or move even farther out.    The price of a house in Princeton's traditionally minority John-Witherspoon neighborhood has shot from $48,000 in 1983 to $150,000 today, according to local officials. Volunteer firefighters have been speaking out in favor of a local program to provide cheap housing, saying they can't afford to live in Princeton anymore and are being forced to move farther and farther away from the fires they are fighting.    Fairfax County, says one official, has become too expensive for many of its butchers, bakers and candlestick makers. The county office has had trouble recently hanging on to a receptionist. Three of the last four receptionists said the money wasn't worth their long commutes. In many of these new places, the signs in front of the fast-food outlets advertise jobs as often as burgers.    Others wonder whether the inefficiency of it all is setting up some of these booming new suburbs for a bust. Plano has proudly and carefully planned for a tripling of its population through the year 2020, among other things building concrete roads that are six lanes wide and eight inches thick.    But as the oil glut has dampened growth and softened housing prices, some of those involved in the planning are nervous. &quot;If this growth pause is temporary, everybody'll say, 'Gee, weren't we smart to get ahead of the growth curve.' If it doesn't, then we have a hell of a lot of unused streets and sewers . . . and those of us who have chosen to stay here will have a pretty hefty tax bill,&quot; says Shep Stahel, who headed a citizens' committee to plan for Plano's growth.    And some places only recently considered hot spots are already losing out to newer, hotter spots. As schools are being built in western Fairfax County, they are being closed in the east. Mr. Davis, the supervisor, says that the firm he is employed by moved recently from Tysons Corner to Reston, Va., because it was fed up with the Tysons traffic. He believes that Tysons' image as the busy nerve center of the county may be tarnishing a bit in the gleam of the grand plans for the Dulles area to the west.    &quot;What I fear,&quot; he says, &quot;is that all the greed and exuberance will cause these places to be used up in five years instead of being sustained over 30 or 40.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>