<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880224-0143 </DOCNO><HL> The Middle East: To America From an Israeli Friend </HL><AUTHOR> Ariel Sharon </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST </CO><G> EXE </G><DATELINE> JERUSALEM  </DATELINE><TEXT>   With Israel about to celebrate its 40th anniversary, it is once again being called on to fight a struggle for its own existence. The political siege of international proportions sought to be imposed on Jerusalem has been accompanied by acts of violence initiated by the Arabs in the suburbs and in the heart of Israel's capital, as well as in many parts of the country.    It is only natural that such a siege on Jerusalem causes anxiety to Israel's friends and once more arouses vain hopes in the minds of Israel's opponents and its enemies. The latter, and first and foremost the Palestine Liberation Organization, are under the illusion that they have found the right path that will lead them to the destruction of Israel. In situations such as these, there are those who are tempted to seek instant solutions. They seem to believe that, in a matter of just a few months, following a timetable dictated by the U.S. State Department, it will be possible to find a solution -- even if it is imposed -- to the Israeli-Palestinian conflict.    It is possible that this sense of urgency has led even a true friend of Israel, such as Secretary of State George Shultz, to schedule a new tour to the Middle East this week. There is also talk of a new American peace initiative aimed at furthering the peace process before the end of the year, which is an election year in both Israel and the U.S. For myself, I do not believe in instant, magical solutions of this kind. On the contrary, they are more likely to create illusions. In the Middle East unfulfilled illusions lead only to more frustration bringing a greater degree of violence.    I do not believe that a conflict that already has gone on for 40 years -- and actually started more than 100 years ago -- suddenly can be solved in a couple of months, simply because the PLO has succeeded in isolating Israel in public opinion with the successful television warfare it has been conducting for more than two months.    Moreover, from its own experience the U.S. should know by now that it is preferable for a superpower not to intervene in order to impose a solution in this type of conflict, however much American policy may be paved with the purest of intentions such as those held by Secretary of State Shultz. Washington intervened in Vietnam, and everybody knows what that led to. The American administration interfered in Iran in the name of &quot;human rights&quot; and in return for this we all have been the victim of Ayatollah Khomeini's terror, which has erased any vestige of what is human.    Mr. Shultz, who has made a name for himself as one of the most honest and capable secretaries of state ever to serve the U.S., got burned in Lebanon. In the spring of 1983, urged on by some of his diplomats, Mr. Shultz sponsored the poor agreement between Israel and Lebanon, after having forced Israel to make dangerous concessions. That agreement collapsed on the day it was signed. In the last months of the Reagan administration, such a failure might be repeated -- this time with more severe, and perhaps tragic, consequences -- if the U.S. were now to try to impose a solution on Israel.    Jordan's King Hussein is not a reliable partner for negotiations for the simple reason that the Palestinian element believes that Judea and Samaria and the Gaza Strip belongs to it, and not to him. Thus, if an agreement were to be signed with him, the Palestinians would start fighting him, and as a result he would hand over these territories to the PLO. Yasser Arafat cannot serve as a partner for negotiations with Israel. His organization, the PLO, was and remains a band of terrorists and murderers, constantly citing its Palestinian Convenant, which calls for the annihilation of Israel.    The Palestinians in the West Bank and the Gaza Strip have until now failed to produce a viable leadership for discussion with Israel. The tough negotiations in 1978, which preceded the signing of the Camp David accords, produced only one workable solution to the problem -- ensuring autonomy for the Palestinians of Judea and Samaria and Gaza with a view to both sides experiencing the realities of peaceful coexistence for at least five years.    Personally, I believe in the plan for autonomy as a bridge for peace between ourselves and the Palestinian state that already exists in the Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan. In the more distant future, this autonomy will lead to an Israeli-Palestinian federation or confederation on both sides of the Jordan River.    From the time Israel agreed at Camp David to the granting of autonomy to the Palestinians, nothing has happened to cause the U.S., and certainly not Israel, to alter this agreement, to which the U.S. is a co-signatory. It would be unthinkable for the U.S. to denounce that agreement merely because of a series of violent clashes in Israel, which, painful as they are, do not amount to more than some of the serious urban disturbances that have flared up in the U.S. over the years.    The reality in its totality is far wider than the biggest television screen in any American living room.    If the U.S. now wishes to withdraw from the autonomy plan to which it committed itself 10 years ago, then what value would there be to any new agreement the U.S. might try to impose? If the U.S. turns its back on the agreement reached between the two pioneers of Israeli-Arab peace, Menachem Begin and Anwar Sadat, it is highly doubtful that it will succeed in achieving a better agreement in its efforts to appease the leaders of violence against Israel.    Thus, when the time comes, the autonomy plan will be the only real basis for progress toward peace. I believe that this plan is achievable.    In the prevailing circumstances, in which there is no prospect of any American compromise holding up in practice, it would be best for the U.S. not to get involved. At the same time, it should do everything to dissuade others from interfering -- the Soviet Union, the Arab countries and West European nations, all of which seek to make political capital out of the bitter struggle in the Land of Israel.    The tragic conflict between us and the Palestinians is of such a nature that a solution can come only from within -- from the parties themselves -- in the course and as a consequence of the continued painful friction between the two peoples. Any artificial solution would lead only to a worse situation than the current one.    Even the massive bombardment by the Israeli media has done nothing to diminish the democratic character of the Jewish state. Israel has been and will remain a democracy. Therefore, the U.S. should continue to support the State of Israel as the sole pioneering democracy in the Middle East. A friendly superpower such as the U.S., and not just a small and ancient people like the Israeli nation, should look beyond the horizon -- 50 years to 100 years ahead. It is for the U.S. to comprehend that Israel's very existence is the best guarantee for the democratization of its Arab neighbors -- from the Persian Gulf to the Mediterranean. Democracy, after all, more than any other factor, remains the lifeblood of enduring peace.    ---   Mr. Sharon is minister of industry and commerce of Israel and a member of the inner defense cabinet of the national unity government. </TEXT></DOC>