<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870528-0097 </DOCNO><HL> Proof Positive of Drug Link to Crime---By James K. Stewart</HL><DD> 05/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   The criminal justice system has a powerful, objective new tool to help control crime and encourage suspects and criminals to stay drug-free.    The tool is court-supervised drug testing. Research sponsored by the National Institute of Justice shows that drug testing can provide solid, predictive information on the likelihood of future criminal behavior.    Two recent studies in New York City and Washington, D.C., assembled for the first time objective data about drug abuse among individuals at the time of arrest. The facts far outstrip earlier estimates based on criminals' own reports. The studies show that more than half those arrested in the two cities are using illegal drugs, thus demonstrating the close relationship between drug abuse and crime.    For example, in Manhattan in 1984, more than half of those charged with murder, manslaughter, robbery and burglary tested positive for one or more drugs. These studies, which test urine samples for such drugs as cocaine, heroin and PCP, show that the rate of drug use among criminal suspects is clearly on the rise. In Washington, the proportion of arrestees testing positive was 68% last month, compared with 56% when testing began in March 1984. In New York, the rise in cocaine use has pushed the overall drug-positive rate to more than 80% in people arrested last month.    Identifying the degree of drug abuse among suspects and criminals is vital to controlling crime. Many research studies have shown that drug abuse affects individual crime rates like a lighted match in a test tube of oxygen. For example, a National Institute of Justice study of heroin addicts in California prisons and jails showed they committed 15 times as many robberies, 20 times as many burglaries, and 10 times as many thefts as drug-free convicts. Other studies show that individuals' crime rates are two to six times higher when they are abusing drugs than during relatively drug-free periods.    The Washington study, which tested 10,000 people, found that non-drug-users are less likely to be arrested during pre-trial release. Furthermore, even among people with established patterns of both drug abuse and criminality, court-supervised testing was effective in reducing drug use and crime in those who remained in the program.    The New York and Washington studies and the earlier research provide strong support for nationwide policies:    1.People arrested for serious crimes should be tested for drug use, and judges should weigh those results in setting the conditions for pre-trial release. Judges now use frequently inadequate crime predictors such as arrest and conviction records and family and community ties in determining whether to grant bail and on what conditions. Testing provides strong, objective information about drug habits and future criminality. Supplied with testing information, judges can order drug abusers to enter drug treatment programs, or make them undergo periodic drug testing as a condition of continued release.    2.Drug testing can improve the supervision of the nearly two million people on probation or parole. Staying off drugs is theoretically a condition of release; drug testing can make it a reality. If criminals repeatedly test positive under court-supervised testing, off to jail they go. Remember, these criminals are far more likely to commit serious crimes than drug-free criminals.    3.Once a drug testing program is established in local jurisdictions, it can serve as an indicator of local drug abuse and a way to measure the effectiveness of law enforcement and drug-abuse programs.    As well as helping reduce crime, testing also can help reduce drug abuse. By ordering suspects who test positive to undergo treatment as a condition for pre-trial release, parole or probation, the judge can give drug abusers the opportunity to get and stay clean. Testing provides drug abusers with a way to rebuild the trust of the community by staying off drugs while they are under supervision. People who repeatedly test negative for drugs establish a firm basis for that trust.    So far, only the courts in Washington have put drug testing into effect as part of their pre-trial release -- and crime-fighting-programs. Other jurisdictions should follow suit. The money is available. Under the federal Anti-Drug Abuse Act of 1986, $225 million has been appropriated this year for law-enforcement programs to combat drug abuse. All that's needed is the determination to say &quot;no drugs&quot; to those under court supervision.    ---   Mr. Stewart is director of the National Institute of Justice, the principal research agency for the Justice Department. </TEXT></DOC>