<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880615-0138 </DOCNO><HL> Europe: Some Lessons for France's Conservatives </HL><AUTHOR> Pascal Salin </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><DATELINE> PARIS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The French today, it's commonly believed, overwhelmingly favor solving economic problems according to free-market recipes. Despite this, they placed their confidence in a Socialist, Francois Mitterrand. His re-election and the recapture by the left of a parliamentary majority, however modest, undoubtedly reflect such diverse factors as the personal magnetism of the 71-year-old statesman, the role of the extreme-right National Front and the fractious rivalry among parties on the traditional right.    In democracies, nevertheless, people get the government they deserve. In France, a longer-term perspective indicates that socialism is unavoidable because minds are mostly socialist-oriented. Political transformation always begins in the intellectual sphere. Even if the French favor free-market solutions as regards to practical problems, they have not yet discovered the coherence of liberalism, namely, the connection among firm ethical values, free-market principles and high-incentive tax structures. As a consequence, the left-to-right shift in parliamentary majority in the 1986 legislative elections stemmed more from perceived failures of specific Socialist policies than from a recognition of the principles of another approach to social and economic problems.    State interventionism has been on the rise since World War II in France (with the possible exception of the Pompidou presidency from 1969 to 1974). Individual freedoms steadily eroded and politics became increasingly occupied with a struggle for power at the expense of a debate over ideas. The political dialogue became progressively limited as parties sought to establish their identities within a narrow, left-oriented ideological area. Only the extremes, the Communists and the National Front, provided alternatives.    The Giscard d'Estaing-Barre period is a case in point. Valery Giscard d'Estaing purported to advocate &quot;advanced liberalism.&quot; His and Raymond Barre's policies, however, were of increasing interventionism, the broad relaxation of price controls not withstanding. I participated in a 1982 meeting between Mr. Giscard d'Estaing and a small group of academics some months after his defeat by Mr. Mitterrand. We asked him why he had not followed a more liberal course. He answered that he hadn't because people would have ascribed to liberalism the failures that were in fact due to the economic crisis. He said he wanted to protect the chances of liberalism for the future. In effect, Mr. Giscard d'Estaing was condemning liberalism by posing as a liberal while generally pursuing interventionism.    Conservative politicians traditionally have been considered as better managers, with Socialists as more generous. Liberalism, which already was branded as lacking soul and imagination, now became debatable even as a &quot;management technique.&quot; Moreover, the Socialist Party began to appear as France's only imaginative political organization. It could be said -- possibly with some exaggeration -- that each time the Socialists proposed a solution for, say, unemployment or inflation, Mr. Giscard d'Estaing agreed. He proposed, however, either to apply it in a more limited way or to negotiate with our European partners to avoid competitiveness problems. Socialists meanwhile began a politically successful transformation. Besides appearing generous and increasingly efficient and imaginative, they abandoned their systematic opposition to market solutions. By breaking off with the Communist Party, they even gained respectability.    But the Socialists' proposals were never vigorously challenged by either their political rivals or the press. Logically, if liberal solutions failed and Socialist ones seemed efficient, why not try socialism? Thus years of neglect of conservative ideas put Mr. Mitterrand in power in 1981.    His 1981-84 regime was strongly oriented toward traditional collectivism. After its predictable failure (unemployment soared, for instance), liberal ideas once again became fashionable. The Socialists reacted with a policy of &quot;normalization&quot;: They moderated economic interventionism, abandoned collectivist projects and acknowledged that healthy corporations were necessary for a strong economy. The big demonstration in favor of private schools in June 1984 was a turning point: Socialists realized that they could not impose their ideal -- a &quot;change of society.&quot;    This set a trap for conservatives. The public more or less forgot the early Mitterrand years, accepting the Socialists as respectably mainstream. The conservatives, feeling cornered, responded by concentrating on pure politics. Rivalries were more and more among personalities and less and less among ideas.    The ideological confusion born in that period prevails to this day. It can be summed up this way: The left favors workers, the right, capitalists; if Socialists pay some attention to business and liberals become socially conscious -- as it's frequently claimed in the conservative and centralist parties -- then a consensus is possible. Mr. Mitterrand based his recent campaign on &quot;ouverture&quot; -- a supposed intent to broaden government and the range of his policies.    The 1986-88 &quot;cohabitation&quot; between the Socialist president and the conservative government and Parliament gave further support to this myth. The Chirac government, however, settled for &quot;microliberalism&quot; that was too timid to have perceptible consequences over a short period. The government's measures were not at fault in themselves. Mr. Chirac launched huge privatizations, eradicated most price and exchange controls, suppressed the wealth tax, trimmed income taxes and deregulated parts of the telecommunications and transportation sectors. But these measures were relevant mainly for corporations. As a result they reinforced the false notion that liberalism necessarily favors business and not individuals.    The broad consensus in this year's election results reflects a heavy reliance on this ideological vacuum, on vague positions by candidates and on devious electoral strategies. The rejection of any and all ideologies -- the failure to pose differing ideas against one another -- in favor of pragmatism is nothing but a refusal to think. &quot;Eclectisme a la Francaise,&quot; implying that an idea and its contrary can both be true at the same time, gives direct rise to the centralist, pragmatic tendency. But from a purely ideological perspective -- the only one that merits consideration -- the center cannot exist. There are two conflicting views of society, a collectivist one and an individualist one, and not a third one. Centralism is a purely political proposition to sway the uncertain voter.    The future of French liberalism depends on the capacity of conservative politicians to clarify their beliefs and therefore their message. They must shed their image -- in many cases well-deserved -- as technocratic pragmatists, political deal makers and macroeconomic managers concerned only with the abstract concepts of national accounting. Instead they need to take up ideals of liberalism and present the concrete ingredients of supply-side economics. A French version of such popular capitalism can provide durable answers to the difficulties facing our liberal parties and this nation.    ---   Mr. Salin is professor of economics at the University of Paris-IX-Dauphine. </TEXT></DOC>