<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880810-0111 </DOCNO><HL> Higher Interest: Raising Discount Rate, Fed Puts Inflation War Ahead of Dollar Policy --- Action Is Likely to Push Up Greenback Even Further, Despite 7-Nation Accord --- Bush Campaign Could Suffer </HL><AUTHOR> Alan Murray and Walter S. Mossberg (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP JAPAN CANDA </CO><IN> ECO MON FIN BNK REL CON BON FRX </IN><G> FED EXE TRE CNG </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Defying election-year pressures and a rising dollar, the Federal Reserve Board is raising interest rates decisively to head off a resurgence of inflation.    In a surprise step, the central bank increased its discount rate yesterday to 6.5% from 6%. Even more important, Fed officials made it clear in interviews that they plan to push up other short-term interest rates as well. The key federal-funds rate, for example, will move above the 8% level in coming days, officials said, up from about 7 3/4% in recent weeks. Bank prime rates, mortgage rates and other consumer-interest rates are likely to follow.    The Fed acted despite the dollar's recent strength in foreign-exchange markets. Higher interest rates, which make U.S. investments more attractive to foreign buyers, are likely to push the greenback to even loftier heights -- perhaps breaking through the secret trading ranges that the major industrial nations have set to promote exchange-rate stability. In recent days, the U.S. and other governments have been battling to keep the dollar from climbing too sharply against the West German mark; they want to keep the U.S. trade deficit declining.    The increase in the discount rate -- the rate the Fed charges on loans to financial institutions -- proves once again that, when push comes to shove, U.S. officials put concern about the domestic economy above concern about a stable dollar. &quot;The decision reflects the intent of the Federal Reserve to reduce inflationary pressures,&quot; the central bank said in announcing the increase.    &quot;First things first,&quot; a senior Fed official explained yesterday. &quot;You use monetary policy for domestic purposes, to fight inflation. That's the first priority.&quot;    Moreover, the push for higher interest rates, coming just a few days before the Republican convention, diminishes fears that Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan and his fellow Republican board members would shrink from fighting inflation in an election year.    &quot;The election appears to be very far from their minds,&quot; says Scott Pardee, a former high Fed official and now vice chairman of Yamaichi International (America) Inc., a Japanese securities firm. Mr. Pardee believes that it was time for the Fed to tighten to head off potential difficulties: &quot;The main problem they have is an economy that is strong, but not booming, and inflation that is troublesome, although not out of hand.&quot;    Short-term interest rates and the dollar both rose after the Fed's announcement. Stock prices skidded on fears that higher rates will slow the economy. Bond prices plunged.    Although the Fed's action yesterday isn't likely to slow the economy significantly before the November presidential election, higher rates could amplify the uncertainty that many voters already feel about the nation's economic health, thus hurting Vice President George Bush. Political-economic analysts note that in September 1980 the Fed, then led by Paul Volcker, raised the discount rate, helping wreck President Carter's re-election bid.    The timing of the Fed's move is awkward for the Reagan administration, too. The Treasury Department is going through a transition, with Secretary James Baker departing next week to take over Mr. Bush's election campaign and investment banker Nicholas Brady awaiting Senate confirmation as Mr. Baker's replacement. The move took many Treasury officials by surprise; Mr. Baker himself had said emphatically on NBC's &quot;Meet the Press&quot; Sunday that he didn't think the Fed had indicated any plan to raise rates.    Moreover, the action came on the same day the Treasury was beginning its quarterly refunding operations, its offerings of new securities to replace maturing issues. As a result, it forced the government to pay higher interest rates on the securities it sells. The average yield on the three-year notes sold yesterday was 8.77%, the highest in three years.    White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater, reading a statement approved by Secretary Baker, said that the administration is &quot;disappointed&quot; by the Fed's move but that &quot;we understand there's a sound reason for it.&quot; He added that &quot;we think the Federal Reserve has done a good job . . . the Fed's on the right course.&quot;    House Minority Leader Robert Michel of Illinois expressed some discomfort with the Fed's decision. &quot;I don't see the signs of inflation out there,&quot; he said. But he noted that the impact of the Fed move won't be entirely negative for his party because price stability has been a Reagan &quot;hallmark&quot; that Republicans will stress at their convention next week.    For the Fed, the action resolved a battle that has been brewing for weeks between the presidents of the system's regional banks and the members of the Fed's board of governors. Worried by signs of strong economic growth, many of the presidents have argued that the Fed needs to raise rates. But some of the governors have resisted such suggestions, and the dispute was threatening to explode at next week's meeting of the policy-making Federal Open Market Committee, which is composed of the Reserve Board members and five Reserve Bank presidents.    The governors apparently were moved to act, however, when they discovered at their regular Monday meeting that nine of the 12 regional banks were requesting a discount-rate rise, up from only six last week. Late Monday, Chairman Greenspan called a board meeting for yesterday morning, and all six governors (one board seat is vacant) agreed to support the rate increase. They also decided to announce it in the morning, to give investors time to react before the Treasury refunding.    The rise in the discount rate brought it to its highest level since July 1986. The Fed's expected new level of just over 8% for the federal funds rate -- the fee banks charge on loans to each other -- would boost that rate to its high since early 1986.    U.S. officials emphasize that the Fed's move doesn't signal a defection from the general effort by the Group of Seven leading industrial nations to stabilize the dollar within a secret range of exchange rates. In addition to citing the matter of priorities, they explain that the G-7 exchange-rate system is flexible, allowing for short-term deviations and even unannounced changes in the exchange-rate ranges if economic fundamentals shift.    But the Fed's action marked the second time in less than a year that American monetary policy makers have felt compelled to meet a domestic-policy challenge at the expense of international dollar policy. Last October, in the wake of the stock-market crash, the Fed slashed interest rates to stave off a recession, even though the move drove the dollar down below levels the G-7 thought desirable. In yesterday's case, as in October, the U.S. informed its economic partners in advance of the move and, officials say, received general support for it.    It has been widely assumed that the upper end of the secret range is about 1.90 marks and 140 yen to the dollar, though the governments have never confirmed this. The G-7 central banks had been fighting in recent days to keep the dollar from piercing the 1.90-mark ceiling, by selling greenbacks in the currency markets. But the Fed's decision pushed the dollar firmly above 1.90 marks, and the governments beat a tactical retreat.    &quot;With this move by the Fed, we expect the dollar to stay firm for a while,&quot; says Fred Scala, a senior currency trader at Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co. in New York. &quot;I expect we'll see new highs every day because the foreign-exchange market has become so interest-rate sensitive.&quot;    The officials indicate that the G-7 governments would probably avoid drastic exchange-rate actions for now and wait to see how far the dollar rises against the mark -- and how long it stays high -- before mounting any huge intervention campaign or changing joint exchange-rate policies.    They say other coming events -- including next week's scheduled release of U.S. trade data -- could moderate the dollar's rise. And they indicate that the G-7 might wait until its next scheduled meeting, around Sept. 22, before formally reconsidering whether its secret range still meshes with the fundamental positions of the world's major economies.    The lower, more stable dollar that has resulted from the G-7 effort has helped produce the desired boom in U.S. exports. Yesterday, officials said they weren't sure how much damage to the trade improvement a further surge in the greenback would cause just now. They noted that the dollar's surge, both before and after the Fed action, has been mainly against the German mark. The dollar's value against the Japanese yen has remained comfortably within the supposed ceiling of 140 yen. The officials said that if the dollar's climb remains more moderate in terms of the yen, it could have less detrimental effect on the trade balance than an overall surge.    Fed Vice Chairman Manuel Johnson and several other governors who watch financial-market indicators of inflation, rather than focus on the pace of economic growth, have tried to play down worries of inflation in recent weeks. A rising dollar, a strong bond market and stable commodity prices suggested to them that inflation fears were under control.    But concern about inflation stepped up Friday when the Labor Department announced that employment increased strongly in July and that hourly earnings rose at a 6% annual pace. That added to the belief of many district Fed presidents that the economy couldn't continue to grow so rapidly without sparking inflation.    &quot;The evidence suggests the economy is continuing to grow in a 3.5% to 4% range,&quot; Kansas City Fed President Roger Guffey says. &quot;Given the strong employment numbers that have been posted recently and the high capacity utilization rates, that all adds up in my mind to the idea that inflationary pressures are quite likely to increase.&quot;    On Monday, Chairman Greenspan, who has worked to reconcile the two opposing camps, apparently was able to convince all five of his fellow governors that the time for action had come. Even Governor Martha Seger, who has dissented on many of the Fed's votes for a tighter policy, supported the move.    In its statement, the Fed first mentioned the need to curb &quot;inflationary pressures&quot; and then added that &quot;the action was also taken in light of the growing spread of market interest rates over the discount rate.&quot; The Fed hadn't changed the discount rate since last September, but it has been steadily pushing up other short-term interest rates since late March.    The increase was initially requested by the boards of all the Fed district banks except those in Chicago, Minneapolis and Dallas. Late yesterday, the Chicago and Minneapolis banks also requested a discount-rate increase.    Asked about the Fed's move yesterday, Lawrence Summers, a Harvard economist and an adviser to Democratic presidential candidate Michael Dukakis, said, &quot;It just illustrates that the Federal Reserve is in an extraordinarily difficult position as long as we have so strong an economy coinciding with such large budget deficits.&quot;    The Fed's move puts the German government, too, in a difficult position.    For weeks, capital has been surging out of Germany. Much of it has gone into dollar-denominated holdings, helping to lift the dollar against the mark. That trend is partly due to higher U.S. interest rates, but U.S. officials and market participants also attribute it to investors' growing perception that Germany's economy is too stagnant and regulated to attract much investment. Germany's growth rate has been hovering around 2% -- far below that of the U.S. and Japan -- partly because its government has been too worried about inflation to favor much stimulus.    Now, the German government and the independent central bank, the Bundesbank, face a cruel choice. They can raise interest rates to try to maintain the differential with U.S. rates and thus bolster the mark a bit. But such an increase, following a flurry of others recently, might slow German growth even further and cause the capital outflow to continue or even speed up. That might weaken the mark so much as to more than offset the bolstering effect of an interest-rate rise.    &quot;As soon as the Bundesbank hikes rates again, it will start running the risk of choking off economic growth,&quot; says Ulrich Ramm, the chief economist of Commerzbank AG in Frankfurt. &quot;At this point, the Bundesbank ought to wait. The higher the dollar rises, the sooner it can fall.&quot;    The Bundesbank's next scheduled opportunity to alter its key interest rates will come Aug. 25, when its policy-setting Central Bank Council returns from a four-month break. The Bundesbank yesterday left unchanged at 4.25% the rate it charges on its one-month securities-repurchase agreements, the bank's favored tool for steering German money-market rates.    Elsewhere in Europe, the effects will be much smaller. The Bank of England raised its own base rates by 0.5 percentage point Monday but insisted yesterday that its action and the Fed's weren't coordinated. </TEXT></DOC>