<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870708-0112 </DOCNO><HL> Tough Mandate:Immigration ServiceFaces Big AdjustmentIn Dealing With Aliens---It Will Help Many BecomeCitizens Under New Law,And Prosecute Employers---Can It Live Down Its Past?---By Thomas E. RicksStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABORJUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> EL PASO, Texas  </DATELINE><TEXT>   For 31 years John Sanchez chased illegal aliens as an agent of the Immigration and Naturalization Service's Border Patrol. But earlier this year Mr. Sanchez came out of retirement to work in the Immigration Service's new amnesty program, legalizing qualified aliens at an office a few blocks from the Rio Grande and the Mexican border.    It isn't a switch that Mr. Sanchez's old colleagues appreciate. At a Border Patrol reunion here in May, the crewcut exMarine says, &quot;They called me a traitor.&quot; He says he thinks they were joking.    Mr. Sanchez's new job, and his old friends' reaction to it, reflects the task now facing the Immigration Service. It probably is the biggest challenge the service has faced in its 123 years, and the task could overwhelm the agency.    Historically, the Immigration Service has arrested illegal aliens at the border and in the workplace. But under the broad new immigration law now being phased into effect, it is charged with two new and very different jobs: It must administer an amnesty for some illegal aliens, and it must start penalizing employers who persist in hiring others.    Both tasks require tough adjustments by an agency not known for flexibility. The Immigration and Naturalization Service, which last year made some 1.7 million arrests, more than any other law-enforcement organization in the U.S., now must turn from catching aliens to embracing many of them -- in one of the biggest amnesties ever.    The second task may be even more daunting: The service must turn from nabbing alien workers to punishing their employers. An agency that has dealt with relatively powerless aliens now will have to deal with the business community, which, if provoked, can marshal money, lawyers and political clout.    Given the job it faces, the Immigration Service &quot;desperately needs to change,&quot; says Doris Meissner, a former acting commissioner of the agency. &quot;You have to turn around an entire bureaucracy,&quot; she says. But she says she believes it can be done.    Others inside and outside of the agency are less optimistic, and some feel the new immigration law will collapse if the agency doesn't adapt to its new job. That would severely damage both the Immigration Service and the congressional consensus on immigration reform that took a decade to build. Most important, it would represent a defeat for the U.S. in its effort to regain control of its borders.    The adjustments the service is being asked to make would be formidable for any organization. They are especially hard for an agency that for decades has been the Rodney Dangerfield of the federal bureaucracy -- disrespected, neglected, and understaffed.    David Simcox, a former State Department official who now directs the Center for Immigration Studies, says the Immigration Service was &quot;infamous in the U.S. government for mismanagement of information.&quot; Charles Foster, the incoming chairman of the American Bar Association's committee on immigration law, says the old Immigration Service &quot;gloried in its obscurity,&quot; believing that &quot;we can make aliens do anything we want because no one cares.&quot; Rep. Henry Hyde of Illinois once labeled the Immigration Service &quot;the worst agency in government.&quot;    The view from inside was, if anything, worse. Immigration staffers long had felt that their agency was the &quot;stepchild&quot; of the Justice Department, the poor relative of the Federal Bureau of Investigation and of the Drug Enforcement Administration. Over the past 15 years, as illegal immigration skyrocketed, morale nose-dived. &quot;INS was a hated agency. It was despised,&quot; says Perry Rivkind, the agency's district director in Miami. &quot;There was an attitude problem.&quot;    That seems to be changing now, at least among the service's managers. How well the new attitude filters down to the rank and file could determine the success of the new law.    At Immigration Service headquarters in the Chester Arthur Building, in a shabby Washington neighborhood of vacant lots and auto-body shops, agency officials talk happily about the task at hand. &quot;We've gotten very good vibes from employers,&quot; says Commissioner Alan Nelson, a Californian.    Today's agency understands it can no longer dictate terms to its public, argues John Schroeder, the assistant commissioner for employer relations. &quot;We've recognized that we have to market the benefits&quot; of the law, he says. &quot;We've never tried to sell before, to actively convince people to do something.&quot;    The new law does fatten the agency considerably. This year alone, it brings an increase in staff and a requested near-doubling of the annual budget to $1.05 billion. &quot;It's put us in the big leagues,&quot; says Mr. Schroeder, who notes that every one of the 6.6 million employers in the nation soon will be touched by the Immigration Service.    Even renowned Immigration Service hard-liners, such as Harold Ezell, the Western regional commissioner, have begun sounding warm and friendly.    Mr. Ezell left the vice presidency of Wienerschnitzel International Inc., a fastfood chain, in 1983 to join the Immigration Service. He soon became something of a Southern California media celebrity with his tough talk about illegal immigration. In one memorable interview, he volunteered that the best way to handle illegal aliens was to &quot;catch 'em, clean 'em and fry 'em.&quot; Hispanic activists have denounced Mr. Ezell as a racist.    But these days Mr. Ezell is promoting the new law with all the fervor he once devoted to hawking hot dogs. In an interview in Los Angeles, he touts the efforts of his office to spread the word on legalization, from a mobile information van to promotional spots at a boxing match featuring Mexican fighters. Mr. Ezell, who only recently was whipping up concern about the nation's porous borders, now proudly says, &quot;I've told our people to look for ways to say yes, not to say no.&quot;    Nor is he taking a hard line on the other side of the new law. In San Diego a few weeks ago, Mr. Ezell and his subordinates appeared at a Sea World media event to soft-pedal employer sanctions. As Shamu the killer whale looked on, the curlyhaired, red-faced Mr. Ezell held up the I-9 form that employers are now required to complete for new hires. &quot;This isn't a complicated W-4 form,&quot; he promised.    &quot;Education is what we're after,&quot; added James Turnage Jr., the Immigration Service director for San Diego.    &quot;We're not even thinking about penalties right now,&quot; concluded Dale Cozart, the chief of the local Border Patrol station.    Mr. Ezell insists he hasn't turned liberal. &quot;I haven't gone soft,&quot; he says.    But some low-level immigration officers say they feel betrayed by Mr. Ezell's newfound enthusiasms. &quot;He's done a complete flip-flop. He's embracing all the aliens,&quot; complains one embittered investigator in Los Angeles. &quot;Seems he's milked the conservatives for all they're worth, and now he's working a new group.&quot;    The rank-and-file officers, in general, show less enthusiasm for the new law, and less confidence in their ability to enforce it, than their superiors do. Officials' assertions that the agency will have the resources to carry out the new law are mocked in the trenches.    &quot;It's going to be just about impossible to enforce&quot; the new law, says Larry Fort, an investigator in San Diego. Reminded of the agency's proposed budget increase, he responds, &quot;We've had promises before.&quot;    In El Paso, a veteran investigator says, &quot;I think we're going to be short-handed.&quot; In Los Angeles, William Willdanger, a supervisory agent, says that for all the talk of a new Immigration Service, the vinyl roof of his official automobile still is ragged, and &quot;sometimes it's a hassle just to come up with money to buy tires.&quot; On the Otay Mesa near the Mexican border, Kevin Clouthier eats a chicken burrito as he watches the sun set over the golden barley fields and talks about a fellow Border Patrol agent whose family is on food stamps. Starting pay in the Border Patrol is $14,822, before overtime.    Managers further contend that the new law will lighten the agency's workload by legalizing many aliens who can prove they have resided in this country since Jan. 1, 1982, and by discouraging the entry of new illegal aliens looking for jobs. But staffers insist that the new law will only provoke illegal aliens to scramble for counterfeit documents to show to prospective employers. Already-burdened investigators are despairing. &quot;Right now, we're lucky if we're working 5% of the tips that come in,&quot; says Alfred Gervacio, an agency fraud specialist in California.    Managers see their enforcement agents becoming part-time public-relations people for a year, teaching employers how to follow the new law. Investigators say they have been told not to enforce the employer sanctions except in notorious cases until June 1988. They say they will perforce make the transition from door-kicking to hand-holding. But Anne Estrada, an investigator in El Paso, says that even as she visits employers to talk about the new law, &quot;in the back of my mind is that we have to teach them to comply -- and then they're fair game.&quot;    The split between the agency's supervisors and staffers results in mixed signals to the public, critics say. &quot;Whatever good intentions are mouthed in Washington don't necessarily filter down,&quot; contends Joseph Trevino, the director of the League of United Latin American Citizens. Virginia Lamp, who follows employer sanctions for the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, questions whether Immigration Service agents can make the transition. They are &quot;used to raiding employers,&quot; she observes. &quot;They're not used to being educational.&quot;    As if all this weren't enough of a challenge to the agency, a clause in the new law requires reports to Congress on whether sanctions create &quot;an unnecessary regulatory burden&quot; on employers. This gives the business community a built-in incentive to bellyache about the law. A subsequent section of the law provides for its repeal if it leads to widespread discrimination in hiring.    Although the agency must overcome decades of distrust to demonstrate that it genuinely wants to help aliens, signs are that it may succeed with the legalization of aliens. Aliens seem to realize now that the amnesty program isn't the giant sting operation that many had first feared.    The sanctions side of the law will be far trickier to implement because of the predicament it presents for the Immigration Service. Thomas Muller, who is studying the economic effects of immigration for the Twentieth Century Fund, observes that &quot;if they can't show they're enforcing the law, Congress will say they're not doing the job.&quot; But, he says, &quot;If they enforce the law too vigorously, the business community will be up in arms.&quot;    Critics of the agency gleefully predict fireworks if the Immigration Service tries to handle U.S. businessmen the way it is accustomed to treating aliens. And agency foot soldiers fear that employers will probably prove far less docile than Mexican peasants. &quot;Your business owners in this country are powerful people,&quot; says Mr. Fort, the San Diego investigator. &quot;I think they'll get the law watered down until it's impossible to enforce.&quot;    Yet agency managers almost universally express confidence that they will succeed in their new mission. Dale Cozart, for example, presides over the Border Patrol's San Diego Sector from an office on the edge of Otay Mesa, overlooking the distant bright lights of Tijuana. His is the single busiest stretch of the border. Last year alone, his agents arrested more than 625,000 aliens. At least that many more eluded the patrol, he says.    Mr. Cozart says that if he gets more manpower and if employer sanctions work, then -- &quot;over several years&quot; -- he will be able to cut apprehensions in half, to about 300,000 a year. But, he warns, he is an optimist. </TEXT></DOC>