<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880804-0047 </DOCNO><HL> U.S. Reportedly to Seek Charges Tied To Transactions of Princeton/Newport </HL><AUTHOR> James B. Stewart and Daniel Hertzberg (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TAXES </CO><IN> STK SCR </IN><G> SEC </G><TEXT>   The government has decided to seek criminal racketeering charges against people involved in a series of transactions between Princeton/Newport Partners -- an investment partnership with close ties to others implicated in Wall Street's insider-trading scandal -- and Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. The case is expected to be of major significance in the government's massive insider-trading investigation.    A New York federal grand jury hearing evidence in the case is scheduled to meet this morning, and indictments are likely to be handed up today, according to people familiar with the case.    Those expected to be indicted on racketeering and numerous other securities and tax fraud charges include James Sutton Regan, a general managing partner of Princeton/Newport, based in Princeton, N.J., and Newport Beach, Calif., and three or four general partners. Mr. Regan's lawyer, Theodore Wells, a partner in Lowenstein andamp; Sandler in Newark, N.J., said Mr. Regan is innocent and will vigorously contest any charges, if they are filed.    Two people employed at Drexel at the time of the transactions are also expected to be charged: Bruce Newberg, a former trader in Drexel's Beverly Hills, Calif., office who recently left the firm, and Cary Maultasch, an employee in Drexel's New York office.    As previously reported, Mr. Maultasch has also been named a defendant in civil charges that the Securities and Exchange Commission has approved, but hasn't yet filed, against Drexel, as part of the government's broader investigation of the firm.    Neither Mr. Newberg nor Mr. Maultasch could be reached, and their lawyers didn't return phone calls.    A spokesman for Drexel said that, as a matter of policy, the firm doesn't comment on grand jury matters. Robert Kasanof, a lawyer for Princeton/Newport, declined to comment.    The government investigation of Princeton/Newport was the subject of a front-page story in The Wall Street Journal in April. Princeton/Newport is managed by Oakley Sutton Management Inc., of which Mr. Regan is a principal.    The charges are expected to name Princeton/Newport as a &quot;racketeering enterprise.&quot; Drexel itself isn't expected to be charged with any wrongdoing. However, the case is likely to be a further blow to the firm, already laboring under the most intensive investigation in Wall Street's history. The expected Princeton/Newport charges suggest the possibility of wrongdoing within Drexel that ranges far afield from anything connected to its ties with now-imprisoned former takeover speculator Ivan F. Boesky.    If the grand jury votes an indictment, Princeton/Newport would be the first securities firm ever charged as a racketeering enterprise and the first to have officials charged with violations of the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, or RICO, thus making it an important and potentially controversial test case of RICO's applicability to securities firms.    Under the criminal RICO law, passed in 1970 to combat organized crime and drugs, a person or business that commits two or more felonies as part of a pattern can be charged with racketeering. The law carries severe penalties, including as much as 20 years in prison and the confiscation of property and earnings, even if they are unrelated to wrongdoing. RICO's civil counterpart allows plaintiffs to bring private suits seeking treble damages.    Taken with the government's recent RICO case against a Chicago lawyer charged with insider trading, the expected Princeton/Newport charges make clear that the government could file RICO charges against other securities firms, including Drexel, suspected of insider trading and other securities crimes, according to people familiar with the Princeton/Newport case.    Moreover, the government hopes to make Princeton/Newport officials potential witnesses in two of its most important securities investigations, according to people familiar with the matters. One investigation involves Drexel and Michael Milken, the firm's junk-bond chief. The other involves Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co.'s head of arbitrage, Robert Freeman, said by the persons to be a close friend of Princeton/Newport's Mr. Regan.    Princeton/Newport officials have steadfastly refused to cooperate with the government, and so far have withstood the pressure of the potentially ruinous penalties that could accompany a RICO conviction. Those penalties could include a government claim to all their Princeton/Newport earnings since the beginning of any alleged racketeering activity.    Mr. Regan's earnings alone from Princeton/Newport since 1984, when the alleged wrongdoing began, total many millions of dollars, and a RICO sanction could virtually strip him of all his assets, whether or not they were found to be illgotten. And if such an approach is upheld in the Princeton/Newport context, the implications for other wealthy potential defendants are obvious.    Mr. Wells, Mr. Regan's lawyer, characterized the government's attempt to convert what he says should be a civil tax case into a RICO case as &quot;frightening.&quot; He continued: &quot;It seems clear that Mr. Regan is being used as a pawn in a chess game being played on a much larger board.&quot;    Paul Grand, a partner in Grand andamp; Ostrow and a lawyer for a Princeton/Newport general partner, whom he declined to identify, said, &quot;We're outraged that the RICO statute is being used in this heavy-handed manner that was never intended by Congress.&quot;    Though likely to be named as a racketeering enterprise, Princeton/Newport itself won't be named as a defendant in the RICO counts, people familiar with the case said. That means the firm wouldn't be subject to RICO penalties, though any of its general partners who are named as defendants could be.    People familiar with the case said the likely charges in the Princeton/Newport case, besides racketeering, include 30 to 40 instances of tax fraud; parking of securities to conceal their true ownership; and market manipulation.    The potential tax charges, which were the basis for a search by federal agents of Princeton/Newport's New Jersey offices last December, are likely to involve alleged violations of so-called wash sale rules.    The government is likely to charge that, beginning in late 1984 and continuing through 1985, Princeton/Newport allegedly &quot;sold&quot; securities to Drexel to realize a short-term loss, then bought them back, protecting Drexel against any loss. The government also is likely to allege that the securities were actually parked with Drexel in fraudulent, sham transactions intended to generate tax deductions for Princeton/Newport, people familiar with the case said.    They said the transactions appear to be part of hedging strategies routinely carried out by Princeton/Newport, and were intended to match offsetting short-term losses and gains in hedged positions. Princeton/Newport engaged in similar transactions with Merrill Lynch andamp; Co., the people said, but Merrill Lynch has cooperated with the government and isn't a target of the investigation.    Merrill Lynch officials couldn't immediately be reached for comment.    The people familiar with the case said Princeton/Newport also allegedly parked securities of toy maker Mattel Inc. during 1985 at Drexel's behest, and allegedly attempted to manipulate the price of C.O.M.B. Co., a Minneapolis-based merchandiser, by selling its stock prior to a Drexel-underwritten securities offering in 1985, also at the request of Drexel.    They said that the government has in its possession Princeton/Newport tape recordings of conversations between Drexel and Princeton/Newport employees arranging the allegedly unlawful Mattel and C.O.M.B. transactions.    None of the likely charges relate to Mr. Regan's or Princeton/Newport's relationship with Mr. Freeman and Goldman Sachs, the people said. As previously reported, the government has been scrutinizing trading by both Princeton/Newport and Mr. Freeman in Storer Communications Inc. in advance of Storer's acquisition by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts Inc. for the possibility of insider trading. It isn't known whether that aspect of the Princeton/Newport investigation continues.    Lawyers for Mr. Freeman couldn't immediately be reached for comment.    The government remains keenly interested in anything Princeton/Newport officials might be able to tell it about Messrs. Freeman or Milken. Mr. Grand, the lawyer representing a potential defendant, said that Rudolph Giuliani, the Manhattan U.S. attorney, told an attorney for one of the potential defendants that the case could be disposed of without a RICO indictment if two or more Princeton/Newport officials agreed to cooperate and testify for the government in two other continuing investigations.    &quot;You'd have to be a fool&quot; not to know that he meant Messrs. Freeman and Milken, Mr. Grand said.    Mr. Giuliani yesterday denied making the statement attributed to him by Mr. Grand, and he declined comment on the case. </TEXT></DOC>