<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881004-0036 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   KIDNAPPERS RELEASED an Indian-born educator held hostage in Lebanon.    Police in Beirut said Mithileshwar Singh, 60, was freed after 20 months in captivity and turned over to Syria. Singh, a U.S. resident alien, was a Beirut University College professor when he was abducted. American officials said Islamic Jihad for the Liberation of Palestine probably freed Singh in an effort to pressure Reagan to make concessions to win the freedom of three Americans held by the group. The White House denied making any deals to free the captives.    Nine Americans are among 17 foreign hostages in Lebanon. Held longest is the Associated Press's Terry Anderson, kidnapped March 16, 1985.    ---   DISCOVERY LANDED, ending a mission that revived the U.S. space program.    The space shuttle touched down gently in California after a four-day flight that cleared the way for more ambitious manned missions. NASA officials said the flight seemed to be trouble-free but needed further analysis. The shuttle's five astronauts were greeted by about half a million people, including GOP candidate Bush, who watched the landing at Edwards Air Force Base and congratulated the astronauts. Dukakis wasn't invited.    Discovery ended a 32-month hiatus in the space program caused by the Challenger explosion. Sister shuttle Atlantis is scheduled for launch Oct. 17.    ---   The Supreme Court opened its 1988-89 term, acting on about 1,000 cases in its first day. The nine justices agreed to expand their study of drug testing in the workplace. They also said they would decide whether displays of a Christmas nativity scene and a menorah should be allowed at two government buildings in Pittsburgh.    ---   South Korean President Roh said he was prepared to go to Pyongyang to talk with North Korea's Kim Il Sung on ways to reunify the peninsula. Leaders of the two nations haven't met since the end of World War II. Separately, Seoul released more than 1,000 prisoners, including 52 political offenders, under a holiday amnesty.    ---   The U.S. expressed &quot;serious concern&quot; to Chile about reports that Pinochet may cancel or nullify tomorrow's plebiscite on extending his presidency. The balloting will be the first direct vote on the general's rule since he seized power in 1973. Each side says it expects victory. If Pinochet loses, he must call a multicandidate election.    ---   Soviet officials capped a Kremlin shakeup by moving Politburo member Vitaly Vorotnikov to the ceremonial post of president of Russia, the largest of the 15 Soviet republics. The Russian legislature elected Interior Minister Alexander Vlasov, a Gorbachev ally, to take over as premier.    ---   Most Burmese workers returned to work after a one-month general strike, the government said. Attendance at 18 ministries and various departments in Rangoon was 95%, it said, while all civil servants were working in Mandalay. The strike was the first mass labor action since a one-party military system was instituted in 1962.    ---   Pakistan's president vowed to punish gunmen who have killed more than 260 people in recent days. Visiting Hyderabad, where 182 people were slain Friday, Ishaq Khan said that the massacre was aimed at creating instability and that he knew who was responsible. He said November elections would take place as scheduled.    ---   Indian officials intensified relief efforts in four northern states, where at least 460 people have died in nearly two weeks of flooding. More than 250,000 people have been evacuated from the region. Water is receding there, but in Bombay yesterday, torrential rains killed at least 14 people, and roads and rail links in the city were cut off.    ---   Libya and Chad agreed to restore diplomatic ties, formally ending a 15-year desert war. A joint communique said the two governments would set up full missions in each other's capitals by the end of October. The countries agreed in September 1987 to observe an OAU-brokered cease-fire, ending fighting at their disputed border.    ---   Franz Josef Strauss died in Regensburg, West Germany, at the age of 73. The conservative Bavarian premier, a leading figure in Germany's post-war transformation, collapsed during a hunting trip and died of pulmonary complications. His death may create problems for Chancellor Kohl in his bid to retain power. </TEXT></DOC>