<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870818-0086 </DOCNO><HL> Aided by Racketeering Laws, a CityWins Out Over Adult Bookstores---By Martha BranniganStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> FORT LAUDERDALE, Fla.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Jerome Cohen, until recently a purveyor of pornographic magazines at two adult bookstores in this oceanfront resort, is selling corned beef these days at his new delicatessen.    His bookstores -- the last holdouts against a vigorous and protracted anti-pornography campaign by the city -- closed June 25 as a special condition of his plea bargain to racketeering charges for the sale of obscene material.    Mr. Cohen, an affable and balding man of 47 who favors cutoffs and white Reebok sneakers, figured a plea bargain for probation and a new career looked a lot better than risking a trial and the prospect of up to 30 years in prison, the forfeiture of his assets and the considerable expense of fighting a racketeering case.    Many cities have been frustrated and thwarted in their efforts to eliminate pornography. This is a look at how one town tried almost everything to get rid of its porn merchants -- from relentless arrests and heavy police pressure to rigorous enforcement of local ordinances and building codes -- and ultimately won by hauling out a bigger gun: the state's Racketeer-Influenced and Corrupt Organizations law.    &quot;We started using RICO for obscenity violations, and that's when the bookstore operators decided it was time to get out of Dodge,&quot; says Vincent Rizzitello, an organized-crime detective who has been making life miserable for adult-bookstore operators for more than seven years.    The decision to employ Florida's RICO law against pornography came in the wake of widening use of such laws elsewhere for similar purposes. A few years earlier, for example, Orlando had been successful in using the law to close adult bookstores there. Currently 11 states besides Florida list obscenity as a crime that can be prosecuted under their RICO laws.    Moreover, the attorney general's Commission on Pornography urges use of RICO laws for this purpose. The federal version was invoked for the first time in an obscenity case last Thursday, when three people and a corporation in Alexandria, Va., were indicted by a federal grand jury there on racketeering and obscenity charges.    While Fort Lauderdale's 13-year effort has drawn praise from anti-pornography groups, many critics assert that the police tactics -- characterized in federal lawsuits brought by the store owners as harassment and intimidation -- mark a blow to individual rights. &quot;An adult bookstore in your neighborhood is sometimes the price of freedom,&quot; says Norman Kent, a Fort Lauderdale lawyer who represents bookstores and video shops.    The city's effort was certainly strenuous. One Sunday morning in May 1976, for example, police and the local sheriff staked out a gathering of adult-bookstore merchants at a Holiday Inn here, surreptitiously photographing comers and goers. They then raided the meeting, detaining and demanding identification from the participants, who were discussing legal strategy for coping with stepped-up police enforcement, says Bruce Randall, a lawyer for the bookstores who was present.    The incident spurred storekeepers to file a civil suit in federal court here, charging the police and sheriff's departments and several local officials with harassing and depriving them of the right of free assembly. The case was settled out of court for several thousand dollars, according to several of the plaintiffs' lawyers. (The police department was unable immediately to confirm or deny this.)    In 1980, undercover police opened their own store, Cloud 9 Adult Boutique, to infiltrate the business. The investigation culminated in December of that year in a raid on 11 bookstores and the seizure of 1,800 films and hundreds of peep-show projectors and coin boxes. A state circuit judge ultimately ruled that the seizure was illegal and ordered the return of the goods.    Two years later, police wielding crowbars again made massive seizures of projectors and coin boxes. The practice was ordered halted in July 1983 by a federal judge who said police had &quot;engaged in a pattern of unconstitutional seizures.&quot;    Then there were the continual misdemeanor arrests of employees for sale of obscene material. These forced the shops to close temporarily as clerks were jailed and subjected to strip searches. The arrests became so routine, police say, that clerks sometimes carried envelopes filled with bail money.    On March 13 last year, Mr. Cohen and a clerk were arrested at his A Adult Bookstore and jailed for 10 hours. Like several other store owners, he filed suit in federal court here, charging police with harassment and intimidation of shopkeepers and customers. Mr. Cohen voluntarily dismissed his suit as a special condition of his plea bargain. (The other suits were withdrawn under similar circumstances.)    Detective Rizzitello says such allegations of harassment and intimidation are unfounded. Police always acted professionally in making arrests, he says, though he concedes that on occasion &quot;you've got to yell louder than anyone else in the room in order to take charge of the situation.&quot;    His partner, Gary Daughenbaugh, adds, &quot;We're real low-key as far as I'm concerned, compared to, say, going on a drug raid.&quot; He says that the frequency of arrests made things &quot;pretty routine,&quot; noting that he came to know most clerks on a first-name basis. He explains that when police were seizing coin boxes and projectors, the scene was &quot;a little more dramatic,&quot; because &quot;you had to knock the coin box off the wall with a crowbar.&quot;    Throughout the police effort, city officials were pushing on a parallel front with a host of civil measures, all of which proved ineffective. In 1981, for example, the city passed an ordinance -- which bookstore owners moved to block -- that declared the bookstores a &quot;moral nuisance&quot; and sought to shut them down. The case is still mired in state court, having finally gone to trial this February. The judge hasn't yet made a ruling.    In 1983, another ordinance, aimed at curbing the alleged illicit sexual activity that occurs inside the stores, sought to remove doors from the peep-show booths. The storekeepers' motion to stop this is also still pending.    Police say they turned the corner when they began using the state's RICO law. In Mr. Cohen's case, they strung together several misdemeanor offenses, punishable by no more than one year in prison each, and alleged a &quot;pattern of racketeering.&quot;    The practice is seen as unfair by many defense lawyers, who say a legal challenge in Florida's high court seems certain. &quot;It's like using a cannon to shoot a fly,&quot; says David Bogenshutz, an attorney for Brian Hinman, who similarly agreed to get out of the adult-bookstore business as part of a plea bargain to racketeering charges in December 1985. (The use of civil RICO laws in obscenity cases in Indiana was upheld by the state supreme court in March, and bookstores there plan to seek a hearing before the U.S. Supreme Court.)    With the bookstores vanquished, police here have focused their attention on retail video shops that stock some pornographic films. In November 1986, they began visiting the shops and warning proprietors that some films -- without specifying which -- might be construed as obscene if presented to a state judge for a determination. They also said that if the unidentified films weren't removed, they might return and arrest the owners on obscenity charges.    &quot;We went to our video stores and said, 'Hey, not for anything, but I was just around the corner and made an arrest of a (bookstore) clerk for selling me something just like this, so you're going to have to clean up your act, start policing yourself,'&quot; says Detective Rizzitello.    In a fit of self-censorship, the videoshop owners have pulled numerous questionable films from their shelves. They also filed suit in state court, seeking to force police to warn them which films are ruled to be obscene so that they can remove them. The judge's decision to deny the request is being appealed.    &quot;It's like driving down a highway and a sign says, 'Observe the speed limit,' but there's no speed limit posted,&quot; says Mr. Kent, who is representing the video-shop owners. &quot;They are chipping away at our constitutional rights.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>