<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870923-0078 </DOCNO><HL> Tuning Out:Black Radio StationsFace Balky AdvertisersAs Competition Rises---Station in Louisiana FightsA White-Owned OutletTo Regain Its Dominance---Will FCC Deal a New Blow?---By Bob DavisStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)MARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT)FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION (FCC) </IN><DATELINE> NEW ORLEANS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Some would call James Hutchinson pushy.    The former Dartmouth College lineman battles businesses that won't advertise on his New Orleans radio station because of its primarily black audience. He wars with white-owned stations that would woo away his listeners. The people he pushes don't like it much, but that doesn't stop Mr. Hutchinson. &quot;I don't know of much progress without confrontation,&quot; the burly 39-year-old says.    Few may have his contentious approach, but most black radio executives have Mr. Hutchinson's problems. After a decade of slow but significant growth, black-owned radio stations face an increasingly perilous future. Many advertisers won't buy ads on black radio, and those that do want to pay less than for comparably rated white stations. White-owned stations, looking to improve ratings, raid black audiences. And the Federal Communications Commission, as it moves toward deregulation, may abandon policies that helped most black stations get started.    The survival of black radio stations has an importance far beyond financial gain to the owners. Black stations promote black artists, air black grievances and, sometimes, push for change. In Washington, D.C., a black radio-station owner led a boycott of the Washington Post's new Sunday magazine, prompting the newspaper to broaden its coverage of the black community. In Chicago in 1983, two radio stations with black managers and formats led voter-registration drives that were crucial to electing the city's first black mayor.    Benjamin Hooks, the executive director of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and a former FCC commissioner, says, &quot;Black station owners bring in a spectrum of thought not filtered through the minds of white people.&quot;    Mr. Hutchinson is the president and chief broadcast official of Chicago-based Inter Urban Group, which bought WYLDFM and WYLD-AM in New Orleans in 1981. The FM station jumped to the top of the ratings in 1982 by playing dance music with a driving beat and mixing in an occasional rap song. But WYLD has never been tops in ad revenue. With annual revenue of about $5 million, the two stations bring in $500,000 to $1 million less than would similarly rated New Orleans pop-music stations, Mr. Hutchinson estimates.    Advertisers who won't use black radio include some computer companies, suburban shopping malls and Japanese electronics companies, says Mr. Hutchinson, who is the chairman of the National Association of Black Owned Broadcasters, a trade group. When Cunningham andamp; Walsh plotted an ad campaign for Panasonic office copiers last year, for instance, it ruled out black stations, instructing salesmen, &quot;Please do not submit black/ethnic or heavy teen stations.&quot;    Frank McDonald, executive media director at N.W. Ayer Inc., which later acquired Cunningham andamp; Walsh, says the directive makes sense because few office-copier buyers listen to black stations. But Lois Wright, corporate counsel for WBLS-FM, a black-owned station in New York, says the letter shows that advertisers &quot;operate under the assumption that black consumers aren't in the 20th century -- we don't buy office copiers, don't fly and don't use credit cards.&quot;    WYLD's Mr. Hutchinson battles to overcome advertiser resistance using management skills he picked up at Dartmouth's Amos Tuck business school and his own tough-guy tactics. He once led a college demonstration in which George Wallace's car was nearly overturned. So far, he has both success and bruises to show for his efforts.    When he thought a suburban New Orleans mall had unfairly rejected WYLD, Mr. Hutchinson complained to the mall's home office in New York. Now Lou Flanigan, the marketing director for Esplanade Mall, says he won't ever advertise on WYLD. &quot;I told them what they could do with their station,&quot; he bristles.    Several years back, Delta Air Lines wouldn't advertise on WYLD because the station's ad rates had become too expensive for Delta's separate &quot;black&quot; advertising budget. Mr. Hutchinson flew twice to Atlanta to complain to executives at Delta's advertising agency that WYLD should get part of the airline's general advertising outlays. He also castigated Delta at a Federal Communications Commission hearing. WYLD's advertising sales representatives lobbied Delta directly.    Last year, WYLD reduced its rates and Delta eliminated its black advertising budget. The airline's agency, BDA/BBDO Inc., a part of BBDO International Inc., added WYLD to its ad campaign. But resentment smolders on both sides. WYLD's confrontational style &quot;is coming back to haunt them,&quot; says Andre Klein, senior buyer at BDA/BBDO, who says he may now switch to WYLD's arch-rival, white-owned WQUE. WQUE is owned by Clear Channel Communications Inc. of San Antonio, Texas.    &quot;Even when we win, we lose,&quot; counters Mr. Hutchinson, who points to his Delta struggle as an illustration of the added burdens faced by black-owned radio stations. &quot;We had two years of plane bills and hotel bills our competitors didn't incur,&quot; he says. &quot;That's a cost of doing business that white businesses don't have.&quot;    Federal policy has helped blacks win new broadcast licenses and buy stations up for sale, quadrupling the number of black-owned stations to about 165 since 1977. Some black broadcasters, including Mr. Hutchinson, have prospered. But many other black owners can afford only tiny AM stations that are steady losers in the ratings.    Some of those stations can broadcast only during daylight; others have signals so weak they can't reach suburban listeners. &quot;Half the stations black people own are dogs,&quot; says Pluria Marshall, the chairman of the National Black Media Coalition, a Washington, D.C., advocacy group.    Adding to their problems, black stations now must compete for the very audiences they were established to serve. WYLD is locked in a bitter struggle with WQUE-FM, which this spring overtook WYLD-FM as the top-rated station in New Orleans, a city that's 55% black. Both stations reach black listeners by playing music by black musicians, but their similarity ends there. WYLD prides itself on news and public affairs; WQUE boasts of nonstop music. All WYLD's news staff and announcers are black. All but two of WQUE's nine on-the-air staffers are white.    The rivalry is so heated that a WYLD announcer jumped on stage during intermission at a Kool andamp; the Gang concert sponsored by WQUE in May and harangued the largely black crowd to tune out WQUE. He was booed off the stage and later demoted by Mr. Hutchinson for acting &quot;overzealously,&quot; but WYLD's reputation suffered anyway. Domino's Pizza Inc. says it won't advertise on WYLD because of the incident and turned to WQUE instead.    Similar battles are flaring around the country. In Philadelphia, white-owned WUSL-FM woos black teens from black-owned WDAS-FM by playing more hits and less news. In Dallas, KDLZ-FM says it slumped to No. 17 from No. 3 in the ratings after a better-financed white station switched to black music and launched extravagant promotions. When KDLZ announced it was giving away the use of a car for a year, for instance, its rival countered by giving away a Mercedes outright. &quot;Every time we try to do something, they outdo us,&quot; says James Tyler, KDLZ's general manager.    WYLD in New Orleans tries to attract followers by promoting black music and community pride. WYLD-FM plays hits by black artists and WYLD-AM features blues and &quot;oldies&quot; -- which for a black station means mostly Motown. One AM show, featuring a 76-year-old disk jockey who goes by the moniker Dr. Daddy-O, plays New Orleans jazz and blues. The station also sponsors a city-wide talent show and a community picnic that draws 60,000.    WYLD and an all-news radio station are usually the only radio stations in town that send reporters to cover events. WYLD reporters probe whether black companies get a fair share of Mardi Gras business and they routinely seek comments on issues from black legislators. A call-in show on the AM station discusses local news.    Public-affairs programs are increasingly rare on black stations. In Boston, black activists are pressing black-owned WILD-AM for more news programming and a talk show, but the station's owner, Kenneth Nash, refuses, contending listeners want music instead. A talk show &quot;would lead us to bankruptcy,&quot; he says.    Mr. Hutchinson reinforces WYLD's high profile by giving free air time to civil-rights groups and the city's black mayor and by corralling political ads at election time. So many candidates clamor to advertise on the station that WYLD limits each of them to eight spots a day.    Few whites listen in, so many politicians try blatantly racial appeals. In last year's mayoral race one ad accused the eventual winner, Sidney Barthelemy, of &quot;passing for white&quot; and ignoring black concerns.    Mr. Hutchinson is adept at politicking, too. He was a fixture at former Mayor Ernest Morial's fund-raisers and used his influence to win mayoral appointments to community boards, where he could hobnob with other civic leaders, says Warren Bell, WYLD's former news director. WYLD editorialized in favor of changing the law to allow Mr. Morial a third term, but when that failed, WYLD contributed $7,000 to Mr. Barthelemy and $14,000 to his main opponent to keep up its ties to City Hall.    The civic work and political ties have opened doors for the station at white businesses. &quot;You do business with people you know,&quot; says Tom Purdy, the president of the New Orleans chamber of commerce, which holds monthly breakfast meetings of black and white businessmen.    Mr. Hutchinson and Thomas Lewis, Inter Urban's chairman and majority owner, have been savvy about taking advantage of FCC policies. They started their broadcast careers in 1976 when they paid $190,000 for a struggling Gary, Ind., AM station. The FCC suspected the former owners of inflating their count of minority employees, Mr. Hutchinson says, and encouraged the sale to Inter Urban to avoid a lengthy hearing on the charges. Inter Urban now owns seven stations and a minor-league baseball team, the Savannah, Ga., Cardinals.    Inter Urban sold the Gary station in 1981 for $495,000, about a year after buying WYLD for $2.25 million in a sale also aided by the FCC. The agency awards tax credits to broadcasters who sell to minority-group members.    That avenue soon may be closed. As a part of deregulation, the FCC is expected to decide by year end whether to eliminate decade-old policies that help blacks win new broadcast licenses and buy stations up for sale. The FCC believes that the help may be unconstitutional and encourage scams in which blacks act as fronts for white buyers.    But Mr. Hooks of the NAACP says the programs give blacks &quot;a fair shake.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>