<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880323-0065 </DOCNO><HL> Mercenaries Perform Vital Defensive Role In Gulf Tanker War --- Their Discipline Aboard Ships, Plus Sandbags and Decoys, Helps to Keep Oil Flowing </HL><AUTHOR> John J. Fialka and Allanna Sullivan (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST </CO><IN> PET TRA MON </IN><TEXT>   The Iranian oil tanker Rover was anchored off Kharg Island in the Persian Gulf when Jason Cox saw two pinpoints of light racing toward it in the darkness.    Instinctively he dived for cover, yelling for the crew to follow. When a fearful seaman froze, Mr. Cox poked his head out to urge him to move -- just as an incoming rocket exploded in a shower of shrapnel, killing four men. In the ensuing chaos, Mr. Cox showed crewmen how to lower the wounded and dying 30 feet by a rope to a waiting tugboat.    Some men had gaping holes in their chests and necks. One had part of his face shot off. Mr. Cox, blood streaming from wounds in his face, arm and leg, stayed with the tanker.    It was a brief encounter last October in the seven-year &quot;tanker war&quot; that has now killed about 400 commercial seamen and injured another 400 as Iran and Iraq keep trying to knock out each other's oil export capability. Lately the tanker war has heated up considerably. According to Lloyd's of London, seven ships have been hit in the past five days.    The most recent spasm of attacks began shortly after dawn Saturday when Iraqi aircraft set two Iranian-owned tankers ablaze at Kharg Island. There are reports that the bomb and missile attack hit the ships' crew quarters, killing as many as 50 seamen. Iranian gunboats and helicopters then took revenge on five ships ranging from a Greek supertanker to a Spanish refrigerator ship.    In this oddly sporadic but deadly struggle, Jason Cox is one of the heroes. A former British commando, he is part of a security team hired to help defend the 18-tanker oil &quot;shuttle&quot; that Iran uses to move its oil out of the gulf.    Under the stealthy rules that govern his business, he can't be identified. Jason Cox is a pseudonym. But it is mercenaries like him, their ingenuity and their willingness to risk life and limb that are among the reasons 17% of the world's oil keeps moving out of the gulf despite almost 500 attacks on merchant ships.    Defence Analysts Ltd., a small British consulting firm, provides former commandos such as Mr. Cox and a variety of other services to tanker owners. Clients include another U.K. firm, World Carrier Management S.A., which manages part of Iran's tanker fleet.    In a typical recent package deal for an Iran-bound tanker, Defence Analysts charged $300,000 to reinforce the steel around the engine room, provide two decoys designed to lure radar-guided missiles astray, and install sundry other devices to help the ship elude missiles. This low-technology self-defense package included $50,000 of chemically treated rubber pads that look like doormats -- radar-absorbent material, or RAM, wrapped around such radar-reflecting &quot;hot spots&quot; as corners, angles and handrails. Also included in the package was the on-board service of a security adviser for six months.    Many see the job as defending the undefendable. Consider the Rover, a slow-moving behemoth nearly as long as three football fields, with 360,000 barrels of crude oil sloshing in its tanks. Certainly decoys and RAM have their uses, but the man who heads Defence Analysts, retired Royal Navy Cmdr. Nigel D. Ward, says that the main things his men provide are common sense, discipline and a great many sandbags.    Giorgos Fraghistas, managing director of World Carrier Management, says 15 of his tankers have been damaged during the past four years. Only three have had to be junked. He says the great steel bulk of his ships means he doesn't have to worry much about hull damage by Iraq's Frenchmade Exocet missiles. &quot;It is like taking a small injection,&quot; he says.    A much greater concern, he says, is protecting the crew quarters and the bridge, which have increasingly been the targets of Iraqi bombs and anti-tank missiles. Mr. Cox uses some 2,000 sandbags around the crew quarters and sometimes makes a small bunker of them inside the bridge and the wheelhouse. Forty-five-gallon oil drums filled with water are scattered around the deck to provide extra cover. &quot;If a drum gets hit, we have instant water everywhere, which is what you need,&quot; explains Mr. Cox, who trains his crews to fight fires.    In the boiler room, Mr. Cox applies more sandbags around fragile parts and often fills the ship's main fuel-oil tanks with water, shifting the more flammable fuel oil to less vulnerable tanks elsewhere on board. Here in the boiler room, he admits, the threat of the Exocet bothers him.    Three of the tankers he has been assigned to protect have been hit with the missile. Mr. Cox says the warhead usually goes off with a &quot;muffled whump&quot; somewhere in the crude oil without igniting the oil. So it isn't the explosion that worries him but the shock of the 1,000-pound rocket hitting the side of the ship at the speed of sound. The resulting vibrations can put out the boiler.    The boiler provides the light and the water pressure to fight fires with. It also provides what Mr. Cox says is the best defense of the tanker: its speed. While it is moving, at some 17 knots, the tanker is a relatively difficult target. The most dangerous time comes when it stops or when it is caught at anchor.    Mr. Fraghistas says his company undertook its work for Iran four years ago. &quot;We found a gap in the market,&quot; he says, &quot;and thought that if somebody can organize himself to profitably run and protect these ships, he is achieving two goals. One is financial. Secondly, you can save a hell of a lot of damage and lives.&quot; Some of the tankers he uses are owned by Iran; others are chartered from private owners.    &quot;The fact of life is that if you are willing to get to the war zone, you're going to make more money,&quot; Mr. Fraghistas says. But the rise in attacks aimed at crewmen, he says, is taking a bigger bite out of profits. For one thing, he says, commercial insurance, when available, is now running 30 to 40 times higher than normal rates. Most of his business goes to Bimeh, an insurance company operated by the Iranian government, which &quot;will come in and pick up whatever risks there are&quot; at a cheaper rate.    The increased attacks, Mr. Fraghistas says, also mean more morale problems among his crews, who are mainly Filipinos. Demoralized men don't do as thorough work as happy ones, and that means less maintenance and more mechanical breakdowns. There are days when Mr. Fraghistas's own morale is affected. &quot;It is not a nice thing sitting in your office saying this ship has been hit,&quot; he says. &quot;You have to organize the evacuation, take the crew somewhere safe and then handle the repairs.&quot; In the days before Iraqi planes started concentrating on crewmen, he says, &quot;all you had to do was patch a hole.&quot;    On the southern side of the gulf, the ships that pick up oil in Kuwait -- considered by insurers to be, behind Kharg, the second most dangerous destination in the gulf -- have developed their own methods of trying to stay out of harm's way. Many of them don't have the right flags to get protection from the U.S., French, British and other navies escorting ships in the gulf.    Some give false destinations when Iranian naval vessels query them over the radio. Some trail navy-escorted convoys or drift to one side, hoping that their radar signal will be lost among the other ships. Many tankers leave Kuwait with partial loads so that they can hug the shallow western coast of the gulf where attack by Iranian gunboats is less likely.    Sometimes nothing helps. Capt. David McCaffrey of the ship Caribbean Breeze recalls a dawn two years ago when he woke up to find an Iranian reconnaissance plane making lazy circles overhead. After what seemed like a very long time, an Iranian fighter, a Phantom, appeared on the horizon and began its target run. It put two anti-tank missiles into the bridge and wheelhouse.    Capt. McCaffrey fell through the shattered floor of the bridge and found himself dangling over burning crew quarters below. A fellow officer pulled him out, saving his life. The captain recalls, &quot;I was a sitting duck.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>