<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871130-0109 </DOCNO><HL> Conservative Backers of Reagan Wage CampaignTo Bar His Agreeing to SDI Limits With Moscow---By Tim CarringtonStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST EUROPNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   As Ronald Reagan prepares for his summit with Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev, the president is under attack.    One group is trying to raise at least $100,000 to run a series of ads attempting to pressure the president. Another is lobbying the Senate, attacking his arms-control stance. A senator is demanding that the Federal Bureau of Investigation investigate a senior Reagan adviser.    These types of attacks on Ronald Reagan are nothing new. What is new is the source: They come from some of the same conservative groups and lawmakers who have been Mr. Reagan's staunchest supporters. Their goal is to block him from even considering the possibility of agreeing to limits on his Strategic Defense Initiative when he meets with the Soviet leader.    This firestorm of activity is a sign of desperation, says Paul Warnke, chief arms-control negotiator in the Carter administration and a strong opponent of the SDI program. &quot;They figure they're losing,&quot; he says.    Three events have the conservatives so concerned: the summit, the rising demand for cuts in the Pentagon budget and the resignation of Caspar Weinberger as defense secretary.    &quot;It is a critical moment for the program,&quot; says Richard Perle, formerly the Pentagon's top arms-control specialist and a strong backer of the SDI program, which is popularly known as Star Wars. &quot;It's lost its second champion in Weinberger, the first being the president. I don't know where Frank Carlucci (the new defense secretary) stands on it.&quot;    Mr. Carlucci, who describes himself as a supporter, says that &quot;we ought to deploy the Strategic Defense Initiative,&quot; but he doesn't say when.    In one effort to mobilize political support for the beleaguered project, High Frontier, the pro-Star Wars group headed by retired Army Lt. Gen. Daniel Graham, is telephoning conservative contributors around the country in an eleventh-hour push to raise at least $100,000 for a series of pointed advertisements to run just before the summit, which is scheduled to begin next Monday.    Meanwhile, conservative activist Paul Weyrich is lobbying for senators to withhold ratification of the nearly completed treaty eliminating intermediate-range missiles in Europe until Mr. Reagan commits the U.S. to deploying Star Wars. And Wyoming Republican Sen. Malcolm Wallop has written FBI director William Sessions, demanding an investigation of whether administration arms-control adviser Paul Nitze has been secretly negotiating through U.S. scientists to curb SDI research.    The most immediate issue at stake is the interpretation and life expectancy of the 1972 anti-ballistic missile treaty, which prohibits both of the superpowers from deploying space-based anti-missile systems or from testing them under highly realistic conditions. If the ABM pact is extended for years to come, and interpreted strictly, SDI officials say they can't carry out the tests necessary to convince the military and the Congress that it is worth spending hundreds of billions to deploy Star Wars weapons.    Other scientists say that, regardless of the treaty, tight budgets and technological constraints for a while will preclude tests with space-based interceptors and actual missiles. These scientists argue that many useful tests can occur within the limits of the treaty.    The Soviets have called for a 10-year extension of the treaty, while the Reagan administration has said it is willing to stick with the accord for only seven more years. What happens after the time period is also in dispute. The Soviets call for more talks; the Reagan administration thinks both countries should then be free to deploy Star Wars weapons. The superpowers also will debate the Reagan administration's permissive interpretation of the treaty, which would allow for many more tests to be conducted while the pact is in effect.    One possible outcome of ABM negotiations will be language that clarifies which tests are prohibited and which are permitted under the treaty. Hard-line supporters argue that such a list represents a backdoor means of crippling the SDI program, but some senior Pentagon officials, including Adm. William Crowe, chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, think the program wouldn't be hurt if it moved at a slower pace.    But the current storm over the project has more to do with political atmospherics than science. Star Wars proponents are even alarmed by the stock market crash and the subsequent federal budget talks. &quot;Ronald Reagan was against tax increases and he's negotiating a tax increase right now,&quot; Mr. Weyrich says, adding that this might foreshadow a compromise on Star Wars.    To a great extent, the campaign to stave off a Star Wars compromise is aimed at the president himself. California GOP Sen. Pete Wilson wrote a &quot;fable&quot; in which Mr. Gorbachev demands a key Star Wars concession minutes before a scheduled White House ceremony to sign the Intermediate Nuclear Forces treaty on intermediate missiles. At the end of the fable, the president stares out at the December drizzle &quot;and ponders his presidency and the future of America.&quot;    The article, which was published by The Wall Street Journal editorial page, struck a nerve. According to an aide to Sen. Wilson, President Reagan telephoned the California Republican and said: &quot;It ain't going to happen. I will not let you down on this issue.&quot;    But the campaign also takes aim at officials perceived as favoring a compromise on the program. As currently envisioned, the High Frontier ads will attack Mr. Nitze, the senior arms-control adviser, who also is the target of other pro-SDI campaigns.    According to Sen. Wallop's office, Mr. Nitze briefed a team from the National Academy of Sciences, who then met with Russian scientists to discuss possible curbs on Star Wars tests. These talks, while unofficial, could set the stage for a summit compromise.    Administration officials say the incident has been overblown. They note that the scientists meet regularly with their Soviet counterparts on arms-control matters. Moreover, any resulting suggestions are ignored when an administration disagrees with them. However, Mr. Perle argues that if President Reagan discards such suggestions, &quot;It puts him in an awkward position; he appears to be unreasonable.&quot;    Scientists working on the strategic defense project say the ABM treaty is already forcing planners to design Star Wars experiments to comply with the limits of the treaty. &quot;Even now, technologists are constantly speaking back and forth with lawyers,&quot; says Lowell Wood, head of special studies at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory. He worries that scientists may desert the program if it remains under the treaty for much longer. &quot;Scientists working on SDI, if they think it isn't serious and that it'll be under ABM indefinitely, will go do something else,&quot; he says.    SDI officials say that while there are many scientifically useful tests they can do under the treaty, these may not be sufficient to convince the public of the project's merits. For example, the treaty prohibits both superpowers from firing space-based interceptors against ballistic missiles. Scientists say they can learn a lot by firing an interceptor at a sounding rocket or a satellite, but these experiments won't necessarily convince a skeptical Congress that strategic defenses really work. Says one SDI scientist: &quot;Technologists can get a lot of answers that satisfy technologists, but that's not enough to convince the skeptical lay person. These guys need flaming wreckage.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>