<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871015-0123 </DOCNO><HL> Dial 'O' for Options: ComputersEnhance Phone-Answering Gear---By William M. BulkeleyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMPUTERS (EDP)TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL) </IN><TEXT>   Computerized answering machines may do for switchboard operators what automated teller machines have done for bank tellers.    A new generation of sophisticated telephone-answering devices is helping businesses and institutions to handle calls more efficiently and accurately. The simplest &quot;voice-mail&quot; machines let callers leave a recorded message, just like a standard tape answering machine. But many of the systems -- the so-called automated attendants -- do a lot more, directing callers to select from among various options using the buttons on a touch-tone phone. Such devices now enable some 40,000 students at Texas A andamp; M University to register for classes by phone, and in the coming weeks a computer will tell callers to the Butterball turkey hotline how to thaw their holiday birds.    Although reaction to the devices has been cool in some quarters, a growing number of businesses are resorting to them to protect costly employees from time-consuming, and sometimes annoying, outside callers. Falling prices have made them even more attractive.    &quot;Five years from now, when calling the overwhelming majority of companies, people will reach automated attendants,&quot; predicts Blair Pleasant, a researcher with Yankee Group, a Boston-based consulting firm.    That's already the case for those who call American Airlines to check on flight delays. A slightly disembodied feminine voice says: &quot;Thank you for calling American Airlines' automated information system. For flight arrival information, press one. For fare and schedule information, press two. For assistance anytime, press asterisk and zero.&quot;    If the caller presses one on a touch-tone phone and then taps out the flight number, the voice reports on its status. (As with most similar systems, an operator assists those calling from rotary-dial phones.)    Is this progress? Some people don't think so. Carlton Vogt, an editor with Design News magazine in Newton, Mass., says sometimes the computers make him go through so many steps that &quot;I just hang up.&quot; And the Internal Revenue Service concedes that more than one-third of the callers to its three-year-old TeleTax service, which tells taxpayers when they can expect to receive refunds, hang up without getting their information.    But most callers, who have become used to answering machines in one form or another, put up with communicating with computers. Some even like it. &quot;In all fairness, I haven't found them to be worse than most receptionists,&quot; says Rusty Weston, a reporter for MacWeek magazine in San Francisco.    Storing voice messages on computer disks isn't a problem technologically. A phone line is hooked to a device that converts voice signals into digital information, which is then recorded on a disk. The process is similar to storing digital information on musical compact disks, although in a computer the information can be erased and rerecorded. In fact, some systems give callers the option of listening to and redoing the messages they leave. Computers' ability to recognize the tones generated by touch-tone phones is what allows them to be interactive.    The systems vary widely in cost, depending on the number of phones in the network. One for a company with 6,000 employees would cost around $400,000; one for a 300-room hotel would run about $20,000. There is even a $349 device, called the Complete Answering Machine, that fits inside a personal computer.    The first computerized voice-mail system was introduced by VMX Inc., a Dallas firm, in 1980. By last year, annual sales in the industry had reached $181 million, according to William Spain, a researcher at Probe Research in Morristown, N.J. Mr. Spain forsees 50% annual sales growth.    Making computers acceptable to callers requires care. Companies that have tried voice mail say that even first-time users can manage if the system tells them exactly what is going on, doesn't require them to deal with more than three choices at a time and provides an easy way to get a human operator at any time.    Indeed, even enthusiasts concede that human operators have a role. &quot;If you have a consumer complaint line and a computer answers it, that's the worst possible application,&quot; says Brad Wendkos, president of Phoneworks, a Hackensack, N.J., firm that designs telephone promotions. Kay Fairweather, a marketing manager for Lowell, Mass.-based Wang Laboratories Inc., which sells a voice-mail system, adds a recommendation that such businesses as law firms &quot;have a human with a lot of information&quot; to answer the phone.    But there are many situations, particularly where routine queries are involved, in which automated systems can do at least as good a job as humans.    Consider the system at Citizens andamp; Southern National Bank in Atlanta. Every day -- 24 hours a day, seven days a week -- the bank receives some 16,000 calls from customers who can tap in a password and an account number to find out about account balances, credit-card payments or whether certain checks have been cashed. Mary Farrell of Perception Technology, the Canton, Mass., firm that developed the system, says it handles about 80% of the bank's phone inquiries.    Deluxe hotels, too, are beginning to install voice-mail systems to take messages for guests. Kevin Carlson, an assistant manager at an Embassy Suites hotel in Minneapolis, says the system installed there lets international callers leave messages in their own language and has improved accuracy. &quot;If there is a screw-up on the time,&quot; he adds, &quot;it doesn't get blamed on the hotel.&quot;    System designers are combining telephones and computers for increasingly esoteric functions. Sharon Kalin, president of New York-based Risk Arbitrage Monitor Inc., tracks mergers and acquisitions for subscribers who pay $3,300 a year. Each subscriber gets a beeper and a number for a voice-mail box. When Ms. Kalin wants to make a recommendation, she records her advice for subscribers. Then, she says, &quot;their beepers go off, and like Pavlov's dogs they call voice mail and listen to what the master has to say.&quot;    VoiceMail International Inc. in Cupertino, Calif., has designed systems for airlines that need to notify substitute flight attendants when they're needed. The substitutes used to have to call one number -- which was often busy -- and listen to a recording that named everyone needed the next day. If they were on the list, they then dialed another number for their assignments. With the new system, attendants dial a voice-mail box, tap in a personal code number and get their assignments.    But Paul Finnigan, president of VoiceMail, says there are times when applications have flopped. He recalls, for example, that a flowers-by-wire service once offered senders the chance to record a message that the recipient could hear by dialing an 800 number connected to a VoiceMail box. Few used it. People sending flowers, Mr. Finnigan concludes, didn't want to verbalize a message. </TEXT></DOC>