<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870115-0085 </DOCNO><HL> Secrets Police:Neutral Nations GuardAmerican TechnologyTo Gain Import Rights---U.S. Lets Sweden and OthersGet Export Licenses FastIf Leaks to Soviets Stop---Ericsson Negotiates a Bargain---By Eduardo LachicaStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP ASEAY ERICY FREST GOVMTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Swedish industrialist Peter Wallenberg acted quickly to minimize the damage after the U.S. charged two of his multinational companies with illegally transferring U.S. technology to the Soviet bloc.    He retained former Secretary of State Henry Kissinger and Edward Bennett Williams, the noted criminal lawyer, to defend his interests. His companies, L.M. Ericsson AB and ASEA AB, stood to lose millions of dollars of business if the U.S. government made it harder for them to import American products for their manufacturing operations around the world.    He also lobbied hard in both Stockholm and Washington for a bargain that the U.S. and Sweden eventually struck -- closer Swedish vigilance against illegal diversion of U.S. technology, in exchange for continued access to U.S. high-technology components.    The U.S.-Swedish accord, which was negotiated quietly in 1981 and 1982, has become the model for similar arrangements with some other neutral countries -- Austria, Switzerland and, more recently, Singapore. India may eventually follow suit. These unwritten agreements, which require neutral countries to do a better job of policing their trade, are designed to make it harder for the Soviets to circumvent curbs on the transfer of U.S. technology that has military applications.    &quot;This is one of the great untold stories of our times -- how the need for U.S. technology is driving neutral countries to cooperate with us,&quot; says Paul Freedenberg, the assistant secretary of commerce for trade administration.    The bargain certainly has worked well for both the U.S. and Sweden. A cabinet ordinance that Sweden put into effect last June extends U.S. controls to American products imported by Swedish nationals -- and by definition to a lot of locally produced goods as well if they have components of U.S. origin.    As a reward for Swedish cooperation, U.S. export-licensers treat Ericsson and ASEA as generously as they do importers from Allied countries, with which the U.S. has formal agreements on export controls. That is an invaluable privilege. Getting U.S. export licenses on time can mean the difference between winning or losing an order for, say, a telephone switching system or factory automation layout that needs an IBM computer.    As a consequence, the U.S. has been able to pull Sweden deeper into its economic sphere and away from the Soviet Union. Since 1981, Sweden's investments in the U.S. have grown 69% and its yearly exports to the U.S. have more than doubled to $4.3 billion. In 1985 the U.S. surpassed West Germany as a buyer of Swedish goods and became Sweden's largest overseas market.    The new business climate partly reflects changes that have taken place since the Justice Department in 1981 charged that Datasaab Contracting AB had violated U.S. export-control laws by sending the Soviets $3.1 million in U.S. computers and software that could permit tracking of military as well as civilian aircraft. The violation would have made Datasaab, a computer-software company later absorbed by Mr. Wallenberg's L.M. Ericsson, liable for criminal prosecution in the U.S.; potential penalties included fines of up to five times the value of the U.S. products involved and -- the most severe of all penalties for Ericsson -- denial of subsequent U.S. high-tech products.    Shortly after the Datasaab case was brought, the U.S. charged that ASEA, a Wallenberg heavy-machinery and electrical manufacturer, had illegally shipped nine computers to the Soviet Union and Czechoslovakia during the two preceding years.    The only thing Mr. Wallenberg says about these cases is that &quot;it took a long time to settle them.&quot; From 1981 to 1985 he made frequent trips to Washington, often with ASEA President Percy Barnevik. At a meeting with Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige in 1982, he made a strong plea for his companies and vowed that they would handle their trade more scrupulously. Mr. Baldrige doesn't want to talk about his dealings with Mr. Wallenberg or his role in winning tougher technology-policing procedures from Sweden and some other neutral countries. &quot;The less said, the better,&quot; the commerce chief remarks.    It is clear, though, that Mr. Wallenberg began a two-track effort to protect his companies' ability to ship products using advanced American technology. He worked hard to soften penalties against his companies and began an effort to convince the Swedish government that helping the U.S. police curbs on technology exports was in Sweden's interest.    The U.S. was anxious to close Sweden as a conduit for technology smuggling. In 1981, Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger offered Sweden the blueprints of a state-of-the-art General Electric Co. jet engine and other aerospace technology from Lear Siegler Inc., Teledyne Inc. and Honeywell Inc. if the Swedes would tighten their export controls. Sweden badly needed this equipment for the development of its new fighter-bomber, the JAS 39 Gripen, and eventually Washington and Stockholm reached an agreement.    In Sweden, Mr. Wallenberg worked to convince other businessmen that their interest, too, lay in cooperating with the U.S. When two Pentagon officials in charge of export-control policy, Richard Perle and Stephen Bryen, were in Sweden in 1982, Mr. Wallenberg invited them to his house to address a group of business leaders over dinner. According to Mr. Bryen's account, Mr. Perle was very direct about the U.S. desire to stop leaks of U.S. technology through Sweden, telling the businessmen: &quot;We have a serious problem -- serious enough to make us very tough even with a country like Sweden, which has been a good friend.&quot;    On his many trips to Washington, Mr. Wallenberg, a pro-West conservative, was fighting what he thought to be an anti-Swedish bias. He bristles at what he sees as an American notion of Swedes as self-indulgent socialists and welfare-staters. &quot;Why, 90% of the Swedish GNP is produced by the private sector,&quot; he says. He retained Mr. Kissinger to advise Ericsson and ASEA on Washington policy.    Mr. Bryen says an understanding was first struck with Prime Minister Thorbjorn Falldin's conservative government in 1981-82. The Falldin government was shortly afterward replaced by that of the late Olof Palme and his Social Democrats, who, despite initial reluctance, subsequently adopted the Falldin deal.    But the Social Democrats began cooperating with the U.S. long before the cabinet adopted an export-control ordinance last year. In November 1983 Swedish customs, acting on the request of the U.S., stopped three containers of diverted U.S. computer parts from leaving the free port of Helsingborg for a Soviet destination -- despite the lack of clear-cut laws to justify that action.    In April 1984 Mr. Williams, the lawyer Mr. Wallenberg had retained to represent Ericsson, won a favorable settlement for the firm. Ericsson agreed to pay a $3.1 million fine, the stiffest ever levied against a company for export-control violations; but Ericsson avoided a Commerce Department denial of export privileges, a penalty that usually accompanies infractions of this kind. In a U.S. court hearing, Mr. Williams had argued that export denial would have been a &quot;lethal, devastating blow to a company that relies so heavily on its ability to do business in the U.S.&quot;    Moreover, the settlement averted a punitive breach-of-contract suit by the Soviets. It recognized Ericsson's right to complete some of its work for the Soviet air-traffic system, and the company thus remained eligible to claim a large part of the $75 million that the Soviets had offered to pay for the system.    ASEA also got off light. The Commerce Department fined it $440,000 in May 1985 but didn't disturb its export privileges. The ASEA executive responsible for selling the computers in violation of U.S. laws was convicted of tax evasion in Sweden, but not of technology piracy.    Out of all this emerged the Pentagon's plan to recruit neutral countries as unofficial associates in policing technology transfers. As Mr. Bryen describes it, the plan has three stages.    First, get the neutral countries to protect U.S. technology that they import for their own use. All the European neutral nations and most major Asian buyers of U.S. technology now unhesitatingly do this.    Second, get them to prevent sensitive U.S. products passing through their free ports, duty-free zones and bonded warehouses from being illegally diverted by third parties. Switzerland and Sweden introduced tougher in-transit restrictions early last year. Austria has promised to adopt similar rules in a few months.    Third, talk these neutrals into denying the Soviet bloc high-tech products that they manufacture themselves. This is a tougher request for the neutral nations to swallow, but Mr. Bryen asserts that the U.S. has had &quot;good success&quot; even in this matter. &quot;We have persuaded them not to ship lasers, computers, aircraft parts and other stuff to the Soviets,&quot; he says.    The Wallenberg companies are pulling out of Soviet-bloc trade, although they say they are doing so mainly for economic reasons. &quot;It's a lackluster market,&quot; says Lars Thunnell, ASEA's executive vice president. &quot;Our business with them has been declining over the last few years.&quot;    Franklin Forsberg, the U.S. ambassador to Stockholm when the export-control arrangements were negotiated, says Mr. Wallenberg is simply following the wisdom of his late father, Marcus Wallenberg, the noted Swedish financier and industrialist. &quot;Marcus,&quot; he says, &quot;knew that a country with only eight million people and a highly developed industry could only find growth in export markets like the U.S.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>