<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880104-0124 </DOCNO><HL> Knight-Ridder's No-Lose Plan Backfires --- Detroit Paper War Brings No Win, No Merger </HL><AUTHOR> Joseph B. White (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> KRI GCI </CO><IN> TNM PUB </IN><G> JUS </G><DATELINE> DETROIT  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Back in 1979, executives at Knight-Ridder Inc., the nation's second largest newspaper chain, took a big risk that seemed to promise rich rewards at one of its largest properties, the Detroit Free Press.    Stuck in second place behind the rival Detroit News in the war for newspaper supremacy in Detroit, it seems the Free Press and Knight-Ridder gambled that spending millions to win over readers and advertisers would either:   --Make the Free Press win the race.    --Or, says an administrative law judge, cause both papers to rack up such losses that the U.S. attorney general would allow a merger of the two Detroit dailies' business operations under a law designed to save failing newspapers. Such an arrangement would be highly profitable for both papers, considering that Detroit is the nation's fourth largest market in terms of overall newspaper circulation.    But what looked like a win-win strategy for Knight-Ridder has so far produced the worst possible results: The Free Press says its losses totaled $91.5 million between 1981 and 1987; it hasn't overtaken the News in either circulation or advertising; and now the prospects for the lucrative merger with Gannett Co.'s News are suddenly quite dim.    While Attorney General Edwin Meese ultimately will decide the issue, last Wednesday his hand-picked fact-finder, administrative law judge Morton Needelman, concluded that Detroit's papers don't qualify for a sanctioned monopoly. The papers are victims not of a declining market, Judge Needelman wrote, but of their own aggressive policies pursued &quot;in the belief that failure, too, had its reward.&quot; The Justice Department's Antitrust Division already had said the same thing.    The details of how Knight-Ridder painted itself into a corner in Detroit are disclosed in the 129-page decision Mr. Needelman wrote after reviewing more than 140,000 pages of documents and taking testimony for nearly two weeks at a hearing in Detroit last August.    The report portrays the last seven years of the Great Detroit Newspaper War as a series of corporate miscalculations compounded by the difficulties of trying to pursue two contradictory strategies --win big, or lose big --at once.    For their parts, executives of the two newspapers say the big losses were unavoidable, given the bitter competition between the two papers and the post-1979contraction of the Detroit economy. Asked this summer why the Free Press didn't raise circulation prices to become profitable in the early 1980s, Knight-Ridder's chairman, Alvah Chapman, replied, &quot;We would have lost so much market share and so much advertising we would have been out of business.&quot;    News executives make similar arguments to explain their unprofitable pricing. Both Knight-Ridder and Gannett executives say they believe that accepting second place would be suicidal. &quot;The dominant paper ultimately thrives,&quot; Gannett Chairman Allen H. Neuharth says. &quot;The weaker paper ultimately dies.&quot;    Still, Knight-Ridder now appears trapped by its own rhetoric. The Free Press is a &quot;failing newspaper,&quot; the company declared in its May 1986 application for a joint operating agreement, or JOA, with the News. And Mr. Chapman has tried to bolster the case for a merger by saying the Free Press will close if a JOA is denied. Now, the paper's share of full-run advertising --the ads that run in all editions of both papers --is stuck at an unhealthy 35%. Several well-known Free Press writers have jumped to the News, or left town altogether. And when Mr. Needelman's recommendation was announced last week, one Free Press reporter said: &quot;A lot of resumes will be going out of here tomorrow.&quot;    All this began in the 1979-1983recession that produced a depression in Detroit. The shock of high oil prices and soaring interest rates staggered the auto industry, and brought Michigan's economy to its knees.    It was in 1979 that the morning Free Press --the nation's ninth largest daily paper --sharply escalated its efforts to seize advertising and circulation dominance. Miami-based Knight-Ridder slashed advertising rates and held the Free Press's subscription prices down, and started a string of operating losses unbroken in the past eight years. The News, an afternoon paper then independently owned, followed suit; the nation's eighth largest paper, it began posting losses in 1980.    In early 1981, says Mr. Needelman's report, JOA negotiations began between News Chairman Peter Clark and Knight-Ridder's Mr. Chapman. At one of those early meetings, wrote Mr. Needelman, company executives &quot;emphasized that one or both newspapers needed to continue to show losses in order to qualify for a JOA, and that with a few more years of such losses, the prospects for a JOA would be 'ironclad.'&quot;    Losses are important for papers that want to merge their business operations. That's because the federal law that exempts such mergers from antitrust laws requires that one or both newspapers be failing, and locked in a downward spiral of declining advertising revenue and falling circulation.    The law's goal is to preserve independent editorial voices, albeit at the cost of allowing a business monopoly. Joint operating agreements now exist in around 20 U.S. cities. The four previous applications since 1974 --in Anchorage, Alaska; Cincinnati; Chattanooga, Tenn.; and Seattle --ultimately have been approved. The Detroit application is by far the largest ever.    Throughout the '80s, the Free Press and the News escalated their price war. Losses at the Free Press, including management fees to Knight-Ridder, averaged $10.7 million a year between 1981 and 1983, and rose to an annual average of $13.8 million between 1984 and 1986.    Free Press executives persevered, however, partly on the basis of estimates that the News was losing twice as much, according to Mr. Needelman's report. But that was hardly the case.    Later, Knight-Ridder would learn that the News was losing less money than the Free Press, and actually posted a pretax profit of $667,000 in 1985.    Between 1981 and 1985, Knight-Ridder had spent &quot;extravagantly,&quot; Mr. Needelman stated. It launched a $26.8 million drive called &quot;Operation Tiger&quot; --in the expectation that the News would fold, or be forced to accept a JOA on Knight-Ridder's terms.    In 1985, Knight-Ridder stepped up Operation Tiger. It committed $6.8 million to expanding the Free Press's staff and another $22.3 million to adding press capacity at its Detroit printing plant. Free Press managers projected the paper might turn a profit by 1990, and Knight-Ridder management backed the printing plant expansion saying, &quot;a $300 million market (for total ad revenue) is worth fighting for.&quot;    Enter Gannett, the nation's largest newspaper chain, and its hard-driving chairman, Allen H. Neuharth. In late 1985 Gannett, based in Arlington, Va., bought the News. But even before the deal was concluded Mr. Neuharth sounded out Knight-Ridder about a JOA, and got a favorable response. Thus in April 1986, with the News still on top, Knight-Ridder declared it would file for a JOA because the Free Press was a failing paper. The new printing facility wasn't even finished.    Knight-Ridder's problem then became how to convince the Justice Department that the Free Press was in an irreversible downward spiral caused by market conditions. The obstacles to proof: Its previously optimistic projections for the Free Press, the failure to undertake serious cost-cutting, and the economic recovery that boosted the Detroit area in 1985 and 1986.    To date, that effort has failed.    The Justice Department's Antitrust Division, under then-chief (and later Supreme Court nominee) Douglas H. Ginsburg, questioned the &quot;failing newspaper&quot; claim in a July 1986 report. Among other things, the Justice Department asked why the News would agree to give a &quot;failing&quot; competitor 50% of the profits from joint operations after five years.    Gannett's Mr. Neuharth has said his primary interest was in maintaining control of the joint operations. Under the proposed arrangement, Gannett would have three of five votes on the board that would set policy for the joint operations.    The merger also encountered fierce union opposition at both papers, and from Detroit Mayor Coleman Young. The unions, fearful of losing as many as 1,500 jobs in a merger, hired a battery of lawyers to fight the JOA in the administrative process. In hearings before Mr. Needelman last August, the lawyers attacked the seeming contradictions between the papers' earlier upbeat statements and ambitious spending, and their more recent statements that the Free Press is failing.    The unions, according to Detroit attorney Eugene Driker, see a simple solution to the Newspaper war. The papers, he says, should simply adopt &quot;rational pricing&quot; to cover their costs. That could mean price fixing, retorts Free Press Publisher David Lawrence Jr., who adds: &quot;You can go to jail for that in this country.&quot;    The News, under Mr. Neuharth, has vowed to hold its ground, and &quot;continue to pursue those strategies that ensure the News survives.&quot; That means selling the paper for 15 cents on weekdays and Saturday --less than any major daily in the country and less than any of the daily papers Gannett publishes. And it means steeply discounting advertising rates.    Knight-Ridder's Mr. Chapman says he's confident the case for a JOA is strong enough to win ultimate approval. If Mr. Meese disagrees, Knight-Ridder could appeal to the courts. But if the JOA eventually is denied, Knight-Ridder's options are few and unattractive. The Free Press could be closed, as Mr. Chapman has threatened. The paper could be sold, although Mr. Chapman says no serious offers are in sight.    Or Knight-Ridder could stay and fight, and continue to lose millions unless the News retreats from the price war that the Free Press itself launched eight years ago. But this seems the least likely outcome of all. Says Mr. Lawrence: &quot;I can't expect Knight-Ridder to continue funding huge losses without any hope of return.&quot;    ---   Andy Pasztor in Washington contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>