<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871118-0087 </DOCNO><HL> 'President Is Not a Creature of Congress'</HL><DD> 11/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MDESTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   These are excerpts from the minority report of the Iran-Contra congressional committee that will be released today:    We emphatically reject the idea that . . . the executive branch subverted the law, undermined the Constitution, or threatened democracy. The president is every bit as much of an elected representative of the people as is a member of Congress. In fact, he and the vice president are the only officials elected by the whole nation.    CONGRESS   Congress has a hard time even conceiving of itself as contributing to the problem of democratic accountability. But the record of ever-changing policies toward Central America that contributed to the NSC staff's behavior is symptomatic of a frequently recurring problem. When Congress is narrowly divided over highly emotional issues, it frequently ends up passing intentionally ambiguous laws or amendments that postpone the day of decision. In foreign policy, those decisions often take the form of restrictive amendments on money bills that are open to being amended again every year, with new, and equally ambiguous, language replacing the old. This matter is exacerbated by the way Congress, year after year, avoids passing appropriations bills before the fiscal year starts and then wraps them together in a government-wide continuing resolution loaded with amendments that cannot be vetoed without threatening the whole government's operation.    One properly democratic way to ameliorate the problem of foreign-policy inconsistency would be to give the president an opportunity to address the major differences between himself and the Congress cleanly, instead of combining them with unrelated subjects. To restore the presidency to the position it held just a few administrations ago, Congress should exercise the self-discipline to split continuing resolutions into separate appropriations bills and present each of them individually to the president for his signature or veto. Even better would be a line-item veto that would permit the president to force Congress to an override vote without jeopardizing funding for the whole government. Matters of war and peace are too important to be held hostage to governmental decisions about funding Medicare or highways.    THE PRESIDENCY   The Constitution created the presidency to be a separate branch of government whose occupant would have substantial discretionary power to act. He was not given the power of an 18th-century monarch, but neither was he meant to be a creature of Congress. The country needs a president who can exercise the powers the Framers intended. As long as any president has those powers, there will be mistakes. It would be disastrous to respond to the possibility of error by further restraining and limiting the powers of the office. Then, instead of seeing occasional actions turn out to be wrong, we would be increasing the probability that future presidents would be unable to act decisively, thus guaranteeing ourselves a perpetually paralyzed, reactive and unclear foreign policy in which mistakes by inaction would be the order of the day.    If Congress can learn something about democratic responsibility from the Iran-Contra affair, future presidents can learn something, too. The administration would have been better served over the long run by insisting on a principled confrontation over those strategic issues that can be debated publicly. Where secrecy is necessary, as it often must be, the administration should have paid more careful attention to consultation and the need for consistency between what is public and what is covert. Inconsistency carries a risk to a president's future ability to persuade, and persuasion is at the heart of a vigorous, successful presidency.    A president's most important priorities, the ones that give him a chance to leave an historic legacy, can be attained only through persistent leadership that leads to a lasting change in the public's understanding and opinions. President Reagan has been praised by his supporters as a &quot;communicator&quot; and criticized by his opponents as an ideologue. The mistakes of the Iran-Contra affair, ironically, came from a lack of communication and an inadequate appreciation of the importance of ideas. During President Reagan's terms of office he has persistently taken two major foreign-policy themes to the American people: a strong national defense for the United States, and support for the institutions of freedom abroad. The 1984 election showed his success in persuading the people to adopt his fundamental perspective. The events since then have threatened to undermine that achievement by shifting the agenda and refocusing the debate. If the president's substantial successes are to be sustained, it is up to him, and those of us who support his objectives, to begin once again with the task of democratic persuasion.    A related editorial appears today. {See: &quot;REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Reagan's Hard Lesson&quot; -- WSJ Nov. 18, 1987} </TEXT></DOC>