<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871201-0052 </DOCNO><HL> Dollar Hits Record Lows, Stocks Plunge;U.S. Weighs Early Meeting With Allies---Currency's Slide PromptsEfforts to AcceleratePlans for 7-Nation Talks---By Walter S. Mossberg and Jeffrey H. BirnbaumStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP JAPAN CANDA GOVMTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The continuing plunge of the dollar is causing governments to speed preparations for a new meeting of the Group of Seven industrial nations, U.S. officials said.    The officials, who asked not to be identified, stressed that no such meeting has been scheduled yet and that basic understandings still haven't been reached that would be needed for a new accord on coordinating economic policies and stabilizing the dollar.    U.S. Treasury Secretary James Baker reportedly remains convinced that it would be disastrous to rush into a Group of Seven meeting strictly for the sake of appearances, without being certain the meeting would result in a credible international economic accord.    But pressures from abroad resulting from the decline of the dollar -- which resumed with a vengeance yesterday and depressed the stock markets as well -- has produced a greater sense of urgency in Washington, and a meeting could come sooner than previously expected. The Group of Seven -- the U.S., Japan, West Germany, Britain, France, Italy and Canada -- reached agreements early this year that kept the dollar relatively stable for several months, largely through central bank intervention in the currency markets.    Officials now appear to be trying to prepare for a meeting in less time than the several weeks they earlier suggested would be needed. And Mr. Baker appears ready to attend a well-prepared meeting even if every last detail of the U.S. budget-reduction accord hasn't been settled.    The Treasury secretary previously sought to tie a Group of Seven meeting to implementation of the budget pact, but officials said that statement leaves him room to maneuver on the timing of the session.    Yesterday, Mr. Baker and Federal Reserve Board Chairman Alan Greenspan conferred on the market and dollar declines. The Treasury secretary also discussed the same subjects, and the Group of Seven meeting process, by telephone with several of his foreign counterparts, the U.S. officials said.    U.S. officials acknowledged yesterday that second-level officials from the Group of Seven nations will meet in Paris Dec. 9 and 10 for a routine, previously scheduled meeting under the auspices of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development.    They cautioned that this session, which will discuss exchange rates and other matters, isn't necessarily a prelude to a G-7 meeting, and they said these officials already are in frequent telephone contact.    The behavior of the markets yesterday was worrisome to officials because it recalled, for a time, the pattern of Nov. 10, when the dollar, bonds and stocks all fell in tandem for the first time since the Oct. 19 stock market crash. On that day, the Treasury and Fed orchestrated a series of White House statements, including one from President Reagan, saying the U.S. wasn't actively driving the dollar down.    Although no formal statements on the dollar were issued yesterday, officials pointed to public remarks by Mr. Reagan supporting the deficit-reduction pact reached by White House and congressional negotiators last month. They said market concerns about whether the pact -- and its $30 billion cut in the fiscal 1988 budget deficit -- will be enacted by Congress were one factor behind the declines yesterday.    Officials also noted that the president praised recent West German interest rate reductions. They called his statement a sign of international harmony on economic policy.    Mr. Reagan, in remarks to business representatives at the White House, made a strong pitch for lawmakers to quickly enact the deficit-reduction plan and send it to him for his signature.    &quot;While it's only a first step, it's the right step at the right time. . . . It's imperative that we act and act now,&quot; Mr. Reagan said.    The president acknowledged that the package isn't as comprehensive as many had hoped for but insisted it is &quot;an adequate deal, the best we could get.&quot;    He warned lawmakers, though, against trying to enact the tax increases in the package without simultaneously approving its spending cuts. &quot;The total package is what we bought,&quot; he said. &quot;And we'll all be watching closely over the next few weeks to see that the agreement is fully implemented.&quot;    The president's appearance before the business group, and similar appearances planned throughout the week, are designed to illustrate that Mr. Reagan doesn't intend to stand on the sidelines as Congress debates the deficit-reduction package. Business and financial executives who met with Mr. Reagan last week told him that quick enactment of the plan will be important to show financial markets that the U.S. is serious about making deficit cuts.    However, the deficit-reduction package for fiscal 1988, which began Oct. 1, probably won't be completed until Christmas, and it faces many hurdles before then.    The plan, reached Nov. 20 after four tortuous weeks of negotiations, must be translated into two massive pieces of legislation: a tax-increase and spending-cut package called a &quot;reconciliation&quot; and an omnibus spending bill that would fund the entire government through the end of the current fiscal year next Sept. 30.    Difficulties face the two bills on almost every leg of their Byzantine journey through the House and Senate and onto the president's desk. Congressional leaders acknowledge the problems but pledge that the pact will be fully implemented.    Congress will take the first major step Thursday, when the House is expected to begin considering the omnibus spending bill. That nearly $600 billion package faces some opposition from Republicans who think its non-military spending is too high as well as from some liberal Democrats who consider the military spending figure too high.    This fiscal debate in Congress is expected to linger until Christmas Eve or so, giving legislators opportunities to attach their pet spending plans to the bill and turn the measure into &quot;a Christmas tree,&quot; as one Democratic aide put it.    If Congress fails to enact a budget compromise, the budget for fiscal 1988 will be cut by $23 billion automatically, under the Gramm-Rudman deficit reduction law.    The passage of the budget compromise, which also envisions a larger deficit reduction for fiscal 1989, set the stage for a Group of Seven meeting by showing that the U.S. is prepared to help correct economic imbalances that have triggered the dollar's decline.    Since the Oct. 19 stock market crash, the Federal Reserve, with Reagan administration encouragement, has tilted toward easier money to fend off a recession, a move that temporarily precludes using higher interest rates to support the dollar. Although Mr. Reagan said last month that he doesn't want the dollar to fall further, the U.S. hasn't taken any major policy action to stop the dollar's decline.    In Europe yesterday, several economists and analysts pointed to this lack of action and said the key to the dollar's big tumble is the widespread doubt abroad as to whether the U.S. is truly concerned about the currency's fall.    Nigel Rendell, an international economist at James Capel andamp; Co., said that under current policy, the dollar is &quot;the only thing that can give.&quot; U.S. fiscal policy, he said, is constrained by the need to cut the budget deficit and by political considerations as the nation heads into an election year, while monetary policy is tied to supporting the stock market.    As the dollar fell to new lows against several major currencies yesterday, Mr. Rendell said Capel's latest currency forecasts call for it to decline still further throughout the first half of 1988.    The gloom on the currency front has been deepened by a perception that finance ministers from the Group of Seven aren't likely to meet before Christmas. It wasn't clear yesterday whether the stepped-up activity disclosed by U.S. officials can change that.    Although hopes for a decisive result from a G-7 meeting never were high, the delay in holding the talks has confirmed the market's worst fears that the deficit-cutting agreement between the White House and congressional negotiators had become an anticlimax b the time it was reached.    Paul Chertkow, director of economics for London stockbroker Hoare Govett, wrote in the company's latest weekly foreign exchange report that &quot;the real problem is not the budget deficit itself but the cumulative impact of U.S. debt on the budget deficit.&quot;    He warned that continued U.S. deficits of more than $150 billion a year could cause interest payments to swell to more than 20% of federal spending by 1990 from 14% at present. He said this could push the services account of the U.S. balance of payments into a long-term deficit and offset any improvement in the merchandise trade balance resulting from the dollar's decline. This is one reason the markets have failed to react positively to the rise in U.S. export volume that has accompanied the dollar's fall.    The U.S.'s trading partners, meanwhile, would like to brake the fall of the dollar because it is making U.S. manufacturers more competitive abroad.    Secretary Baker reportedly is ready to tell West Germany and Japan the U.S. will participate in a new dollar-stabilization accord that would amend or replace the Louvre accord reached in February. But officials have said any such accord must carry two conditions: It must be backed by firm and compatible economic policies in each country to support the currency; and it must leave the U.S. the right to refrain from using tighter money to back the dollar, if the Fed judges that higher interest rates might risk a recession.    Moreover, according to officials, the U.S. in return will seek significantly stronger commitments from some other nations, particularly West Germany, to stimulate growth through domestic demand. The U.S. would like Bonn's scheduled 1990 tax revisions moved forward and would favor various policy changes to deregulate and free up the sluggish West German economy. Bonn has shown some willingness to make fiscal changes, but they are politically difficult steps for the government.    Japan isn't a major target of U.S. economic policy demands for the moment. But the new government there will be pressed for a commitment to continue a recent trend toward stimulating the domestic economy, and the U.S. will continue to seek pledges that Japan will open its markets further to imports.    All of these measures are designed to help the U.S. slash its trade deficit by curbing its domestic consumption and raising exports while West Germany and Japan take opposite, complementary steps. If the three nations' policies mesh in that manner, U.S. officials hope, the trade deficit can be slimmed without causing a world recession.    Another part of the policy was disclosed recently when Treasury Department officials mounted a public offensive against the economic policies of South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore. Although they aren't members of the Group of Seven, the four account for 20% of the U.S. trade deficit, and U.S. officials want them to allow their currencies to appreciate further against the dollar.    ---   Gerald F. Seib in Washington and Peter Norman and Peter Torday in London-contributed to this article.    (See related story: &quot;Dow Jones Industrials Post Eighth Biggest Decline; Treasury Issues Advance&quot; -- WSJ Dec. 1, 1987) </TEXT></DOC>