<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880329-0123 </DOCNO><HL> Singapore Steals the Headlines </HL><AUTHOR> William McGurn </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><IN> PUB </IN><DATELINE> SINGAPORE  </DATELINE><TEXT>   All along the narrow hawkers corridor known as Change Alley, young men sidle up to tourists with their furtive sales pitch. &quot;Copy watches,&quot; they whisper, and the visitor who responds will find himself at some backroom table in front of an impressive selection of fake Rolex, Cartier and Dunhill wristwatches. Although the government discourages it, the discreet shopper can still get his hands on pirate copies of everything from Apple software to Gucci handbags.    Today, shoppers also can get a fake of what has become another luxury item in Lee Kuan Yew's Singapore: the Far Eastern Economic Review. Printed from real issues of the weekly news magazine brought in from neighboring Malaysia, the fake Reviews are pretty close to the real McCoy, complete with full-color cover but with large white gaps where the advertising ought to be. Unlike the copy Rolexes, however, the copy Reviews are found not in Singapore's back alleys but on the shelves of the smart Times Bookstores scattered throughout the city state, mixed in with bona fide issues of magazines such as Time, Newsweek and the Economist. So doing, Singapore has gone a step beyond those Asian countries that turn a blind eye toward piracy: Here they've legalized it.    The irony is that the Jan. 27 amendment to the Newspaper and Printing Presses Act permitting the copying of publications whose circulations have been restricted for allegedly &quot;engaging in domestic politics&quot; -- Asiaweek and The Asian Wall Street Journal, whose parent Dow Jones also owns the Review, fall into this category as well -- comes less than a year after Singapore passed a copyright law to assure foreigners that their property rights would be protected. The government says that nothing has changed, that the new amendment is designed only to deny affected publications profits while still allowing the &quot;free flow of information,&quot; but in Washington the affair is escalating into a trade issue.    Already, a group of 23 congressmen led by Rep. Don Bonker (D., Wash.) has sent a letter to Secretary of State George Shultz saying that the new amendment &quot;appears to be actionable under section 301 of the Trade Act as an unreasonable foreign trade practice.&quot; The Commerce Department has been similarly irked, with U.S. Trade Representative Clayton Yeutter having protested to Singapore in what aides say is &quot;strong language.&quot; Mr. Shultz had a public spat over the general principle of copyright with Singapore Minister of State Yeo Cheow Tong at an ASEAN meeting in Washington last month.    &quot;In the first instance, what the Singapore government has authorized is de facto copyright infringement,&quot; says a top U.S. trade official. &quot;While their Parliament is free to do that, and that's the way it is in Singapore at least in the short term, our view is that if it walks like it, talks like it, and smells like it, it's copyright infringement. And we are not letting the government's statement that it is not stand.&quot;    The new amendment empowers the government to license people to reproduce foreign publications whose circulations the government has slashed provided that copies are &quot;made, circulated or sold&quot; only in Singapore, that they &quot;shall not carry any advertisements,&quot; and that &quot;no person shall make any profit out of the production, sale or distribution&quot; of the copies above cost. It's hard to see what incentive exists for anyone save the Review itself to go to all the trouble of reprinting it under these restrictions. Of the eight approved applications for a license only the Singapore Manual and Mercantile Workers Union is doing so for public distribution. (The Review's request to reprint its own magazine has not been answered.) Nor is it clear why Singapore is allowing gazetted publications to be reprinted and circulated at all -- the fakes are not censored -- if the news therein is as false and dangerous as the government says.    Such contradictions result from Singapore's claim that it aims only to make offending publications suffer economically and not to impede the flow of information to its citizens. But the latter cannot be separated from the former. Advertising, for example, is part of the information publications offer; the vanity of editorial staff notwithstanding, some people buy papers only for the ads, and the only reason papers can charge the advertising rates they do is because people look at them.    In any case, the free flow of information is, as the People's Action Party government well knows, no different from the free flow of goods and services, with the paper's existence dependent on a complex dynamic of news gathering, processing, production, advertising, distribution and sales. The government contends that the new law is not piracy because no profit is allowed, as if the pope were to attach a rider to the Seventh Commandment making its violation depend on personal gain and not the theft itself.    &quot;The ability of any publication to provide the news depends on their financial ability to make a profit,&quot; says the Review's managing director, Charles Stolbach. &quot;While the copies in Singapore are being sold profit-free, this is made possible only by the substantial investment the Review has made in producing the editorial content in the issues that are being reproduced. Ultimately, this is made possible only by the Review's remaining financially healthy and profitable. Should the Review as an organization be forced to go out of business, the free flow of information would be severely affected in that there would no longer be anything to reproduce.&quot;    More generally, the question other businessmen have to ask themselves is how the legalized piracy of the Review affects them, particularly software manufacturers and others who depend on the honoring of copyright. Right now, many think it doesn't, given that Singapore has enforced the law elsewhere. Shops in the Funan Centre that used to sell for $3 to $4 rip-off copies of software whose originals cost from $150 to $200, for example, have gone out of business or been driven under the table, and the money lost by U.S. manufacturers last year to intellectual property inadequacies here should be far less than the $81.4 million the U.S. International Trade Commission reported for 1986.    &quot;It's a personal thing,&quot; says a foreign computer executive, explaining the government's selective copyright enforcement. But there's the rub. The rule of law is supposed to make life less arbitrary by making justice less subject to the whims of the powers that be; this is why Justice wears a blindfold. Today, the government wants high technology, so computer firms are safe. But if the government becomes annoyed with them for some reason, the law could again become a club rather than a refuge. The merchant bank Jardine Fleming found this out in 1984 when the Monetary Authority of Singapore, using new powers Parliament had granted it, revoked the bank's license over what it said was Jardine's bad advice and inadequate controls. Less than a year later, the same merchant bank was one of the first six foreign brokerages given a seat on the Japanese exchange.    &quot;The government could just as well decide for public-policy reasons that it would allow the free flow of microcomputer software and license Singaporeans to copy it provided they didn't make a profit,&quot; says Theodore R. Harper of Graham andamp; James, a U.S. lawyer who assisted in building support for last year's copyright law.    If all this is a bit confusing, that's exactly what the Singapore government hopes. Even those who have followed the dispute have a hard time recalling exactly what's got Singapore's dander up, because apart from the regular and minor errors that crop up in any publication -- and which have been corrected when pointed out and verified -- the reporting has been on target. In the thicket of disputes over accuracy, profit and right of reply, the government clouds the gut issue: that &quot;Western journalism&quot; is not suitable for home consumption. Thus Singapore has become the only non-Communist country in Asia systematically to restrict the circulations of the leading regional publications, suggesting that what Mr. Lee's government objects to is not their errors but their accuracy.    In the short term, the government's strategy of attacking the foreign press's profitability has helped make the free flow of information here neither free nor a flow. The long-term question is whether the principles at stake can continue to be undermined without ultimately doing in the principles upon which Singapore's continued growth depends in a world economy that brings it into increasing contact with foreign ideas, markets and powers beyond its control. Right now the government appears to think it can, and taking a page out of Lewis Carroll, it is creating its own little Wonderland where the legislative looking glass changes the meaning of basic words such as theft:   &quot;When I use a word,&quot; Humpty Dumpty said, in rather a scornful tone, &quot;it means just what I choose it to mean -- neither more nor less.&quot;    &quot;The question is,&quot; said Alice, &quot;whether you can make words mean so many different things.&quot;    &quot;The question is,&quot; said Humpty Dumpty, &quot;which is to be master -- that's all.&quot;    Mr. Dumpty was speaking, of course, before his celebrated fall.    ---   Mr. McGurn is deputy editorial page editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal. </TEXT></DOC>