<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870506-0056 </DOCNO><HL> Flouting Tradition:More Thrifts Grow BigBy Investing in AreasOther Than Mortgages---But Critics Fear Junk Bonds,Real Estate and OptionsAre Too Risky for Most---Weathering April Rate Surge---By David B. HilderStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CSV AMCCBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><DATELINE> OTTAWA, Kan.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   This is a farming town of 11,000, where the tallest structure is the local co-op's grain elevator and Main Street has fewer than a dozen traffic lights.    It is also the home of Franklin Savings Association, one of the nation's fastest growing, most profitable and most sophisticated thrifts.    Some residents refer to Franklin's two-story white stucco and concrete headquarters as &quot;that vulgar display of wealth.&quot; But then Franklin didn't grow to nearly $9 billion in assets from $300 million in 1982 by making mortgage loans to the people in its hometown. The thrift, which originated less than $10 million of local mortgages last year, put nearly $2 billion of new assets on its books in the first two months of 1987 by buying mortgage-backed securities from Wall Street dealers.    Franklin is one of a growing number of thrifts that are growing large quickly by making nontraditional investments like junk bonds, stocks, real estate, mortgage-backed securities and financial futures and options. New tax-law provisions are likely to accelerate the trend. The thrifts contend that such strategies offer bigger profits than traditional mortgage-making and that careful hedging techniques will help them survive periods of volatile interest rates like the one last month.    But regulators, other thrift executives and investment bankers fear that most of the nation's 3,200 thrifts don't have the skill to manage such investments. They worry that as such strategies spread among smaller thrifts, losses may result that will worsen the problems of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp. (The deposit-insurance fund was found to be technically bankrupt in a recent audit by the General Accounting Office, the investigative arm of Congress.)    Last month's rate run-up shows that even sophisticated Wall Street firms can be humbled by one employee's mistakes. According to Merrill Lynch andamp; Co., the former head of its mortgage-backed securities trading caused $250 million in pre-tax losses, $160 million of them because of unauthorized trading.    &quot;If you're very smart and very honest you can make a go of it,&quot; says William M. Isaac, a former chairman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. &quot;If you aren't either, you can lose your shirt.&quot; The Federal Home Loan Bank Board, the major regulator of thrifts, is drafting comprehensive regulations on the use of mortgage-backed securities, financial futures and options. But Mr. Isaac says he questions the ability of thrift regulators to control the burgeoning trend toward investments like real estate and stocks because &quot;they aren't used to dealing with these kinds of activities.&quot;    And Edwin J. Gray, the bank board's outgoing chairman, contends that thrifts should stick to mortgages because the whole system -- including the federal deposit insurance -- was intended to stimulate housing.    Even advocates of the new investment strategies fear that a growing number of imitators will bid up the cost of certain mortgage-backed securities and hedging instruments, reducing the impressive profits enjoyed by the first wave of innovators.    California has more liberal investment rules for state-chartered thrifts than most other states, and bank-board examiners have looked very closely at some thrifts there that invest heavily in real estate or junk bonds, a name for high-yield, low-rated corporate debt securities. Columbia Savings andamp; Loan Association in Beverly Hills, which has 27% of its assets -- or $2.6 billion -- in junk bonds, passed its most recent exam. But after more than a year, examiners are still poring over the real estate portfolio of Lincoln Savings andamp; Loan Association in Irvine.    At Columbia Savings, the annual return on average equity -- an important measure of profitability -- has ranged from 44% to 114% since 1982. At Franklin Savings, it has ranged from 62% to 98% since 1983. And at American Continental Corp., the parent of Lincoln Savings, it has ranged from 28% to 54% since the thrift was acquired in 1984. In contrast, the overall thrift industry's return on equity last year was less than 3%. And the average return of companies in the Standard andamp; Poor's 500 index was stuck between 11% and 13% from 1982 to 1986.    One reason for the high return is that nontraditional savings and loans are taking advantage of the tremendous capital leverage that thrifts are allowed, which magnifies the effect of profits or losses. Until this year, thrifts generally had to maintain a capital-to-assets ratio of only 3%, compared with about 6% for commercial banks. (That means that if the owners of a new thrift put up $3 million of their own capital, the thrift could invest in $100 million of assets such as loans, securities or real estate. An annual profit of just 1% on that $100 million would mean a 33% return on the capital. On the other hand, a 1% loss would wipe out a third of the initial investment.)    The required capital level is gradually being increased to 6%. But the new capital rules allow thrifts to operate with a capital-to-assets ratio as low as 3% -- or 4% after 1990 -- if they minimize vulnerability to interest-rate swings. That is likely to encourage thrifts to increase their use of potentially volatile hedging instruments such as futures and options.    One advantage of investing in mortgage-backed securities and junk bonds is relatively low overhead costs. At Franklin, for example, about half a dozen people handle the paperwork associated with more than 90% of the thrift's assets. Dozens of employees are needed to process the paperwork for the thrift's tiny mortgage loan portfolio and its retail deposit accounts.    At Santa Barbara Savings andamp; Loan Association in California, 13 employees manage $2.7 billion of mortgage-backed securities. Operating costs for that portfolio are about 0.05% of assets, compared with average costs of about 2% on traditional thrift operations nationwide.    Savings like these don't go unnoticed. Nor did a change in federal tax law that reduced to 60% from 82% the amount of mortgage-related assets that a thrift must have to qualify for a special tax deduction.    &quot;The number of thrifts adding high-yield bonds to their portfolio is increasing,&quot; says Mack R. Christian, whose year-old San Diego investment advisory firm manages $1.65 billion of junk bonds for 18 clients, mostly thrifts.    But many thrifts that have begun nontraditional investing haven't realized the constant management attention that the new, more volatile investments require. &quot;Once they made {the investment}, they wanted to put it on the shelf and forget about it,&quot; says an investment banker who works with Midwestern thrifts that have tried such strategies.    Eureka Federal Savings andamp; Loan Association tried such transactions for a few months in late 1984 because, like Franklin Savings, it couldn't make enough loans in its southeast Kansas home base. But when a group of new shareholders helped Eureka make more loans in the Kansas City and Wichita areas, Eureka unwound its positions.    &quot;To us, it felt good to become a traditional Sandamp;L again and not get into these various types of esoteric financings,&quot; says Robert McCue, its president. He adds that the thrift &quot;broke even&quot; on the transactions, largely because of falling interest rates.    Less successful were two California thrifts that played the options and futures markets last year. Tiny Seapointe Savings andamp; Loan Association in Carlsbad, with $40 million in assets, was declared insolvent after it sustained about $20 million of losses on options transactions. Guarantee Savings in Fresno, with $3 billion in assets, faced a potential loss of $54 million on options trades last year, although its actual loss was substantially reduced when interest rates fell.    To be successful at hedging, says Edward Young, the head of the mortgage banking unit at Freedom Federal Savings Bank, Oak Brook, Ill., &quot;I'd have to have a full-time rocket scientist sitting here with a computer monitoring it constantly.&quot;    In fact, Franklin has one financial &quot;rocket scientist&quot; here in Ottawa, and he is connected via computer to a consulting firm full of them about 50 miles away in a Kansas City suburb.    In Ottawa, much of Franklin's daily trading is handled by Wiley D. Angell, a computer expert and the 24-year-old son of Federal Reserve Gov. Wayne Angell, who used to be a Franklin director and consultant. The younger Mr. Angell works out of a small office equipped with a personal computer and a bond-market data terminal provided by Merrill Lynch.    He talks several times a day with the consulting firm of Smith Breeden Associates, which helps 16 thrifts, mostly in the Midwest, manage about $20 billion in assets. The firm is headed by a former Wall Street securities salesman, Gregory Smith, who runs the 12-person office in Overland Park, Kan., and Douglas T. Breeden, a professor of finance at Duke University, who runs a 13-person office in Chapel Hill, N.C.    Every month, each client gets a detailed report of its financial condition. The report includes estimates of the thrift's liquidation value under three scenarios, its value as a going concern, the sensitivity of its portfolio to interest-rate shifts, and the effectiveness of its interest-rate hedges under seven interest-rate scenarios.    &quot;We believe that our clients know more about themselves than anybody in the country,&quot; Mr. Smith says. &quot;We're facing reality. We're facing all the bad stuff.&quot;    Investment bankers credit Franklin with an unusual understanding of the financial markets. &quot;They understand prepayment risk and mortgage economics as well as any Wall Street firm,&quot; says Eric Hemel, a First Boston vice president and former bank-board official. &quot;They are very scientific about minimizing interest-rate risk.&quot;    People who have worked with Franklin say that Ernest M. Fleischer, Franklin's chairman and controlling shareholder, is largely responsible for the institution's success. An intense, slightly built man, he works out of an office in his suburban Kansas City home. Rising at 4 a.m., he is in daily telephone contact with investment bankers and analysts at major Wall Street firms.    Until 1985, Mr. Fleischer was one of Kansas City's leading tax lawyers, but now he devotes nearly all his time to Franklin, where his initial $25,000 investment in 1967 has grown to a 50% stake worth about $150 million.    During the most volatile days in the mortgage market last month, Franklin didn't engage in any transactions, believing the hedges it already had in place were adequate. It figures that as of April 10, a one-percentage point rise in rates on U.S. Treasury securities would have reduced the value of its assets and future cash flow by $368.7 million. But its hedge positions, including investments in financial futures and options, would have increased in value by $369.8 million, leaving it undamaged. (Actual interest-rate moves since April 10 have been about half the rise used in Franklin's calculations, although mortgage rates have fluctuated more wildly.)    Lincoln Savings, also headed by a wealthy executive with a major ownership stake, has pursued a different and more controversial strategy. Lincoln's gregarious and aggressive chairman, Charles H. Keating Jr., has clashed frequently with Mr. Gray of the bank board over Lincoln's heavy investments in real estate and stocks.    At the end of last year, Lincoln had $881.6 million of real estate and $100.3 million of stocks, totaling about 25% of its assets. Partly because of those investments, Lincoln is still undergoing one of the longest examinations ever by the bank board. Among other things, the board has challenged the $200 million appraised value of a golf and tennis resort hotel still under construction at the base of Camelback Mountain in Phoenix, Ariz.    Mr. Keating says that he doesn't plan to buy any more big parcels of land, but he says it will take Lincoln about 10 years to develop the more than 30,000 acres it currently owns or has an interest in.    At American Continental's office in Phoenix, Mr. Keating is active in managing Lincoln's portfolio, which includes about $500 million of mortgage-backed securities and $370 million of junk bonds.    When the financial markets became volatile in late March and early April, Mr. Keating moved from his own office -- equipped with three financial-market computer screens -- to an office down the hall with six computer screens and nine 25-inch television monitors, all displaying financial-market quotations or news-service headlines.    Mr. Keating insists that he isn't worried about Lincoln's strategy but just wants to keep on top of things. &quot;I hate to leave these screens,&quot; he says.    (Revised WSJ May 12, 1987)</TEXT></DOC>