<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870519-0063 </DOCNO><HL> Reconsidering Transylvania's Fate---by Peter Keresztes</HL><DD> 05/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP </IN><TEXT>   Readers of the Times of London were startled a few weeks ago to open their newspaper to an eight-column headline declaring: &quot;A CONSCIOUS FORGERY OF HISTORY UNDER THE AEGIS OF THE HUNGARIAN ACADEMY OF SCIENCES.&quot; Underneath, in heavy black type, appeared a full-page advertisement inveighing &quot;against the gross distortions of the history of Transylvania and, hence of the history of the Romanian people.&quot; Such distortions, the ad suggested, were part of &quot;attempts to contest Romania's territorial integrity contained in the history of Transylvania. . . .&quot;    A resident of Athens who frequently defends Romania's official positions was prompted to place the ad by the publication of a new book called &quot;The History of Transylvania.&quot; The three-volume, 2,000-page history actually came out in November in the capital of Romania's arch-rival, Hungary, and was written by the Hungarian Academy of Sciences. Its repercussions will be rippling for some time, as it is being prepared for publication in the West in French, German and English.    What got the goat of the Romanians was the book's discussion of early history. It finds no support for the official Romanian theory of Daco-Roman continuity. This theory holds that the Romanians are descendants of the ancient Dacians and Romans and have lived without interruption in Transylvania ever since. Though the theory has long been controversial among historians, it seeks to provide a historical basis for Romanian rule in Transylvania. Anything, therefore, that threatens to reignite the dispute is extremely sensitive, particularly to the Communist regime that rules from Bucharest through military oppression.    This is why, in an unprecedented step, Nicolae Ceausescu convened in February a joint session of the Working Peoples' Nationality Councils and personally denounced the book. &quot;Can,&quot; he demanded, &quot;anybody change the fact that 2,500 years ago Herodotus described the Dacians who lived on these territories, inclusive of the territory of contemporary Transylvania, Moldova and Muntenia, as 'the fairest and bravest of the Thracians'? or that the Dacians fought for hundreds of years with the Romans until they were -- this is true -- defeated?&quot; Mr. Ceausescu added: &quot;The problems of Romania, of socialist development, are solved by the Romanian people in its entirety, in full unity, by its leading force -- the Romanian Communist Party.&quot;    The patent falsity of Mr. Ceausescu's reference to full unity is evident to any who have followed the persecution within Romania of the Hungarian minority. Hungary's government had, in fact, been protesting the ill treatment of Hungarians living in Romania. But these protests were made feebly, in the secret socialist spirit. This contrasts with the clear voice the Turks have been using to protest the attempts of Bulgaria to annihilate its Turkish minority. Indeed, in recent years, many among the Hungarian and Western intelligentsia have been bringing increasing pressure on Budapest, particularly at Helsinki review conferences, to speak up on Transylvania. What protests have been wrung from Hungary's Communist Party boss, Janos Kadar, have been made in oh-so-polite terms.    This bickering between Warsaw Pact allies is over a region so well shielded by snow-tipped mountains, dense forests and Romanian border guards that it's best known in the West for the wolves, thunderstorms and suspicious-looking peasants of the Hollywood fantasies immortalized by Bela Lugosi. To historians, however, Transylvania is the land that heralded the Enlightenment by decreeing the freest practice of religion in the world in 1656, though Orthodox Romanians were excluded. It formed a bulwark for Protestantism and, like Switzerland, became a haven for people fleeing religious persecution. It is still populated by seven million Romanians, German Saxons, Hungarian-speaking Szeklers, Csangos, Magyars, and Tziganes and Armenians.    Things turned sharply worse for Transylvanians when Romania gained custody of the land at the 1920 peace treaty signed at the end of World War I in the Trianon Palace outside Paris. Bucharest, and most recently Mr. Ceausescu, has been conducting a progressively brutal campaign to disperse or assimilate the region's minorities. It has persecuted the more than two million Hungarians -- the largest ethnic minority in Europe outside the Soviet Union -- with a concerted drive on native-tongue schooling, publishing, theater, historical archives and even birth and death registries. Bucharest has been sending the Saxons back to Germany, extorting hard currency in the process, and has been cynically husbanding emigration of its dwindling population of Jews, mostly Hungarian speakers, so as not to lose its preferential American trade status.    As to Moscow's role in all this, that remarkable advertisement in the London Times provides a clue, in three grammatically tortured sentences: &quot;In their fight against socialism, back in 1956, Hungarians have had no luck. They try now -- with higher hopes -- against socialists. There's still to be seen, the way in which the Western world will support this maneuver -- as recently Hungarians have requested in Vienna -- and, also and more interesting, the way Russians will swallow it.&quot; The implication is that Moscow may &quot;swallow&quot; a Hungarian line and punish Romania for its gadfly foreign policy by carrying out a socialist version of Hitler's 1940 Vienna Award, which reattached two-fifths of Transylvania to Hungary. The Soviets reversed the move in 1947.    That's an interesting point. Given Romania's scandalous stewardship of Transylvania, a change in the region's status is worth serious thought. One goal might be the restoration of Tranyslvania to its former independent and neutral status along contemporary Swiss lines. The similarities between the two lands after all are striking -- from their geography, to their lingual, ethnic and religious diversity, and to their heritage of high culture, commerce and independence. Let us see whether glasnost can handle that.    ---   Mr. Keresztes, born in Hungary, is deputy editorial-page editor of The Wall Street Journal/Europe. </TEXT></DOC>