<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871105-0019 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 11/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   NATO EXPRESSED support for a proposed U.S.-Soviet arms-control treaty.    NATO defense ministers, ending three days of talks in California, called for ratification of the pact to abolish intermediaterange missiles after its scheduled signing next month, and urged progress in superpower talks to reduce long-range weapons. The alliance, however, resolved to upgrade its remaining nuclear arsenal after the elimination of the midrange arms. The moves came as Reagan, in an address broadcast to Europe, reaffirmed a U.S. commitment to the security of NATO countries.    Weinberger refused to comment about his expected resignation as he left the NATO meeting, but officials said Reagan was planning a White House ceremony for the defense secretary.    ---   Iraq said its jets bombed Iran's Kharg Island oil export terminal and attacked four tankers in the Persian Gulf. Baghdad admitted losing one plane. The Iraqi attacks came as Iran marked the eighth anniversary of the seizure of the U.S. Embassy in Tehran. Rafsanjani said Iran would confront &quot;American aggression&quot; in the gulf.    The State Department said it was regrettable that an Indian fisherman was killed Sunday when a Navy frigate fired on three small boats in the gulf. The statement didn't say whether the U.S. was at fault.    ---   House Democrats agreed to seek renewed &quot;nonlethal&quot; aid to the Contras, but backed away from requiring that the aid to be distributed through international or church agencies instead of the CIA. The requirement would have been consistent with a Central America peace plan, which is to be enacted today.    ---   North testified before a federal grand jury in Washington investigating his role in the sale of U.S. arms to Iran and diversion of profits to Nicaraguan rebels. The former National Security Council aide appeared before the panel for less than a half-hour. Sources said North invoked his constitutional right against self-incrimination.    ---   The GAO said it didn't find any impropriety on the part of NASA administrator Fletcher in the choice of Morton Thiokol as the only supplier of the space shuttle's booster rockets. Thiokol received the original $1.3 billion contract in 1973. It was extended last April by another $1.8 billion.    ---   An Army private returned to the West from the Soviet Union, seven months after defecting through East Germany. Wade Roberts, 22, arrived in Frankfurt, West Germany, from Moscow. He said he intended to surrender to U.S. authorities.    ---   Spain has rejected as &quot;insufficient&quot; a U.S. offer to cut by two-thirds the number of Air Force warplanes at the Torrejon Air Base outside Madrid, the newspaper El Pais reported. New talks on reducing the U.S. military role in Spain are to begin in Madrid today.    ---   Gunmen in Haiti attacked the home of an election official, and a candidate's offices in Port-au-Prince were firebombed in violence linked to Nov. 29 national elections, Radio Metropole said. The assaults began Tuesday, after an electoral council banned some supporters of ousted dictator Jean-Claude Duvalier from seeking the presidency.    ---   French President Mitterrand was aware of illegal munitions sales to Iran for almost two years but failed to halt them, according to a Defense Ministry report published by two Paris newspapers. Le Monde and Le Figaro said some proceeds from the sales may have been given to the Socialist Party.    ---   Gorbachev called for renewal in the communist movement and stressed that Moscow wouldn't any longer dictate policy to its allies. The remarks, in a speech to foreign delegates marking the 70th anniversary of the Bolshevik revolution, were considered to be in sharp contrast to the attitude expressed by previous Soviet leaders.    ---   Police in the Philippines detained 17 people in connection with the slaying of three Americans near Clark Air Base last week, officials said. The police were awaiting the results of weapons tests before deciding whether to file charges. In Manila, police rounded up about 1,000 people in raids on suspected communist guerrilla hideouts.    ---   The Labor Department proposed a record $4.2 million fine against Bath Iron Works Corp. for alleged worker-safety violations at its shipyard in Maine. OSHA inspectors cited the Navy contractor for unsafe practices including exposing workers to asbestos, radiation and raw sewage in some work areas.    ---   The U.S. signed a 30-year agreement allowing Japan to ship plutonium by air from Europe with refueling stops in Alaska. The agreement, if approved by Congress and Tokyo, will free Japan from having to get separate approval for each shipment.    ---   Philadelphia Mayor Goode said he would &quot;continue to build a new prosperity&quot; following his victory Tuesday over GOP rival Frank Rizzo, who said he might challenge the results in court. In Miami's mayoral race, a runoff was scheduled for next week. In gubernatorial contests, Kentucky and Mississippi elected Democrats.    ---   GOP senators complained that an American Bar Association panel is moving too slowly in reviewing the qualifications of Supreme Court nominee Ginsburg. In a letter to the panel, the Republican members of the Judiciary Committee said the pace of the ABA assessment could &quot;serve as an impediment&quot; to action on Ginsburg's nomination.    ---   Federal agents have smashed what they described as the nation's most sophisticated drug transport ring, which used infrared beacons and spotter planes to avoid detection. At least 30 people were indicted. The Miami-based ring was contracted by the Medellin Cartel, a Colombia-based drug-smuggling group, investigators said.    ---   Reagan wasn't informed about the diversion to Nicaragua's rebels of the proceeds from the sale of U.S. arms to Iran, according to portions of a draft dissent by GOP members of the Iran-Contra committees obtained by United Press International. The GOP and full committee reports are scheduled to be released next week. </TEXT></DOC>