<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880222-0092 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor: Taking Proper Care of the Elderly </HL><SO> </SO><IN> PHA </IN><TEXT>   Congratulations to Sydney Freedberg and the Journal for printing &quot;A Week in a Florida Nursing Home Shows a Week of Sorrow and Strain&quot; (second front page, Jan. 29). As the administrator of a nursing facility, I want to applaud Ms. Freedberg for her sensitive portrayal of staff, residents and guests, for her empathy for the care of the elderly, and for the impact that the article has had on several lives.    Of the several people who have commented to me on the article, one legislator has vowed to visit a nursing home every week, and a businessman has been so impressed that he wants to organize a group to become &quot;friendly visitors&quot; to nursing-home residents.    In short, a super piece of well-done journalism with a positive impact.    Jeffrey A. Smith   Administrator   Community Convalescent Center   Naperville, Ill.   ---   By observing nursing-home life only in a proprietary, chain-operated facility -- albeit one of the &quot;better&quot; homes -- your article failed to describe the generally superior quality of life for those aged people who receive care in voluntary, not-for-profit, long-term care facilities.    I always have been troubled by our society's willingness to allow the care of our elderly and infirm to be rendered by those with a profit incentive. With a nationwide shortage of nursing-home beds, the benefits of a competitive marketplace do not exist. The pressure to increase profits is at odds with the need to spend money on quality-of-care items. Further, the expansion of the proprietary sector certainly must result in discrimination against poor people whose nursing-home care is paid for with comparatively low Medicaid rates.    But the most troubling aspect of profitmaking nursing homes is the glaring lack of community involvement in the care of the aged. The primary source of &quot;sorrow and strain,&quot; as identified in your article, is isolation and loneliness on the part of the elderly patients and residents. The way to remedy this is by active community involvement in the day-to-day operation of the facility -- an involvement that generally is not part of a proprietary facility.    Not-for-profit, long-term-care facilities are operated by religious, fraternal or community groups that have an active interest. These facilities, by virtue of their eleemosynary status, have voluntary boards of directors comprised of people who are active and involved in the community and who act as conduits to foster programs with other community groups and activities. These community boards provide critical links and ensure regular interaction with the community.    At the Hebrew Home for the Aged at Riverdale -- and this facility is by no means unique -- an intergenerational education program with local public and parochial schools was created. The &quot;narrow world&quot; you speak of is nowhere present for those children and aged who participate. An antiquities museum and a &quot;living museum&quot; were established, in which artworks are displayed throughout our public and private rooms. These exhibits encourage various groups to visit the facility, thus eliminating the walls that can separate an institution from its surrounding community. The discussion between residents and visitors from the community about the meaning of a particular painting or sculpture does much for the continued growth of aged individuals.    As long as our society relies on profit incentives to promote health care for the aged, the isolation and loneliness of elderly nursing-home residents will continue. One need not go to a proprietary nursing home to await death, but can be admitted to a nonprofit community-integrated facility, to continue the process of human growth and happiness.    Jacob Reingold   Executive Vice President   Hebrew Home for the Aged   Riverdale, N.Y.    ---   Congratulations to Ms. Freedberg for a sensitive and insightful article about long-term care. I have been an activities director in an 85-bed facility for 12 years. I shared the article with the staff members and they loved it.    There are many excellent nursing facilities in the country. There are a few very bad facilities and you can spot them immediately. The mediocre ones are the ones to watch. Educating the public about nursing homes is so important. It is an investment in everyone's future. Some day you may be a nursing-home resident or placing someone from your family in a facility.    The decision to place someone is emotional, expensive and often times done under acute pressure. The better informed you are the more comfortable you will be with your decision.    Shirley M. Cashin   Roslyn Nursing and Rehabilitation Center   Roslyn, Pa.</TEXT></DOC>