<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880706-0023 </DOCNO><HL> Big Board Reportedly Will End Its Curb On Program Trading In Volatile Sessions </HL><AUTHOR> Steve Swartz and Thomas E. Ricks (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> STK SCR </IN><TEXT>   The New York Stock Exchange plans to drop one of its major post-crash revisions, one that bars users of a popular form of program trading from access to the exchange's automated order system during times of market volatility, industry sources said.    People close to the Big Board said the so-called 50-point collar, which bars index arbitragers from using the automated system when the Dow Jones Industrial Average rises or falls 50 points or more in a day, is being phased out because it is no longer needed. But critics have complained that the collar is ineffective at best and may have added to the volatility it was supposed to curb.    The Big Board's action is one more sign that efforts to reform U.S. stock and futures markets in the wake of last October's crash are proceeding slowly. Although the Big Board and other exchanges are studying several possibilities, no major changes have yet been implemented. And much of what has been proposed or tested -- such as the 50-point collar -- has been widely criticized.    &quot;The way things are going, I don't think anybody wants to change much of anything,&quot; says James C. Bradford Jr., a Big Board director and senior partner of the Nashville, Tenn., securities firm J.C. Bradford andamp; Co.    But while the Big Board is proposing to drop the collar, it is moving ahead with another measure designed to bring individual investors back into the stock market. The plan would give small investors priority over institutions when both are using the automated stock order system, industry sources said.    Both the proposal to allow the 50-point collar to expire this fall and the plan to institute a priority system for individual investors will be considered by the exchange's board at its monthly meeting tomorrow, industry sources said. News of the proposals was reported in Securities Week, an industry newsletter.    A Big Board spokesman declined to comment on any issues coming before the exchange's directors.    The collar, which was enacted in February, was never popular with market regulators. When the Securities and Exchange Commission approved it for a six-month trial, it specifically asked the exchange to consider &quot;other means of addressing market volatility,&quot; such as creating a system to trade entire baskets of stocks without an investor having to purchase the shares individually. The exchange is studying that proposal but doesn't expect to have anything ready for consideration before this fall.    Proponents of the collar said that because of it, market swings of 50 points or more have occurred less frequently. One proponent said the 50-point mark has been hit only five times this year, compared with 26 times in 1987. Money manager Robert Kirby, who was a member of the presidential task force that studied the crash, said, &quot;I think the 50-point collar inhibited speculative trading activity&quot; by many institutions.    But critics charged that the collar actually added to volatility by making it more difficult for index arbitragers to do their business. Many traders argue that such arbitrage has the effect of smoothing out volatility in the markets. Index arbitragers buy and sell large amounts of stocks and stock index futures to take advantage of brief price disparities between the two related instruments.    Other critics said the collar was largely irrelevant because sophisticated program traders could easily get around it by having their orders to buy and sell stocks distributed on the trading floor manually by floor brokers. Robert Gordon, president of Twenty-First Securities Corp., said the Big Board should be applauded for trying to curb the extreme volatility that was plaguing the markets. But, he said, &quot;The collar really had no effect.&quot;    People close to the exchange said it will reserve the right to reimpose the collar should volatility pick up.    The proposal to give some priority to individual investors is an attempt to convince them that the stock market isn't rigged in favor of big institutions, industry officials said. At least one program trader said the proposed priority system would disrupt somewhat the activities of program traders by slowing down their ability to execute trades. &quot;It means more risk,&quot; the trader said.    The proposal that Big Board officials plan to put before their board tomorrow is a watered-down version of what had been circulated among exchange members last week, industry sources said.    The current proposal, which has been dubbed the Individual Investor Express Delivery Service, would guarantee that individual investors' trades of 900 shares or fewer that enter the exchange's automated order delivery system are moved through the system more quickly than institutional orders are if the Dow Jones Industrial Average has risen or fallen at least 25 points during that session.    The automated system, however, doesn't execute trades. It merely receives orders from brokerage-house computers and routes them to the specialist, or market maker, who handles a particular stock. The Big Board proposal won't require the specialist to give preference to an order from a small investor.    Industry officials say such a requirement was included originally but was dropped after securities firms and some specialists argued that the exchange should continue to give preference to the first order received by the specialist, whether from an individual or an institution. &quot;We have to treat everyone equally,&quot; said one Big Board specialist.    The current proposal would cover only routine orders to buy or sell stock at the market price. It wouldn't apply to conditional orders such as a limit order, which places a limit on the price the order can be executed at.    Industry officials and some Big Board directors who were aware of the latest proposal praised it as a good way to reach out to individual investors but said they doubt the proposal will have any real effect on trading.    &quot;It's mostly psychological&quot; in that the proposal will have more effect on investor confidence than on the markets themselves, said Samuel E. Hunter, head of stock trading at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. &quot;In that regard,&quot; he said, &quot;I think it's a plus.&quot;    Mr. Gordon of Twenty-First Securities said the new priority plan would be more important to individual investors if the events of the Oct. 19 crash ever were repeated. On that day, the automated system was inundated with institutional and smallinvestor orders, causing big delays in the execution of orders. The automated system &quot;was created to handle retail orders,&quot; Mr. Gordon said. &quot;I think giving them priority is appropriate.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>