<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881019-0107 </DOCNO><HL> Media: Computer Magazines' Electronic Spinoffs Give Readers a Quick Way to Talk Back </HL><AUTHOR> Michael W. Miller (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> PUB TEL </IN><TEXT>   By day, Bill Machrone sits in a quiet Park Avenue office in New York and edits PC Magazine, a computer biweekly.    When he goes home at night, things get livelier: Hundreds of readers barrage him with reactions to the magazine.    In one recent session, a reader branded a product review &quot;biased and not helpful to the consumer&quot; and accused PC Magazine of &quot;Toshiba-bashing.&quot; Another groused that the magazine spends too much time writing about new products and not enough time helping &quot;those of us who lag behind.&quot;    Mr. Machrone has faced a steady chorus like this since May, when his magazine created PC MagNet, an interactive counterpart to the magazine that readers can dial up on their computers. PC Magazine is one of about a half-dozen computer publications that offer such electronic companions, and more are on the way. These services are blurring the lines between print and electronic publishing. More subtly, they are redefining the relationship between a magazine and its readers.    Users of the services typically can send electronic messages to individual magazine staffers -- and get swift replies. They can read extra material about topics that appear in the printed magazines, plus news that breaks after deadlines. They can carry on debates with other readers. They can even load into their own machines software that editors have sent onto the services.    &quot;It's like having a letters-to-the-editor section without the production lead-time wait and without the overwhelming chance that your letter will be lost in the shuffle,&quot; says John Cornicello, a PC MagNet user.    Jacqueline Wheeler, another MagNet user, says, &quot;Reading a magazine doesn't hack it when you need two-way communication, when you have a question, when you don't have the time to experiment for an afternoon or a day or a week, or when you just plain need to discuss the ins and outs of something.&quot; Mr. Cornicello and Ms. Wheeler made their comments through MagNet in response to an electronic query from Mr. Machrone asking users what they thought of the service.    On-line magazines are still quirky ventures with the potential to bewilder users and eat up lots of cash. No general-interest publication has tried one. Many are nervous about the whole area of dial-up computer networks for consumers, which has lost millions for companies such as Knight-Ridder Inc. and Times Mirror Co.    But computer magazines may turn out to be a special case in which interactive computing takes hold. Their readers are exactly the market that interactive services have been chasing for years: savvy PC owners who like to try adventurous new technologies.    PC Magazine's publisher, Ziff Communications Co., is shaping up as the most aggressive force in this market. It hopes to follow PC MagNet, which already has about 30,000 users, with a string of electronic companions to other Ziff magazines, including PC Week, MacWeek, and MacUser. Ziff distributes MagNet, and is likely to distribute its other services, over Handamp;R Block Inc.'s CompuServe, the most popular PC dial-up information service, with about 470,000 subscribers.    Ziff already faces a handful of lively competitors. Quantum Computer Services Inc., a closely held Vienna, Va., concern, runs a Commodore users' network that features a tie-in with Run, a magazine about Commodore machines. This year Quantum introduced joint ventures with Apple Computer Inc. and Tandy Corp. that eventually will offer electronic versions of magazines about those two PC makers.    The arena's most eclectic offering is Bix, short for Byte Information Exchange.    McGraw-Hill Inc.'s Byte magazine, a monthly for hard-core techies, has offered the service for three years. Along with late-breaking news and rap sessions about Byte articles, it has sections earmarked for electronic chatter about algorithms, scuba diving, ham radio, cats, and hundreds of other topics. McGraw-Hill says Bix has more than 25,000 subscribers and will become profitable next year.    Notably missing from the ranks of the market's cheerleaders is International Data Group Inc., the world's biggest publisher of computer magazines. It operates the Run service on Quantum's Commodore network but has no other current plans in the field. Bartlett Rhoades, executive vice president of International Data's publishing business, says the company is still jittery about the collapse of ventures like Knight-Ridder's. &quot;We made a conscious decision to continue to explore {the field} as opposed to leaping in,&quot; he says.    Setting up an electronic spinoff isn't expensive if a magazine joins forces with services like CompuServe or Quantum, which have the necessary computer gear and phone links. These concerns function as something like electronic mall operators, offering their space to other suppliers and often handing them a percentage of hourly user fees. A magazine can advertise a new service for free in its own pages. PC MagNet's only big start-up expense was salaries for three employees.    PC MagNet and Bix generally cost users $10 to $20 an hour. Quantum, trying to build a broad following, costs about $10 a month. But most magazines in the field aren't looking for quick revenue. For now, they see the services as ways to promote themselves, forge bonds with readers and dabble in the technology.    Those editors who have plunged in are finding that an electronic offshoot can help them put out a magazine. Bix users have seen their electronic musings find their way into print in Byte, in a section called &quot;Best of Bix.&quot; Not long ago Byte editors wandering through Bix were struck by insightful comments on telecommunications from a subscriber in San Diego. Today the subscriber, Brock Meeks, is a regular Byte contributor, one of several the magazine has recruited from Bix.    The cover story in the Oct. 31 issue of PC Magazine, a big spread on printers, included results of a survey of 1,000 readers. The publication polled readers over PC MagNet, cutting in half the six weeks a mail survey would take. PC also uses MagNet for its own market research, canvassing all new users about their jobs and their influence in purchasing computers at work.    The electronic magazines also are putting writers in much closer touch with their normally invisible readers. Byte articles, for instance, end with instructions on how to reach the author on Bix.    In the future, there's the danger that the electronic services could cannibalize sales of their print progenitors -- a danger that may grow as the electronic magazines become more sophisticated. MacUser's editors, for instance, predict that within a year, users of its planned network will be able to load perfect replicas of magazine pages into their Macintosh computers.    Mr. Machrone isn't worried about that kind of scenario yet. &quot;The electronic medium is incredibly primitive compared to magazines today,&quot; he says. &quot;A magazine is a magnificent random-access device.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>