<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890817-0103 </DOCNO><DD> = 890817 </DD><AN> 890817-0103. </AN><HL> Litmus Test:@  Right-Wing Zealots@  Still Wield Power@  Over Bush Appointees@  ---@  Nomination of Robert Fiske,@  Hailed by Most, Is Victim@  Of Conservative Activists@  ---@  Thurmond Pounds the Table@  ----@  By Gerald F. Seib and Kenneth H. Bacon@  Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/17/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> GOVMT </CO><GV> EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </GV><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Among President Bush's high-level appointments, Robert Fiske seemed unlikely to ignite controversy. A respected New York corporate lawyer, Mr. Fiske had also handled a string of celebrated criminal cases as U.S. attorney for New York and seemed ideally qualified for the No. 2 job in the Justice Department.    He seemed an equally eminent choice by Republican standards. He was appointed U.S. attorney by a Republican president, Gerald Ford. More recently, he had thrown his support behind two of the conservative, controversial favorites that President Reagan had nominated to the federal bench, Daniel Manion and James Buckley.    But Mr. Fiske won't be working in the Bush administration. His selection triggered intense opposition in Congress and was doomed before the White House had a chance to formally submit his nomination.    Mr. Fiske wasn't ambushed by liberals, or even Democrats. He was done in by conservative members of his own party.    His crime? He once was chairman of the American Bar Association's judicial nominations panel, which conservative activists have long suspected of torpedoing their candidates. Worse, he acknowledged that his ABA committee sounded out liberal groups about potential judicial appointees during the Reagan years. Already aroused, the conservative activists began an investigation and found Mr. Fiske had contributed $1,000 to the campaign of a Democratic Senate candidate in Vermont.    No matter that the Vermont candidate was an old friend who lost the race in any event, and the contribution probably reflected friendship more than ideology. Mr. Fiske spent three months in a political nether world in which he never got a formal chance to answer charges. Conservative Senators were energized, the White House was put on notice, and the nomination died.    Such are the humiliations of seeking political appointments these days. Even for well-respected nominees, the privilege of public service now includes not only the inspection of Congress and the scrutiny of the press, but the possibility of attack by ideological groups -- from within their own party. Mr. Fiske's experience is a case study of how single-minded political activists can distort Washington's nomination-and-confirmation process.    Robert Fulton, an Oklahoma state official, is another such casualty. Fearing that he wouldn't oppose abortion aggressively enough, well-organized activists ignored the strong GOP credentials of Mr. Fulton, blocking him from a top post in the Department of Health and Human Services.    On grounds that were tenuous at best, anti-abortion groups seized on Mr. Fulton as the embodiment of their concern that President Bush and HHS Secretary Louis Sullivan might not be tough enough on abortion. At one point, Mr. Fulton was told by Colorado Republican Sen. William Armstrong: &quot;They are suspicious of Bush. They totally distrust Sullivan. And you, Fulton, have become their enemy.&quot;    Even though Democrats rallied to oppose Sen. John Tower, it was a staunch conservative, Paul Weyrich, who first raised ethical objections to Mr. Tower's nomination as secretary of defense.    Conservatives aren't the only groups that wage these fights, of course, and they don't win every one. But they have a surprising degree of leverage in what is generally perceived as a moderate Republican administration. When conservatives support a nominee, the White House can count on strong backing. And President Bush needs the support of conservative Republicans in Congress -- especially powerful senators like Strom Thurmond -- on a broad range of issues.    So when conservatives attack a nominee, even for reasons that seem unfounded, the White House may have to quietly back off. Conservatives appear to have an ally in John Sununu, the White House chief of staff and President Bush's most powerful aide. Mr. Sununu played a key role in derailing the Fiske and Fulton nominations despite active support from their cabinet sponsors. Mr. Sununu's influence was evident in his successful promotion of Richard C. Breeden, selected by Mr. Bush to be chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, and Mr. Sununu's backing may help protect Mr. Breeden from conservative attack.    Mr. Sununu plays down the role of ideology in the Fiske and Fulton setbacks. &quot;The reason they never got to the president is that they had issues involving qualifications and performance that prevented them from being the best choice for the president,&quot; he says.    Nowhere have conservatives better illustrated their ability to overrule the administration than in the fight over Mr. Fiske, a well-known and respected partner in the Manhattan law firm of Davis Polk andamp; Wardwell.    Word began seeping around Washington last March that Attorney General Dick Thornburgh had asked the White House to name Mr. Fiske his top deputy. Mr. Fiske's name &quot;obviously rang a bell with me and many others&quot; in the conservative movement, says Paul Kamenar of the Washington Legal Foundation, who spearheaded the Fiske attack.    As the chairman of the ABA's 15-member judicial nominations panel from 1984-87, Mr. Fiske had acknowledged that as part of an established panel practice, he sometimes shared the names of prospective nominees with a liberal legal group to elicit reactions to the candidates' records on women's and minority issues. Mr. Kamenar filed suit to force the ABA panel to share the names of prospective judicial nominees with conservative groups as well. The committee then stopped disclosing the names of potential nominees altogether.    Conservatives acknowledge that those specific complaints mattered less than the fact that Mr. Fiske symbolized a part of the legal establishment that conservatives detest. &quot;The ABA judicial selection committee is just absolutely anathema to conservatives in this town,&quot; says Daniel Casey, executive director of the American Conservative Union.    The opposition was set in motion largely by Mr. Kamenar, a lawyer who works full-time as a conservative activist. Among other activities, he led a network of Washington conservatives that played a key role in helping the Reagan Justice Department under Edwin Meese locate and recruit conservatives as judicial nominees, some of whom then ran into trouble with Mr. Fiske's ABA committee.    Mr. Kamenar contacted aides to Republican Senators Gordon Humphrey of New Hampshire and Charles Grassley of Iowa, who had previously complained about the ABA's role in judicial nominations. &quot;My fax machine was smoking,&quot; says Mr. Kamenar. Soon, the net of conservative opposition widened through the 721 Group, a little-known umbrella organization that was active in the fight over the Supreme Court nomination of conservative jurist Robert Bork.    The group discussed its opposition to Mr. Fiske at a spring meeting. Conservatives began looking for more damaging material on Mr. Fiske and uncovered a 1970s Internal Revenue Service investigation of a land transaction. But it seemed so routine, resulting in an assessment of $1,000, that it never became much of a factor.    Then Mr. Kamenar, acting on a hunch, ran a computer check at the Federal Election Commission and uncovered Mr. Fiske's contribution to the unsuccessful Democratic senate candidate. This revelation helped sway GOP partisans in the White House and the Senate who wondered why Mr. Fiske wasn't loyal enough to resist making contributions to a Democrat.    In April Sen. Humphrey sent a letter of concern to President Bush. Then a key conservative, Sen. Malcolm Wallop of Wyoming, distributed a letter to Mr. Bush opposing the nomination to a group of conservative senators. Crucially, South Carolina Sen. Thurmond -- the ranking Republican on the Judiciary Committee, which would vote on the Fiske nomination -- signed, in part because he feared continuing conservative opposition would be divisive for congressional Republicans. He was so worked up that he pounded on the table and urged others to sign, conservative activists say. Ultimately, 14 senators signed the June 14 letter.    At about the same time, Sen. Wallop also carried the argument personally to Mr. Bush during a flight aboard Air Force One with the president, who was traveling to Yellowstone Park to make a speech. But Mr. Bush seemed preoccupied with other concerns; back in Washington several days later, reading a line inserted in a speech by an aide, Mr. Bush said he looked forward to Mr. Fiske's arrival.    Finally, Mr. Fiske and his supporters at the Justice Department asked Senate Majority Leader Robert Dole to bring together in his office Mr. Fiske and his conservative opponents.    Sen. Thurmond stood up at the outset and declared that Mr. Fiske's nomination wasn't good for Mr. Bush or the nation and that he should withdraw it, staffers say. Further discussion was futile.    With Mr. Fiske on the ropes, a group of about 20 conservative activists gathered for a previously scheduled meeting at the White House on June 26 and used the opportunity to complain to Mr. Sununu.    He assured them the White House would follow the lead of Sen. Thurmond because of his position as party leader on the Judiciary Committee, says an activist who was there. That afternoon, at a private meeting with the president, according to an aide, Sen. Thurmond said of the Fiske nomination, &quot;Don't send it up. Period.&quot;    White House aides seemed less concerned about the merits of Mr. Fiske's appointment than the political fallout. They say Sen. Thurmond indicated that Republican conservatives were so agitated that they would launch a filibuster to block the nomination, which would embarrass Mr. Fiske and the administration and could ruin the White House's relations with Sen. Thurmond and his committee, which will act on pending and future judicial appointees.    Though the White House didn't order Mr. Fiske to give up, he got the message. On July 6, Mr. Fiske sent Mr. Thornburgh a letter withdrawing his name from consideration. In his letter Mr. Fiske deplored the &quot;inaccurate reports&quot; of his role on the ABA committee; beyond that, he declines to comment.    The effort to block Mr. Fulton from becoming the head of the Family Support Administration in HHS followed much the same course -- from conservative interest groups, to Senate staffers and their GOP bosses, to a White House anxious not to offend them. The primary charge against Mr. Fulton was that in 1983, when he was director of the Oklahoma department of human services, he had failed to react vigorously to a report that an Oklahoma hospital had allowed 24 severely handicapped infants to die without surgery.    Mr. Fulton strongly denied the charge. He noted that the deaths had occurred before he became human-services chief and that he had changed the state's system for dealing with handicapped infants, sharply reducing the death rate.    Nonetheless, and even though handicapped infant mortality isn't an abortion issue per se, anti-abortion groups began to mobilize against Mr. Fulton, a recognized welfare expert, shortly after Dr. Sullivan picked him in February to run federal welfare programs. &quot;From then on the White House appeared to be supercautious,&quot; Mr. Fulton says. He met with White House officials in early March to answer questions about his record. At their suggestion, Mr. Fulton met with officials of the National Right to Life Committee to refute the charges against him, but to no avail.    On April 18, Dr. Sullivan met with President Bush, Mr. Sununu and others. In response to a comment about conservative opposition to the Fulton appointment, Mr. Bush instructed Messrs. Sununu and Sullivan to resolve the problem. &quot;At that point I think the White House could have helped,&quot; Mr. Fulton says, but it didn't.    Like Mr. Fiske, Dr. Sullivan asked Sen. Dole to arrange a meeting with conservative senators so that he and Mr. Fulton could address their concerns. But that meeting was similarly fruitless. The day after, Sen. Humphrey and five other senators wrote Mr. Bush opposing Mr. Fulton.    Mr. Fulton did have strong support. Sen. Don Nickles, a Republican abortion foe from Oklahoma, backed him. So did Mr. Fulton's boss, Gov. Henry Bellmon, who had directed Mr. Bush's campaign in Oklahoma. Gov. Bellmon called Mr. Bush at Camp David one weekend to speak up for Mr. Fulton. The President wasn't available, so the governor talked to an aide. Then Gov. Bellmon sent Mr. Bush a handwritten note. Mr. Bush didn't respond to the governor's letter.    The appointment continued to languish, and on June 1, Dr. Sullivan called Mr. Fulton and suggested that he withdraw his name from consideration. Dr. Sullivan had concluded that even if he pushed the Fulton nomination through the White House and the Senate, the price of victory would be too high. &quot;He would have incurred the wrath of the right-to-life movement, and I would have been the enemy,&quot; Mr. Fulton says.    Looking back, Mr. Fulton says, &quot;You've got right-wing politics taking precedence over everything else. I really believe that Sununu and some of the others at the White House are disregarding those who are running the departments.&quot;    ---   Paul M. Barrett contributed to this story. </TEXT></DOC>