<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870225-0090 </DOCNO><HL> Toyota Learns to Live With U.S. Unions---Firm Yields in ConstructionOf Kentucky Plant---By Richard KoenigStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TOYOY LABORAUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON) </IN><DATELINE> GEORGETOWN, Ky.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When Toyota Motor Corp. first considered locating a plant here in central Kentucky, it knew the state would offer financial lures. But it had yet to hear about Jerry Hammond.    A union officer for the construction trades, Mr. Hammond never contracted the &quot;Toyota fever&quot; that affected much of Kentucky when the auto maker announced in December 1985 that it would build an $800 million assembly plant here. Though the plant's construction meant jobs for at least 2,500 laborers and craftsmen, the unions were initially thwarted in their efforts to control hiring.    So Mr. Hammond helped to set in motion a union campaign of lawsuits, street demonstrations and lobbying in Congress that ultimately forced Toyota's project manager to allow all construction workers to be hired through union halls.    Some contractors say the accord is unprecedented, since it came after construction had already begun. Fujio Cho, the chief operating officer of the Toyota unit that will run the plant, acknowledges through an interpreter that the whole process has been &quot;a learning experience.&quot;    Japanese companies and U.S. unions are confronting each other more often as the Japanese expand their role in U.S. labor markets. In the construction industry, for instance, Japanese companies won $1.8 billion in U.S. contracts in 1985, versus only about $100 million in 1982, according to International Construction Week, an industry publication.    In the confrontation over the Georgetown plant, &quot;there's a potential lesson for Japanese investors not to underestimate the force of labor,&quot; says Robert E. Cole, a business and sociology professor at the University of Michigan. &quot;Labor may be down, but it's not out.&quot;    The construction unions badly needed a victory, since contractors who do business without union workers have been winning a growing share of industrial projects. That trend intensified when, starting in 1981, Nissan Motor Co. built its Smyrna, Tenn., plant, largely without union workers. The Toyota plant was seen by the unions as &quot;the second domino in what we feared would be a long line of losses on major construction projects,&quot; Mr. Hammond says.    The unions caught Toyota by surprise after it had been persistently courted by state officials. The plant is expected to create about 3,000 jobs for auto workers once production reaches capacity in the next few years. Aside from questions about how the plant might change the rural character of Georgetown, a community of about 11,000, there were few early signs that Toyota would encounter opposition.    Mr. Cho says Toyota left decisions about labor relations to its project manager. That was Ohbayashi Corp., a Tokyo-based company that has supervised Toyota projects in Japan. There, unions form within the work forces of individual contractors, rather than across entire trades. Ohbayashi itself has done considerable work in the U.S., including public works jobs employing union workers exclusively.    Lewis Smoak, a Greenville, S.C., lawyer who advised Ohbayashi, estimates that in recent years 85% of commercial and industrial construction in Kentucky has been done without union labor -- a percentage that Mr. Hammond derides as including &quot;barns, outhouses, garages.&quot;    Whatever the number, Mr. Smoak says he recommended that &quot;the best posture for Ohbayashi was not to exclude any group, not to take sides on the labor issue at all.&quot; Ohbayashi then opted for a so-called merit shop, which would award construction contracts to the lowest bidders without regard to whether the contractors employed union workers. Construction got under way in August 1986.    But to the 44-year-old Mr. Hammond, the top staff official of the Kentucky State Building and Construction Trades Council, a merit shop was a veiled form of an open shop, in which no worker is obliged to belong to a union. He thought the low bids would come from contractors hiring workers at below-union wages. Though a few trades had decided they could go along with a merit shop, Mr. Hammond dismissed this acquiescence as the result of a divide-and-conquer tactic that Ohbayashi was using among his members. He urged union members to boycott the plant, and it soon became a target of construction-trades officials at the AFL-CIO.    Robert A. Georgine, the president of the AFL-CIO's Building and Construction Trades Department, said Toyota was trying to ignore strong union traditions in the U.S., &quot;to impose upon American workers their Japanese work culture.&quot;    Mr. Hammond, for his part, did a quick study of Japanese culture and corporations. It happened that one of the first materials he obtained was a documentary contending that the fierce commitment of the samurai warrior survives in the Japanese executive. &quot;I have to admit it's a little overdone,&quot; he says of the film, &quot;but it scared the hell out of us.&quot;    Since the Toyota plant was hailed as the start of an industrial resurgence in Kentucky, the unions tried to avoid being tagged as spoilsports. They refrained from setting up a picket line. And Mr. Hammond associated himself with broader issues by lending his name to lawsuits over environmental and other matters related to the plant. He spoke to anyone in Kentucky who would listen, including a Republican women's club.    In Washington, the unions successfully lobbied against a tax break that Toyota sought under the transition rules of the new federal tax law. The estimated loss to Toyota: $32 million. Demonstrations were staged before the Japanese embassy and in New York at a meeting of Japanese business and government leaders. There also was some talk of demonstrating in Kentucky on Dec. 7, Pearl Harbor Day. Union officials say they suppressed the idea.    By November, Toyota had had enough. Worried about damage to its reputation for smooth labor relations and about protectionist sentiment against its Japanese operations, it told Ohbayashi it wanted peace with the unions. A new labor agreement was reached in late November; the first contract under the new terms was awarded last month.    &quot;There was developing this disharmony,&quot; says Alex M. Warren Jr., a Toyota executive. &quot;We wanted people to see the project as positive.&quot;    Ohbayashi, for its part, says construction had proceeded on time and on budget despite the unions' boycott. The steel framework of the sprawling plant was already rising on a 1,500-acre site outside Georgetown that had once been brush and farmland. Wakao Ohba, Ohbayashi's project director, says of the turnabout in hiring plans, &quot;Toyota is the client.&quot;    Now it is the open-shop contractors who are protesting. The new agreement between the unions and Ohbayashi provides that all hiring under future contracts be done through union halls, whether or not the job applicants are union members. Though open-shop contractors may still bid for work on the plant, they fear they won't be able to retain their own workers under the unions' referral system. And wages must conform with local union rates, which often are higher than open-shop rates.    If open-shop contractors no longer bid for work, Ohbayashi &quot;won't get the lowest competitive bid in the marketplace. All the players aren't in there,&quot; says Ron Carmicle, the president of River City Development Corp., Louisville, Ky.    Though Mr. Carmicle is completing two masonry contracts he won under the merit-shop arrangement, he says he won't bid under the new agreement. Seeking to undo it, he and the Associated Builders and Contractors of Kentuckiana Inc., a trade group of open-shop contractors, are suing Ohbayashi and the unions.    Ohbayashi officials acknowledge that few open-shop contractors now appear on the bidding lists for future contracts. Without going into specifics, they say also that they expect the new agreement to increase the cost of the plant, which is to be completed this year.    Though the new agreement is a clear victory for the unions, it isn't clear that events in Kentucky are best explained as a clash between Japanese and American cultures. Differences in regional labor markets and the size of any particular project also have a lot to do with how both Japanese companies and U.S. unions pursue their ends.    Currently, Honda Motor Co., Mazda Motor Corp. and a joint venture of Isuzu Motors Ltd. and Fuji Heavy Industries Ltd. are building plants in strong union states -- and all the construction work is going to union contractors. On the other hand, several auto suppliers are building plants in Kentucky under open-shop arrangements that the unions haven't fought.    Yet another confrontation in Kentucky may develop after autos start rolling out of the Toyota plant. The United Auto Workers union, which so far hasn't succeeded in efforts to organize the Honda and Nissan plants, have served notice that they intend to try again at Toyota. The UAW points out that it represents workers in the joint venture that Toyota has with General Motors Corp. at a plant in Fremont, Calif.    Toyota says only that whether its Georgetown workers join a union will be up to them. </TEXT></DOC>