<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880229-0036 </DOCNO><HL> Cash Crisis Could Topple Panama Chief Where Protest and U.S. Pressure Failed </HL><AUTHOR> Michael Allen (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><IN> BNK MON </IN><DATELINE> PANAMA CITY, Panama  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A cash crisis may yet succeed in toppling Panama's leader, Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega, where a presidential order and intense pressure from the U.S. have failed.    Last week Gen. Noriega refused a command from civilian President Eric Arturo Delvalle to step down, and instead engineered the dismissal of Mr. Delvalle, who went into hiding. The general appears to be firmly in charge of the 16,000-man Panamanian Defense Forces, the key to his power. President Reagan ruled out the use of U.S. military force to dislodge him, and while several Latin American nations voiced support for Mr. Delvalle at a Saturday-night meeting of the Organization of American States in Washington, they offered no concrete help for his struggle to hang onto his post.    But economic measures now under consideration by U.S. policy makers and domestic opponents could prove the general's undoing. Congressional leaders from both parties are calling for a trade embargo or even a freeze on bank transfers between the U.S. and Panama, measures that would strike at the heart of this country's foreign-based economy. And here, opposition leaders plan to kick off a national strike today and redouble a drive to withhold tax payments.    Even without further U.S. sanctions, the government appears to be in deep financial trouble. Burdened by one of the world's highest per-capita foreign debts, it faces the danger of bankruptcy by midyear, according to diplomats and both government and private economists. Because it uses the U.S. dollar as the national currency, the government can't buy time by printing new money, but instead is considering politically painful moves, such as firing thousands of civil servants, who support the general. &quot;They are on the knife's edge at all times,&quot; says one diplomat, who calls central bank reserves &quot;mindbogglingly small.&quot;    Signs of the budget crunch are everywhere in this steamy seaside capital: Traffic lights broken months ago by anti-government demonstrators still aren't fixed; shortages force some public workers to take toilet paper to the office; electricity blackouts plague the financial district.    But dwarfing the problem of shortages is the specter of default on the government's $2 billion debt to commercial banks. After winning postponement of interest payments due in December, the government must come up with $85 million in interest and principal payments to banks and bondholders by March 31. Analysts say that exceeds the probable reserves in the National Bank of Panama, which serves as the equivalent of a central bank.    Preliminary refinancing talks earlier this month between Panamanian officials and a 13-member bank steering committee went nowhere, according to sources, in part because the government hasn't yet approved a 1988 budget. Progress also appears hindered by Panama's lack of an agreement with the International Monetary Fund and a dispute with the World Bank that has resulted in suspension of the second half of a $100 million loan.    Last week's political upheaval cast further doubt on the talks, as it isn't clear which government officials will be representing Panama in the next round. Adding to bankers' insecurities, the U.S. Congress in December cut off almost all economic and military aid from Washington.    The commercial-bank negotiations are critical because Panama can't finance its budget deficit through money creation and thus relies on foreign debt to make ends meet. Judging from a report presented to the steering committee, the government's thirst for new money this year is substantial, perhaps exceeding $100 million. While that mightn't sound like much compared with the billions other Latin debtors are seeking, it is an albatross for a nation of just two million mostly poor people.    Foreign bankers won't comment on the negotiations. But many outside observers say creditors are unlikely to risk new loans without an overhaul in the system, which, under Gen. Noriega, has been characterized by graft. The general himself has been indicted by two federal grand juries in Florida on racketeering and drug-related charges, and Washington is openly campaigning for his downfall.    Says Luis Alberto Arias, who resigned as head of the National Bank last summer, &quot;What is needed is a fundamental change in the current system. This means Noriega leaves.&quot;    The government denies its finances are in crisis. Some revenue sources, such as Panama Canal toll receipts, are up. Budget planners say they are exploring the possibility of mortgaging or even selling portions of the 169 square miles of real estate straddling the canal.    And though pleas for emergency loans were rebuffed recently by a number of nations, including Libya, Rigoberto Paredes, head of the legislature's budget committee, says the government is close to obtaining funds from undisclosed &quot;secret sources.&quot; He rejects the suggestion that Gen. Noriega might have to step down.    But other observers say the government's political capital is wearing as thin as its economic resources. When word leaked that budget planners are considering firing as many as 12,000 government employees, normally pro-government unions threatened a nationwide strike. And labor leader Rolando Ordonez, a Noriega supporter, says any attempt to raise money by selling Panama Canal land, because of its symbolic value, &quot;would be {the government's} tomb.&quot;    Although their black-painted headquarters at the Chamber of Commerce have been taken over by government troops, opposition business leaders claim their call to Panamanians to withhold tax and utility payments from the government is taking its toll. They are also telling foreign bankers new loans won't be recognized if the opposition takes power.    Gabriel Lewis, former Panamanian ambassador to the U.S., says Mr. Delvalle will announce in advertisements in newspapers around the world this week that a government he headed wouldn't recognize any obligations contracted by the Noriega regime. The ads also will alert embassies and consulates that transferring any fees to the Noriega regime would be punished criminally by a Delvalle government.    One former high-ranking government official says warnings to the general about economic perils always fell on deaf ears. But while he may have little inclination to leave, analysts say, the decision might be made for him if political unrest and a choking off of weapons supplies snaps the military's patience.    Meanwhile, one government adviser frets that there are major drawbacks to all contingency plans under consideration, including default, raising revenues and cutting expenditures. &quot;We have three alternatives, none of which is suitable,&quot; he says. &quot;Little by little, we are getting to the point of no return.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>