<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880826-0098 </DOCNO><HL> Natural Tan: To Fend Off the Sun, Researchers Are Using Body's Own Chemistry --- They Put Melanin, a Pigment In Skin, Into Products To Block Harmful Rays --- Bronzed Like a Red Chicken </HL><AUTHOR> Jerry E. Bishop (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> APOS </CO><IN> HHP PHA </IN><TEXT>   For centuries, humans have smeared countless elixirs on their skin to ward off sunburn or soothe its painful effects. Now, scientists say they are on to the ultimate tonic, one derived from the body's own chemistry and one that, when harnessed, may prove the most potent sun protection of all: melanin.    Melanin is the dark pigment the body produces to protect against damage from sunlight, especially burning ultraviolet rays. It is what makes black people black and gives light-skinned people a tan.    If the efforts of several enterprising scientists pan out, retailers soon may be selling a variety of melanin-based products to the sun-fearing as well as the sun-loving. A small California company is developing a melanin ointment that blocks the entire spectrum of burning ultraviolet rays and washes off at night with soap and water. In Arizona, researchers are testing an ointment that stimulates the skin to produce a natural melanin tan before you go out in the sunlight. And in Texas, a scientist is fashioning melanin-impregnated eyeglasses and contact lenses that protect the eyes from sun damage, and melanin-coated windows that prevent sun bleaching of art works and draperies.    &quot;Melanin's time has come,&quot; says James Gallas, assistant professor of physics at the University of Texas at San Antonio and the researcher developing melanin-based eyeglasses.    The outcome of the research is bound to get plenty of attention. Doctors and the public are more anxious these days about the risk of exposing too much skin to too much sun. Because of America's increased penchant for playing in the sun and for wearing shorts, T-shirts and bikinis, the incidence of skin cancer in the U.S. is growing at a faster rate than the population. This year 500,000 people will develop the malignancies, the American Cancer Society estimates. Particularly alarming is the incidence of malignant melanoma, a once-rare form of skin cancer that kills quickly. Cases of melanoma have jumped more than sixfold since World War II and this year will afflict 27,000 Americans and kill 5,800, the society says.    Reports that pollution is thinning the ozone layer high in the Earth's atmosphere are heightening worries about skin cancer. The depletion of this layer of charged oxygen molecules will allow more of the sun's ultraviolet radiation to reach the surface of the Earth, and the incidence of skin cancer probably will climb even faster, health officials say.    Whether any or all of the proposed new melanin-based products ever reach the consumer is uncertain at this stage. For the most part, tests in humans haven't yet been done. Even if the human trials are successful the products' safety and efficacy would still face the scrutiny of the U.S. Food and Drug Administration. And it isn't certain that consumers would rush to melanin-based products with the same alacrity they are showing for, say, Retin A (to remove wrinkles) or minoxidil (to fight baldness).    Nature offers its own proof of melanin's effectiveness in preventing sun-induced skin cancer. Black and dark-skinned people, whose ancestors adapted to a climate of intense, year-round sunlight, rarely develop such malignancies. Their melanin-producing system keeps the skin constantly filled with the dark pigment.    Light-skinned people are able to produce as much melanin as dark-skinned people but it is a different type, and leaves them more susceptible to skin cancer. Their Northern European ancestors had to adapt to a climate where sunny days were few and short and it was important for the skin to absorb sunlight to produce vitamin D. Thus, light-skinned people have a type of melanin that builds up only after the skin is threatened by repeated sunburn and fades quickly when the threat diminishes.    As protection against the sun, melanin can't be beat, the researchers say. Mr. Gallas says melanin filters the wavelengths of light in proportion to the damage that each wavelength does to the skin. Thus, it blocks most of the highly dangerous invisible ultraviolet waves and much of the visible blue. &quot;But even green and red are bad, not as bad as ultraviolet and blue, but still bad,&quot; Mr. Gallas says. Melanin also blocks some of these   In contrast, the sunglasses and sunblocking lotions currently on the market block only the most dangerous part of ultraviolet light, although some newer products are promoted as &quot;blue blockers.&quot;    Although chemists have been able to synthesize melanin for some years, it is insoluble and sticky and, thus, hasn't been incorporated into commercially usable formulations. One company that believes it has overcome this problem is Advanced Polymer Systems Inc. in Redwood City, Calif.    Advanced Polymer has a technique for incorporating various substances, including melanin, in microscopic plastic sponges. The transparent, melanin-containing sponges are tiny - -about the same size as the microscopic dots of melanin found inside the skin's melanin-producing cells. In bulk, the sponges have the texture and consistency of a cream. The company hopes to get federal clearance later this year to begin human tests of the melanin skin cream and to invade the $300 million-a-year sun-screen market in 1990. &quot;We're developing a new line of skin protectants based on melanin produced by genetic engineering,&quot; says Sergio Nacht, vice president for research and development and a biochemist who has specialized in dermatology research.    The melanin cream, Mr. Nacht says, should be 10 times more effective than sun screens currently on the market, as it blocks the entire spectrum of solar ultraviolet light rather than just one portion of it. The melanin sponges are too big to be absorbed by the skin, so the researchers believe the cream shouldn't pose any health risks, Mr. Nacht contends.    Melanin cream will be waterproof and will stay on the skin until washed off with soap, Mr. Nacht says. But there is one problem: The lotion isn't clear and actually colors the skin wherever it is smeared on. The researchers hope consumers will see this as an advantage, rather than drawback. They say they have developed cosmetically pleasing tints that will give users the appearance of being tanned, albeit temporarily.    The melanin for the Melanosponges, as the company has dubbed them, is being made through a new type of genetic engineering developed by another small California company, Biosource Genetics Corp. in Vacaville.    Biosource has a novel technique by which a plant-infecting virus is genetically engineered to introduce a new gene into grown plants, Robert L. Erwin, president, explains. The new gene changes the chemicals a plant produces internally. All one has to do is spray the virus on the leaves of the right kind of plant and it soon will begin producing the desired chemical. Unlike other plant genetic engineering techniques, the new gene isn't passed on to offspring, nor does it spread to other plants. Instead, it dies with the plant, Mr. Erwin says.    The company is currently producing experimental quantities of melanin by infecting plant cell cultures with a genetically engineered virus, Mr. Erwin says. The plant cells normally produce a mix of chemicals that happen to be raw materials for melanin. The new technique inserts a gene that causes the cells to make an enzyme that converts these precursors into melanin.    Should Advanced Polymer's melanin sun-blocking cream prove successful and large quantities of melanin be needed, Biosource would switch to applying the virus to growing plants, probably broccoli, cabbage or related plants, which contain the right precursors. He envisions greenhouses full of plants producing hundreds of kilograms of melanin that eventually would be smeared on thousands of human bodies.    Because melanin is ubiquitous in nature, Biosource has a wide choice of melanin-producing genes to choose from to get exactly the right kind of melanin for the cream. It currently is using a bacterial gene in the plant cells and is investigating other genes including one in Rhode Island Red chickens, which makes the melanin that produces the chickens' distinctive color.    For those who might want a permanent tan, Prof. Mac E. Hadley a University of Arizona endocrinologist, and a colleague, chemist Victor J. Hruby, may have an answer. The two have developed a chemical variation of melanocyte-stimulating hormone (MSH), the hormone that activates the skin's melanin-producing cells, the melanocytes. When the chemical is rubbed on the skin, it soaks through and quickly begins activating melanin cells throughout the body. So, one could get a natural, whole-body tan before going out in the sunlight and much more quickly than normal, without any white areas left from bathing trunks and halters. &quot;Soon there will be no need for tanning parlors,&quot; Mr. Hadley claims.    The invention has just been licensed by the university's agent to &quot;a major producer of dermatological products,&quot; Mr. Hadley says, declining to name the company. The first human trials to test for safety are under way, he adds.    The melanin-impregnated plastics for sunglasses, contact lens and window panes under development by Mr. Gallas in San Antonio also have generated commercial interest. &quot;We've already signed 15 secrecy agreements&quot; with companies that want to look at the inventions, the physicist says. He adds that he expects to sign licensing agreements soon.    Mr. Gallas says he began looking into melanin about five years ago when he was working on solar energy and was looking for materials that absorb sunlight. As he investigated melanin's properties, he says, &quot;it seemed reasonable to put it into a lens to protect the eye&quot; from solar radiation. He tackled the problem of how to get the sticky synthetic melanin incorporated into plastic and already has produced some experimental eyeglasses, though he won't explain how. In appearance, the glasses range from brown to a yellow amber, depending on how concentrated the melanin is, he says.    The first of the eye-protection products, Mr. Gallas says, probably will be contact lenses and the intraocular lenses implanted after cataract surgery. Medical evidence is growing that long years of exposure to ultraviolet rays prompts cataracts. Melanin-impregnated contact lenses could help prevent this sort of damage while intraocular lenses could, in addition, help protect the retina.    The physicist also is working on melanin-coated windows that could be used where valuable items -- such as books, paintings, photographs and fabrics -- need to be protected from light. Since melanin doesn't totally block any color of the visible light spectrum, such windows wouldn't distort the colors of paintings and fabrics. In fact, the scientist says, colors stand out sharper and clearer when viewed through melanin-impregnated plastic.    Which gives these researchers heart. If all else fails, melanin products may still profoundly affect modern life in at least one way. &quot;One unexpected finding was that even the color of television images is enhanced&quot; when viewed through melanin glass, Mr. Gallas says. </TEXT></DOC>