<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870910-0116 </DOCNO><HL> Is This Mexico Recovery for Real?---By David Asman</HL><DD> 09/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM TAXESMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><DATELINE> MEXICO CITY  </DATELINE><TEXT>   President Miguel de la Madrid, known for his serious if not dour demeanor, is in a jovial mood throughout a Wall Street Journal interview at Los Pinos, his official residence. Picking up from his upbeat state of the union address Sept. 1, the president boasts about the nation's massive international reserve account, said to be close to $15 billion, enough to support one year's imports.    &quot;I think that this gives confidence to the economic community, to the national and international community, and we intend to take advantage of this situation,&quot; he says. &quot;You saw the reaction . . . in the stock market. {The Mexican stock market grew by 6% on the day following the president's speech.} This is an important sign. And in general, confidence in Mexico's situation has grown appreciably in both Mexican and international financial circles.&quot;    The current administration, which took over in 1982, can't take all the credit for the large reserve account, however. About half the $10 billion increase over last year comes from the new loan package worked out with international lenders. Another portion comes from the increase in oil prices; Mexico's last budget was prepared with the assumption that oil would remain at about $12 a barrel.    Nevertheless, Mr. de la Madrid has received credit for setting the nation on a responsible economic course. &quot;This president is beginning the process of 'de-Echeverriaizing' the economy,&quot; says political scientist Enrique Krauze, making reference to former President Luis Echeverria.    The Echeverria administration (1970-76) dramatically increased Mexico's statist tendencies and inaugurated an era of financial irresponsibility (Mexico's external foreign debt, now well over $100 billion, was $4 billion when Mr. Echevveria became president). Both Mr. Echeverria and his successor, Jose Lopez Portillo, increased the role of the state in the economy, particularly in their last 12 months in office: Mr. Echeverria expropriated vast areas of productive farmland in 1976, and Mr. Lopez Portillo's swan song was his 1982 nationalization of the banks.    President de la Madrid, on the other hand, seems intent on staying a more conservative course throughout this, his last, year in office. &quot;A responsible government refuses to manage the economy in a manner that merely seeks accomplishments and progress that become apparent during its mandate,&quot; he said in his state of the union address, in what may have been a veiled reference to his two predecessors.    While some critics of Mr. de la Madrid complain that government expenditures and regulations have been shifted around but not really reduced, there are tangible changes that have already paid off. This is particularly apparent in the government's attempts to open its trade policies.    Maintaining a steady devaluation of the peso to fuel non-petroleum export markets helped boost non-petroleum exports to nearly $10 billion last year, compared with $7.1 billion in 1985. (Exports of manufactured goods grew 49.9% in the first half of this year from the same period last year.) At the same time, by joining the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and reducing tariff levels to the current top rate of 40% -- from 100% in 1983 -- the government has given notice that it won't use the old import-substitution model to protect inefficient industries. A high official in the Ministry of Commerce put it bluntly: &quot;We will defend Mexican industries by not overvaluing the peso. But if these industries can't survive through open competition, we won't protect them from collapse.&quot;    The nation's fiscal policies may be changing as well. Currently, Mexico's tax receipts amount to just 4% to 5% of gross national product, according to Carlos Salinas de Gortari, secretary of budget and planning. Because the country can no longer count on external credit, it has initiated efforts to increase savings and tax revenues. Among them are the classic notions of seeking out and penalizing tax evaders, but some supply-side measures of increasing the tax base also have been announced.    During last week's speech, Mr. de la Madrid announced a lowering of business taxes, a revision of individual tax schedules -- that still include 16 brackets -- and, as of next year, a lowering of the top marginal personal income tax rate (currently about 60%).    Asked during the Journal interview whether his government's attempts to increase revenue by lowering rates meant that he is now a supply-sider, the president smiled and answered: &quot;No. But I do think the tax rate should encourage labor, savings and investment. And we must have rates that are competitive with the international market.&quot;    The key question now is whether Mr. de la Madrid's policies will be continued by his successor after next July's election. &quot;About the only measure taken in the past two or three years that couldn't be reversed is the entrance into GATT,&quot; says Luis Rubio, a political scientist and economic consultant here.    For the first time in post-revolutionary Mexico, the leading candidates of the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) have been announced publicly. The six candidates, all members of the cabinet, have had several weeks to discuss their views in semi-public forums in front of party members. The selection process previously was shrouded in mystery.    But this gesture of a political opening masks the reality of Mexican power politics: It will still be the president who will choose his party's candidate (probably within a month). And since it is unlikely that the PRI would permit a victory by an opposition candidate (assuming that there was an opposition candidate strong enough to compete with the PRI's agents and &quot;friends&quot; in practically all positions of influence in Mexican society), the president's choice will be the next president.    The problem with second-guessing the next president's policies is that since all the candidates are cabinet members, they say nothing critical of Mr. de la Madrid's policies. In an interview last week, Mr. Salinas de Gortari, a leading candidate, pledged to &quot;continue the structural changes begun in this administration. I am not one who believes that bigger is better in the size of the state.&quot;    Of course, one must question the extent to which these dramatic free-market conversions of former statist interventionists are real or are manufactured for eager gringo audiences. For example, the government insists that the nation's 130% annual inflation rate could not be a result of its monetary policy, since M1 grew at a rate of about 100% in July. Nevertheless, if one looks at M5, which includes time deposits, treasury bonds and other financial instruments issued by the government, the rate of growth in the money supply is much higher.    Also, as economist Luis Pazos notes, the money supply usually lags a bit behind prices in high-inflation economies. That doesn't mean that rising prices are responsible for inflation, as Mr. de la Madrid and his advisers maintain. Rather, people are reacting to the government's monetary policy and trying to stay a bit ahead of the game. As Mr. Pazos says: &quot;That's why the Brazilian price freeze didn't stop inflation, but why the Bolivian monetary freeze did.&quot;    On the spending side, the government's figures on sales of government enterprises, cutbacks in subsidies to producers and consumers, and cuts in the costs of maintaining a huge bureaucracy are greeted with skepticism by many. Certainly the government has sold many of the businesses that were nationalized along with the banks in 1982. But deficit spending and the burden of financing Mexico's internal deficit continues to put an enormous strain on the economy.    According to Mr. Pazos, who draws his figures from government statistics, the cost of interest payments and amortizations for the public-sector deficit absorbed 73.6% of public-sector spending in the first half of this year. In fact, after the favorable terms worked out with the nation's foreign creditors, only 22.5% of the government's debt payments went to foreign creditors in the first half of this year; the internal debt accounted for the remaining 77.5%. The government's use of credit, of course, crowds out private credit, which remains scarce. But it also leads to questions of exactly how the nation's huge reserve account will be used.    Certainly the mere existence of the large reserve does not mean economic well-being. In his 1981 state of the union message, then President Lopez Portillo also announced a huge reserve account about the same proportion to the publicsector debt as this year's reserve account. But Mr. Lopez Portillo used that reserve to overvalue the peso and support continued deficit spending. The result was economic disaster. Mr. de la Madrid promises not to repeat this mistake. The government may even use some of its reserves to pay off principal on its debts, through debt swaps or direct payments.    Still, a feeling of &quot;deja vu&quot; remains. The broken promises of fiscal responsibility, of electoral reform, of &quot;moral rejuvenation&quot; are hard to forget. Will this administration's promises be kept? Probably not all of them.    If there is a difference between the PRI of today and of a few years ago, however, it seems to be that the party is aware that it can no longer remain impassive to the changes occurring in the world as a whole and in Mexico itself. It has been shaken by the strong condemnation of electoral reform, by coming close to losing credit lines, and by dissension within its own ranks. But these &quot;cold showers,&quot; as political scientist Enrique Krauze calls them, may not be enough to ensure that the next administration evolves any further than the current one has. Says Mr. Krauze: &quot;Only more cold showers will do that.&quot;    ---   Mr. Asman edits the Journal's Americas column. </TEXT></DOC>