<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871021-0024 </DOCNO><HL> France ConfirmsA Firm ViolatedExport Curbs---U.S. Balks at ExplanationOf Incident, and StageIs Set for Possible Battle---By E.S. BrowningStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP FRESTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)INDUSTRIAL EQUIPMENT, MACHINE TOOLS (IND)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><DATELINE> PARIS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The French Foreign Ministry acknowledged that a French company violated Western export restrictions by exporting nine machine tools to the Soviet Union in the mid-1970s.    But Stephen Bryen, the U.S. Defense Department deputy undersecretary in charge of trade controls, said the French explanation of the incident is unsatisfactory, setting the scene for a possible Franco-U.S. confrontation over the issue.    The machine tools, large devices that are used to manufacture machinery, may have helped the Soviets produce parts for warships and other military equipment. Three of them were sent to the same Leningrad shipyard whose later receipt of even more sophisticated machine tools from a unit of Japan's Toshiba Corp. caused a furor in the U.S. earlier this year.    The U.S. says the Toshiba exports helped the Soviets build quiet propellers to help its nuclear submarines evade Western detection. But Toshiba says it sold the machinery only after learning that the French company, Ratier-Forest S.A., already had violated the Western export ban.    French sources said the Ratier-Forest exports were made with full government approval, but the Foreign Ministry refused to say whose fault it was that the violations occurred. A ministry spokesman sought to defend the French exports by saying that other, unidentified countries were exporting &quot;comparable&quot; machines during that same period, when detente with the Soviets was in vogue. The ministry said that the exports were only slightly beyond the limits allowed at that time.    One French source maintained that the machines didn't permit the kind of qualitative improvements in armaments that the Toshiba equipment did permit. The only difference between the illicitly exported French machines and machines openly available to the Soviets, this source said, was that the illegal machinery worked faster than the legal machinery. The source, who declined to be identified, said that the government considers the violations minor and isolated and that the violations aren't going to provoke a change in procedure for export authorizations. Among other things, Ratier-Forest became bankrupt in 1979 and a successor company says it hasn't any knowledge of the affair. No penalties are envisioned.    The Defense Department's Mr. Bryen rejected the French explanation. &quot;I think it is an effort to diminish the impact of what is really a very serious violation,&quot; he said. He said the U.S. would be obliged to discuss the issue further with France. The Franco-U.S. disagreement over the Ratier-Forest case reflects a broader U.S. concern that France still isn't adequately enforcing its own laws on export controls, Mr. Bryen said.    The Western restrictions are agreed upon unanimously by noncommunist countries through a Paris-based international organization called the Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls, or Cocom. The actual restrictions then are enforced through laws passed in the individual Cocom member countries.    Mr. Bryen said the Ratier-Forest exports helped the Soviets automate their manufacture of propellers for nuclear submarines, which until then they made by hand. Japan initially had obeyed the export ban and rejected Soviet overtures, he said. But he said the French sale weakened the Japanese resolve. When the French equipment proved disappointing, he added, the Soviets turned back to the Japanese, this time obtaining the advanced machinery they needed.    &quot;I think that if the French had said no in 1976-1979,&quot; said Mr. Bryen, &quot;the Japanese never would have sold the machines. So the French did two kinds of damage.&quot;    Today, Mr. Bryen said, the French approval process has been tightened up, but he charged that France still has trouble pursuing and punishing exporters that manage to violate the law.    Previously, the U.S. Commerce Department said that four French exporters, apparently three individuals and a small company, have been banned from doing further business involving U.S. exports. The four are accused of arranging at least one illicit sale of U.S.-made semiconductor-manufacturing equipment to a Soviet bloc country -- apparently either the Soviet Union or Czechoslovakia.    The four exporters named by the Commerce Department are Robert Almori of Paris, Marcel Goldfarb of Viry-Chatillon, Jean-Michel Didat of Yerres and a company called Cotricom S.A., also of Yerres. The individuals couldn't be reached for comment. One knowledgable French source said he isn't aware of the case and hasn't heard of those exporters until now.    The four are accused of conspiring to sell sensitive equipment to the Soviet bloc, and of actually succeeding in delivering one machine, a device to test computer memories. Two other devices used to manufacture semiconductors were seized in New York. A Commerce Department official said the four banned exporters operated through a Liechtenstein-based company and created a fictitious French customer to obtain official U.S. and French government authorization documents. </TEXT></DOC>