<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870721-0018 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 07/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   A U.N. PANEL PASSED a resolution urging a cease-fire in the Iran-Iraq war.    All 15 nations on the Security Council voted to adopt the U.S.-backed resolution demanding an end to the Persian Gulf conflict. Iran said the resolution, which doesn't carry any punishment for violators, wasn't &quot;worth a penny&quot; and threatened to retaliate for any attack. As U.S. warships prepared to escort Kuwaiti oil tankers flying the American flag through the gulf, Reagan hailed the vote as a step toward ending the conflict. The first ship to sail through the gulf under U.S. protection could come as early as today.    Kuwait said it would consider any U.S. request for temporary use of Kuwaiti military facilities, but ruled out the establishment of American bases.    ---   POINDEXTER SAID he never attempted to trace the funds diverted to the Contras.    In testimony before the House and Senate panels investigating the Iran-Contra affair, the former national security adviser said the funds were handled entirely by a private network overseen by North. Poindexter said he had authorized the diversion to the Nicaraguan rebels of proceeds from U.S. arms sales to Iran after only &quot;several minutes&quot; thought, describing the funds as vital for the insurgents fighting Managua's government. He also said he didn't have &quot;any regrets for anything I did.&quot;    The White House wouldn't comment on the possibility of a pardon of Poindexter and North, although such a move had been discussed in December.    ---   Justice Blackmun is undergoing treatment at the Mayo Clinic in Minnesota for &quot;a small and localized recurrence&quot; of prostate cancer. A spokesman said that the Supreme Court justice's treatment was &quot;short-term,&quot; and that the &quot;prognosis is excellent.&quot; Blackmun, 78, is probably best known as the author of the 1973 ruling legalizing abortion.    ---   The Reagan administration said Iran's refusal to allow one of its diplomats to be questioned by French police about last fall's bombings in Paris was &quot;a perversion of international diplomatic practice.&quot; Guards, meanwhile, kept watch over Iran's embassy in Paris and 15 French staffers remained confined to France's mission in Tehran.    ---   Reagan has decided to include a homosexual on a 13-member federal advisory commission on AIDS, administration officials said. The officials emphasized that the selection was based on professional credentials, consistent with an earlier refusal to guarantee gay representation on the panel. Members are to be announced Thursday.    ---   A federal immigration official said he expects the Immigration and Naturalization Service to begin issuing citations to employers of illegal immigrants next month and to begin fining those employers by September.    ---   Ruling party officials in Seoul said they would seek to retain a provision that would bar dissident Kim Dae Jung from running for president because of three years spent in exile. The constitution calls for a candidate to have resided continuously in South Korea for five years prior to the vote.    ---   The Army has begun producing a new type of anti-tank missile in response to the Soviet Union's embrace of a defensive technology for its tanks known as reactive armor. The modified missile carries a wand on its nose and is designed to penetrate the armor, which is equipped with an explosive device to deflect a missile's warhead.    ---   Japanese police are investigating the possible illegal transfer of millions of dollars of aeronautical technology from Japan to the Soviet Union. The information concerns commercial aeronautic data and related projects, a police spokesman said.    ---   Egypt's foreign minister arrived in Tel Aviv and urged Israel to help convene an international Mideast peace conference. Israeli Prime Minister Shamir suggested a regional parley instead. The Egyptian official is the first to visit the Jewish state since Israel's 1982 invasion of Lebanon.    ---   Gorbachev met at the Kremlin with Afghan leader Najibullah. The news agency Tass said the two officials discussed &quot;additional steps&quot; that could be taken to promote a settlement in the conflict between Kabul and Moslem rebels in Afghanistan.    ---   Portugal's prime minister said his main task would be to improve the country's economy, including opening the state-dominated sector to private enterprise. Anibal Cavaco Silva's remarks came after his Social Democratic Party won an overall majority in Sunday's parliamentary elections.    ---   Mixed-race demonstrators staged a protest outside South African government offices in a white Cape Town suburb, where teachers faced disciplinary actions for failing to administer exams during 1985 school boycotts. Following the rally, police said a homemade bomb was thrown at a police vehicle, injuring at least one officer.    ---   Flood waters receded across the Italian Alps and rescue workers continued to search for victims of mud slides caused by four days of heavy rains. Officials said the death toll rose to 19. At least eight people were missing, and 50 others were hospitalized.    ---   The Philippine government announced civil charges against an industrialist and six Marcos associates related to a bid to recover $10 billion that Manila said the ousted leader acquired illegally during 20 years in power. The government also is to file today corruption charges against Marcos. </TEXT></DOC>