<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880301-0076 </DOCNO><HL> Soviet Unrest Poses Greatest Challenge To Gorbachev Since He Assumed Power </HL><AUTHOR> Frederick Kempe and John Walcott (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Growing ethnic unrest in the Soviet Union is posing the greatest challenge yet to Mikhail Gorbachev, whose power is already being resisted by political opponents.    Despite an appeal by the Soviet leader for restraint, last week's unrest in Armenia has spread to neighboring Azerbaijan. The official news agency Tass yesterday reported &quot;rampage and violence&quot; in Sumgait, an industrial city on the Caspian Sea. Sumgait has a large Armenian population and is only 150 miles from the autonomous region of Karabagh. Armenian demonstrators have been demanding that Karabagh, an area that is more than 80% Armenian, be returned to their republic after 65 years of Azerbaijani control.    Most Armenians are Christians and most Azerbaijanis are Moslems. Though Tass provided few details of the latest outbreaks, a Soviet dissident in Moscow was quoted by the Associated Press as saying Moslems in the city were attacking Armenians.    American experts say the continuing unrest shows how easily Mr. Gorbachev's policy of &quot;glasnost,&quot; or openness, can turn against him by unwittingly encouraging ethnic groups to voice their demands. The Soviet leader over the weekend won an agreement by Armenian nationalist leaders to suspend demonstrations in the two affected republics for a month. But no matter how he reacts in coming days, the unrest will complicate his efforts to consolidate power at the critical Communist Party Congress scheduled for June.    &quot;This is one way the whole reform program can be undermined,&quot; says Stephen Sestanovich, director of Soviet studies at the Georgetown Center for Strategic and International Studies. &quot;This has become a big problem because it seems to demonstrate a loss of control by the center over outlying regions.&quot;    Mr. Gorbachev already faced riots last year in Kazakhstan, an Asian republic, after appointing a Russian as first party secretary, and he weathered demonstrations last summer in all three Baltic republics -- Estonia, Latvia and Lithuania. Demands are even arising in normally pliant republics such as the Ukraine for wider use of the native language and rewriting of history books.    Some Kremlinologists had predicted that Mr. Gorbachev's policies could trigger challenges from party apparatchiks worried about the loss of privileges, laborers unwilling to work more and to drink less, and East European political activists who might view glasnost as an invitation to challenge Moscow. These problems still dog Mr. Gorbachev, but nationality issues have arisen as his most immediate and explosive test.    An administration official says Mr. Gorbachev may have underestimated ethnic tensions because he lacks experience in non-Slavic areas. &quot;Gorbachev is the first Soviet leader since Lenin who never served in a non-Russian part of the country,&quot; the official says.    This official argues that Mr. Gorbachev's two central policies of &quot;perestroika,&quot; or economic restructuring, and glasnost both raise nationality problems he didn't anticipate. His willingness to allow a certain level of unemployment is likely to leave almost all transplanted Russian managers in their positions in Georgia, for example, while costing natives their jobs. His anti-alcohol campaign aims at Slavic drunkenness, but it hurts the economies of grape and grain-producing Georgia, Armenia, Azerbaijan, and Moldavia.    The latest troubles in Armenia are a direct result of glasnost. Abel G. Aganbegyan, Mr. Gorbachev's top economic adviser and an Armenian, disclosed in London that a special commission had decided that the disputed Karabagh region should be economically tied to Armenia rather than to Azerbaijan. Administration officials say Mr. Aganbegyan's comment, which he confirmed while in Washington last week, heightened Armenian demands for control of Karabagh.    Even before the disturbances in Armenia and Azerbaijan erupted, some Western Kremlinologists believed Mr. Gorbachev's political power was limited. &quot;Mr. Gorbachev clearly doesn't control the Politburo,&quot; says Cornell University Kremlinologist Myron Rush.    The general secretary's opposition is led by rival Politburo member and Communist Party ideologist Yigor Ligachev and by Viktor Chebrikov, who as head of the KGB, the Soviet state security and intelligence service, is responsible for keeping order in the far-flung Soviet republics. Mr. Chebrikov began making veiled criticisms of Mr. Gorbachev's handling of nationalities problems last summer, U.S. officials say.    &quot;The head of the KGB is in rather clear opposition to the general secretary of the Communist Party. This . . . isn't unprecedented, but the history does not bode well for the general secretary,&quot; says Mr. Rush.    Gorbachev allies control the KGB's First Chief Directorate, which is responsible for Soviet intelligence operations overseas, but Mr. Chebrikov's cronies control the Second Chief Directorate, which handles internal security, argues Mr. Rush.    Some Western analysts argue that Mr. Gorbachev also may be politically vulnerable because, unlike former Soviet leaders Josef Stalin, Nikita Khrushchev, and Leonid Brezhnev, he hasn't made capturing control of the Communist Party apparatus his first priority. &quot;This may turn out to be a mistake,&quot; says Mr. Rush. In fact, in an interview last autumn with Michel Tatu of the French newspaper Le Monde, Mr. Ligachev made the remarkable assertion that he, not Mr. Gorbachev, runs the party Secretariat.    In the end, the natural conservatism of Russia and of the Soviet system, along with the desire of the nation's leaders to avoid another change at the top so soon, may keep Mr. Gorbachev in power despite the apparent misgivings of his rivals. But a crackdown on dissent could tarnish his image in the West and at home. In addition, the Soviet leader may be forced to scale back his ambitious reforms in order to survive, analysts say. </TEXT></DOC>