<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870518-0062 </DOCNO><HL> A Deadly Epidemic -- AIDS Costs:In Lives and Dollars,The Epidemic's TollIs Growing Inexorably---Care, Research and EducationWill Take Massive Effort;By 1991: 324,000 Cases---A Preview in San Francisco---By Marilyn ChaseStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTFINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><DATELINE> SAN FRANCISCO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Paul Volberding surveys the teeming AIDS clinic at this city's general hospital with apprehension. The clinic handled 16,000 patient visits last year, as much or more than the hospital's medicine or surgery units. But within four years, the influx of sick is expected to soar more than fivefold.    &quot;Given the problem we're having with 3,500 cases, can the medical system survive that onslaught?&quot; asks Dr. Volberding, the hospital's chief of AIDS activities.    This city is the AIDS capital of the U.S., with an estimated male homosexual population of 70,000, at least half of whom are believed to be infected. (The estimate is based on blood tests and a survey conducted in heavily homosexual San Francisco neighborhoods.) In San Francisco's problems, other cities see a preview of their own future in dealing with the invariably fatal disease, acquired immune deficiency syndrome. Based on the current level of infection -- estimated at more than 1.5 million Americans -- the federal Centers for Disease Control now expects 324,000 diagnosed cases by the end of 1991, compared with 35,518 counted as of May 11. CDC estimates have all just been increased by 20% to account for previous under-reporting of the disease.    In a newly released study, the federal Office of Technology Assessment endorsed a forecast by Anne Scitovsky, the chief health economist for the Palo Alto Medical Foundation, predicting that medical costs alone will grow eightfold nationally, to $8.5 billion by 1991. Research, education and blood-screening costs will quadruple, to $2.3 billion.    Ms. Scitovsky estimates that indirect costs -- the lost wages from disability and death of working-age people -- could be as high as $55.6 billion by 1991, although other economists say the wage figure, despite the incalculable human toll, could be sharply lower if unemployed or underutilized workers fill the void.    &quot;The real costs will come in treatment,&quot; says economist Lester Thurow of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, &quot;and they will be horrendous enough.&quot;    Cost predictions, large as they are, may turn out to be too low. These projections are based on the current cases of the disease and on new cases brewing among those already infected. Thus, they are unaffected by any change in the rate of the disease's spread. Last week, the CDC tentatively reported an apparent leveling in the rate of new infections among military recruits. Estimates also don't include the expenses associated with AIDS-related complex, or ARC, an earlier phase of illness that can be as severe -- and as costly -- as AIDS itself.    In a cruel irony, more effective treatment with new drugs such as AZT -- at $10,000 a year, the most expensive prescription drug in history -- may increase the costs of some AIDS cases by prolonging life without curing the disease. If drugs are to cut rather than increase AIDS costs in the future, price competition will have to bloom among pharmaceutical companies or a successful treatment will have to be found to prevent the development of AIDS in infected individuals.    There are ominous indications that a higher percentage of people exposed to the AIDS virus will eventually fall ill than was once thought. Early estimates put the rate at 20% to 30%. But a long-term study of infected homosexual men here shows 60% of them are ill after seven years of medical observation, &quot;and it's getting worse,&quot; says Dr. Volberding.    Moreover, AIDS is an unpredictable disease, with such varied symptoms as pneumonia, cancer, dementia and emaciation. Its costs can explode in many ways. Keith Sparks, a 28-year-old former law clerk here, ran up bills of $160,000 last year when he developed multiple symptoms that ravaged his body, reducing his weight to 97 pounds. His bills were picked up by a private insurer, the Travelers Insurance Co.    &quot;I've been hospitalized 12 times in the past year,&quot; Mr. Sparks says. &quot;I've been diagnosed with squamous-cell carcinoma, lymphoma, meningitis, pneumonia and a collapsed lung.&quot; In addition, he has blinding headaches that render him unable to speak. He takes interferon to boost his immune system and drugs to dull the pain. &quot;I get tired of just preparing for death,&quot; Mr. Sparks says.    The cost of caring for one AIDS or ARC patient is very high. Insurers say the average ARC hospitalization claim is almost as high as the average AIDS claim. Caring for the average patient in San Francisco costs about $35,000 a year, or $70,000 from diagnosis to death, according to several experts. Those averages roughly equal the annual cost of caring for patients with certain terminal cancers, or with kidney failure.    But unlike other catastrophic illnesses, the report by the Office of Technology Assessment notes, &quot;What makes this disease a special case is the increasing prevalence&quot; of AIDS and its infection. By 1991, total AIDS care will cost the nation more than kidney dialysis, or cancer of the lung, breast or colon. Only cardiac patients and auto accident casualties are expected to cost more.    How the enormous AIDS bill eventually will be apportioned among patients, their families, private insurers and government health plans is a subject of conflicting estimates. Medicaid, the federal health plan for the poor, covers 12% to 65% of patients, depending on the region, for example, while private insurance covers 13% to 65%.    Overall, federal authorities estimate that about 40% of all AIDS patients will eventually be without means or insurance and will thus depend on Medicaid to pay doctors and hospitals. Economists at the Government Accounting Office are struggling to clarify the picture, but some researchers already conclude that far too many patients can't obtain private insurance. Phillip Lee, the director of the Institute for Health Policy Studies at the University of California at San Francisco medical school, predicts that AIDS will generate renewed calls for a unified national health program &quot;to even out the playing field.&quot;    Certainly, San Francisco's experience makes clear that, as the epidemic grows, private insurance becomes harder to obtain, more and more victims are bankrupted, and the government's role inevitably increases. But San Francisco's problems also offer a more positive lesson for other cities: The financial and human costs can be alleviated by concentrating resources, by innovations in medical treatment and by developing a network of volunteers offering private support.    Despite its modest proportions -- 715,000 people living within an area of 49 square miles -- San Francisco already staggers under the heaviest per capita concentration of AIDS in the country -- twice that of New York City. Already, the city spends on AIDS half as much as the whole state of California does, and the city's needs are &quot;rapidly escalating,&quot; frets David Werdegar, San Francisco's public health director. Home nursing, education, and chronic care for AIDS dementia are items not currently reimbursed by state or federal funds.    Yet, thousands of patients get by under the city's patchwork of public hospital care and private volunteer support. It is a model, the Office of Technology Assessment says, that gives San Francisco patients &quot;the lowest lifetime hospital costs&quot; of any place in the country. The average length of a San Francisco hospital admission -- roughly 12 days -- compares with about 18 days in New York City.    What makes it work is the AIDS program at San Francisco General Hospital. Ward 86 -- the AIDS clinic -- is housed in a worn brick outbuilding that also houses an Asian refugee clinic.    The hospital's AIDS center has attracted a dedicated cadre of specialists, and it concentrated their expertise and compassion. Many staff members are homosexual, and patients feel all the more comfortable because of that.    &quot;The county hospital may not look as pretty as private hospitals, but the staff makes up for it. Our doctors are incredibly nice,&quot; says Walter Hurd, a patient who spent Christmas in the hospital and who was cheered by volunteers dispensing a basket of teddy bears. &quot;I may have to wait a little extra time here, but I'm never pressured to get in and out.&quot;    Ambiance aside, &quot;the General&quot; works because it stresses outpatient clinic care. It gives experimental chemotherapy and even blood transfusions on an in-and-out basis, releasing patients to recuperate at home in familiar surroundings. Gayling Gee, the head nurse, points proudly to an old blood bank &quot;donor chair,&quot; once used to take blood and now redeployed to transfuse blood. A result of this approach: fewer admissions and shorter stays. These are critical savings because Medi-Cal (California's version of the federal Medicaid program for the poor) reimburses the General just $625 a day for services that cost at least $800 to provide.    But AIDS patients can't be discharged into an uncaring void. The city has evolved volunteer programs dispensing philosophy, food and money. Chief among these is the Shanti Project, a private organization whose 350 volunteers donate 75,000 hours of free counseling and labor a year. The city underwrites 36% of its $2.2 million budget, but Shanti worker Paul Stearns says: &quot;The charge for our services works out to 40 cents an hour. So this city is getting a bargain.&quot;    Most patients cling to Shanti like a spiritual life raft: Of the city's 1,200 AIDS patients, 800 are clients. It supplies emotional-support counselors to dying patients and their families. It sends out practical-chore workers to cook and clean, shop and provide transportation for people with AIDS. &quot;We want them to have a {good} quality of life,&quot; Mr. Stearns says.    Shanti also runs 12 low-cost residences for AIDS patients, asking them for just 25% of their disability checks, roughly $125 a month, as rent. It runs two vans to shuttle patients to hospital and clinic appointments. It handles 6,000 informational calls a month. Shanti has also trained similar groups in Los Angeles, Seattle, Puerto Rico and London.    At the San Francisco AIDS Foundation food bank, patients get free groceries worth about $40 a week. Says patient David Casconi: &quot;Every week, I pick up a bag of staples, with macaroni, beans, tuna, eggs, and occasionally delicacies like artichoke hearts or olives with pimentos. It's a godsend.&quot; And Walter Hurd gratefully accepts cash from Catholic Social Services, though as a non-Catholic he says, &quot;I feel guilty.&quot;    Still, the cost of admission into San Francisco's or any city's public safety net is usually personal bankruptcy. Mr. Hurd, a 32-year-old with an M.B.A. degree, had been a marketing consultant. He had to abandon his career and his creditors when AIDS pneumonia struck him last September. He now lives on $378 in disability checks every two weeks, and he qualifies for public care. &quot;I'm a medically indigent adult -- an MIA -- just like missing-in-action,&quot; he says.    Mr. Casconi, a 31-year-old former stereo salesman, exhausted his savings account on vitamins, herbs, psychics and acupuncture-wares from thriving but dubious &quot;AIDS boutiques&quot; that he says exploited him. Now, Medi-Cal picks up his medical bills though not his morale. &quot;It affects your self-esteem, having worked and then going on the dole,&quot; he says. &quot;What can I tell people, that I'm now a professional patient?&quot;    There is no guarantee that the San Francisco model can be transplanted to cities like New York, which is large, diffuse, and troubled with drug abusing AIDS patients who don't volunteer. Without San Francisco's tightknit corps of volunteers, says Peter S. Arno, an economist at the City University of New York, &quot;Patients are being lost. Then they wind up back in the emergency room, much sicker, and at much higher cost.&quot;    Still, the Robert Woods Johnson Foundation is betting the model can be transplanted. And it staked $17.2 million in grants to nine urban medical centers on its belief. &quot;The concept makes sense,&quot; says spokesman Mervyn Silverman. &quot;We think we'll demonstrate cost savings the first year.&quot;    As the epidemic progresses and patient rolls get longer, the San Francisco model faces its toughest tests. While Dr. Volberding plans for 18,000 to 20,000 patients by 1991, the city contemplates its most controversial move yet -- a special AIDS hospital to be housed in the mothballed Public Health Service Hospital here. The idea of a single-purpose facility has drawn some fire.    In New York, where the city's daily AIDS hospital census of 1,100 patients could nearly fill Bellevue Hospital, experts don't like the idea. &quot;I think it's horrible. It would be like setting up a leper colony, and would inevitably result in substandard care,&quot; says Robert Cohen, the vice president of medical operations for the New York City Health and Hospitals Corp.    But Mr. Silverman, who once was San Francisco's public health chief, champions the idea. &quot;I'm a believer,&quot; he says. His only concern, he says, is that an AIDS hospital &quot;could serve as an even greater magnet to San Francisco.&quot; Unless the federal government picks up more of the costs, he says, it will put too great a burden on San Francisco.    If AIDS patients are lured to San Francisco, the city at the same time sees population changes of another sort. Indeed, epidemiologists expect AIDS to make dramatic demographic and economic differences here. &quot;People will die, or move out,&quot; says George Rutherford, the medical director of the city health department's AIDS office, thus altering residential patterns and property values. &quot;AIDS is going to change that Bay Bridge sign reading: Population 715,000. It is grisly.&quot;    Already battling burnout, the city's volunteer corps is in great need of fresh recruits. &quot;We don't have the resources to meet the needs of the '90s,&quot; says Shanti's Mr. Stearns. Most volunteers stick by their clients until death comes, but fresh patients outnumber counselors. &quot;Volunteers leave because they're tired,&quot; he says. &quot;It's a lot to give.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>