<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861218-0136 </DOCNO><HL> Delayed Dreams:Aquino's RevolutionChanges Life LittleFor Many Filipinos---Feuds and Rumors in ManilaHurt Efforts to ImproveCountryside's Well-Being---Poverty of Davao Is Intact---By June KronholzStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/18/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> DAVAO, the Philippines  </DATELINE><TEXT>    By the humble measure of ahumble land, these are good times in Davao.   Copra is selling for 4 1/2 times the price a year ago. Ramie fiber is bringing double the cost of production. Giant Davao tuna are flown every evening to an insatiable market in Japan. And a gold rush in the Cordillera Mountains, a three-hour drive north, has drawn 50,000 pick-and-shovel prospectors.    But for all that, the 3.8 million people who live in this remote part of the Philippines produced goods and services valued at only $80.85 per capita last year. And by even the generous estimates of government planners, this sum will rise only $5.25 a year through the end of the decade.    One-third of the labor force has no work or not enough. Four pre-schoolers in five are malnourished. And the insurgent New People's Army, which has just signed a cease-fire in the 17-year guerrilla war that has battered Davao, still has control over or roams freely in 1,126 of the region's 1,776 barangays, or wards.    Preoccupied with political infighting, distracted by rumors of plots and coups, Philippine President Corazon Aquino leads a revolution that has barely brushed the provinces outside Manila. Certainly, the press now is unstifled; pride is restored. There is a new regard for human rights, and &quot;a man feels more at peace in his home at night,&quot; says the new public-works minister, Vincente Jaime.    But economic change that would better the countryside, where 60% of Filipinos live, and that could undercut the insurgency -- that sort of change is still a distant goal.    Even with the sizzling 6 1/2% annual growth rate envisioned by the government, the Philippine economy won't return to its 1981 size, meager even then, until 1991. &quot;It will take time -- two years, three years -- &quot;to see appreciable progress in the provinces, says Zafiro Respicio, the new acting mayor of Davao.    It is a mark of the tortuous course of Third World development that the country will have to wait that long. And it is a reminder that however much better things are in the Philippines, they still are a long way from good.    In Manila, politicians and businessmen are quick to say why progress is so slow: The government, though popular, is unstable. Coup rumors that have flared sporadically since June, a series of department-store bombings and political murders this fall, a fractious cabinet that defied direction, a defense minister who loudly challenged Mrs. Aquino's right to office, a military thought to be teetering in its loyalty -- together they sketch a picture of political havoc.    Mr. Jaime, a prominent banker until his cabinet appointment, tells of a group of Singaporeans who postponed plans to form a Philippine investment fund after coup rumors spread in November. And Alberto Soriano, who owns pineapple plantations and a cannery in Davao, tells of a Japanese delegation, pondering an investment in his business, that put off its visit after the kidnapping of a Japanese businessman.    Moreover, this fall's political ruckus, leaving Manila's investors and allies wary, followed months of policy blunders and hand-wringing inaction. For example, Mrs. Aquino's labor-policy speech on May 1 was warmly received -- and promptly forgotten; no one thought to draft a plan to carry it out.    There is said to be no agenda at the weekly cabinet meetings, no advance briefing papers, little follow-through on cabinet decisions. By the account of one Aquino adviser, the 28 ministers have discussed the guerrilla war only once. &quot;Cory didn't realize the need for leadership,&quot; the adviser contends. &quot;She assumed her ministers would pick up hints and directions in her speeches.&quot;    Far from it. Cabinet members feud openly, both among themselves and with Mrs. Aquino. The minister of economic planning publicly proposed repudiating some of the country's foreign debt, while the finance minister argued for paying it. Mrs. Aquino's own vice president at one time said he might oppose her new constitution.    &quot;We are like a man after a 20-year fast,&quot; says Jaime Cardinal Sin, the archbishop of Manila, explaining the noisy dissent in the Aquino cabinet. &quot;Now we're eating too much.&quot;    If months of unease and drift have squandered opportunities, there are more months of unease and drift ahead. Filipinos will vote on the constitution in February -- a convenient reason for businessmen again to put off new ventures. &quot;Psychologically, emotionally, businessmen want a constitution,&quot; says the public-works minister, Mr. Jaime.    Then too, Mrs. Aquino's supporters and opponents alike are viewing the plebiscite as a test of her popularity. If voter turnout is low or if the constitution wins only a thin majority, &quot;Cory will face the same challenges to her legitimacy&quot; raised by her disputed victory over Mr. Marcos last February, says a drafter of the new charter. Well-financed pro-Marcos radio stations already are decrying the constitution as &quot;pro-American, pro-World Bank and anti-Filipino.&quot;    The plebiscite will be followed by elections for the new congress in May, and perhaps voting for governor and local mayors next fall -- more opportunities for tensions to boil and for investors to remain doubtful. What is less doubtful is that the elections will be costly: &quot;Everyone I know is trying to stay out of town to avoid all the political contributions they'll be asked for,&quot; says the head of an accounting firm. The balloting will be chaotic: With 54 parties already organizing, the elections &quot;will make the Italian multiparty system look unified,&quot; he says.    And they probably will also be inconclusive. After 20 years of Mr. Marcos's single-handed rule, Philippine politicians may be too inexperienced at consensus-building and too enamored of their new power to provide much leadership. &quot;We lack the great power of public opinion to move the machinery of congress,&quot; says Blas Ople, the labor minister under Mr. Marcos and a leader of the political opposition.    Thus, many of Mrs. Aquino's advisers -- and even some foes like Mr. Ople -- are urging her to impose land reform and an economic program by decree before congress has a chance to stymie her. Mrs. Aquino &quot;has the space now to ram through her program,&quot; Mr. Ople says. Even Mr. Marcos occasionally had trouble controlling his lap-dog legislature, he says, and Mrs. Aquino, facing a newly free and feisty congress, could fare even worse.    But the coup rumors, cabinet battles and constitutional debates that rattle Manila go unremarked in places like Davao on Mindanao island, a longer flight from the capital than are Taiwan and Hong Kong. &quot;What is sensational in Manila passes us by in Davao,&quot; says the president of the Davao chamber of commerce.    Many other things passed them by during the 20-year rule of Mr. Marcos. He poured money for roads, power plants and tourism into northern Luzon, his political base, but largely ignored southern regions like Davao.    Manuel Garcia, a national assemblyman from Mr. Marcos's own party, says that two years ago he persuaded the then-president to build a fruit-processing plant in Davao -- but at the last minute, Mr. Marcos moved it to his home province of Ilocos on Luzon.    The occasional private investor with plans for Davao has found that the banks didn't share his interest: Capital remains concentrated in Manila. Mr. Soriano says he had to put up $3 million in collateral to get a $2 million loan to build the only cannery in the region. Then, when interest rates soared in the turmoil of Mr. Marcos's last years, Mr. Soriano says, his loan grew into a $14 million obligation, and there wasn't any money to tend the plantations that should have been supplying the cannery.    Since 1980, Mr. Soriano says, the plant has operated only 400 days, and he has been able to fill only 10% of his orders. His new $1 million fish-canning factory is the only new investment in Davao since the Aquino election.    With an economy tied to agriculture and with most world commodity prices low, family income in Davao was only $320 a year in 1983, the last time the government computed it. Predictably, Davao proved ripe for the New People's Army.    The military recorded four encounters a week with the guerrillas last year. Political assassinations averaged five to seven a week, says Abelardo Aportadera, a Davao human-rights lawyer. Some Japanese traders sold out or moved their operations to Manila. Some planters abandoned their crops. A government-run paper plant had its equipment burned 10 times in two years, the military says, for failing to pay &quot;taxes&quot; to the NPA.    Rebounding prices for some of the local crops have buoyed incomes recently, and gold-rush money is filtering into Davao's economy, too. Mrs. Aquino's vast popularity has hurt NPA support and returned credibility to the military; political assassinations are down to five or 10 a month. &quot;The middle class feels it now can cooperate with the military,&quot; Mr. Aportadera says.    Marsman Co., a pharmaceutical concern, says its Davao sales were up by a third in October from October 1985. Salesmen can canvass areas that were too dangerous last year. And coconut farmers have the money to buy medicine.    But Davao remains a long way from prosperity. Coconut, an obsolescent industry, accounts for half the economy. The government talks of new ventures, like prawn culture, but then it concedes it hasn't the money for a hatchery.    The centerpiece of Mrs. Aquino's recovery plan is a $190 million New Deal-type jobs program, and in Davao the government has hired 6,277 people for 729 public-works projects. But the program is slow to take off because the government is low on managers to run it and afraid the money will be stolen by contractors and bureaucrats. (Davao has enlisted the Jaycees and Kiwanis as watchdogs.)    The program aims not at development but at employment -- a dozen men to do the job of one front-end loader. They are filling potholes in Davao instead of, say, building farm-to-market roads. Moreover, the jobs are only temporary; they will end by spring, and there is nothing to replace them.    This lack of prospects means the insurgency is far from over, despite the cease-fire between the government and the rebels -- certainly the most stunning accomplishment of Mrs. Aquino's presidency. The military says that at the beginning of 1986 there were 3,562 NPA regulars in and around Davao, a sharp rise from a year before, and few have surrendered since Mrs. Aquino's election.    In fact, an intelligence officer claims that in the past three months the rebels have progressed to using trucks and M16 rifles. On a recent weekend, after the agreement on a cease-fire, the NPA murdered three policemen in Davao and attacked a bus.    Mayor Respicio says Filipinos' patience and Mrs. Aquino's great popularity have forestalled any local grumbling over the months of inaction and will assure her another two or three years of honeymoon. &quot;It is our nature, we give people a chance,&quot; he says with a shrug. Adds Cardinal Sin: &quot;You cannot harvest your rice the day you plant it.&quot;    But in 10 months in office, Mrs. Aquino hasn't planted much rice. And that could mean a meager harvest in places like Davao. </TEXT></DOC>