<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871021-0073 </DOCNO><HL> Earnings Forecasts Defy Gloom in Stocks---Dollar's Drop, Labor CostsBrighten Outlook---By Ralph E. WinterStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR TAXESSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)EARNINGS (ERN)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><TEXT>   The distance between the executive suite and the stock trading floor has never been greater.    Stock prices have collapsed, but profits are soaring. And the earnings outlook, barring a recession arising from the trauma in world financial markets, is bright.    For example, at Eastman Kodak Co.'s offices in Rochester, N.Y., Monday, top executives told visitors that earnings prospects continue to be very good because strong demand persists for film, chemicals and almost everything else the company makes. Meanwhile, on Wall Street Kodak stock was plummeting $27.75 a share to close at $62.875, a 31% drop for the day.    Companies ranging from producers of computers and software to old-line concerns like Sears Roebuck andamp; Co. and Amoco Corp. are reporting spectacular profit gains for the third quarter.    &quot;Corporate profits are nothing short of sensational,&quot; says Allen Sinai, chief economist for Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., a unit of American Express Co. &quot;We have a trend here -- momentum that won't be easily reversed.&quot;    Propelling profits higher, among other things, are the continued weakness of the U.S. dollar and a related rise in export sales; restraint in labor costs; corporate restructurings and other cost-cutting moves; and the outlook for steady, low-inflation economic growth in 1988.    While some Wall Street analysts and money managers do see a recession in the cards for 1988, what's surprising is how many believe it won't necessarily happen.    In addition, contrary to some dismal forecasts, the 1986 federal tax law didn't seriously cripple corporate profits. The law raised corporate taxes by eliminating the investment tax credit and other benefits. But most companies took that in stride because of favorable business fundamentals. And next year the law should help earnings of many highly profitable concerns.    However, the drop in stock prices over the past five days presents a threat to the prospect of much-fatter profits in 1988, economists say. &quot;This kind of stock market decline, if prices don't recover soon, has to dent consumer spending,&quot; says Mr. Sinai.    Nonetheless, he's forecasting an 8%-to-12% rise in profits next year, and &quot;single-digit gains&quot; if a recession occurs, which he rates a 1-in-3 possibility.    Rising interest rates for a while threatened to hamper corporate performance. But the rate outlook has improved significantly, at least for the near term, with Monday's stock market crash and rally in the bond market, which continued yesterday.    For many U.S. manufacturers, the decline in the dollar's value has spurred earnings by turning the companies into low-cost producers on world markets. Consequently, U.S. exports increased 13% in the first eight months to $161.53 billion.    Furthermore, profits from foreign sales now translate into more dollars. &quot;We've been showing a 25% compound growth rate in sales, with about 10% coming from (the weaker dollar) and 15% from growth in real terms,&quot; says William P. Madar, president and chief executive officer of Nordson Corp., which exports half its output.    As a result, profit at the Westlake, Ohio-based producer of equipment to apply adhesives and coatings is likely to surge about 75% in the year ending Nov. 1.    &quot;For next year, we can't count on continued currency gains, but we expect to be able to continue the 15% gain in unit sales,&quot; producing another strong earnings rise, says Mr. Madar.    Even more important to overall corporate profits, the dollar's decline has permitted price increases on many U.S.-manufactured products, both at home and abroad, as foreign competitors are forced to raise their dollar prices. Simultaneously, U.S. companies are cashing in on intensive cost-reduction and quality-improvement programs undertaken since the 1982 recession.    Taking these factors into account, analysts have been boosting earnings estimates of many basic-product manufacturers. For instance, estimates for Dow Chemical Co. for both 1987 and 1988 have been raised about $1 a share since last spring. Many analysts are expecting the Midland, Mich.-based chemicals producer to earn about $6 a share for 1987 and $7 a share for 1988, compared with last year's net income of $3.82 a share.    Similarly, executives at Mead Corp., the big Dayton, Ohio-based forest products concern, don't quarrel with analyst forecasts that, barring a softening in the general economy, the company's operating profit, after stripping out unusual charges and gains, will jump more than 40% this year and another 20% next year.    Most of Mead's plants are running all-out and prices are strong. Only two years ago, &quot;the export business was so bad that there was a glut of pulp and paper products here in the U.S.,&quot; says William A. Enouen, senior vice president and chief financial officer.    Because of the dollar's decline, however, North American producers again have lower costs than their Scandinavian competitors. As exports rise and domestic surpluses shrink, prices are climbing. For instance, the price of linerboard, used for the outside layer of corrugated containers, jumped on Aug. 1 to $380 a ton from $350 a ton, the fifth price rise in about 18 months. Those increases totaled a whopping 46%.    Like many other U.S. companies, Mead has modernized and expanded its best plants, spending $350 million, for instance, at its Escanaba, Mich., pulp and paper mill. That investment has paid off handsomely since the mill is a major supplier of paper for mail-order catalogs, which have surged in number.    Even for many companies that haven't been aided much by the dollar's decline, the profit outlook is bright. Standex International Corp., for instance, foresees a 20% profit rise in fiscal 1988, ending June 30. &quot;Business is quite good in almost all of our divisions, and we've done a lot of cost-cutting,&quot; says a spokesman for the Salem, N.H.-based manufacturer of products ranging from heating and ventilating equipment to chiropractic tables.    Some economic pitfalls could damage the rosy profit forecasts. The impact of the recent stock-market drop on consumers and business spending is difficult to estimate at this point. Furthermore, if interest rates were to rise sharply again soon, it could pare demand for a wide range of building, automotive and capital-goods items, slowing the economy's growth.    The weak dollar that is aiding profits could become a major factor producing higher interest rates. If foreign investors shy away from dollar-denominated investments, that could create a shortage of savings to fund the huge federal deficit, pushing up rates. Some economists believe that's already happening, helping to depress the stock and bond markets. Many economists expect a recession in 1989, but soaring rates could pull it into late 1988.    A further decline in the dollar, which some economists expect, wouldn't be an unmixed blessing to U.S. companies either. &quot;Retailers benefited from the strong dollar,&quot; says Lawrence Chimerine, chairman and chief economist at Chase Econometrics, Bala Cynwyd, Pa. &quot;They could buy cheaply overseas, add a good profit margin, and pass it through to the consumer. Now they will have to pay more for many imported goods, and it will be more difficult to maintain margins.&quot;    Also, says H. Bradlee Perry, chairman of David L. Babson andamp; Co., Cambridge, Mass., investment advisory concern, &quot;By late next year, inflation may start picking up enough to boost corporate costs and prevent a further rise in profit margins.&quot; Already, higher costs for materials are pinching some tire makers.    Finally, there are indications that the consumer may be running out of steam. Dealers will sell only 6.9 million U.S.-made cars in 1988, down from 7.1 million in 1987 and 8.2 million in 1986, according to Chrysler Corp. estimates.    Some economists caution that the profit outlook isn't quite as bright as it appears because earnings for both this year and next will include a sizable dab of inventory profit arising from higher wholesale prices for goods in the supply pipeline.    Nonetheless, the good news on the profits front clearly outweighs the bad. Take labor costs, for example. During the second quarter, the hourly cost of wages and benefits in non-farm businesses rose only 2.7% from a year earlier, the Labor Department said. In manufacturing, where output per hour increased 3.4%, the labor cost for each unit produced dropped 1.9% from the 1986 second quarter.    Some economists question whether labor costs can be contained as successfully in 1988 if the economic expansion continues. But a recent survey by Hewitt Associates, Lincolnshire, Ill.-based compensation consultants, indicates that business expects to grant wage and salary increases next year almost identical to those of 1987.    The effects of corporate restructurings and major cost-reduction programs should also aid 1988 profits. At some concerns, these benefits will be even greater next year because the companies already will have absorbed the cost of severance pay, inventory write-off, plant closing expenses and other charges.    For most companies, such favorable economic fundamentals have more than offset the bigger tax bite under the 1986 tax law. Tax changes will cost U.S. companies about $22.5 billion this year, Shearson's Mr. Sinai estimates, somewhat less than many economists expected a year ago.    More important, however, the tax law hasn't had the negative impact on the overall economy that some of its opponents forecast, such as causing a drastic cutback in business investment and risk-taking.    For 1988, corporate executives and economists say, the tax increase will be even less of a factor in earnings, raising corporate taxes about another $3 billion. And as pretax profits rise, the lower tax rates incorporated in the 1986 law become more significant, offsetting the loss of investment tax credits and other benefits wiped out by the law.    Many highly profitable concerns already pay less in taxes than they would have under the previous rules, and more will cross over into plus territory next year. For instance, Rubbermaid Inc. will pay an effective tax rate this year of about 43% to 44%, down from 47% to 48% in 1985 and 1986. The rate will drop toward 40% next year, says the Wooster, Ohio-based rubber and plastics products concern. </TEXT></DOC>