<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870528-0011 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 05/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN SAID he wouldn't permit Iran to block Persian Gulf shipping routes.    The president, in an interview with European and Japanese journalists, said the U.S. wouldn't allow a &quot;barbaric country&quot; like Iran to cause &quot;economic havoc&quot; by blocking the shipment of oil in the gulf. Reagan, who said U.S. actions in the region would be defensive, refused to disclose what retaliatory measures might be taken in the event of an attack by Tehran. In Baghdad, U.S. investigators questioned Iraqi officers about the chain of events that led to the May 17 missile attack on the USS Stark.    The Navy has begun escorting ships from friendly nations through the gulf, protecting the vessels from attacks by either side in the seven-year-old Iran-Iraq war, the Pentagon said.    ---   DUTTON TESTIFIED that arming the Contras was a White House operation.    The retired Air Force colonel told the congressional Iran-Contra panels that he managed a secret airlift to the Nicaraguan rebels and that North indicated they were &quot;working for the president.&quot; Reagan told a group of foreign reporters that the scandal has damaged his credibility, but blamed the media. The president, who said he never considered resigning over the affair, noted that he doesn't believe &quot;I'm faced with any crisis.&quot;    Investigators are trying to determine if top CIA officials approved Contra-aid efforts and whether field officers are trying to protect superiors.    ---   Gorbachev arrived in East Berlin and is expected to announce, possibly today, an arms plan that could include a unilateral withdrawal of some Soviet troops from Eastern Europe. U.S. officials said any new arms proposal would boost pressure on Western leaders ahead of the June 8 Venice summit.    Reagan expressed hope that he will meet with the Soviet leader this fall. The president also said that &quot;great progress has been made&quot; toward an agreement eliminating medium-range missiles from Europe.    ---   Canada filed a diplomatic protest in Washington over an attempt by an independent counsel to subpoena Ottawa's envoy to the U.S. as a witness in the case against former White House aide Deaver. Canadian officials declined to accept the subpoena.    ---   The U.S. issued a sharp reminder that it wanted Israelis involved in the case of American spy Jonathan Pollard brought to account. In Tel Aviv, the cabinet endorsed the findings of two panels that called on the government to take responsibility in the case, but Prime Minister Shamir said he didn't expect any ministers to resign.    ---   Morton Thiokol successfully staged a full-scale test of a space shuttle booster rocket, the first since last year's Challenger explosion. The booster was fitted with electrical heaters and other improvements to the O-ring seals. Failure of the rings was blamed for the shuttle tragedy. NASA has set the next shuttle flight for June 1988.    ---   An alliance was formed to oust President Chun's government as thousands of South Korean students boycotted classes to honor a dissident who died Jan. 14 in police custody. About 150 political, religious and human rights leaders met in a Seoul church to form the group, which called for massive action to end military dictatorship.    ---   Japanese police arrested two Toshiba Machine Co. executives for their alleged role in the illegal export to the Soviet Union of high-technology machine tools, which are believed to have helped Moscow design quieter submarines. The arrests came less than two weeks after Tokyo imposed trade curbs on Toshiba in connection with the exports.    ---   Australian Prime Minister Hawke called an election for July 11, about four months ahead of the scheduled end of his three-year term. Hawke, saying the election was needed on economic grounds, told Parliament that the 148-member House and the 76-seat Senate would be dissolved June 5.    ---   The Philippine Supreme Court refused to overturn recent congressional elections. The court ruled 13-1 that the center-right opposition failed to prove widespread fraud in the May 11 vote, which was won by a majority of candidates backed by President Aquino.    ---   Irish voters approved a package of political and economic measures meant to bring the 12 Common Market nations closer together. The final result of Tuesday's balloting showed 69.9% of Ireland's electorate in favor of the Single European Act.    ---   A car bomb seriously wounded a leader of Hezbollah, an Iranian-backed group, in Lebanon's southern port city of Sidon. Responsibility wasn't claimed, but hours later a bomb killed a child and wounded nine people in a building housing Syrian agents in the northern port of Tripoli.    ---   The White House is opposed to adding prescription-drug benefits to legislation on catastrophic illness for the elderly, Health and Human Services Secretary Bowen told a House panel. He said such a program would be too expensive.    ---   Sri Lanka said it was taking control of the northern part of the Jaffna Peninsula held by Hindu Tamil separatists. Colombo said 18 soldiers and 50 rebels were killed, and rebels said 200 civilians may have died in the fighting. The government said it was meeting with little resistance, but rebels said heavy fighting continued.    ---   The leader of Fiji's May 14 coup said it could be 16 months before elections are held, contradicting the governor-general, who pledged six months. Meanwhile, a trade ban by unions in Australia and New Zealand caused food shortages as the South Pacific nation searched for new suppliers. </TEXT></DOC>