<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880308-0113 </DOCNO><HL> Evangelical Schools in Growth, Catholic Schools in Decline </HL><AUTHOR> James Davison Hunter </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Gallup polls show that well over two-thirds of Americans favor instruction in the schools that deals with values and ethical behavior. One would think that such a broadly based conviction would stimulate a bull market for private religious education. But for the two largest religious traditions for which religiously based education has been a longstanding concern, the patterns are quite different.    Evangelical schools and enrollment, on the one hand, have grown at a prodigious rate in the past two decades. Since 1965, enrollment in non-Catholic religiously affiliated schools (of which Evangelical schools are the major share) has grown 149%, accounting for roughly 2.5 million students. The elementary and secondary schools educating these children number about 18,000.    Enrollments at Roman Catholic schools, by contrast, have shown a serious decline. Between 1965 and 1985 the number of Catholic elementary and secondary schools fell 28% and enrollments declined 54%. What makes these trends all the more dramatic is the fact that Catholics have grown from 25% of the U.S. population in 1970 to 29% in 1987.    The values that each tradition holds dear may differ, of course, but certainly Catholic parents are no less concerned about the moral content of their children's education than are Evangelical parents. What, then, would account for these contradictory trends?    The hypothesis that the growth in evangelical schools and school enrollments is born out of a desire to avoid busing and racially integrated schools doesn't bear up under scrutiny. Desegregation and mandatory busing were implemented in public policy many years before the explosion of growth in Evangelical schools. Besides, numerous studies have shown a steady and dramatic increase in racial toleration in these quarters.    The more plausible hypothesis about both the growth of Evangelical schools and the decline in Catholic schools is rooted in the cultural history of each group.    It is often thought that the primary purpose of American religious schools has been to serve the educational needs of their constituencies. But an even more important function of religious education has been to preserve the religious identity of the group -- to maintain the purity of the tradition for succeeding generations.    Through most of the 19th century, the moral ideology of public education was explicitly Protestant (and Evangelical) in character, making Evangelical schools unnecessary. Even through the early 1960s, the moral ethos of public schools was sufficiently Protestant as to not generate concern, even though Evangelicals had lost force and credibility as a religious movement.    But the social experimentation of the 1960s generated a trend of liberalization that put the Evangelicals on the defensive. Their vision of the world seemed to be facing unprecedented hostility. Evangelicals began pouring enormous energy into constructing and expanding a vast edifice of &quot;parallel institutions&quot; as a means of preserving their way of life and their vision of truth -- a publishing industry, political organizations, missionary and social outreach agencies and, not least, schools. In the view of most Evangelicals, as long as American society continues its moral tailspin, private Evangelical schools represent one of the only means by which to preserve their distinct religious identity in the next generation.    The Catholic experience has been fundamentally different. From the time of the mass immigration of Irish Catholics in the 1830s and of Southern and Eastern European Catholics in the late 19th century, Catholicism found itself a stranger in a strange-Protestant-land. The great Catholic schools of Philadelphia, New York, Boston and elsewhere provided havens for Catholics committed to preserving their ethnic and religious heritage. And it worked. Parochial education continued to expand with an expanding Catholic population.    Two significant trends, however, began in the early 1960s that contributed to the dilution of a more or less distinct American Catholic identity. The first is that traditionally urban, working-class Catholics began to experience tremendous social mobility. The number of Catholics attending college, for example, has more than doubled since World War II to a point that exceeds the national average. With that social mobility came a move from the cities and to the more wealthy and remote suburbs -- away from the communities and institutions earlier generations had built as a preserve for religious and ethnic life.    Because of the shifting demographic base, urban Catholic schools are less able to draw upon their historic constituency. (They have, however, been increasingly successful in attracting immigrant Hispanics, for the same sociological reasons that applied to earlier Catholic immigrants. While Hispanics constituted 7.1% of the population in 1985 compared with 4.4% in 1970, Hispanic youngsters made up 9.6% of Catholic school enrollment in 1985 compared with 5% in 1970.)    The second trend contributing to the dilution of Catholic identity began symbolically with Vatican II -- the liberalization of the Catholic religious experience. Catholic opinion became increasingly pluralized over the traditional landmarks of Catholic faith and practice -- the authoritative teachings of the church on marriage and divorce, abortion, birth control, homosexuality and the like. Thus, defining what it means to be Catholic has become increasingly difficult.    The consequence of both trends is that the thought, behavior and values of ordinary Catholics have come increasingly to resemble those shared by other Americans. Though their moral concerns have become less parochial, like those of most Americans they remain quite strong.    A pluralistic and secular America therefore has become a more comfortable place to live for the majority of Catholics. For most Evangelicals, however, it has become significantly more hostile. The private schools of each community reflect these changing realities.    Public schools also need to recognize changing realities. The growing demand for moral education by Americans of every religious stripe cannot be easily met while public education remains a government monopoly. At the very least, public education remains faced with the challenge of addressing with equity the pluralistic concerns of the American people.    ---   Mr. Hunter is an assistant professor of sociology at the University of Virginia and author of &quot;Evangelicalism: The Coming Generation&quot; (University of Chicago, 1987). </TEXT></DOC>