<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870521-0138 </DOCNO><HL> PromiscuityAnd AIDS: MoralOr Clinical Issue?---By Andrew Hacker</HL><DD> 05/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   The battle lines on AIDS are being drawn. One side sees it as retribution for &quot;random, repeated, anonymous sex.&quot; The other calls for funding research to find a preventive or a cure and talks of advertising condoms and teaching techniques of &quot;safe sex.&quot; And the inevitable reply: Rather than tell six-year-olds about sodomy, press the case for abstinence.    The way the debate is going, we are asked to choose between moral and clinical postures. Witness the split within the Reagan administration: the secretary of education vs. the surgeon general. I wish it were that easy. The more I listen and read, I find myself firmly on both sides.    To begin with, AIDS is an awful affliction, which may reach plague proportions. Even now it is claiming innocent victims: newborn babies and recipients of blood transfusions. It is only a matter of time before it becomes widespread among heterosexuals. One can support research without condoning certain kinds of conduct, simply for reasons of self-protection. Even if we have little sympathy for carriers of syphilis and gonorrhea, we want to cure those diseases. Which leads to my feeling that, in clinical and moral terms, AIDS may be sending us a message.    AIDS should remind us that ours is a hostile world. Nature has always harbored threats to human health, not least within the bodies of our fellow beings. If we wish to stay alive and well, prudence requires that we limit our intimate contact with other individuals. We don't come too close to people who are sneezing, use another person's toothbrush, or -- for that matter -- tailgate other drivers. And then there is sex. Here the lesson of AIDS is not new: Like all venereal diseases, it tells us that the more monogamous we are, the greater our odds of good health. Put another way: The more we pass ourselves around, the larger the likelihood of our picking something up.    Which brings us to the association of AIDS with homosexuality. And let's be frank on this score. Some who speak of &quot;retribution&quot; may actually welcome AIDS, since they see it as extirpating an outlook and behavior they regard as perverse. This happens not to be my view, if only because I am less sure about which modes of conduct come &quot;naturally&quot; to us.    Even so, the preponderance of homosexual victims brings us to another fact to be faced. There exists a group of homosexual men whose number of sexual partners has exceeded many times over those of heterosexual men and -- prostitutes apart -- homosexual or heterosexual women.    A Kinsey Institute survey, conducted several years ago, when AIDS was first incubating, found almost half of the homosexual men they studied had had at least 500 different partners up until the time they were studied. Even the relatively monogamous have been at risk, since many of their possible partners have had intimate contact with large numbers of people. Moreover, anal intercourse, more commonly practiced by homosexuals than heterosexuals, frequently leads to the rupturing of blood vessels, facilitating AIDS transmission.    Whether on clinical or moral grounds, it seems clear that promiscuity has its price. Even so, I am uneasy with that term. Taken literally, it can mean any form of conduct that is too casual, too frequent, or lacking in standards. It can apply to overeating, extending confidences, even television-watching. As part of the double standard, it has been used to intimidate women, warning them that &quot;too many&quot; partners can put a reputation in peril. And now promiscuity is being applied to those homosexual men whose &quot;random, repeated, anonymous sex&quot; has got them and others in trouble.    That said, I should add that almost a million cases of syphilis and gonorrhea are reported every year, the vast majority among heterosexuals. Moreover, to our best knowledge, AIDS first emerged, in Africa, among heterosexuals. And, as we all know, it is being transmitted via needles, by addicts who, once again, are mainly heterosexual. (Passing around needles bearing other people's blood is another example of promiscuity.) Nor is there anything inherent in homosexuality that leads to multiple partners, or frequenting bathhouses and bars.    Well, of course, we want a vaccine against AIDS. With people dying and others surely doomed, no one can humanely argue against such a campaign. At the same time, I hope some ancillary questions will be raised. Let us assume we can develop medicines able to do in an AIDS virus before it does any harm, indeed halt its emergence altogether. Will that mean we will go back to multiple partners and sharing bloodied needles?    So far as sex is concerned, something like that happened with the sexual revolution, which was largely a heterosexual affair. Birth-control pills played a part, as did the availability of abortion. But antibiotics also had a role, since they meant infected individuals could take a short respite and then pursue partners again. Insofar as we are seeking a penicillin for AIDS, will it become a license to again test the limits of human intermingling? If so, the toll next time may be even more severe.    Living species come and go. A species will survive only if its members acknowledge that they have a vulnerable frame. Indeed, nature is usually a step ahead of us: witness variants of gonorrhea that resist conventional treatment. Yet despite occasional setbacks, we deem ourselves superior to the bees and the beavers in our ability to control and cultivate nature. After all, we and not they invented research. The ancients had a word for this attitude: hubris.    My own suspicion -- moral as much as clinical -- is that too many of us have allowed ourselves too wide a range of sexual activity for our own good. Perhaps we will conquer AIDS. But even if we do, we should learn the lessons implicit in it. Otherwise, we may find ourselves confronting its successor.    ---   Mr. Hacker is a professor of political science at Queens College of the City University of New York. He has written widely on political and social topics. </TEXT></DOC>