<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880106-0154 </DOCNO><HL> Africa: False Images Of Ethiopian Famine </HL><AUTHOR> Robert D. Kaplan </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> AFRIC </CO><TEXT>   No country in this century has been so totally defined by the film medium as Ethiopia. It was born in our collective minds in 1935, with the sickening newsreel images of a white Italian fascist army brutalizing a primitive black African nation: tanks and poison gas vs. spears. But like all pictures of Ethiopia since, much was excluded: Many of those Italian soldiers were actually black, scimitar-wielding Eritreans for whom the colonialism of Benito Mussolini was preferable to that of the Amhara emperor, Haile Selassie. A half-century of Italian rule had at least brought modern development to Eritrea. Haile Selassie had brought only death. Better a colonial ruler in Rome than one right on your border.    After the British defeated the Italians in 1941, the Foreign Office in London, aware that millions of Eritreans and Tigreans yearned to be free of Amhara rule, debated whether even to allow Haile Selassie back from exile. But the emperor returned. In 1961, after Haile Selassie broke a United Nations-sponsored autonomy agreement for Eritrea, a rebellion erupted. The fighting has been going on ever since and, because the north of Ethiopia is an ecologically fragile zone, famine has become a fact of life.    Haile Selassie's chief tool for suppressing peasants of the north was not guns but feudalism. The young army officers who overthrew him in 1974 found that Marxism offered a better means of control. In place of feudal landlords, whose interests were similar -- but not always identical -- to those of the emperor, came peasant associations that owed their very existence to the government. Stalinist agricultural practices, employed as a weapon of domination, made the food situation worse.    The point of this review is not necessarily to let off the Eritreans, who have recently come under deservedly strong criticism for attacking two food convoys, but to demonstrate how famine in northern Ethiopia is part of something much broader and more complex than drought. What has been going on in northern Ethiopia is nothing less than one of Africa's last colonial wars: Unlike the British, the French and other European colonialists, the Ethiopian Amharas never have had to give up their colonies.    The Marxist potentate in Addis Ababa, Mengistu Haile Mariam, has proved to be an even more dedicated imperialist than Haile Selassie. Food is in the middle of this struggle. And because throughout this decade the war between the government and the guerrillas has, by and large, been reported from one side only, the surfeit of famine coverage has often been misleading. Try imagining a situation whereby almost every event in the Middle East was reported by Tel Aviv-based reporters, depending on Israeli sources and Western diplomats attached to Tel Aviv embassies who had spent little time in the Arab world.    To a limited extent, this is how the American press and networks have been covering the Ethiopian famine. (The British press has been more far more sensitive.) Although half of the Ethiopian famine victims were located in areas controlled by either Eritrean or Tigrean guerrillas -- accessible only to guerrilla-affiliated relief agencies -- only a small percentage of American journalists made the journey to guerrilla-held territory because the famine was more easily glimpsed on day trips from Addis Ababa.    In Addis Ababa, it has been safer for foreign relief workers to criticize the guerrillas and Western governments than to criticize the Mengistu regime. This is because Ethiopia, like South Africa, is an efficiently run police state. The Ethiopian regime, however, is a far more brutal one. Diplomats in Ethiopia have sometimes been prone to self-defeating relativism. They play up any positive-seeming government action, while de-emphasizing mass brutality. As for the Ethiopian officials of the Relief and Rehabilitation Commission, they are the vestiges of the emperor's powerless Western-educated elite, which the regime has always used to beg for food with one hand while it bombed villages in Eritrea and Tigre with the other.    Addis Ababa-based relief officials and Western diplomats, quoted in the Nov. 30 issue of Newsweek magazine, blamed the latest round of starvation on two elements: the weather and the Eritrean People's Liberation Front, or EPLF. Referring to convoy attacks, James R. Cheek, the U.S. charge d'affaires in Addis Ababa, said: &quot;From a humanitarian point of view, the guerrilla strategy is outrageous.&quot; Neither Mr. Cheek nor anyone else in the article made any reference to the Marxist government's own strategy, which has included price fixing, forced resettlement, the brutal collectivization of millions and spending half the entire budget on the war. The fact that for years Soviet MiG fighter jets have taken off from government bases and bombed anything that moved in guerrilla areas, including food convoys, was not noted.    The two recent EPLF attacks on clearly marked food convoys mark a shift in the group's policy. The guerrillas may have figured that there was little to gain from further cooperation with Western governments. Although the EPLF runs the most effective locally based famine-relief agency in Africa, aid to the civilian population it administers has usually lagged behind aid to people in government areas. Although the group's actions in the area under its control -- such as building dams, establishing health and agricultural extension services -- are exactly the things the U.S. Agency for International Development has been telling African governments to do for years, the EPLF is dismissed as &quot;Marxist.&quot; Nor has the group's fight against a Soviet-equipped and Soviet-advised army, which is larger than the one in Angola, attracted much sympathy.    There is a precedent for all this: the war 20 years ago between the Nigerian government and the rebels of Biafra. In a recently published book, &quot;The Brutality of Nations,&quot; Dan Jacobs documents how Western governments and international relief officials repeatedly shut their eyes to large-scale human-rights violations by Nigerian troops, while loudly condemning every single rebel infraction. Like the regime in Addis Ababa, the one in Lagos was a major Third World power with considerably more clout than the stateless guerrillas it fought.    The paucity of reporting on the guerrilla side indicates a deeper problem. The Ethiopian famine, more so than many foreign news stories, has been dominated by television. Television broke the story in the first place, and the very power of images of starving children intimidated many print reporters into spending too much of their time at emergency feeding camps. They packaged the famine as a relief issue. Striking out on their own to cover the historical processes of war, the rise of guerrilla movements, and the furthering of communism entailed focusing on images that were less in demand. So far, however, Americans are slaves to an image, this time of starvation, which like the one of Mussolini's soliders, excludes too much and explains too little.    ---   Mr. Kaplan, an Athens-based writer, has just completed a book on the African famine. </TEXT></DOC>