<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870814-0138 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas:Bank Nationalization Signals End of Peru's Spending Spree---By Felipe Ortiz de Zevallos</HL><DD> 08/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAMBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><DATELINE> LIMA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Last Friday, before a mass rally in support of his July 28 proposal to nationalize the Peruvian financial system, President Alan Garcia backed up a bit. In front of the crowd -- organized by his American Popular Revolutionary Alliance (APRA) party -- he announced the suspension of an administrative intervention, by which the government had attempted to replace the banks' directors with intervention committees (the supreme decree had already been suspended by a judge days before). And while defending the rationale behind his call for bank nationalizations during an Aug. 2 speech, Mr. Garcia nonetheless reiterated his faith in Peru's industrialists who have benefited from a yearlong consumer &quot;spending spree.&quot;    Indeed, until the announcement of the financial-services nationalization, Peru's business community had not been wholly critical of Mr. Garcia's heterodox economic policies. While Mr. Garcia's 1985 unilateral and partial default on the external debt certainly led to an increasing international isolation, lowering taxes and raising wages has put more money in people's pockets and led to significant growth and short-term gains for businessmen. But the announcement of the bank nationalization was a strong indication that the party is over.    Mr. Garcia's decision to limit the external debt service to 10% of exports provoked great public enthusiasm, and a mixture of apprehension and sympathy in local business circles. The increasing intervention of the state in productive activities -- imposing salary raises, price and exchange controls, increasing import licenses and quotas, temporarily suspending profit remittances abroad -- was considered by many entrepreneurs as a manageable cost in the midst of an internal boom that raised gross domestic product by more than 8% in 1986, while inflation was lowered from the previous three-digit level.    Of course, the ultimate cost of achieving this &quot;growth&quot; was that a surplus of $1 billion in the current account of the balance of payments in 1985 turned into a deficit of $320 million by 1986. Net international reserves are $700 million and are being lost at a rate of $100 million a month. Growth based on idle capacity is now out of oxygen -- GDP will increase 6% in 1987, but only because January's figures were 5% above the 1986 average -- and the fiscal deficit will add up this year to 12% of GDP. And, obviously, the country is short of savings.    In the beginning of this year, when central bank analysts called the attention of the government to some of these figures, the president and his official advisers accused the chairman of the central bank of mismanagement and fired him. Then two months ago, Luis Alva Castro resigned as prime minister, in a move that reflected both the exhaustion of the heterodox policies that had been followed and his political aspirations for the 1990 presidential elections.    When Mr. Alva, against the wishes of Mr. Garcia, was elected chairman of the house of deputies, our mercurial president felt outraged and in need of bold measures for recovering political initiative. Economic palliatives were promptly proposed to delay facing the fact that the economy is in urgent need of severe adjustment. They included ideas such as reducing interest rates to 5% per anum and a price freeze for all goods and services for 180 days. Manuel Romero, the current minister of industry, who may resign any day now, considered such proposals &quot;science fiction.&quot;    Finally came Mr. Garcia's State of the Nation speech, in which he announced the nationalization of all local banks, investment and insurance companies. Mr. Garcia knew he was playing with fire. He had publicly rejected such an idea as a candidate and in his 1986 State of the Nation speech. During the last months he had been courting local bankers and entrepreneurs to persuade them to reinvest all their profits in Peru. Carlos Franco -- a former ideologist of Gen. Juan Velasco's radical-left military government and Mr. Garcia's primary political adviser -- was resentful of such an approach. His main recommendation for the immediate future was to split Peruvians between poor and rich, expecting that with a proposal such as the bank nationalization, public opinion would again support Mr. Garcia by an 80% majority (as happened in his initial confrontation with international bankers.)    A division resulted from Mr. Garcia's announcement, but it didn't meet Mr. Franco's expectations. Local bankers fought back with the support of television and the press. The judiciary confirmed the right of financial institution owners to manage their companies until the projected law is passed by both the Peruvian house and senate. Bank employees went to the streets to support their employers' rights of ownership. And instead of an 80% block in favor of the nationalizations, the public was split 50-50; this split turned 40-60 against Mr. Garcia after one week of open public discussion. (These figures are based on polls made by my own firm and published in the Peruvian daily, El Comercio.) Most informal street vendors reject the nationalization and they don't believe in &quot;credit democratization by the state.&quot;    Not all the APRA leaders are in favor of nationalization, either. The house passed the bill yesterday morning, but the discussion in the senate -- where the APRA's absolute majority is thin -- may be another matter. Luis Alberto Sanchez, the 87-year-old vice president and the senate's senior member, has publicly announced that the bill could be &quot;approved or dismissed.&quot; The new prime minister, Guillermo Larco Cox, also a senator, has declared his concerns in private. The president, however, is rallying support in mass meetings and is willing to veto any compromise and make a deal with the Marxist left, in which case the bill would be approved. Mr. Garcia will definitely lose power to the extent that the senate amends his proposal. However, the fragile democratic system, in a country with a &quot;caudillo&quot; political culture, appears to be working.    Anything can happen in Peru in these coming months of increasing stagflation. Some believe the government increasingly will need to expropriate the means of production as the only way to make its ends meet, at least in the short term. Others feel that the political system, weak as it is, may be strong enough to guarantee strict respect of the constitution, which specifically mentions that private property can be expropiated only if it would benefit the &quot;social interest&quot; and, more concretely, if the property is fairly valued and paid for in cash. But even if these prerequisites are met, the business community has other worries. &quot;They don't have the right bureaucrats to run the machine,&quot; affirms one industrialist.    Solidarity of international bankers, unsurprisingly, seems quite thin. Representatives of the Credit Lyonnais, a French bank with interests in the local Banco de Lima, were privately negotiating compensation with the government and offering their services to the government for the management of the to-be nationalized banks.    ---   Mr. Ortiz de Zevallos is chairman of Apoyo, a consulting and publishing firm in Lima, Peru. </TEXT></DOC>