<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870806-0057 </DOCNO><HL> Northern Mystery:Supergiant or Midget?Chevron Alaska WellHas Oil Men Buzzing---The Company Isn't Talking,And Hole Could Be DryAs U.S. Dependence Rises---'No Smoking' Sign at KIC 1---By Frederick RoseStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CHV BP ARCPETROLEUM (PET)NATURAL GAS, PIPELINES (LNG) </IN><DATELINE> JAGO RIVER DELTA, Alaska  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Close to midnight near the top of the world, a half-dozen caribous are illuminated by a summer sun still hanging above the horizon. Nearby, a rusted five-foot pipe, its opening plugged with concrete, sticks out of the tundra. It represents what may be the last best hope the U.S. has to control an increasing and worrisome dependence on foreign oil.    Etched on the pipe are the words &quot;Chevron USA, KIC #1,&quot; the cryptic identification of the only wildcat well yet drilled in a piece of landscape thought most likely to hold the Big One -- not just a large field, not even just a so-called &quot;elephant&quot; field with a billion barrels of reserves, but a supergiant containing several billion barrels, a once-in-a-generation field like Prudhoe Bay 150 miles to the west.    Oil men generally agree that a supergiant has to be found if the U.S. hopes to keep its crude-oil imports, now above five million barrels a day, from soaring to even higher levels. While domestic demand for crude has stayed roughly level for years, domestic production has dipped sharply. What is worse, the monster field at Prudhoe Bay, which yields about 20% of all domestic oil, is showing the first ominous signs of old age. So the hunt for a new supergiant gains urgency by the day.    Rumors are flying all over the oil patch now, rumors that Chevron Corp. has found just such a deposit beneath KIC No. 1. (Chevron, the operator, has a half interest in the well; the other 50% is divided between Standard Oil Co. and its parent, British Petroleum Co.) But in an industry usually perforated by information leaks, the results of Chevron's drilling remain secret.    All that is certain is that the $50 million wildcat, completed and tested more than a year ago, was drilled to 15,193 feet and now is technically plugged and abandoned -- the usual designation for a dry hole. Chevron, however, has been careful not to say that it was dry, and the rumor mill keeps grinding out more speculation.    &quot;It's the tightest, most mysterious well that has ever been drilled,&quot; says Robert Wycoff, president of Atlantic Richfield Co., which found Prudhoe Bay along with Humble Oil andamp; Refining Co. Chevron Chairman George Keller says that only two of his company's directors know what lies under KIC 1 -- and, he claims, he isn't one of them.    Chevron isn't the only player holding the cards close to its vest. Marching eastward from Prudhoe Bay, just offshore in the Beaufort Sea, are wells drilled by Unocal Corp., Amoco Corp. and Shell Oil Co. All these, too, are &quot;tight holes,&quot; the industry's term for wildcats whose results are under wraps. Like Chevron's well, all are aimed at underground structures capable of harboring a huge deposit -- or of harboring nothing commercial at all.    Nothing much is what the industry has been finding, and the search for a new supergiant in the far north now has a hint of desperation to it. Oil men are here not just because the geology is promising, but also because they are running out of alternatives.    The structures that can hold such a big deposit are rare to begin with, and once they are located by geophysical investigation, there is no guarantee they will be anything more than so many empty buckets. Only drilling will tell, and disappointing drilling results in recent years have already reduced estimates of U.S. reserves of undiscovered oil and gas.    In the lower 48 and the waters around it, oil men producing in the Santa Maria basin off California, and in deeper waters in the Gulf of Mexico, see further promise in those areas. But they were also optimistic about the Baltimore Canyon off New Jersey, which was a dud. And the prospect of rich finds all along the Overthrust Belt, a geological feature running border to border through the western U.S., hasn't materialized either.    So the elephant hunters are being forced to the far northern oil frontier. &quot;If you're looking to replace production the size of Prudhoe's, clearly Alaska is it,&quot; says Richard Bray, who recently retired as an executive vice president of Standard Oil.    Even large parts of Alaska have had to be written off. Drilling in the Gulf of Alaska has yielded one failure after another, and more than 100 wells drilled in the Naval Petroleum Reserve west of Prudhoe Bay have been dry, too. Mukluk, the most expensive well ever drilled -- $140 million in drilling costs, $1.6 billion in acreage payments -- tested the Beaufort Sea northwest of Prudhoe in 1983, and failed miserably.    So, gradually and inexorably, the industry's best hopes have narrowed to the strip of coastal Alaska east of Prudhoe to the Canadian border, and to the part of the Beaufort Sea off that shore. KIC 1, presumably aimed at a huge underground structure beneath the Jago River delta, is smack in the middle of that strip.    But even if the well has tapped a supergiant, it may be impossible to exploit, for the barren but ecologically sensitive coastal plain here has become a battleground in a ferocious conflict between the oil industry and environmental groups. The area is part of the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, and it would take an act of Congress to permit large-scale drilling there.    Chevron was able to drill KIC 1 only because it made a lease deal with two Alaskan native corporations that hold surface and mineral rights to a small section of land that includes the drill site. That agreement, however, was limited to exploration in that small area; commercial-development drilling anywhere within the refuge is still forbidden.    Siding with the oil industry, Interior Secretary Donald Hodel recommended to Congress in April that it open the strip to oil development. Interior has also been trying to make land swaps with the oil industry that would achieve at least part of that goal. But the environmental movement, which retains strong political clout, is fighting fang and claw to keep Big Oil out. &quot;Places like the refuge are the last places we should drill,&quot; says Robert Adler, executive director of the Trustees for Alaska, a law firm that represents opponents of development in the state.    So Chevron and the others sit tight, guarding the data gleaned from their first probes against the day when -- and if -- Congress acts and the rights to drill are auctioned off.    While they wait, west of the Jago River one of the most valuable single resource assets of the U.S. is poised on the lip of decline. Discovered in 1968 and put into production a decade later, the great field at Prudhoe Bay is peaking. Prudhoe and an associated field, Kuparuk, are still shipping about 1.8 million barrels of crude a day, by pipeline and tanker, to the thirsty lower 48. But the effort needed to maintain production is growing, and slippage is coming soon. Prudhoe's recoverable reserves, almost 10 billion barrels initially, are half gone.    At drill site 16, operator Charles Dunham mutters as he taps requests into a computer that displays a maze of colored numbers, names and interconnected lines -- data on the 24 wells he controls, each, he says, with a personality of its own. Thousands of feet below, in a formation akin to a vast, stiff sponge partly filled with honey, oil oozes reluctantly from porous sandstone toward the producing wells.    Water and natural gas must be injected into the 250-square-mile field to help the honey move out of the sponge. Solvents, too, are injected, in effect dry-cleaning the formations. Both Arco and Standard Oil, co-operators of Prudhoe Bay, have multibillion-dollar plans to improve recovery and tap strata within the field that haven't been fully exploited yet. But all these measures would only delay the inevitable.    Production is already fading at the fringes of the formation, and gas pressure is dropping across the field. Alaska's Natural Resources Department predicts that production will begin to drop starting in 1989, and that six years after that, Prudhoe will be yielding only 40% what it does today. &quot;There's no way that anyone can completely offset the drop. New fields will have to be found,&quot; says C.V. &quot;Chat&quot; Chatterton, chairman of the Alaska Oil and Gas Conservation Commission.    The importance of Prudhoe Bay's looming decline is magnified by weakening production that has already affected the rest of the U.S. oil patch. In 1986 many high-cost or marginal wells were shut down, helping drive total U.S. output down by a whopping 800,000 barrels a day -- almost 10% of previous annual production -- in barely a year.    Low oil prices accounted for the drop, and they have risen this year. But no price increase can draw from the ground oil that simply isn't there, and many analysts and oil men now believe that the domestic industry is at the beginning of a resource decline from which no escape is likely soon. Michael Smolinski, director of world oil services for Data Resources Inc., a Lexington, Mass.-based economic consulting firm, estimates that by the year 2000, the U.S. will be importing more than twice as much crude oil and refined products as it does now to compensate for fading domestic production.    The analysts note that most of the nation's likely oil prospects have already been explored and, if productive, developed. Existing fields are playing out, too, and many have been kept producing only by costly enhanced-recovery programs. Robert Kaufman, senior economist at Wharton Econometrics, says: &quot;This only means that when production does fall in these fields, it will fall a lot faster.&quot;    A long string of average to merely large discoveries would have to be made in order to improve the industry's outlook -- but only one or two new supergiants would have the same effect, which is why Chevron and others are willing to collectively spend billions exploring Alaska.    Everyone is still trying to figure out what Chevron discovered, if anything, and the company's secretiveness has only inflamed speculation. When crews first showed up in the Eskimo hamlet of Kaktovik, they didn't talk much and they didn't stay long. Moving 15 miles east, they built a runway on the ice for heavy cargo planes that brought in 12,000 tons of equipment for the well, which was built on a special base of wood and Styrofoam designed to preserve the tundra.    Kaktovik residents saw rig lights glowing, but no one saw the flare-off of natural gas under high pressure that usually accompanies a hopeful test. Still, village rumor has it that high pressure was encountered under KIC 1, and that geologists were heard saying excitedly, &quot;It's all over here.&quot;    Nobody really knows. &quot;They never told us anything,&quot; complains Archie Brower, president of Kaktovik Inupiat Corp. (that's what KIC stands for), one of the two native corporations that granted Chevron the lease. But hope springs eternal. Mr. Brower visited the well site a few months ago and says: &quot;They had a big 'No Smoking' sign by the well. Now, you don't need a 'No Smoking' sign around a dry hole, do you?&quot; </TEXT></DOC>