<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861203-0034 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> STOCK INDEXES (NDX)PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD) </IN><TEXT>   Stock-index futures prices closed sharply higher as the rally that began late Monday gathered momentum and helped propel the Dow Jones Industrial Average to a record.    Analysts differed over whether the stock-index rally will continue or whether it may be poised for at least a temporary reversal.    Arbitrage-related trading based on price discrepancies between index futures and the underlying stocks fueled the explosive rally, analysts said. A strong bond futures market also buoyed stock-index futures.    The Standard andamp; Poor's 500 stock-index futures contract for December delivery closed up 3.45 at 254.50, nearly nine points above its intraday low Monday. While the Dow Jones Industrial Average closed at a record 1955.57, the Sandamp;P contract fell short of its record.    Arbitrage-related trading rocked the market from the opening bell as the Sandamp;P futures contract traded at nearly a 200-point premium to the underlying stock index. Traders at securities firms and financial institutions sold the stock-index futures, which currently have a theoretical value of only about 25 points over the cash index of stocks, and bought the underlying stocks.    The futures and the stock index itself are considered equivalent investments because the futures contract will expire at the same price as the stock index Dec. 19. Arbitrage traders sell the more over-priced of the two, and buy the relatively cheaper investment, to lock in a profit.    Arbitrage selling of the futures narrowed their premium over the stock index at times during the day, but the surge of buying interest that fueled the rally initially continued to drive futures prices higher, analysts said.    &quot;Monday was mostly short-covering (or buying back contracts that had been sold earlier), but there was a lot of new buying coming in today,&quot; said Alan Bush, an analyst with A.G. Edwards andamp; Sons Inc. in Chicago.    Gerald Walsh, an analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., said, &quot;People didn't believe the market would do what it did today, but now they've thrown in the towel&quot; and bought stocks or stock-index futures.    Treasury bond futures closed higher as well on expectations of lower interest rates early next year, said J.R. Fredericks, an analyst with E. David Stephens, an affiliate of G.H. Miller andamp; Co. in Chicago. The stock-index futures rally tracked the strength in the bond futures market, receiving an added boost when the bond futures closed at their highs for the day, he said.    Several analysts said that they expected the rally's momentum to continue at least into today. But Mr. Walsh noted some warning signs that may indicate yesterday was an interim market peak.    He noted that the Major Market Index stock-index future based on 20 blue-chip stocks, while also rallying strongly, actually closed at a slight discount to the underlying stocks. The Major Market Index futures contract starts trading on the Chicago Board of Trade 15 minutes before the New York Stock Exchange opens. If the discount widens in the first few minutes of trading, &quot;people could jump on that and say the market is due for a break,&quot; Mr. Walsh warned.    In other futures markets yesterday:    LIVESTOCK AND MEATS: Cattle futures prices were mixed. The December contract, which had its first delivery date yesterday, showed the most strength as it continued trading at a discount to cash prices, analysts said. Futures and cash prices tend to converge at the delivery date. Tightness in the supply of cattle ready for market also pushed the December contract higher, analysts said. Most pork belly and hog futures were higher. Hog prices rose on fears that bad weather will limit the movement of animals to slaughter, analysts said.    PRECIOUS METALS: Platinum, gold and silver contracts plunged amid profit-taking from recent rallies, traders and analysts said. The metals markets are &quot;tired and weak and overbought,&quot; said Richard Maseri, senior trader for Private Securities Corp., Miami. Producer selling helped push prices lower, traders and analysts added. &quot;Everytime the markets show some strength, producers come in and sell, and that attitude is discouraging,&quot; said one trader in New York. And many market analysts expect further price weakness in the coming weeks and months. William O'Neill, research director for Elders Futures Inc., New York, expects gold prices, for example, to fall to as low as $320 to $340 an ounce by the end of next year's first quarter. Other traders and analysts, while not as pessimistic, don't expect any strong rallies soon. &quot;There's a better chance of testing new lows before going over $400&quot; an ounce, said one commission-house trader in New York. However, some market watchers continue to forecast higher prices. Craig Rhyne, president of Rhyne Precious Metals Inc., Seattle, contends that metals prices will rise as the nation's money supply increases. Mr. Rhyne says gold prices will soar to $475 by year's end. December gold contracts on the Commodity Exchange in New York yesterday closed at $389.30, down $4.50 an ounce.    COFFEE: Futures prices closed higher. Roasters for the first time in weeks showed some buying interest in green beans, which stimulated some buying of futures, analysts said. There were wire service reports that seven Latin American coffee-producing nations have moved to reduce exports in the current quarter and the first quarter of next year to try to trim the supplies overhanging the market, trade sources said. At a two-day meeting in Bogota, Colombia, that ended yesterday, the nations reportedly agreed that their shipments shouldn't exceed 11.8 million bags during this quarter and 15.7 million bags during the 1987 first quarter, trade sources said. This is down from 15.7 million bags and 16.3 million bags, respectively, in the year-earlier periods. A bag weighs 132 pounds. Trade sources noted, however, that the year-earlier figures were inflated and not really comparable because prices then were rising and there were heavy exports just prior to the suspension of International Coffee Agreement export quotas early this year. Trade sources were puzzled and skeptical about the the export reduction plan's application of the quotas for all producing members of the ICO. &quot;How can seven countries speak for all 51 producers when Robusta and other Arabica producers weren't represented at the meetings?&quot; asked one dealer. He also noted that this is a totally voluntary action, with no controls or policing. &quot;Will these countries, who are dying for dollars, really hold back shipments?&quot; he asked. </TEXT></DOC>