<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880906-0011 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   BUSH AND DUKAKIS SPARRED on the fall campaign's traditional opening day.    The Democratic presidential candidate, struggling to regain the initiative from his rival, appeared at a Labor Day rally in Detroit and pledged to bring &quot;prosperity . . . to every home in every neighborhood in America.&quot; In San Diego, the Republican candidate painted a much rosier picture of the economy and attacked Dukakis's knowledge of defense issues, saying he wouldn't be surprised if his rival thought a naval exercise &quot;is something you find in Jane Fonda's workout book.&quot;    The campaign is shaping up as one short on substance and long on harsh rhetoric as both sides zero in on the same critical states and swing voters.    ---   Moscow charged the U.S. with shipping arms directly to Afghan rebels in violation of recent Geneva accords on the conflict in Afghanistan. A spokesman for the foreign ministry didn't elaborate on how the direct shipments to the rebels were made. Moscow also denied that Afghan jets bombed a settlement in Pakistan last week.    ---   The Air Force launched an aging Titan missile that was believed to be carrying a set of Navy spy satellites. The successful launch of the rocket, a converted nuclear missile, from a base in California followed a similar attempt Friday in Florida. That rocket's final stage failed to ignite and its spy-satellite payload was rendered useless.    ---   Brezhnev's son-in-law went on trial in Moscow on charges of taking $1 million in bribes. Yuri Churbanov, a former first deputy interior minister, could be sentenced to death by firing squad if convicted. The case is part of Soviet leader Gorbachev's drive to expose cronyism and corruption under the regime of the late Communist Party chief.    ---   Burmese opposition leaders paid tribute to those killed in 26 years of one-party rule during a demonstration by more than 50,000 in Rangoon. Students called for strikes and mass protests in support of their call for an interim government, and set a deadline of Wednesday for President Maung Maung's government to accede to their demands.    ---   A South Korean court sentenced the brother of former President Chun to seven years in prison and a $4.4 million fine in what was viewed as a verdict on corruption in Chun's government. Chun Kyung Hwan, who ran a government-supported agency, was convicted on bribery, embezzlement, influence-peddling and tax-evasion charges.    ---   Walesa defended his efforts to end Poland's worst wave of strikes in seven years as the only chance to win legalization for the banned Solidarity trade union. The Solidarity leader also said Sunday he wouldn't tolerate wildcat strikes. Solidarity activists, however, promised more strikes if talks with the government aren't successful.    ---   The U.S. postponed the scheduled departure of the USS Vincennes from the Persian Gulf region, citing diplomatic concerns. The cruiser, which shot down an Iran Air jetliner with 290 aboard July 3, was scheduled to sail for its home port of San Diego Sunday. Separately, France said it is cutting back its fleet in the gulf region.    ---   Chile's Pinochet said he was confident of victory in next month's presidential plebiscite, which could extend his rule for eight years. His comments came after a massive anti-government demonstration in Santiago Sunday. Police made 262 arrests during the march by more than 100,000 people, the largest since Pinochet seized power in 1973.    ---   Sixteen Israelis were arrested on suspicion of taking part in a scheme to free soldiers from mandatory service in exchange for bribes, the army said. Military officials said the ring, which included senior officers, was suspected of releasing as many as 60 conscripts and reservists from service. Officials said more arrests are expected.    ---   Singapore's Lee Kuan Yew said Saturday's parliamentary elections, in which the ruling People's Action Party won all but one of 81 seats, finished the transition to a new generation of party leaders headed by Deputy Prime Minister Goh Chok Tong. Lee has pledged to give up the premiership, but has given no exact date.    ---   Brazil completed work on its new constitution, which opens the way for a final transition to democracy. It is to be promulgated Oct. 5 and will replace the 1969 constitution of the former military regime. The document, completed late last week, is politically liberal but broadly nationalistic and populist in economic matters. </TEXT></DOC>