<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880407-0026 </DOCNO><HL> Panamanians Worry About What May Follow Noriega --- Political Leadership has Atrophied Under Years of Military Stranglehold </HL><AUTHOR> Charles McCoy (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><DATELINE> PANAMA CITY, Panama  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Sooner or later, Gen. Manuel Noriega will have to leave this beaten-down country. Then, Panama's troubles may really begin.    As difficult as dislodging the general is proving, many diplomats and prominent Panamanians believe transforming Panama into a stable, civilian-run democracy may be even harder. For many reasons -- ranging from the military's stranglehold on Panamanian life to atrophied political leadership -- many observers fear Panama might rid itself of dictatorship only to slide into a torpor that sows the seeds for dictatorship's eventual return.    &quot;Gen. Noriega has done something that always seemed impossible,&quot; says one European diplomat in Panama City. &quot;He has united Panamanians. They all hate him. But once he's gone, the unity disappears. Panama is back to being Panama again -- except it will be broke.&quot;    For the moment, the general continues to hang tough, having survived strikes, street disturbances, a coup attempt and U.S. efforts to cut off the government's finances. In fact, many Panamanians believe that the economic pressure hurts them more than it does the general, and that the only way he will leave is the way he himself predicted weeks ago: dead.    U.S. policy makers are split over how much more to pressure Gen. Noriega, but diplomats here think the only sure way to remove him -- sending U.S. troops or intelligence operatives to kidnap or kill him, as some State Department officials reportedly have urged -- would cause more problems than it would solve.    All the howling over the general's fate has distracted attention from the mess he would leave behind. It starts with the Panamanian Defense Forces, the 15,000-man security force headed by the general and his cronies. Apart from a politically feeble Roman Catholic church, the force is essentially the country's only institution. It is the army, the police, the immigration authority, the customs office, the prison system. Its political party, controlled by the general, holds 34 of the legislature's 67 seats; the next largest party holds only 13. Some political experts think the military-party's patronage system might even enable it to win a post-Noriega election.    The general's nominees also dominate the judicial system from the Supreme Court down. That means any efforts to clean out the military by prosecuting officers for complicity in the general's alleged drug-dealing and other schemes would likely fail. Opposition figures have identified about 10 high-level officers they believe engage in crimes ranging from peddling drugs to selling visas. They might be able to leave Panama with the general, but there are hundreds of other lower-ranking officers involved in graft that might be impossible to root out.    &quot;Everybody on the Supreme Court will have to go first,&quot; says Roberto Eisenmann, an opposition businessman who lives in Miami. An opposition political leader adds: &quot;We can't go after these guys in the courts, and not being able to will be very unpopular politically.&quot;    Gen. Noriega has been purging the defense forces since the bungled coup three weeks ago, promoting more than 100 loyalists into top positions and making post-Noriega reform even more troublesome. Beyond that, Mr. Eisenmann and other opposition figures believe the defense forces should be an elite group of about 2,000; right now, the defense forces' 15,000 troops are largely poor, less-educated men who mightn't find other work easily. &quot;These guys have had all sorts of privileges as soldiers and they aren't going to happily walk away to go live in the slums,&quot; says a Panamanian government official.    In truth, neither the U.S. government nor the opposition knows how to get the army back in the barracks. State Department spokesmen have repeatedly said the U.S. wants to preserve the &quot;integrity&quot; of the forces; most Panamanian opposition leaders argue for a complete revamp. Some of the opposition's notions appear outlandishly optimistic. Opposition newspaper editor Ruben Carles contends Panama need do no more than establish an incorruptible, efficient civilian government. Then, &quot;the military will follow the government's example. It's as simple as that.&quot;    By that logic, restoring the economy should be a breeze, too. Opposition economists estimate that Panama needs about $1.5 billion to repair the damage done by U.S. economic sanctions and the four-week shutdown of Panama's banks. They expect the U.S. to fork over a lot of that cash, an iffy bet. &quot;I'm not sure what the Panamanian opposition has been smoking, but I doubt very seriously whether the U.S. Congress will cough up that kind of money,&quot; says Ambler Moss, a former U.S. ambassador to Panama.    Some foreign bankers think it may take years, even with generous infusions, to rejuvenate Panama's economy, until recently probably the strongest and most modern in Latin America. Panama's banking-secrecy laws -- and the protection of Gen. Noriega -- had made Panama a haven for drug profits and other hot money. But about $16 billion of deposits is estimated to have fled in the past 10 months, and much of it isn't likely to come back. &quot;Believe me, the last thing these depositors want to see is a reform government in Panama,&quot; says one American banker. &quot;A lot of that money is in the Bahamas to stay.&quot;    Perhaps the biggest obstacle to rebuilding Panama is a lack of builders. The economy aside, 20 years of military rule and long reliance on the U.S. and the Panama Canal have left Panama among Latin America's most politically underdeveloped nations. Its parties are fragmented, its leaders drab, and political experts fear petty infighting would engulf any post-Noriega government.    &quot;None of the opposition political figures here strikes one as having the charisma and the savvy to hold this place together and do what will have to be done,&quot; says a European diplomat.    From among the few Panamanians with claims on the presidency, the U.S. backs Eric Arturo Delvalle, who is likely to head any transition government. But he is held in contempt by most Panamanians because he served obediently as the general's president for two years before trying to dismiss him in February. He was dismissed himself and has been in hiding.    Mr. Delvalle is said to be dispirited and contemplating giving up the fight. A pivotal opposition party led by 86-year-old Arnulfo Arias, who is widely believed to have actually won a fraud-riddled 1984 election awarded to the general's man, now says it won't cooperate with any government involving Mr. Delvalle. Other opposition figures say they would work with him but they can barely disguise their scorn. &quot;We are willing to give Mr. Delvalle our help,&quot; says Roberto Arias Calderon, the leader of the Christian Democrat Party. &quot;And believe me, there is perhaps no one who needs our help as much as Mr. Delvalle.&quot;    Then there is Mr. Arias. He has been elected president of Panama five times since 1940 but because of coups and vote fraud has never completed a term. Mr. Arias won't shake hands with visitors for fear of contracting acquired immune deficiency syndrome, or AIDS. Years ago, he suggested deporting Chinese and West Indians to preserve Panama's bloodlines.    Yet even at 86 he is considered the country's most dynamic political figure. &quot;He's the only guy who could show up in the plaza and draw a crowd of 75,000 people,&quot; says one Latin diplomat. Mr. Eisenmann, the opposition businessman, says &quot;Arnulfo isn't the solution, but there isn't any solution without Arnulfo.&quot;    Says an opposition businessman: &quot;When you're counting on old men to remake your country, you've got serious problems.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>