<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870102-0005 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 01/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   POLICE IN PUERTO RICO SUSPECT arson as the cause of a hotel fire.    As rescue crews recovered the bodies of 60 people killed in the New Year's Eve fire and explosions that swept San Juan's Dupont Plaza Hotel, Puerto Rico's governor said investigators were trying to determine if the fire was set. He said the possibility of arson could be linked to a labor dispute between the beachfront hotel's management and a union representing about half its employees. Union officials denied any involvement. As many as 100 people were feared killed. More than 100 others were injured.    The 20-story hotel has a capacity of 800 guests and was fully booked. Relief workers handed out clothes and other supplies to hundreds of survivors.    ---   A former CIA officer is emerging as a behind-the-scenes figure in covert National Security Council staff operations, including some aspects of the Iran affair. Intelligence sources said Thomas Clines aided Lt. Col. North in an effort to free hostages in Lebanon, and testimony in a federal civil suit linked him to the NSC.    ---   Chinese officials freed 11 students detained during a pro-democracy rally at Peking's Tiananmen Square after about 5,000 demonstrators defied a ban and staged a march to demand the release. The demonstrators claimed that 13 others had been detained, but there wasn't any official information about their fate.    ---   The Reagan administration will propose an expansion of a student loan program in which borrowers repay the full cost of their loans on schedules that vary according to incomes. The program, currently a $5 million project at 10 colleges, would get more than $600 million under a budget request for fiscal 1988.    ---   Botha has announced an election for South Africa's white chamber of parliament later this year, and called on his countrymen to unite and rally around the government in the face of strong international pressure, particularly from the U.S. Botha said he will give the date for the election later this month.    ---   France's railway strike continued despite efforts by President Mitterrand and management's withdrawal Wednesday of a disputed pay structure that based wage increases more on merit than seniority. Officials said the state-owned national rail system was operating on a limited basis as the unions voted against resuming work.    ---   Afghan leader Najibullah announced a cease-fire beginning Jan. 15 in the war with Afghanistan's Moslem guerrillas. The offer was rejected by the main Pakistan-backed rebel alliance. Najibullah also announced an amnesty for political prisoners and said the truce should be followed by peace negotiations, Kabul Radio reported.    ---   Chilean President Pinochet said the four-month-old state of siege in Santiago and two other areas will end Tuesday. The military leader also said that &quot;most&quot; of the 3,500 Chileans banished for political reasons after Chile's 1973 army coup would be allowed to return, probably within three months.    ---   An Iranian official said a &quot;unilateral and abrupt&quot; decision by the U.S. caused the suspension Wednesday of talks in The Hague on the return to Tehran of $500 million of assets frozen after the shah's fall. The U.S. said progress was made during the talks this week, and both sides said that further meetings are planned. A date hasn't been set.    ---   Reagan praised U.N. budget changes that give industrialized nations a larger say in allocations, and a U.N. spokesman quoted the president as pledging to seek an end to cuts in U.S. contributions to the world body. In 1986, Congress authorized only $100 million of the $210 million of U.S. dues.    ---   Marcos accused the U.S. of &quot;practically kidnapping&quot; him last February and said Washington should stop meddling in Philippine affairs. In Manila, police and hospital officials said 13 people were killed and nearly 1,500 others were injured in New Year's Day violence.    ---   Moscow's Central Radio broadcast Reagan's New Year's message to the Soviet people, a day after interference was reported as Voice of America carried the address. The president cited progress in U.S. arms-control talks in Geneva. Gorbachev, in contrast, said in a year-end interview that the talks were &quot;fruitless and inert.&quot;    ---   New York's Cardinal O'Connor issued an apology in Jerusalem for canceling meetings with Israeli leaders. The Roman Catholic prelate, who met with Jerusalem's mayor, also issued an indirect call to Israel to recognize Palestinian rights to a homeland and urged an end to terrorism.    ---   Two explosions demolished a five-story luxury apartment building near the U.S. Embassy in Dublin, killing at least two people. Police said the cause of the blasts wasn't known, but a gas leak was considered the most likely possibility.    ---   Died: Edwin J. Thomas, 87, former chairman of Goodyear Tire andamp; Rubber Co., Tuesday, in Akron, Ohio. </TEXT></DOC>