<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870325-0023 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 03/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE EAST BLOC CALLED Shultz's planned Moscow trip an arms-control test.    Warsaw Pact foreign ministers, who endorsed Gorbachev's proposal to eliminate U.S. and Soviet medium-range missiles from Europe, said next month's visit to Moscow by the secretary of state would be a way to judge Washington's seriousness about an arms accord. In Washington, Weinberger warned that Moscow plans to deploy by the 1990s new generations of nuclear missiles, bombers and helicopters to gain military superiority over the U.S. and its allies.    A U.S. arms-control official urged Congress against passing legislation that would limit the administration's ability at the Geneva arms talks.    ---   IRAN SAID a U.S. attack in the Persian Gulf would endanger all Americans.    Parliamentary speaker Rafsanjani, responding to U.S. warnings that it will keep the gulf open to shipping despite the placement of Tehran's new missile batteries, said Iran would close the entrance to the Strait of Hormuz with artillery. He said any military intervention by the U.S. in the gulf, a battleground in the Iran-Iraq war, would result in &quot;insecurity for Americans around the world.&quot; The Pentagon recently bolstered U.S. naval presence in the region.    Pentagon officials disclosed that the U.S. Navy was prepared to escort Kuwaiti tankers, which have been frequent targets in the Persian Gulf conflict.    ---   A British security firm has become embroiled in the Iran-Contra affair. A chart found in NSC files indicates that KMS Ltd., which has ties to the Thatcher government, was part of a private network that assisted Nicaraguan rebels during a two-year period when Congress had prohibited U.S. military aid.    ---   Yugoslavia's premier defended Belgrade's anti-inflation policies, but confirmed that the government would back away from a wage freeze that has prompted widespread labor unrest. The announcement by Branko Mikulic came a day after the government said it would roll back price increases on consumer goods.    ---   The Supreme Court lifted an injunction that has held up further exploration for oil and gas off the coast of Alaska. The justices rejected a federal appeals court's ruling that a request for a court order to stop an environmental risk should get special treatment because it involves &quot;unusual circumstances.&quot;    ---   The Marine Corps has arrested a second former guard at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow on suspicion of espionage. Officials said the arrest of the former guard, whose identity wasn't disclosed, was a result of a continuing inquiry of Sgt. Clayton Lonetree, who was arrested in December for spying.    ---   Brazil named Anibal Teixeira, a politician with scant economic experience, as planning minister, succeeding Joao Sayad, who resigned last week. Meanwhile, Brazil's central bank asked foreign bank creditors for a 60-day extension on the country's $15 billion of short-term financing that falls due next Tuesday.    ---   Italy's Justice Ministry said it soon will request the extradition of American-born Archbishop Paul Marcinkus and two other Vatican bank officials to stand trial on charges related to the 1982 collapse of Banco Ambrosiano. Meanwhile, Premier-designate Andreotti is expected today to abandon his efforts to form a new coalition.    ---   India's ruling party was defeated in one of three state assembly elections. Returns from Monday's balloting showed that Prime Minister Gandhi's Congress (I) Party lost to Marxist coalitions in Kerala state and was trailing in West Bengal. Gandhi's party was expected to win in Kashmir.    An Indian rocket crashed into the Bay of Bengal minutes after lifting off in an attempt to place a satellite into orbit. It was the third failure in New Delhi's five attempts to launch a satellite.    ---   Moscow has reduced its diplomatic representation at the U.N. to 187 people, well below the limit of 221 people established by the U.S. last October, Soviet officials said. The State Department, citing the &quot;unreasonable size&quot; of the three Soviet missions and the &quot;threat to U.S. national security,&quot; had ordered the reductions by April 1.    ---   Moslem kidnappers said an &quot;execution sentence&quot; for a Frenchman held hostage in Lebanon hadn't been canceled or delayed, reversing Monday's videotaped statement by the captive. In Jerusalem, Prime Minister Shamir rejected an offer by Lebanese kidnappers to trade an American hostage for 100 Arabs imprisoned in Israel.    ---   Retired Gen. Haig formally declared his candidacy for the 1988 GOP presidential nomination. Conceding that he is a long-shot to succeed Reagan, Haig emphasized his experience as a former secretary of state, White House chief of staff and allied commander of NATO.    ---   The Labor Department charged Utah Power andamp; Light Co. and Emery Mining Corp. with 34 violations of federal mine-safety regulations, which were found during an investigation of a 1984 coal-mine fire that killed 27 miners. The department said nine of the citations contributed to the fire at the Wilberg Mine near Orangeville, Utah.    ---   Israeli Foreign Minister Peres met with 15 Palestinians from the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip for talks on Mideast peace prospects. The meeting was aimed at finding Palestinian representatives to participate in direct peace talks.    ---   Ireland's Haughey formally abandoned pledges to renegotiate the Anglo-Irish accord on Northern Ireland. While he had voiced opposition to the pact, the prime minister told Parliament that he would &quot;fulfill and operate&quot; the agreement, which gives Dublin a role in Ulster's affairs.    ---   The Ecuadoran government ordered schools closed for three days and police arrested four union leaders on the eve of a planned nationwide strike over gas price increases imposed after a series of earthquakes earlier this month. The temblors destroyed a pipeline and cut off oil exports.    ---   As many as 16,000 residents fled their homes in Nanticoke, Pa., as a fire at a metal-processing plant spewed a cloud of sulfuric acid and other chemicals over the northeastern Pennsylvania coal town. There weren't any serious injuries. </TEXT></DOC>