<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870721-0113 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Subpoena Mike Ledeen!</HL><DD> 07/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM FRESTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   We suppose it's only human that after Ollie North stole their show, members of the Iran-Contra committee just want to go home. The president is not going to fall, and there's even talk of presidential pardons to put special prosecutor Lawrence Walsh out of his misery. Still, in apparently shortening its witness listand in particular dropping testimony by Michael Ledeen on the Iran initiative -- the committee is losing its grip on the pretense that it is a fact-finding body and not merely a Ronald Reagan lynching party.    Skeptics already are suggesting that the committee's motives are purely political. &quot;The conceit of the Iran-Contra committee is that it is simply an investigative body,&quot; writes Charles Krauthammer of the Washington Post and The New Republic. The hearings, he adds, &quot;are not about facts. They are designed to advance the interests of one political party or one branch of government against another. Nothing wrong with that. The struggle for power is the essence of politics. The only thing wrong is the Sergeant Friday pose and the contention that a show trial is really a factfinding mission.&quot;    Certainly investigators wanting to make a public record would hear Mr. Ledeen, who already has spent hours over the past months being deposed by committee staffers on his role as the first American involved in the Iran part of the Iran-Contra affair. There is a fairness issue; Mr. Ledeen was accused during the hearing of profiting from the arms sales, which he flatly denies. Lawyers for the panel may not have found anything to prosecute Mr. Ledeen for, but wouldn't Congress like to know more about the Iran initiative? Wasn't that its job? Mr. Ledeen can describe how and why over his objections the strategic opening became arms-for-hostages.    Mike Ledeen is not a government official, arms dealer or retired general. He is the author of nine books, including one on the fall of the shah, and runs a counterterrorism consulting business. He was special adviser to Secretary of State Haig. From 1982 through 1986, Mr. Ledeen was a per diem consultant to the Pentagon and National Security Council. In May 1985, NSC Adviser Bud McFarlane tasked Mr. Ledeen with finding out what was going on in Iran.    The NSC turned to Mr. Ledeen because our human intelligence in Iran is basically nonexistent. Israel still has sources in Tehran. Since Mr. Ledeen specializes in pro-Western members of the Socialist International, Mr. McFarlane asked him to contact then Israeli Prime Minister Shimon Peres. Mr. Peres agreed to share Iran intelligence, and suggested that Mr. Ledeen get in touch with Manucher Ghorbanifar. Mr. Ghorbanifar has emerged as perhaps the shadowiest figure of the hearings, which Mr. Ledeen considers something of a bum rap. He is an Iranian businessman once jailed by the ayatollah who became an intermediary to the mullahs. Then there is the enticing &quot;Second Channel,&quot; a relative of Hashemi Rafsanjani, speaker of the Iranian Parliament.    The opening statement Mr. Ledeen filed with the panel makes interesting reading. &quot;The United States must find a way to develop and conduct a coherent strategy with regard to Iran. I believe that the original initiative was wise and necessary, and held considerable promise. It was overwhelmed by the emotionally charged matter of the hostages. . . . I felt that we needed to judge the real intentions of the Iranians with whom we were in contact by the late autumn of 1985, who claimed that it was possible to achieve a fundamental improvement in both Iranian policies and the relationship between our two countries.&quot;    How high up were these Iranians? Did the ayatollah know? Mr. Ledeen was taken off the Iran operations before it became arms-for-hostages, but the panel needs to know that the early initiative was bearing fruit. The most important question Mr. Ledeen can answer is whether the U.S. has any chance of stopping post-Khomeini Iran from falling to the Soviets.    Whatever we think about the current government in Iran, it is among the planet's most vital territories. Our shared enemy has five divisions on Iran's northern border. This looming Soviet presence threatens not just Afghanistan (south of the Soviet Union and east of Iran), but the Persian Gulf. The warm-water port the czars dreamed of is within reach. We will have a lot more than some Kuwaiti tankers to worry about if the Soviets get their paws on the oil spigot to Western Europe and Japan. In short, the fall of Iran to the ayatollah was bad news for the West; the fall of Iran to the Soviets would be unthinkable.    Mike Ledeen has things to say that are more important than partisan politics. Congress and the American people need to understand how vital Iran is before that case file is passed over to the Kremlinologists. If Mr. Ledeen is called and pulls an Ollie and educates everyone about a significant threat to our security, these hearings will not have been a totally cynical exercise. </TEXT></DOC>