<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870304-0077 </DOCNO><HL> The Birth of the Financial Entrepreneur---By Carl Ferenbach</HL><DD> 03/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   As Congress airs its concerns about the growing number of leveraged buyouts, takeovers of public companies and the insider-trading scandal, policy makers and businessmen alike must deal with three major new influences in domestic capital markets:    --First, financial capital, like other commodities, is now in excess supply. At the start of the decade (as well as at the start of the 1970s) it was in short supply.    --Second, the information revolution has enabled the performance of highly sophisticated financial analysis in a very short period of time. Ten years ago an analysis such as the breakup value of a major corporation required an army of MBAs; today it can be done by an individual at home with a personal computer.    --Third, as an outgrowth of the explosion of capital and the ability to analyze financial information, a new class of professionals has emerged -- the financial entrepreneurs. This class includes two groups that might not enjoy being lumped together: a small but highly publicized group of &quot;raiders,&quot; the Icahns and Perelmans whose takeovers are generally unsolicited by management; and the considerably more numerous leveraged-buyout firms, which organize and invest in leveraged buyouts that generally are friendly to management.    To understand the significance of these developments, one must recognize that the financial entrepreneur is a new kind of owner, who did not exist in meaningful numbers until recently. The American corporation traditionally has been owned by founder-entrepreneurs, their heirs or public shareholders.    The financial entrepreneur is a sophisticated participant in the capital markets, using its resources to his advantage. If he is a &quot;raider,&quot; most often he is interested in the arbitrage between the acquisition value of the enterprise and the ultimate value of its parts. The leveraged-buyout artist, on the other hand, is most often a partner with management in acquiring and operating the enterprise. He may finance the acquisition with junk bonds or he may do it privately with leading insurance companies and commercial banks. Within a year or two of acquiring control, he may seek to raise new money in the public equity or debt markets.    The financial entrepreneur is not contributing only his own equity to his acquisitions. The leveraged-buyout firms in particular represent limited partnerships that are capitalized by America's leading insurance companies, bank holding companies and the pension funds of major corporations and certain state employees.    The primary role of the financial entrepreneur is to allocate available capital to the enterprise. He manages this process by holding management accountable for a business plan on which both have agreed. If management cannot perform according to this plan and if as a consequence the viability of the enterprise is endangered by its financial leverage, the financial entrepreneur is himself accountable to the corporation's creditors and to his own limited partners. If the enterprise is successful, the financial entrepreneur will share in its success through his ownership.    The financial entrepreneur, then, provides accountability for a long-term plan, one that the founder-entrepreneur doesn't develop -- at least formally -- unless he has venture capitalists as investors; and one for which the manager of a broadly owned publicly held company is not generally held accountable except through the price of his company's common stock.    The emergence of the financial entrepreneur is an important development because he represents an alternative form of ownership for the American company, one that provides a longer term, more professional view of capital allocation than is generally available through the board of a publicly held company. Because his investment horizon is often five years or more, he offers management the time to plan and invest that it now says it doesn't have. And because of his access to capital, he offers companies the ability to grow.    Those who decry takeovers and financial leverage should recognize that these three developments -- the availability of capital, information and oversight -- are the very developments that investors of all stripes have been seeking within the capital markets. For the most part, those who engage in these activities are the agents of change in a post-industrial economy. As such, they represent and are represented by most of the leading institutions that provide capital to American companies.    There are numerous examples of the positive changes that leveraged buyouts have brought. The changes in the metal-packaging industry offer good examples. Traditional participants in metal packaging -- packaging for beverages, food, paint and innumerable other substances -- deemed it a mature business segment during the 1970s and used their excess cash not to invest in their existing businesses but to diversify. American Can went into specialty retailing and financial services; Continental Can became Continental Group, branching into forest products and insurance.    During the past four years, at least four major metal packagers have been acquired through leveraged buyouts: American Can's packaging operations, Continental Group, National Can Co. and the packaging division of Sherwin-Williams, now U.S. Can Co. Having either been bought out of the larger, diversified parent or having leveraged and then shed unwanted parts, each is now a company once again engaged primarily in manufacturing and marketing packaging.    The chief executive officer of one of these companies told me recently that when his company was public, the annual rate of investment in new property, plant and equipment was less than 60% of the rate of new investment under his management. At another company, management's commitment to new investment has led to more hourly jobs and important labor concessions, making the company more competitive and enabling it to lower prices.    In my experience, most leveraged buyouts are not about financial risk, junk bonds or unwanted takeovers -- though one or all of these elements may be present. Instead, they are about ownership, which translates into dedication, commitment, focus and eventually a better company.    The financial entrepreneur is the facilitator of this phenomenon. His access to capital and to information are his tools. That much of the capital he employs is debt has not proved to be a restriction to development of the company for which he is accountable. His role as an owner gives him considerable incentive to work with management to produce a success.    If Congress's concerns about takeovers lead it to legislate restrictions on the use of high-yield debt in takeovers, it will be legislating against the activities of a new class of owner whose objectives are (other than those of the relatively few highly publicized raiders) consistent with managements' stated objectives and who, collectively, have the ability to assist in the necessary evolution of our economy. It will also be restricting the free movement of capital at the very time when it is most available to build the future of American business.    ---   Mr. Ferenbach is a general partner of Berkshire Partners, a firm that organizes and invests in leveraged buyouts. </TEXT></DOC>