<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870610-0077 </DOCNO><HL> Tightening Won't Unravel Economic Knot---By David Hale</HL><DD> 06/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGNMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED) </IN><TEXT>   One advantage of appointing a clarinet player as chairman of the Federal Reserve Board is that he may be able to better orchestrate the different parts of American economic policy. The U.S. desperately needs greater harmony between its fiscal and monetary players because excessive reliance on higher interest rates to resolve the country's balance-of-payments problem will increase the danger of recession without correcting the savings/investment imbalance that originally helped to create a large trade deficit.    When facing a currency crisis, central banks usually tighten monetary policy in order to curtail domestic spending, which in the U.S. is already remarkably subdued. Real personal consumer expenditures have fallen for two quarters in a row; commercial construction activity has been declining for over a year; the real growth of defense outlays is projected to drop to the 1%-to-2% range from between 6% and 8% during most years of this decade. Domestic final sales will probably rise by only 1.5% to 2% in 1987 compared with 3.7% in 1986, 4.8% in 1985 and 6.3% in 1984.    It is true that the U.S. inflation rate is returning to the 4%-to-5% range from the 2% level that prevailed after last year's oil-price collapse, but today's inflation has a very different character from the cost-push variety of the 1970s. Although many pundits say the U.S. economy is drifting into &quot;stagflation,&quot; a more accurate label for the current environment would be &quot;profitflation.&quot;    Because of the devaluation of the dollar, a growing number of U.S. companies are now expanding their profit margins and reversing the income shifts between producers and consumers that occurred during the first half of the decade, when the dollar rose sharply and depressed the country's tradeable-goods manufacturing industries. In fact, if profits were not poised for a boom, the recent uptick in bond yields would have already produced a sharp decline in stock prices.    If and when the profit inflation starts to generate cost-push pressures because of competition for labor or raw-material scarcity, there will be a compelling case for much tighter monetary policy. But if the Fed tightens far in advance of such pressures, it will retard the recovery in manufacturing profitability and investment that must occur during the next few years if the country is to adjust to its new status as an external debtor by shifting more resources into the tradeable-goods sector.    In countries with powerful labor unions, such as Australia and Britain, the time lag between a profits boom and a wage boom would be relatively brief. But one of the most distinguishing features of the U.S. economy during the mid-1980s has been a sustained moderation of wage claims in order to help preserve jobs by making the corporate sector more competitive.    The final argument for gradual changes in monetary policy is that the major source of tension in the financial markets in recent months has not been increased uncertainty about the Federal Reserve's intentions but worries about how the U.S. and other industrial nations will resolve international payments imbalances.    The U.S. now faces a crisis in funding its trade deficit for three reasons. First, the global economic policy mix of the past seven years has turned the country into a large external debtor without increasing the size of the capital stock available for generating exports to service the debt. The Reagan administration's highly stimulative fiscal policies, helpful as they were globally in the early 1980s, created a savings shortage that was resolved by turning the U.S. into a large-scale capital importer for the first time since the 19th century. As international flows of goods and capital must balance, this produced a trade deficit equal to 4.5% of GNP or twice the output typically lost during a postwar recession. Such large output losses depressed U.S. manufacturing investment and forced the country to depend almost entirely on job creation in the construction and service sectors to sustain growth after 1984.    Second, increasing discomfort is now felt in Washington at the prospect of financing the payments deficits through further large sales of U.S. assets to foreigners. The White House has vetoed a Japanese takeover bid for a French-owned California semiconductor company. Congress is now moving toward passage of legislation that will require foreigners purchasing more than $5 million of U.S. assets to register with the federal government. As with similar investment-review legislation in Australia and Canada, such an impediment to equity investment in the U.S. will tend to depress the dollar and push up interest rates by forcing the country to depend more heavily upon debt sales in funding its payments deficit.    Third, the U.S. is now entering its first wide-open presidential-election campaign as a large-scale capital importing nation since 1896. In the 1896 campaign, the New York bond market fell sharply because of selling by British investors alarmed at the Democratic Party's nomination of William Jennings Bryan, who promised to cure the farm depression in the Western states by severing America's monetary links with the Bank of England's gold standard.    The U.S. financial markets could again suffer from foreign selling if the country appears likely to support presidential candidates advocating a faster dollar devaluation or more protectionism to solve the trade problem. One could easily imagine speeches about the need to assert American financial independence and not permit &quot;foreign potentates and powers&quot; to dictate U.S. mortgage rates.    The challenge now facing American policy makers is to develop a credible long-term program for correcting the country's external deficit through a better domestic savings/investment balance before crises in the financial markets force the adjustment to occur solely through monetary policy. Sharply higher interest rates would be a poor instrument for achieving such an objective because their primary effect would be to depress investment by triggering a recession.    Although such a downturn would reduce the country's need for external savings, it would not correct the structural savings/investment imbalance by enough to lay the groundwork for a healthy expansion later. Bigger budget deficits would bring an upsurge of federal borrowing, absorbing a large share of the savings freed up by declines in capital spending and home building. The U.S. and its trading partners need a more finely tuned program for correcting their payments imbalances than monetary policy, alone, can provide.    First, the U.S. should introduce a broad-based consumption tax in order to reduce its federal deficit without jeopardizing the reductions in marginal tax rates enacted in 1981 and 1986. Many American supply-siders refuse to accept the need for more consumption taxes, but every other industrial country that reduced income-tax rates during the 1980s financed the change with higher consumption taxes. If the U.S. fails to develop a program for deficit reduction through consumption taxes, it risks a future government reacting to a funding crisis in the bond market by restoring high nominal income-tax rates without bringing back the allowances that were previously used to reduce effective rates.    Second, the U.S. and its trading partners must develop a long-term strategy for reducing global payments imbalances through more expansionary policies in Europe and Japan, not just a slowdown in American spending. Because of the export slump resulting from the appreciation of the yen and the mark, German and Japanese economic policy is gradually shifting to an expansionary direction, but this could easily regress if the U.S. appears willing to stabilize the dollar solely through unilateral changes in domestic interest rates.    Third, the Reagan administration should start issuing debt denominated in foreign currencies in order to have financing alternatives available if there is another run on the dollar before the G-7 nations can develop a credible policy package for correcting their payments imbalances. Since current American-Japanese interest-rate differentials are already discounting for an exchange rate of 80 yen to the dollar by 1997, the U.S. Treasury could even save money if there are sufficient policy adjustments to reduce the need for a dollar devaluation as large as the markets are now discounting.    The risk facing the American economy today is that by not developing non-monetary solutions to global payments imbalances, the U.S. could drift into a protracted period of stop-go business cycles comparable to the British economy of the 1950s and 1960s. In such a scenario, the domestic financial markets would be a perpetual hostage to the threat of balance-of-payments crises and investment would remain depressed because of uncertainty about both the sustainability of demand and the cost of capital. Such an outcome would not merely be disastrous for the economy's growth performance; it also would have dangerous political side effects -- turning the resurgent American confidence of the Reagan era into a frustrated nationalism, conducive to isolationism.    The great public stature that Paul Volcker achieved as Federal Reserve chairman was partly a reflection of his own qualities and partly a reflection of the incoherence that prevailed in Washington's economic policy elsewhere during his tenure. If the world is to avoid dangerous fluctuations in growth and inflation during the next few years, the U.S. must develop a mix of fiscal and monetary policy that reduces the need for the Fed to play as decisive a role in guiding the economy under Alan Greenspan as under Mr. Volcker. The economic changes that confront the nation are structural rather than cyclical, and they can be resolved only through adjustments in the total mix of policy, not interest-rate shocks and a 1989 recession.    ---   Mr. Hale is chief economist of Kemper Financial Services in Chicago. </TEXT></DOC>