<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880915-0151 </DOCNO><HL> Pro-Lifers Should Appeal to Constitution's Heart </HL><AUTHOR> Bruce Ledewitz </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE SUP </G><TEXT>   The Republican Party has fired the first shot in the post-Roe v. Wade battle over abortion. The Republican platform supports &quot;legislation to make clear that the 14th Amendment's protections apply to unborn children.&quot;    Deciding that the fetus is a &quot;person&quot; protected by the Constitution is in the long run more important in outlawing abortion than is overruling Roe v. Wade. If and when Roe is overruled, the states will be free to decide whether to permit abortion. Many states will retain legal abortion and so abortion will remain an option for many, perhaps even most, women. This process was beginning even before Roe was decided.    If, however, the fetus is a &quot;person&quot; protected by the 14th Amendment, the states all must prohibit abortion. Thus, the commitment of the Republican platform is very important. The legislation in question would urge federal judges to interpret the 14th Amendment expansively.    The key role of the judiciary is underscored by the only other sure means to protect unborn children from legislative approval of abortion: a constitutional amendment. It is doubtful that such an amendment would pass at all and it is certain that, even if it did, enactment would take years. Therefore, if Roe is overruled, attention will focus almost immediately on whether judges, particularly federal judges, will imply a heretofore unknown protection for the unborn child in the 14th Amendment. The platform urges federal judges to adopt this protection.    The irony for the pro-life movement is, however, that no recent Republican judicial appointee would endorse such an expansive reading of the 14th Amendment, or indeed, any other portion of the Constitution. For years the Reagan administration, with the misguided but enthusiastic support of almost every segment of the pro-life movement, has been appointing judges firmly committed to the &quot;original intent&quot; theory of interpreting the Constitution. Under this theory, if you want to know whether a provision of the Constitution applies to a particular issue, you ask whether the writers and ratifiers of that provision intended it to apply. As former Judge Robert Bork put it, the proper question is whether the issue was &quot;under discussion&quot; when the provision was written.    Not surprisingly, the original-intent method reduces the Constitution to an insignificant limit on government power. Under the original-intent theory, there is no persuasive objection against segregation in the public schools, discrimination against women, laws banning contraception or censorship of non-political books. It is, in part, original intent that has kept the courts from protecting homosexuals or finding fundamental rights to housing or education.    Original intent has never been fully, or even largely, accepted in the courts as the appropriate method of interpreting the Constitution. It has, however, achieved a foothold after eight years of conservative judicial appointments.    It is this new influence of the original-intent method that will frustrate any attempt to invoke judicial protection for the unborn child. It is beyond dispute that, in 1867, the framers of the 14th Amendment were not thinking about protecting the fetus. In Judge Bork's terms, the fate of unborn children was not &quot;under discussion.&quot; Even if original intent were relaxed to ask what the framers would have intended had the matter been discussed, the unborn child would still achieve no protection. The framers no doubt would have left the matter to the states.    Under original intent, then, the fate of the unborn child must be left to elected officials. Any attempt to protect the unborn child would reflect the judicial activism that has been out of favor for years.    The pro-life movement may point out that the 19th century did not have the advantage of advances in developmental biology. They may say that it was not understood that the developing child is from conception a separate biological unit. It might even be argued that society is developing its moral sense and that what was acceptable in 1867 might be considered prejudice today. None of these objections count with the practitioners of original intent. For them, history is unchangeable and history rules. On the question of whether the fetus is a &quot;person&quot; protected by the Constitution, Chief Justice William Rehnquist, Justice Antonin Scalia, former Judge Bork and all the other judges supported by the pro-life movement must answer &quot;no.&quot;    Until now, the pro-life movement was concerned only about overruling Roe and overruling it on the narrowest ground. Original intent answered that need and so that theory was adopted as a sort of official theory of constitutional interpretation. But that turns out to have been shortsighted. Now that the Supreme Court appears close to overruling Roe, the focus of the debate must shift to whether the Constitution protects the unborn child. Though the Republican platform promises such protection, a conservative judicial philosophy simply cannot provide it. Only the view that the Constitution grows in its protections can serve that need. To put it another way, a Constitution with a heart big enough to protect the unborn child must also have a heart to protect others. That realization may cause the pro-life movement to reconsider its pantheon of judicial heroes.    ---   Mr. Ledewitz is a professor of law at Duquesne University. </TEXT></DOC>