<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870804-0132 </DOCNO><HL> Business World:Rocket Makes Tackle a Private Launch Puzzle---By George Melloan</HL><DD> 08/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MD GOVMT FREST GD ML JAPAN EUROPAEROSPACE (ARO)TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)INSURANCE (INS)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF)TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT (TRN)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   John F. Yardley, president of McDonnell Douglas Astronautics Co., at least has one competitor out of his hair, or so he hopes. The State Department set about last month to block acceptance by any American company of a Soviet offer to launch satellites into space at bargain rates. Such a deal would violate a U.S. ban on the transfer of space technology to the Soviet Union, said State. It was unimpressed by the Russians' promise that they wouldn't peek at the inner workings of any satellite shipped to their Tyuratam launch site.    A few days later, the McDonnell Douglas Corp. unit nailed down a launch contract of its own, its first since President Reagan ceded the commercial business of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) to private industry a year ago. Mr. Yardley made a $100 million deal with Hughes Aircraft to launch two satellites a British firm will use for direct broadcasts to Europeans.    The privatization of commercial space launches is thus well under way. But there are a few sputters. For one thing, says Mr. Yardley, &quot;it's a little fuzzy what our government's position is,&quot; Mr. Reagan's decision last August notwithstanding. The president had said &quot;the private sector, with its ingenuity and cost effectiveness&quot; will take over commercial business. But Mr. Yardley finds that NASA isn't in any great hurry to relinquish its role and &quot;there are a lot of detailed things to be ironed out that affect four different departments, Commerce, Transportation, NASA and the Department of Defense.&quot;    He believes that when things shake out &quot;the DOD will be the mother agency for operations and the DOT will be our licensing agency. I don't know what Commerce is going to do but I think Commerce is going to try to push commercialization.&quot;    NASA currently faces a diminished role in space. The Challenger disaster of January 1986 is one reason. It left private firms that had reserved space on NASA's shuttle high and dry. According to estimates, some 50 commercial satellites are awaiting launch. Even before the disaster, NASA had lost a bureaucratic battle with the Air Force, which had insisted that expendable rockets still were needed, despite the shuttle. NASA, in an attempt to fulfill a congressional mandate that it make the shuttle self-sustaining, had attempted to attract as much military and commercial business as it could.    The Air Force now is ordering those rockets. McDonnell Douglas last January won a $316.7 million contract to build and launch seven Delta II rockets, mainly to put the Air Force's &quot;Navstar&quot; navigational system into orbit next year. Air Force options on 13 more Deltas give the contract a total value of $669 million.    Martin Marietta has even larger Air Force demand for its Titan family of missiles, currently the largest U.S. boosters. Its deal calls for as many as 43 Titans.    General Dynamics' Atlas-Centaur lost out to Titan and Delta but the company hopes to have a shot at a heavy launch vehicle for future strategic defense initiative (SDI) and space-station projects. A Boeing-Hughes consortium also has hopes.    The Air Force contracts give McDonnell Douglas and Martin Marietta a production base that lowers their unit costs in bidding for private launches. But General Dynamics has announced it will spend $100 million of its own money to build 18 Atlas-Centaurs for commercial launches. Several fledgling U.S. firms are bidding for business, too. Space Services Inc., of Houston, headed by former astronaut Deke Slayton, wants to launch small payloads from NASA's Wallops Island, Va., facilities.    But Mr. Yardley makes it clear that the commercialization of space is not simple. In a reversal of the usual flow of contracts, he is negotiating with the Air Force for the rental of its launch pads for commercial flights. Given the government's monopoly on launch pads, his bargaining power is limited. Insurance is a bigger problem in the absence of a direct government role. The insurance industry is gun shy after the failure over the past two years of the Challenger and three unmanned rockets, along with some less serious mishaps.    Especially unfortunate was destruction of a $78 million Atlas-Centaur in March after it was struck by lightning, an accident blamed on bad judgment by the NASA-Air Force launch team. Just last month lightning also accidentally launched three small rockets into the sea at NASA's Wallops Island base. Further, NASA's last remaining Atlas-Centaur was seriously damaged on the launch pad at Cape Canaveral when a service platform broke loose and bashed into a fuel tank.    One of the biggest problems is liability insurance, a difficulty not unfamiliar to private industry generally. Even the Air Force now wants insurance coverage for its range safety officers during commercial launches.    &quot;I think U.S. vehicles are better than any in the world in terms of reliability, all between 95% and 98%,&quot; says Mr. Yardley. &quot;But insurance companies don't seem to care about that. There's no insurance on the open market for launch vehicles.&quot; He he doesn't think the insurance problem is a &quot;show stopper.&quot; But the question is &quot;how competitive we will be when we get it all settled.&quot;    Foreign competition, in Mr. Yardley's view, is the most serious problem. The Russians, with their offer to put a two-ton satellite into an orbit 22,500 miles above the earth for some $30 million, are charging roughly half what an American launch might cost. Aside from the Soviets' usual cost-accounting idiosyncrasies, they launch an average of two rockets a week, which helps spread their costs. Their price is so low that some U.S. experts fear American firms will be tempted to have their satellites built outside the U.S. so that a Soviet launch wouldn't violate U.S. law, but that fear may be groundless.    Mr. Yardley claims all the foreign launch services involve some kind of state subsidy. The Chinese are shopping for business for their &quot;Long March&quot; rocket. Japan is developing its own space technology. Europe's Arianespace, which launches from the island of Kourou, is the strongest foreign competitor but suffered a serious setback last May with the failed launch of its 18th Ariane rocket.    In past trade disputes over subsidization, Europe has countered American complaints by arguing that U.S. rockets, having been developed for military use, were subsidized as well. The U.S. move to privatization alters that argument somewhat. But private U.S. companies cite subsidized competition in negotiating with the Air Force for launch-pad rentals. They argue that the Air Force has an interest in allowing them to be competitive because commercial business, by spreading costs, will lower bids on military contracts.    For NASA -- a worker of past wonders now fallen on hard times -- the future is hard to discern. It has been slow to get the shuttle program back on track. Last May it proposed that it be allowed to launch scientific satellites on expendable launchers by contracting with rocket makers in much the same way a private firm would do. But Congress isn't jumping at the opportunity to fork up the money.    So it may well be that the future mainly lies with the Air Force and private industry. Wherever it lies, there still is a good deal of buffeting to be endured before the U.S. space effort is soaring on its new course. </TEXT></DOC>