<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880606-0026 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   SHULTZ ACKNOWLEDGED failing to make progress on Mideast peace in Israel.    The secretary of state, following talks in Jerusalem, said he hadn't been able to budge Israeli Prime Minister Shamir from his opposition to a U.S. peace initiative for the region. The plan calls for an international forum on Mideast peace and an exchange of Israeli-occupied Arab territory for peace. Shultz also warned of the danger of a new Mideast war and criticized Israel's occupation of the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Shultz began the peace mission Friday in Egypt. He visited Jordan Saturday.    Israel's Supreme Court upheld Shamir's decision to expel Arab-American activist Mubarak Awad. The U.S. had protested the deportation order.    ---   THE SOCIALISTS APPEARED headed for a narrow victory in French elections.    With about 90% of the vote counted from the first round, President Mitterrand's Socialist Party was likely to win a smaller-than-expected majority in parliament. Voter turnout was low. The projections of the distribution of seats after next Sunday's runoff gave the Socialists and their allies between 310 and 330 seats, with 289 needed for a majority in the 577-member National Assembly. They had anticipated a majority of as many as 100 seats.    The Socialist victory will return the party to power after a two-year hiatus and should allow Mitterrand to implement his moderate program.    ---   A Soviet freight train exploded as it entered a station about 240 miles east of Moscow, killing at least 68 people, injuring about 230 others and destroying or damaging as many as 400 buildings, Tass reported. Three of the train's boxcars were carrying industrial explosives. The cause of the Saturday explosion in Arzamas wasn't known.    ---   About 80 Soviets carried banners through Moscow in an unprecedented march to demand the release of political prisoners. Police stopped the protesters from entering Red Square, but allowed them to gather near the headquarters of city government. Demonstrators included Armenians, Crimean Tatars and political dissidents.    Deputy Kremlin leader Ligachev denied reports that he leads a conservative faction trying to undermine Gorbachev. In a speech Saturday, he urged unity. On Friday, human-rights activist Sakharov said Gorbachev must be given time and trust to carry out his restructuring plans. He also welcomed Moscow's pullout from Afghanistan.    ---   Reagan said last week's Moscow summit sowed &quot;seeds of freedom and greater trust&quot; that he hopes will lead to increased liberty for the Soviet people. The president, speaking Saturday in his weekly radio address, returned Friday to Washington after a stopover in London following his five days of talks with Kremlin leader Gorbachev.    ---   Dukakis said he didn't object to Jackson's plans to continue campaigning after Tuesday's final primaries, and added that he expected Jackson to work hard for the Democratic presidential ticket in the fall. In Boston, Dukakis's wife was recovering from last week's spinal surgery, and her doctors said she was &quot;doing splendidly.&quot;    ---   U.S. officials have projected that at least 450,000 Americans will have been diagnosed with AIDS by the end of 1993. The estimate, reported by the Washington Post and the New York Times, was presented last week at a private gathering of health officials in Virginia. The current cumulative total of those with AIDS is 63,726 people.    ---   Negotiations are being held for Taiwan to import coal, crude oil, cotton and other raw materials from China in what would be the first bulk commodities sale between the two nations, business sources in Hong Kong and Taipei said. The talks could lead to a significant relaxation of economic ties between China and Taiwan.    ---   Rescue workers in West Germany found the bodies of six more miners killed in last week's explosion at a coal mine, bringing the death toll to 43. Eight miners remain missing. Six workers who survived three days in an underground air pocket were rescued Saturday at the mine in Borken, about 70 miles northeast of Frankfurt.    ---   Meese withdrew himself from the investigation of Wedtech Corp. only after U.S. Attorney Rudolph Giuliani refused to share evidence in the case with the Justice Department, the New York Daily News reported. Giuliani had refused to forward the informaton unless the attorney general disqualified himself, the newspaper said.    ---   Contra rebels are returning to Nicaragua from Honduras to prepare for renewed fighting with the Sandinista army if the next round of peace talks with the Managua government fails, a rebel commander said. The negotiations are scheduled to begin tomorrow. The Sandinistas also are said to be reinforcing their military positions.    ---   Communist rebels ambushed a platoon of soliders trying to retrieve a hijacked truck near Bacalod, about 300 miles southeast of Manila. Military officials said at least 16 soldiers were killed in the attack, considered one of the worst this year.    ---   Mats Wilander of Sweden won the French Open tennis championship in Paris, defeating France's Henri Leconte in straight sets. West German Steffi Graf defeated Natalia Zvereva of the Soviet Union in straight sets Saturday to capture the women's title.    ---   Died: Clarence M. Pendleton, 57, chairman of the U.S. Civil Rights Commission, in San Diego, of an apparent heart attack. </TEXT></DOC>