<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870206-0071 </DOCNO><HL> Insider-TradingCaveat: In the End,Only Ethics Pays---By John Shad</HL><DD> 02/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><TEXT>   Five years ago, articles in leading magazines stated that insider trading was so pervasive, nothing could be done about it. Many took such articles to be a license to engage in insider trading. If everyone else was doing it -- and nothing could be done about it -- why not?    A few academicians contended that insider trading was good for the market. That it moved prices in the &quot;right&quot; direction. But few shareholders felt it was good for them if the president of a company unloaded his shares on them just before he announced bad news or if he purchased their shares just before he announced favorable news.    Since 1981, the Securities and Exchange Commission has brought 125 insider-trading cases, as compared with 77 during the previous 47 years. The large increase is due principally to the increase in tender offers and to improved surveillance and enforcement systems.    During the past five years, with the support of the business and financial community, the investing public, the administration and Congress, the SEC's ability to expose and prosecute securities frauds has been greatly enhanced by:    --electronic market-surveillance systems and transaction-audit trails, that permit the quick identification of the sources of suspicious trading activities;    -- the Insider Trading Sanctions Act of 1984, whichpermits heavy fines of inside traders;   --close coordination with the Justice Department, which imposes criminal sanctions on inside traders; and    -- by growing cooperation from abroad.   The SEC's 1982 accord with Switzerland removed the haven of the Swiss bank-secrecy laws from inside traders. The SEC has since implemented additional cooperation agreements on enforcement matters with Canadian, Japanese and United Kingdom authorities. Others are in prospect. The logical extension of these bilateral agreements will be multilateral agreements with virtually all major markets.    The Ivan Boesky and many other cases demonstrate that it has become increasingly difficult for inside traders to hide -- either at home or abroad. They also demonstrate that those who engage in such activities are assuming enormous risks of imprisonment, heavy fines and civil suits, disbarment from the legal profession and the securities industry -- and public disgrace. Insider trading has not been eradicated, but it has been inhibited and multimillions of dollars of profits that Mr. Boesky and others have been siphoning off the market are now flowing through to the investing public.    A very disturbing area is the recent rash of insider-trading cases against young men in their 20s and early-30s who are graduates of leading business and law schools -- the cream of the crop. It is notable that none have been young women, even though women have accounted for a growing proportion of business- and law-school graduates during the past decade.    At any rate, 10 recent graduates of Harvard, Stanford, Columbia, Wharton and other leading business and law schools are now convicted felons. Most will serve prison terms. They may be the tip of the iceberg -- symptomatic of more serious problems in America today.    These men were very successful, earning six-figure incomes, with promising careers at distinguished securities and law firms. Their insider-trading profits have typically ranged from $20,000 to $50,000. A few realized substantially more -- and others nothing -- but they all misappropriated material, non-public information from those who trusted them, or knowingly traded on such information.    Why were they willing to risk their brilliant futures and self-respect? While it might have been because of deep-seated psychological reasons, other questions remain. Have the temptations become too great? Was it the challenge or the excitement of seeing if they could get away with it -- if they could beat the system? Were they driven by peer pressures or rivalries to win a game in which the score has a dollar sign in front of it? Or has there been a change in moral attitudes in America since World War II as a result of the dispersion of families, rising divorces, the permissiveness of the '60s and '70s, the Vietnam War and drugs? The answer probably lies in a combination of these factors, but the question now is: What can be done about it?    As premier institutions in our educational system, should the business and law schools attempt to change their images and curricula? Can the media help them? The press emphasizes graduates' incomes, rather than their contributions to society, and the image of some schools is that they are training the next generation of millionaires, who are often characterized as financial schemers and manipulators. In truth, most become very competent managers of people and resources for the benefit of society.    Graduate schools have courses on ethics, but do many students feel that one receives the benefits of ethical conduct in the hereafter rather than the here and now? Are there courses that demonstrate that ethics pays, that those who go for edges, like high rollers in Las Vegas, are eventually wiped out?    I believe corporate executives, investment bankers and lawyers, who do a good job for their customers and clients, employees, suppliers and communities, also do a better job for their shareholders than those who attempt to take unfair advantage of these groups in their drive to maximize their next quarter's earnings.    Law schools and some business schools use the case method of teaching. Are there case studies of successful business men and women, investment bankers and lawyers -- and of companies such as IBM, Johnson andamp; Johnson and others -- that demonstrate that the marketplace rewards quality, integrity and ethical conduct?    These are some of the broader questions raised by recent insider-trading cases.    ---   Mr. Shad is chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission. </TEXT></DOC>