<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870619-0137 </DOCNO><HL> Ozone Depletion:ProbabilityIs All We Have---By James K. Hammitt</HL><DD> 06/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ENVIRONMENT (ENV)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM) </IN><TEXT>   Despite the impression left by reports of Interior Secretary Donald Hodel's &quot;RayBan Plan&quot; that people can adequately protect themselves from ozone depletion by wearing sunscreen, hats and sunglasses, others in the Reagan administration are taking the threat of stratospheric-ozone depletion seriously. As well they should.    The physical, chemical and biological processes involved in ozone depletion and its effects are not yet fully understood. But we do not have the luxury of waiting until science has solved the riddle, since harm may already have been done. The ozone depleters we emit today will affect the ozone layer for a century or more.    This uncertainty about future effects must be recognized when formulating policies concerning chlorofluorocarbons and other potential ozone depleters, but it is not an excuse for inaction. Regulatory actions should be viewed as provisional, and decisions should be continually reevaluated in light of current scientific understanding.    The stakes are enormous. Ozone depletion could increase the amount of ultraviolet radiation reaching the earth's surface, possibly increasing skin cancer and cataracts, suppressing immune responses, and damaging plants, fish larvae, paints, and plastics. These chemicals also contribute to the &quot;greenhouse effect.&quot; Resulting global warming could substantially alter temperature and precipitation patterns, thereby affecting regional agricultural productivity, and could trigger a rise in sea levels that would flood large land areas.    But the costs of regulations that might later prove to have been unnecessary could amount to billions of dollars: Potential ozone depleters are used in a wide range of consumer products and industrial processes. They are attractive for industrial use for the same reason they threaten the stratosphere: They are chemically stable and nontoxic.    The issue that U.S. and foreign governments face now is whether to impose new restrictions on emissions, or to wait a few more years for scientific research to reduce some of the uncertainties. In a recent RAND Corp. report I provide a framework to address this question.    The State Department and Environmental Protection Agency have made significant progress toward international agreements to limit emissions of chlorofluorocarbons and other chemicals. So much progress, in fact, that the Natural Resources Defense Council has agreed to a seven-month extension in the deadline, imposed as a result of an NRDC lawsuit, for EPA to determine whether additional domestic regulations are required. Because potential ozone depleters affect ozone all over the globe, regardless of their origin, international cooperation is essential. So, NRDC is willing to delay a decision on domestic regulations in the hope of securing an international agreement.    This extension provides an opportunity to take stock of our knowledge about potential ozone depletion, global warming, and their consequences, and to reassess the way we approach the issue, recognizing the persistent scientific uncertainties.    Since 1974, when the possibility that chlorofluorocarbons would reduce the concentration of stratospheric ozone was first recognized, there have been dramatic shifts in scientific and popular assessments of the importance of ozone depletion. The current interest is triggered by the recent discovery of the springtime &quot;hole&quot; in the ozone layer over the Antarctic, increased production of chlorofluorocarbons and other potential ozone depleters, and recognition that such substances contribute to global warming.    Whether additional regulations should be imposed now depends on the likelihood that we will need to reduce future emissions. If the probability is high, immediate regulations should be adopted because they reduce the future costs of preventing or coping with ozone depletion. If the probability is low, immediate regulations should not be adopted, since they impose near-term costs that may later prove to have been unnecessary.    The issue is, in effect, insurance. But it is far more complicated than, say, an individual's choice of whether to take out a policy. We have no experience from which to estimate the probability that significant depletion will occur, as we do for such insurable risks as automobile accidents and fires. The probability must be estimated by policy makers, relying on the best available scientific evidence.    Policy makers need not agree on the exact probability that significant ozone depletion will occur. If they agree that the probability exceeds a calculated &quot;cut-off&quot; level, then they can also agree that new regulations should be adopted.    In the RAND study, I show that this cutoff probability is about 30% to 50%. (The range reflects differing assumptions about future demand for potential ozone depleters and the costs of substitutes.)    If policy makers believe the chance that significant emission controls will be required in the foreseeable future exceeds 50%, adopting additional regulations now appears to be a good investment. If they perceive the chance to be less than 30%, immediate regulations look like a poor investment. If the perceived probability is between 30% and 50%, the results are sensitive to projected future demand for potential ozone depleters and other factors. However, for this range of probabilities the expected costs imposed by immediate action or delay are roughly equal, so the choice between them is not as important.    This type of analysis can assist in building a political consensus, by clarifying the relationship between beliefs about the severity of the ozone depletion problem and the preferred policy. This framework can also be used to address other problems where policy makers must choose between taking preventive actions now or waiting to develop better information. Such problems are ubiquitous in health and environmental protection: They include acid rain, disposal of hazardous and nuclear wastes, deforestation, and human exposure to potential carcinogens.    ---   Mr. Hammitt is a mathematician and policy analyst at the RAND Corp. </TEXT></DOC>