<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870602-0007 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Human Sacrifice</HL><DD> 06/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GENEPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA) </IN><TEXT>   Last Friday an advisory panel of the Food and Drug Administration decided to sacrifice thousands of American lives on an altar of pedantry.    Under the klieg lights of a packed hearing room at the FDA, an advisory panel picked by the agency's Center for Drugs and Biologics declined to recommend approval of TPA, a drug that dissolves blood clots after heart attacks. In a 1985 multicenter study conducted by the U.S. National Heart, Lung and Blood Institute, TPA was so conclusively effective at this that the trial was stopped. The decision to withhold it from patients should be properly viewed as throwing U.S. medical research into a major crisis.    Heart disease dwarfs all other causes of death in the industrialized world, with some 500,000 Americans killed annually; by comparison, some 20,000 have died of AIDS. More than a thousand lives are being destroyed by heart attacks every day. In turning down treatment with TPA, the committee didn't dispute that TPA breaks up the blood clots impeding blood flow to the heart. But the committee asked that Genentech, which makes the genetically engineered drug, collect some more mortality data. Its submission didn't include enough statistics to prove to the panel that dissolving blood clots actually helps people with heart attacks.    Yet on Friday, the panel also approved a new procedure for streptokinase, the less effective clot dissolver -- or thrombolytic agent -- currently in use. Streptokinase previously had been approved for use in an expensive, specialized procedure called intracoronary infusion. An Italian study, involving 11,712 randomized heart patients at 176 coronary-care units in 1984-1985, concluded that administering streptokinase intravenously reduced deaths in that group by 18%. So the advisory panel decided to approve intravenous use of streptokinase, but not approve the superior thrombolytic TPA. This is absurd.    Indeed, the panel's suggestion that it is necessary to establish the efficacy of thrombolysis stunned specialists in heart disease. Asked about the committee's justification for its decision, Dr. Eugene Braunwald, chairman of Harvard Medical School's department of medicine, told us: &quot;The real question is, do you accept the proposition that the proximate cause of a heart attack is a blood clot in the coronary artery? The evidence that it is is overwhelming, overwhelming. It is sound, basic medical knowledge. It is in every textbook of medicine. It has been firmly established in the past decade beyond any reasonable question. If you accept the fact that a drug {TPA} is twice as effective as streptokinase in opening closed vessels, and has a good safety profile, then I find it baffling how that drug was not recommended for approval.&quot;    Patients will die who would otherwise live longer. Medical research has allowed statistics to become the supreme judge of its inventions. The FDA, in particular its bureau of drugs under Robert Temple, has driven that system to its absurd extreme. The system now serves itself first and people later. Data supersede the dying.    The advisory panel's suggestion that TPA's sponsor conduct further mortality studies poses grave ethical questions. On the basis of what medicine already knows about TPA, what U.S. doctor will give a randomized heart-attack victim a placebo or even streptokinase? We'll put it bluntly: Are American doctors going to let people die to satisfy the bureau of drugs' chi-square studies?    Friday's TPA decision should finally alert policy makers in Washington and the medical-research community that the theories and practices now controlling drug approval in this country are significantly flawed and need to be rethought. Something has gone grievously wrong in the FDA bureaucracy. As an interim measure FDA Commissioner Frank Young, with Genentech's assent, could approve TPA under the agency's new experimental drug rules. Better still, Dr. Young should take the matter in hand, repudiate the panel's finding and force an immediate reconsideration. Moreover, it is about time Dr. Young received the clear, public support of Health and Human Services Secretary Dr. Otis Bowen in his efforts to fix the FDA.    If on the other hand Drs. Young and Bowen insist that the actions of bureaucrats are beyond challenge, then perhaps each of them should volunteer to personally administer the first randomized mortality trials of heart-attack victims receiving the TPA clot buster or nothing. Alternatively, coronary-care units receiving heart-attack victims might use a telephone hotline to ask Dr. Temple to randomize the trial himself by flipping a coin for each patient. The gods of pedantry are demanding more sacrifice. </TEXT></DOC>