<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870820-0058 </DOCNO><HL> Abusive Computers:As Government KeepsMore Tabs on People,False Accusations Rise---With Data Bases Multiplying,Errors Get Hard to Trace;Bogus Marriage Records---Too Many 499-Pound Males---By Bob DavisStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTCOMPUTERS (EDP)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE (IRS)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   Curtis Arcenaux, a New Orleans sculptor, is afraid to travel to Mexico to meet his fiancee's grandparents. The reason: While crossing the border over the past several years, he has been seized at gunpoint by U.S. police twice and jailed once.    The problem is that a federal computer mistakenly identifies Mr. Arcenaux as a fugitive because a real fugitive sometimes uses his name and Social Security number. &quot;I want to go across the border,&quot; the sculptor says. &quot;But I have to consider, Is it worth facing machine guns again?&quot;    Government computer systems are constantly scouring billions of records kept on Americans to try to turn up fugitives, welfare cheats and other lawbreakers. The computers have an awesome power to track people's lives and discover when they lie by digging through dozens of different data banks and compiling what amount to electronic dossiers. But when people are falsely accused, their lives can become a nightmare. And critics say that the odds of that happening are increasing daily.    &quot;Every day an American wakes up, he or she is less free as far as private information is concerned,&quot; warns Rep. Don Edwards, a California Democrat who heads the House subcommittee on civil and constitutional rights. &quot;Privacy is being invaded on a wholesale basis.&quot;    Ask Melba Henry. The Bronx mother of three young children was kicked off welfare for six weeks a few years back after a New York City computer system probing private bank records accused her of hiding a $1,042 bank account. She scurried from bank branch to bank branch -- sometimes begging money from friends to feed her children -- before discovering that the computer had turned up a savings account of an elderly neighbor. Ms. Henry had forgotten that, as a favor, she had agreed to be an additional signer on the neighbor's account so that she could make withdrawals for the neighbor in an emergency.    After the Legal Aid Society sued on Ms. Henry's behalf, New York City agreed to change some computer procedures. Still, she advises: &quot;Try not to put your name down; they're using information without following through to see if it's right.&quot;    Computer information jumps so quickly from agency to agency that untangling an error can be very difficult. After running a match for delinquent student loans, the U.S. Education Department billed Frederick Harris, a San Jose, Calif., math teacher, for a $5,814 college loan. Mr. Harris assured the agency that he had never taken out a student loan. He said that he was being confused with another man named Harris who had a different Social Security number, a different address and a different alma mater.    Nevertheless, in late 1985 the Education Department threatened to report the default to the Internal Revenue Service, which then could have seized Mr. Harris's tax refund. The department did send Mr. Harris's record to a private credit agency, which resulted in his rejection for a car loan. Only after Rep. Edwards interceded for Mr. Harris did the department relent and admit its mistake. &quot;You feel like David fighting Goliath knowing you left your stones back at the creek,&quot; Mr. Harris says.    Governments have been able to abuse record-keeping systems for a long time. Forty-five years ago, Nazis rounded up Jews by consulting handwritten municipal registries. But until recently, governments collected far more information than they could handle. Now that record-keeping is automated, agencies can run computer tapes crammed with personal records and compare the information for inconsistencies.    Computer matches by federal agencies have tripled since 1980, reports the Office of Technology Assessment, and state and local matches have grown even more rapidly. &quot;On the state and local level, matches are being done every day,&quot; says J. Brian Hyland, the Labor Department's inspector general. Increasingly, police, social workers and bill collectors can use desktop computers to call up data banks.    To find out more about their beneficiaries, state welfare agencies can check federal records on income, state information on wages, automobile registrations, student loans, veterans' benefits, old-age benefits and medical records. The Selective Service System hunts for registration evaders by combing 100 computerized data banks. Once it even bought a computerized list of children who sent in coupons to Farrell's Ice Cream Parlors for free sundaes on their birthday.    State and local food-stamp administrators can check among 248 data banks to catch overpayments. Customs agents search 13 law-enforcement data banks for information on drug suspects. Six state or city social-service agencies have checked computerized records of postal employees to see whether they improperly received welfare benefits -- without uncovering a single case of abuse so far, the post office says.    Tennessee state auditor Frank Greathouse estimates that his state will have a state-of-the-art desktop system within two years. &quot;We'd like to be able to switch from food-stamp records to veterans' benefits to see how eligibility records match up and then switch to {welfare} and elderly benefits to see how they fit in, too,&quot; he explains.    But an agency's findings are only as good as the data in the data banks. The Bronx Legal Aid Society says that it has defended 10 women who were threatened with a loss of welfare benefits after a computer search of marriage records falsely indicated that they had been married recently. In poor neighborhoods, Legal Aid lawyers say, illegal aliens seeking to avoid deportation often use stolen identification papers to fake marriages to U.S. citizens.    Such data put the aid recipient in a bind, though. City welfare officials want proof that a marriage license found during a computer match is bogus. But marriage registry officials often won't give the woman the document -- arguing that she hasn't any right to it if she isn't married.    Legal Aid says that it has won all the marriage-match cases it has appealed to state welfare authorities. It has no idea, though, how many women fail to challenge their aid cutoffs.    Allen Kraus, the deputy commissioner of income maintenance at the New York City Human Resources Administration, doesn't comment specifically on the marriage matches, but he praises computer matches for helping the city welfare agency drastically reduce fraud.    On the federal level, Richard Kusserow, the inspector general for the Department of Health and Human Services, credits computer checks with uncovering welfare and food-stamp cheaters in Texas and California, among other places. David Greenberg, a University of Maryland economist who has studied computer matches, estimates that efficient welfare agencies can save $2 in overpayments for each dollar they spend on matches.    Nevertheless, Mr. Kusserow says, to avoid searching through records of millions of innocent people, agencies should limit their investigations to individuals who have applied for aid. Such screening could create privacy problems, too, though, because it would encourage officials to develop computer systems that instantly scroll through a host of personal records. Few states have such quick access to personal files now; instead, they must send for computer tapes that are frequently stored in different locations.    The Senate recently approved legislation sponsored by Sen. William Cohen, a Maine Republican, that would establish &quot;data-integrity boards&quot; within federal agencies to check computerized data for accuracy. Critics contend, though, that the bill doesn't go far enough. They propose instead an independent privacy commission that could restrict matches.    Computerized tracking in the U.S. now begins at age five, when, under a provision in last year's tax-revision legislation, children claimed as dependents must apply for a Social Security number. That number, in effect, becomes a national identifier, the American Civil Liberties Union complains, enabling computers to find records about a child stored in different data banks. &quot;They're tracking from cradle to grave,&quot; says Jim Wilburn, a Communications Workers of America official in San Angelo, Texas, who has refused to get his seven-year-old daughter, Amber, a Social Security number.    Computer tracking is getting a lot more sophisticated, too, as federal agencies spend heavily on artificial-intelligence research. One Federal Bureau of Investigation system, dubbed Big Floyd, plots relationships between people entered into a crime data bank and draws a graph of those relationships. Then it indicates whether the suspects seem to have violated labor-racketeering statutes. The IRS says that it is working on a similar system.    But state-of-the-art computer systems have been humbled by false data and computer bugs. The IRS doesn't check the accuracy of the interest-income information it receives from banks and then provides to state welfare agencies for computer matches. Last year, however, Congress's General Accounting Office reported that 50 financial institutions sent the IRS inaccurate interest-income statements on one million taxpayers because of a software glitch.    No data bank has more sensitive information than the FBI's National Crime Information Center, which contains 19 million files on fugitives, stolen vehicles and criminal histories. Using the NCIC and local police computer records, a police officer who stops someone for speeding can check the motorist's name, license plate and other identifying information to see whether he is wanted for a crime. A mistake can lead to an unjustified arrest.    An advisory panel recently recommended vastly expanding the NCIC data base so that police officials can track individuals suspected -- but not accused -- of crimes and can consult individual Social Security and tax records. The FBI hasn't yet decided whether to accept these changes.    Overall, the FBI says, only about 5% of the most sensitive information now in the NCIC is incorrect or incomplete. But the accuracy of NCIC information, which comes largely from local police agencies, varies widely from state to state. In Alabama, for instance, an FBI audit in 1985 found that 13% of the information on wanted persons was wrong and that an additional 17% was dropped just before the audit. In Mobile, according to the audit, three-quarters of the wanted persons were listed as weighing 499 pounds and standing seven feet, 11 inches tall -- the maximum entries for weight and height.    The Mobile police department &quot;had a knucklehead adding information into the system,&quot; says Kier Boyd, the FBI's deputy assistant director for technical services. &quot;He didn't think you had to have anything in the system except names.&quot; Mr. Boyd adds that the information has been corrected.    After being challenged in false-arrest suits, New Orleans and Los Angeles have revamped their police computer systems and procedures. In New Orleans, police arrested a woman even though she was 70 pounds lighter and six inches shorter than the woman described in the computer. In Los Angeles, a black man was arrested even though a white man was sought.    Mr. Arcenaux, the New Orleans sculptor, is mistaken for Daniel Wayne Frazier, who is wanted for parole violations. The two men look somewhat alike, and Mr. Frazier apparently obtained some of Mr. Arcenaux's records because he has used Mr. Arcenaux's name as an alias and his Social Security number for identification purposes.    To keep out of trouble, Mr. Arcenaux carries a tattered letter from the Brownsville, Texas, district attorney's office describing his predicament and vouching that his fingerprints aren't the same as Mr. Frazier's. Mr. Arcenaux, who wears his hair in braids down to his belt and an earring in his nose, can hardly afford to seem any more suspicious to police. But if he changed his name and Social Security number, the new identifiers might well wind up in some computer as aliases for Mr. Frazier.    For now, Mr. Arcenaux keeps a low profile. He uses a pseudonym, Coco Robicheaux, for his art, and he avoids getting his name into government computers as much as possible. &quot;I'm living like Daniel Wayne Frazier,&quot; he says. &quot;I'm always on the lookout. I could be mistaken for this guy at any time.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>