<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880211-0076 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint: Romantic Haze Obscures Reality of Afghan Guerrillas </HL><AUTHOR> Alexander Cockburn </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   The possibility that the Soviet Union might quit Afghanistan has fixed more attention on who exactly lurks behind the noble label &quot;Afghan freedom fighters&quot; and on what these &quot;freedom fighters&quot; actually want. In contrast to the Nicaraguan Contras, such Afghans have led charmed lives in U.S. public opinion. The Great Communicator never could persuade most Americans the Contras were anything but a low-rent bunch with no decent political program and with a fortitude that rose and fell in tune with Washington aid levels.    Similar objectivity hasn't detained the tide of dollars rolling toward the Hindu Kush. In the Reagan years about $1.2 billion in multilateral arms aid has gone to Afghan groups, along with about $1.5 billion voted to the CIA by Congress. But whereas various Contra leaders became familiar figures in Washington or pressing their case from op-ed page or TV set, most Americans would have trouble singling out one Afghan hero from the romantic haze that has enveloped the Afghan struggle.    This ignorance is mostly the fault of the U.S. press, which has treated the Afghan war as an opportunity for heroics in the hills, with reporters posing before colorful tribesmen and snow-laden crags. This has had the effect of allowing the Reagan administration, the CIA and their allies in Congress to do as they please, with no troubling questions.    Here are some obvious questions, if the press were curious enough to ask them:   --What sort of groups has the Reagan administration been supporting, courtesy of the U.S. taxpayer?    --How well have these groups done, and to what use have they put all the money coming their way?    --Does the U.S. really want a settlement in Afghanistan along the lines proposed by Mikhail Gorbachev?    The first question finally began to receive some airing after the probable death last October of a Polish-born cameraman of British nationality, Andy Skrzypkowiak, who had scored many news coups inside Afghanistan. But his wife and friends/supporters of Afghan guerrillas claim he has likely been murdered by men of the Gulbaddin Hekmatyar faction, Hezb-e-Islami. The motivation seems to have been robbery, plus a desire to stop Mr. Skrzypkowiak from interviewing one of Mr. Hekmatyar's rivals, Ahmed Shar Masud, a well-known Panjshir commander.    An associate of Mr. Skrzypkowiak recently wrote in the London Spectator, &quot;Almost no visitor to Afghanistan returns without a tale of treachery by {Mr. Hekmatyar's} men.&quot; He denounced Mr. Hekmatyar's party as having a proven record of unreliability, betrayal and ruthlessness&quot; along with its &quot;feebler military effectiveness&quot; and asked why it received up to one-third of all U.S. aid. The answer, he wrote, lay in Mr. Hekmatyar's &quot;flamboyant anti-Soviet rhetoric&quot; and his links to Pakistan's Jamaat fundamentalist brotherhood.    It would be instructive if some U.S. congressmen shoveling money to Mr. Hekmatyar and his friends were to invite them to some hearings to give their thoughts on such matters as the position of women in a just society or the right of Jews to a national homeland. They would get the same answer as from Ayatollah Khomeini.    A great many women in Afghanistan certainly know what fate may await them. Mark Urban, defense correspondent of the London Independent, wrote, &quot;One genuine achievement of the revolution has been the emancipation of (mainly urban) women. There is no doubt that thousands of women are committed to the regime, as their prominent participation in Revolution Defense Group militias shows.&quot;    If the National Organization of Women wants to get back on the cutting edge, it should picket the CIA and the State Department for backing Islamic fanatics who will, given the chance, cut their Afghan sisters to pieces for taking off the veil.    U.S. reporters have been singularly incurious about the genesis of the Afghan resistance. Though it does not make the Soviet invasion of 1979 legal or emend the fact that the ruling People's Democratic Party of Afghanistan commanded small initial support, five of the seven mujahideen leaders had left Afghanistan well before the Soviet troops arrived. It has been a reasonably well-recognized fact that most of the heroin reaching the West comes from opium collected and traded by guerrilla leaders, and that some of the military actions in Afghanistan or on the frontiers have had as much to do with opium concessions as with liberation from the invader. Nor has the U.S. press or public opinion been disturbed by the mujahideen practice of shooting down civilian airliners, planting bombs in streets, blowing up schools and hospitals or committing kindred acts that in other contexts would be denounced as barbarous terrorism.    How well have the Afghan guerrillas done? The wisdom in Congress and the press is that the Soviets have taken a pasting. In his &quot;War in Afghanistan&quot; published earlier this year, the Independent's Mark Urban draws a different picture. He argues for an increasingly successful Soviet-Afghan consolidation from a very weak position in 1979, pointing out to those who say this is the Soviet's Vietnam that on State Department figures the Soviet force in Afghanistan has gone from 85,000 in 1979 to 118,000 men today, whereas U.S. strength in Vietnam went from 16,000 in 1964 to 539,000 in 1969. Though combined Soviet-Afghan forces are less than half the size of U.S. forces at their peak in Vietnam, their area of operations is 3 1/2 times as big, and unlike the U.S. raids against communist bases in Laos and Cambodia, there hasn't been a major Soviet incursion into Pakistan.    Conversely, though the resistance was unchallenged in about 90% of the country in 1980, the tide has never risen to such heights since. According to Mr. Urban, the mujahideen have not overcome any brigade-sized Afghan garrison or held a provincial capital.    &quot;One cannot escape the conclusion,&quot; he writes, &quot;that despite the moral righteousness of their war against the invader, many mujahideen spend little time fighting him. Thousands, perhaps tens of thousands, have perished in intergroup feuding. . . . The mercenary attitude of many fighters is exemplified by the number who have been bought out by the government. . . . No serving government generals have gone over to the mujahideen for ideological reasons during the last few years.&quot; So what would be the consequence of a Soviet withdrawal? Estimates of the weakness of Afghan government forces or popularity of the resistance or of its political coherence may well be askew. No Tet offensive has convinced the Soviet politbureau of the need to withdraw.    Does the Reagan administration really desire a settlement, which would mean arm-twisting the ramshackle guerrilla coalition into accepting a deal? Could the border security between Afghanistan and Pakistan, demanded by Mr. Gorbachev as a precondition for withdrawal, be enforced, even if the guerrillas, Pakistani President Zia ul-Haq or the Reagan administration were to desire it?    Beyond harassing the Soviets, what does the U.S. want to happen to the people of Afghanistan? It's time the romantic haze lifted and permitted a look at the real lie of the land.    ---   Mr. Cockburn is a columnist for The Nation. </TEXT></DOC>