<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881012-0109 </DOCNO><HL> Democracy Outwits the Pessimists </HL><AUTHOR> Marc F. Plattner </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   In his classic study &quot;The American Commonwealth,&quot; published a century ago, Lord Bryce remarked that American democracy was &quot;believed to disclose and display the type of institutions towards which, as by a law of fate, the rest of civilized mankind are forced to move, some with swifter, others with slower but all with unresting feet.&quot; By the 1970s, however, even the most dedicated democrats had begun to doubt that history was on their side.    Commenting in mid-1975 on Bryce's statement, Daniel Moynihan wrote: &quot;Now obviously the most important fact about the American experiment almost a century later is that ours evidently are not the institutions 'towards which, as by law of fate, the rest of civilized mankind are forced to move. . . .' To the contrary, liberal democracy on the American model increasingly tends to the condition of monarchy in the 19th century: a holdover form of government, one which persists in isolated or peculiar places here and there, and may even serve well enough for special circumstances, but which has simply no relevance to the future. It is where the world was, not where it is going.&quot;    How strange these words sound today, with the plebiscite in Chile just one of the latest examples of a democratic resurgence! Yet it is worth considering why the middle of 1975 seemed such a bleak moment for the friends of democracy.    That June, Indira Gandhi signaled the apparent demise of democracy in India by proclaiming a state of emergency. As a result, according to Freedom House's annual survey, the percentage of the world's population living in free countries dropped from 35% to just under 20% in a single year.    By 1975, hardly any democracies remained in Africa, where the democratic forms embodied in the constitutions of the newly independent nations quickly had given way to the reality of one-party states and military coups. The years leading up to 1975 were also unhappy ones for democracy in Latin America, as military regimes took power in one country after another. Particularly telling was the collapse in 1973 of the region's two most long-lived and well-entrenched democracies in Uruguay and in Chile.    Moreover, the vanishing of democracy in much of Asia, Africa and Latin America was accompanied by a heady new sense of solidarity and self-assertion in the Third World. OPEC's success in 1973 was widely taken as a sign that the economic predominance of the West was coming to an end. In 1974 developing countries joined forces at the United Nations to secure the proclamation of a New International Economic Order in which free international markets would be superseded by politically imposed agreements. While a few members of this voting bloc remained democracies, it was dominated by despotisms of both the right and the left.    Given this correlation of ideological forces, it is hardly surprising that Mr. Moynihan, then representing the U.S. at the U.N. after a stint as ambassador to India, despaired about the future of democracy in the developing world. Yet it is clear today that he was wrong. Democracy in the Third World has been advancing dramatically in the 1980s. In 1988, the percentage of the world's population classified by Freedom House as living in &quot;free&quot; countries reached 38.3%, and for the first time became the largest category.    What accounts for this remarkable shift? The most important factor is the massive economic and political failure of the various brands of authoritarianism in the Third World. Except for a handful of Arab countries with vast oil reserves and few people, the hoped for benefits of economic confrontation with the West did not materialize. And despotic rulers who adopted statist economic policies mostly achieved ruinous results, thereby further discrediting regimes whose brutality and corruption had prevented them from securing political legitimacy.    Obviously, however, the intrinsic appeal of democracy and the efforts of dedicated democrats also played a key role in the resurgence.    By 1977, Indians had shown the depth of their attachment to democracy and succeeded in achieving its restoration. Throughout 1975, a momentous struggle was being waged by the Portuguese to determine the post-authoritarian future of their country. With timely assistance from democratic forces in Western Europe, Portuguese democrats triumphed over their totalitarian rivals. Later that year the death of Franco in Spain set in motion another transition that ended happily for democracy. For the first time in history all of Western Europe was being governed democratically. The victories in Spain and Portugal also had profound significance for Latin America, giving the lie to the argument that the Catholic, corporatist, hierarchical and authoritarian traditions inherited from Spain and Portugal made democracy impossible there.    Finally, mention must be made of the new ideological vigor with which democrats began to defend their principles. Here Mr. Moynihan himself made an important contribution at the U.N., helping to pave the way for the human-rights offensive later launched by the Carter administration.    But while President Carter's human-rights policies powerfully reaffirmed the value of democratic liberties, their practical political consequences were not always so salutary. Thus the most critical political transitions of the late 1970s, in Iran and Nicaragua, led not to democratic pluralism but to anti-American regimes more repressive than their predecessors.    These two debacles carried an important lesson for both conservatives and liberals: Over the long run authoritarian regimes cannot be relied upon as stable allies of the U.S. Unless moderate democratic elements are strengthened and assisted, however, the downfall of such regimes can lead to disaster. Similarly, declarations in favor of human rights and condemnations of abuses have their place. But attention must also be paid to what President Reagan, in his 1982 speech to the British Parliament, called &quot;building the infrastructure of democracy.&quot;    Harvard Prof. Samuel Huntington noted last year that &quot;since 1974 two parallel processes of regime transition have been going on with a tremendous increase in the number of democratic regimes, but also a tremendous increase in the number of Marxist-Leninist regimes.&quot; According to one count he cited, &quot;the Marxist-Leninist regimes in the Third World went up from six at the end of the 1960s to 17 at the beginning of the 1980s.&quot; The danger that the breakdown of authoritarian regimes will bring Marxist-Leninists to power must remain of profound concern. But it is also worth emphasizing that no Marxist-Leninist regimes have been established during the 1980s.    This points to what is perhaps the most important reason to be optimistic about the future of democracy: Almost everywhere around the globe, Communist regimes are experiencing economic failure, a loss of ideological vitality, and a decline in whatever popular legitimacy they may have once possessed. The crisis has now unmistakably reached to the very heart of the Soviet Union itself, where Mikhail Gorbachev is trying desperately to breathe new life into a dying system.    Prof. Huntington has also noted that there have been numerous transitions from authoritarian to both democratic and Communist regimes, and from democratic back to authoritarian regimes. But &quot;no democratic country . . . became Communist and no Communist country became democratic through internal causes.&quot; (Indeed, no Communist regime had been replaced at all until the Marxist government of Grenada was toppled by the U.S. intervention in 1983.) Now, however, it appears quite likely that the Communist government in Afghanistan may soon fall due principally to internal causes. A new species of transition must now be considered -- the breakdown of Communist regimes.    It would be foolish to expect a quick or easy emergence of democracy from the dictatorships that still govern most of the developing world. Indeed, it would be unrealistic to expect that all the countries that have recently become democratic will remain so. Yet I would predict that at the beginning of the next century, today's optimism about democracy will prove to have been better founded than the pessimism that reigned in 1975.    ---   Mr. Plattner is director of program at the National Endowment for Democracy, funded mostly by Congress, which supports efforts to strengthen democratic institutions abroad. </TEXT></DOC>