<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870908-0099 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> LABORTEXTILES AND APPAREL (TEX)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> LOS ANGELES  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Along Washington Boulevard, in the heart of the city's garment district, a hand-lettered sign hangs above a battered door. It reads, &quot;Necesitamos operadoras con experiencia,&quot; or &quot;We need experienced operators.&quot;    For the apparel industry in the West, it's a sign of the times. The nation's new immigration law, which was signed last November, has made it illegal to hire the undocumented immigrants who have been the lifeblood of the rag trade here for generations. So California garment makers say they're scrambling for workers just as their market has begun to expand, partly because of the popularity of Southern California styles.    Some licensed manufacturers say they plan to turn to a government program that lets them legally bring in foreign workers. A few say they'll raise wages substantially or improve benefits to attract documented immigrants or U.S. citizens. Meanwhile, the threat of stiff fines is pushing many unlicensed sweatshops even further underground.    Although foreign competition has steadily eroded the domestic apparel industry over the past decade, the local garment trade is enjoying modest growth. Fueled by the supply of inexpensive labor and local designers, as well as by the demand for the &quot;Made in U.S.A.&quot; label, California's apparel industry is now second only to New York's in sales and employees.    Three-quarters of the state's apparel industry is based in Los Angeles County, according to state and U.S. Census Bureau figures. Sales of garments made here reached an estimated $4.5 billion in 1986, up nearly 51% since 1980. By comparison, 350,000 U.S. production workers nationwide have lost their jobs in the past decade because of imports, union leaders say.    But manufacturers and contractors, who employ many of the approximately 120,000 garment workers in the Los Angeles area, say they can't keep up with increasing demand. Industry officials worry that the dearth of workers, along with proposed increases in the legal minimum wage, may push the garment trade permanently abroad. They also fear that the underground part of the industry will thrive as undocumented workers turn to unscrupulous employers to survive.    &quot;Really, we've got to decide whether we want the garment industry in this country,&quot; says Garth Ward, president of the Garment Contractors Association of Southern California.    Losses vary from three or four workers in small shops to dozens in larger establishments, and employers say very few new workers have come forward to fill the vacancies. Now that the Immigration and Naturalization Service has begun citing companies for noncompliance with the new law, many workers are being scared off, fearful of wary employers, INS raids and deportation. Confusion over the complicated immigration law has exacerbated the problem.    In Mr. Ward's shop, the work force has dwindled to 80 workers from a peak of 140 last November, he says, despite weeks of advertising in Spanish-language newspapers.    C.E. Harthorne, co-owner of Cal Sew, a contractor, says, &quot;We're off about 20 people right now, even though things have slowed up a little in the last month or two.&quot; Until recently, Cal Sew had been reduced to one major customer, but not because the customers weren't available. &quot;We didn't have enough workers, and at the time I was hiring anything that sewed,&quot; Mr. Harthorne says.    &quot;We haven't had any new workers in weeks,&quot; says Dennis Emery, owner of Flair Sportswear in South El Monte, Calif., as he walks a visitor past mounds of brightly colored fabric. Dozens of workers, bent over machines, roll a steady flow of sweat pants through the factory.    Part of the problem, as Mr. Emery sees it, is that Americans just won't sew for a living. &quot;I run a couple of video stores, where they earn about as much as these people,&quot; Mr. Emery muses as he looks out at his workroom. &quot;I never have any problems hiring workers there.&quot;    Some contractors say they've been forced to turn away new business. Faced with empty machines and backlogged orders, some are hoping to turn to an ironic solution: importing documented foreign workers.    Unions and immigrants' rights groups question the apparel makers' claims of worker shortages. They charge that many employers are reluctant to modernize equipment, train new workers or offer vacation and health benefits to increase their work forces. Instead, the critics say, employers are looking to the federally monitored foreign-worker program to provide them with a docile, relatively inexpensive work force.    &quot;The industry is notorious for violations of home-work, child labor and minimum-wage laws,&quot; says Steven Nutter, Western regional director of the International Ladies Garment Workers Union. &quot;If the employers offered a living wage and benefits, they'd have no problem attracting workers,&quot; he adds.    Under the foreign worker program, employers may import laborers after proving that no domestic workers are willing to fill the vacancies. Virginia Son, labor attache with the Philippine Consulate here, has begun processing paperwork to bring in as many as 3,000 trained seamstresses from the Philippines.    Depending on the government's approval, the first few hundred temporary workers could be on their way to the United States by the fall, Ms. Son said. The workers would be guaranteed wages comparable to those of their American counterparts, well above the $2.75 per day they would earn in Manila.    Industry executives expect vociferous opposition from unions and other groups, and even proponents concede that it's a stopgap measure. &quot;We're trying to keep the industry here, if we can,&quot; says Bernard Z. Brown, an official of the Coalition of Apparel Industries in California.    Despite the publicity generated by the new immigration laws, critics and employers alike say that the reform is only one of several serious issues facing the industry. A proposed increase in the legal minimum wage could have as severe an impact on the industry, and may in itself cause countless small shops to shut down, they say.    Most employers offer a base wage of $3.35 an hour, the legal minimum, with increases allotted for piecework. Although skilled workers can earn as much as $10 an hour, the average worker earns somewhere between $4 and $4.50 an hour.    Despite their need for workers, employers say there hasn't been any significant overall increase in wages in the past few months, though some are guaranteeing a higher base wage. &quot;The real obstacle to wage increases is not industry reluctance, but external causes like foreign competitors paying ridiculous wages,&quot; says Adolfo Mendez, executive director of the American Apparel Manufacturers Association's Western division. &quot;The real question is whether the consumer, via the retailer, is willing to see an increase in costs.&quot;    Manufacturers and producers warn that prices could be boosted by a prolonged labor shortage or a rise in the minimum wage. The more likely result, however, is that sewing work will continue to flow overseas or to Mexico.    Beyond that, the unions, advocacy groups and most legitimate apparel makers worry that the immigration laws will force undocumented workers deeper underground. Unscrupulous contractors, who have traditionally preyed on undocumented immigrants, appear willing to risk heavy penalties to cash in on the demand for California-style clothing.    &quot;It's real tempting,&quot; said one licensed contractor who asked not to be identified. &quot;You know these guys are undercutting you, and it's real frustrating to watch them get your orders,&quot; because they're taking advantage of their workers, he adds.    Unscrupulous operators even have been able to lower wages and working conditions, knowing that undocumented workers who don't qualify for amnesty won't be hired by many employers. As a result, there have been reports of sweatshops reducing their already low wages to as little as $1.25 an hour. The workers, in most cases, have no choice but to accept.    In certain suburbs, small shops have sprouted almost overnight as high rents and the fear of raids by the INS prompt some contractors to move away from the downtown district. Although there are about 4,000 registered contractors in the area, industry experts say there are anywhere from several hundred to several thousand unlicensed operators working out of warehouses or homes, and there is no estimate of their share of the market.    In Huntington Park, a largely Hispanic suburb a few miles east of downtown, a group of women gathered around a lunch truck say they don't see any changes in their work places in the months since the law took effect. Some have heard rumors that they'll be fired if they don't provide documentation, but they have either resorted to false documents or decided to do nothing.    Most say they work six days a week for an average of about $2.75 an hour, and virtually all say they wouldn't qualify for the amnesty available under the immigration law.    But all of them agree that they'll stay unless they're deported. &quot;People need clothes,&quot; says one middle-aged woman. &quot;And we need to eat.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>