<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880630-0009 </DOCNO><HL> What's News: World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE SUPREME COURT UPHELD the validity of the special prosecutor law.    Voting 7-1, the high court said it didn't find any constitutional problem with the use of independent counsels to investigate top federal officials. Such special prosecutors, who were authorized by Congress in 1978 following the Watergate scandal, currently are investigating the Iran-Contra affair and Attorney General Meese. The justices' ruling also reaffirms independent-counsel prosecutions of former White House aides Deaver, who was convicted of perjury, and Nofziger, who was found guilty of federal ethics-law violations.    The court, which adjourned until October after issuing its final rulings, is to release a list today on additional cases it plans to review next term.    ---   COMMUNIST DELEGATES DEBATED Gorbachev's restructuring plans.    As the 19th national Communist Party conference in Moscow entered its second day, delegates split openly over the pace of social and economic changes and the media's new independence under Kremlin leader Gorbachev. The delegates also argued over how long a Soviet leader should remain in power and ordered an inquiry into a report that some of the 5,000 party officials in attendance were involved in bribe-taking.    Armenia's party leader said Soviet authorities had failed to ease tensions in the republic following unrest over the disputed Nagorno-Karabakh region.    ---   Reagan criticized Dukakis, labeling the Democrat a &quot;true liberal&quot; who would be sure to raise taxes and imperil economic recovery if elected president. Campaigning for Bush in Miami, the president contended that the Massachusetts governor has increased state taxes and boosted spending at twice the rate of the federal government.    Georgia's Sen. Nunn formally removed himself from consideration as a potential running mate with Dukakis on the Democratic presidential ticket. The decision follows weeks of private discussions in which the Southern conservative has told the Dukakis camp of his lack of interest in the vice presidency.    ---   A U.S. judge in New York ruled that the federal government can't close the PLO's observer mission to the U.N. The judge said the Anti-Terrorism Act passed by Congress, which brands the PLO a terrorist group, doesn't supersede U.S. obligations under its 1947 headquarters pact with the U.N.    ---   The U.S. and Israel agreed to cooperate on the development of a new tactical missile designed to counter a growing threat presented by Arab ballistic missiles and chemical weapons. Israeli Defense Minister Rabin, in Washington for talks with U.S. officials, said the new missiles could be ready for testing within three years.    ---   Shultz traveled to Central America to discuss the stalemated cease-fire talks between the Nicaraguan government and the Contras. The secretary of state will visit Guatemala, El Salvador, Honduras and Costa Rica. An official said an administration plan to seek renewed military aid for the rebels won't be a major topic during the trip.    ---   Wright lobbied more intensively and extensively than he has described on behalf of four Texas businessmen, newly released documents and recent interviews show. And the data show that the House speaker, subject of an ethics committee inquiry, accused Sandamp;L regulators of high-handed treatment of a campaign donor.    ---   The House approved a measure to broaden protections against housing bias and speed review of complaints. The bill, passed 376-23 and sent to the Senate, would require HUD to investigate discrimination complaints and permit the department to act on behalf of a victim of discrimination.    ---   South Korea announced that it would release 46 political prisoners today, but opposition leaders contended that hundreds of others remain jailed. Among those to be freed is dissident Kim Kun Tae, who received a five-year prison term in 1986 for attempting to overthrow the Seoul government.    ---   Britain's government proposed a liberalization of the country's sweeping secrecy laws by decriminalizing so-called trivial leaks of information and giving journalists more legal protection. The draft proposals would confine secrecy mainly to defense, intelligence and foreign affairs.    ---   South Africa said a Cuban and Angolan raid on Pretoria's forces in southern Angola could undermine talks to end Luanda's civil war. At least 12 South African soldiers were killed in Monday's attack. South Africa, Angola, Cuba and the U.S. have held three rounds of peace talks since May. A fourth round is set for next month in the U.S.    ---   Archbishop Lefebvre ordained rebel priests at a ceremony in Switzerland, telling the clergymen that they had a &quot;responsibility to disobey&quot; a liberal papacy. The ordination by the traditionalist prelate came a day before today's threatened consecration of four new bishops, a move likely to lead to a schism in the Roman Catholic Church.    ---   The AMA approved a report calling for expanded treatment of drug abusers and other changes in the country's fight against illegal drugs. And the medical association's policy-making body rejected a ban on publishing articles about euthanasia, but reaffirmed its opposition to mercy killing.    ---   Two Air Force F-16 jets crashed over Bodenheim, West Germany, and exploded, killing one pilot, police said. The in-flight incident during a training mission occurred shortly after another F-16 crashed in the Black Forest. The pilot of that fighter plane ejected safely, officials said. </TEXT></DOC>