<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880512-0061 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Stopping START </HL><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><IN> ARO NUK </IN><G> CNG EXE </G><TEXT>   Senate Majority Leader Robert Byrd said this week that so far as he is concerned May 29, the date of the Moscow summit, is just another number on the calendar. In other words, Senate leaders had no remorse about postponing a vote on the INF treaty even if it means no ratification before the summit. And in still other words, Ronald Reagan's arms-control initiatives are running into trouble from an unlikely source, Senators once positioned to his left.    Technically, the Senate is balking because it is not satisfied with the INF verification deal struck with the Soviets by Shultz, Nitze, Kampelman and company. For example, how do we know SS-20 stages aren't coming out of that assembly plant at Votkinsk if we aren't allowed to look inside the smaller canisters?    But there is lot more than that going on. Election-year politics are a factor to be sure, but so are genuine concerns among serious-minded Senators of both parties about Ronald Reagan's latter-day love affair with arms control.    As to election-year politics, George Bush has managed to get himself trapped with Mr. Reagan in the arms-control bag prepared for them by Mikhail Gorbachev and the international left. So even American politicians who had a hand in pushing them in that direction are not above accusing them of being ninnies for getting caught. And they have a point, for whether or not the Senate ratifies the INF treaty, a lot of damage already has been done.    Mr. Gorbachev's strategy of trying to decouple the U.S. from Europe -- which is what his INF proposal was designed to do -- is working quite well. West German bankers have just come up with a $2.1 billion loan for the hard-pressed Russians to enable them to modernize their factories with German equipment. Denmark this week came within a shade of taking itself out of NATO over the question of whether nuclear-armed NATO ships can call at Danish ports. U.S. efforts to persuade its European allies to modernize their deterrent forces as a corollary to the withdrawal of medium-range missiles are stalled. The INF deal removes missiles from West Germany that could strike the Soviets while at the same time leaving in place Soviet missiles that can strike Germany.    Since the Soviets already are achieving their political goals, they aren't displaying much concern about whether the Senate ratifies or not. If SALT II is any guide, the U.S. will follow an unratified treaty, giving them the best of both worlds.    What most concerns the Senate, however, is not INF but START, Mr. Reagan's vision of a sharp reduction of nuclear warheads by both the U.S. and the Soviets. Verification of the INF agreement is a snap compared with verification of any such strategic-arms bargain; if we can't even look inside a canister for supposedly outlawed SS-20s at a designated verification site, what chance would there be of finding all the mobile Soviet ICBMs spotted around its vast territory? Yet until recently there were hopeful noises coming out of the State Department and White House about some sort of START agreement at Moscow, perhaps a framework agreement to be followed by another summit after this fall's election.    Several Senators decided it was time to slow this thing down. Senator David Boren (D., Okla.), head of the Intelligence Committee, was among those most concerned. In a START treaty, he knew, verification would not only be infinitely harder but the stakes, in terms of the direct threat to U.S. security, would be higher. Whoa, said Senator Boren and ultimately so did Senator Byrd.    The asymmetry that is developing in U.S. and Soviet nuclear power is becoming all too evident. The Soviets have mobile missiles that can be hidden; the U.S. does not. The Soviets have a well-developed system of civil-defense shelters; the U.S. does not. The Soviets are rapidly developing an anti-ballistic missile (ABM) defense; the U.S. remains hung up in a political debate over whether the 1972 ABM treaty prevents it from doing even the simplest things to protect its stationary MXs from attack.    Secretary Shultz is in Geneva this week palavering with Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze over the verification questions the Senate has brought up. State and the White House are trying to sound optimistic that the Senate objections will be overcome and ratification will get back on the track. Could be, but it appears that the more the Senate learns about what has been going on in Geneva the more convinced it is that yet another American administration has been snookered into letting the Soviets turn arms-control talks to their own purposes. If that discovery is beginning to cause discomfort for Mr. Reagan, Mr. Shultz and Mr. Bush, they certainly can't say they weren't warned. </TEXT></DOC>