<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870304-0002 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 03/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE WHITE HOUSE SAID Reagan will nominate Webster as CIA director.    Citing the FBI chief's &quot;honor and integrity,&quot; the president, in a statement, announced his intention a day after the nomination of Deputy CIA Director Gates was withdrawn. Reagan offered the job to Webster after being rebuffed by at least two other candidates. Officals said the FBI chief, who was reluctant to succeed Casey, accepted after repeated appeals by top White House aides.    Reagan told national security staffers that &quot;legal issues must be addressed head-on and the rule of law respected&quot; in developing foreign policy.    REAGAN SAID the U.S. will present a draft arms-control treaty in Geneva today.    The president said U.S. arms negotiators would offer to the Soviets a counterproposal to eliminate medium-range missiles in Europe and then return to Washington for consultations. Reagan welcomed Gorbachev's arms proposal, made Saturday, which dropped demands to limit U.S. development of a space-based antimissile system, and said any pact &quot;must be effectively verifiable.&quot;    Officials throughout Europe said that the dismantling of the midrange weapons would bring substantial military risks for the Western alliance.    ---   THE SUPREME COURT SAID U.S. law protects those with contagious diseases.    In a decision that could bolster the rights of AIDS victims, the justices ruled 7-2 that people with contagious diseases are covered by a federal law that prohibits discrimination against the handicapped in federally aided programs. The decision will make it harder for federally assisted employers, landlords and program administrators to fire or refuse access to people with contagious diseases.    The ruling, which didn't directly involve AIDS patients, will revive a lawsuit by a Florida teacher who was dismissed because she had tuberculosis.    ---   Craxi resigned as Italy's prime minister, saying a rift in the five-party coalition had become &quot;harmful.&quot; The resignation of the Socialist premier, Italy's longest-serving postwar leader, was presented to President Cossiga. Craxi will stay on in a caretaker role. The resignation, which was expected, could lead to early general elections.    ---   A federal grand jury indicted a senior Israeli air force officer on charges of espionage. The three-count indictment, returned in Washington, accuses Aviem Sella of recruiting convicted spy Jonathan Jay Pollard to gather and sell classified U.S. military data helpful to Israel. Pollard, a former Navy employee, is to be sentenced today.    ---   Shultz met in Beijing with Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping and delivered a letter from Reagan citing &quot;a remarkable expansion&quot; of Sino-American relations since diplomatic ties were established in 1979. Deng said China's recent wave of political unrest was over, and Shultz said he was convinced that economic changes would continue.    ---   The White House proposed an additional $300 million in economic aid for four Central American nations -- El Salvador, Guatemala, Costa Rica and Honduras. The move was viewed as an effort to help ensure the release of a final $40 million installment of previously approved assistance for Nicaraguan rebels.    ---   Demonstrators in Seoul clashed with almost 30,000 South Korean riot police during rallies to protest the Jan. 14 death of a student during police interrogation. Violent confrontations, which coincided with the sixth anniversary of President Chun's inauguration, also were reported in six other cities throughout South Korea.    ---   Philippine President Aquino directed her cabinet to draft a comprehensive agrarian program, and said she may sign it into law before a new Congress convenes in July. Aquino's remarks came as about 1,500 peasants marched near the presidential palace in Manila to demand farm land.    ---   Iran said its troops made fresh gains in fighting near the Iraqi city of Basra, taking control of territory about six miles east of the southern port. There wasn't any comment from Baghdad on Iran's claims, but an Iraqi general said he expected a new Iranian offensive in the area soon.    ---   Afghan warplanes bombed Pakistan border villages and refugee camps, killing at least one person and wounding four others, officials in Islamabad said. It was the third such raid reported in a week. Meanwhile, Western diplomats said Soviet and Afghan forces launched an attack last week against Moslem rebels north of Kabul.    ---   Britain formally announced that Prime Minister Thatcher will visit the Soviet Union March 16-17 for her first full-scale talks since taking office more than seven years ago. She is expected to discuss superpower disarmament negotiations with Gorbachev.    ---   Died: Danny Kaye, 74, actor and comedian, in Los Angeles, of heart failure caused by internal bleeding and hepatitis. </TEXT></DOC>