<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880404-0024 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   SHULTZ ARRIVED in Israel as Rabin unveiled a policy change to quell unrest.    The U.S. secretary of state, on his second Mideast peace mission in five weeks, called for Israel to act on a U.S. plan for talks aimed at Palestinian self-rule. He insisted that &quot;peace is possible,&quot; but that &quot;time mustn't be lost debating&quot; elements of Washington's proposal. Upon Shultz's arrival, Israeli Defense Minister Rabin announced that the army would take the offensive against Palestinians to &quot;suppress the violence.&quot; He said Israeli troops had initiated clashes with Arabs Saturday, in which six demonstrators were killed.    Three more Palestinians died in the Israeli-occupied territories as continuing violence prompted the cancellation of some Easter and Passover services.    ---   MEESE FACES Justice Department turmoil despite a lack of criminal charges.    Independent prosecutor McKay said Friday that he doesn't plan to seek an indictment against the attorney general, and although the inquiry will continue &quot;at least through the end of April,&quot; prosecutors already are concluding their work. Despite the announcement, persistent morale problems reportedly are afflicting the Justice Department, coupled with an erosion of support for Meese among congressional Republicans and Democrats.    Meese, whose involvement with Wedtech and an Iraqi pipeline plan were the subject of the inquiry, also has become a target for Democratic candidates.    ---   Presidential candidates prepared for today's Colorado caucuses and tomorrow's primary elections in Wisconsin, taking their politicking to Easter church services in both states. With Bush almost assured of the GOP nomination, attention was turned to the Democratic contest, where polls showed Dukakis leading Jackson and Gore.    ---   The U.S. is sending 1,300 more troops to Panama this week as Washington considers its next move in a campaign to oust Noriega. The troops are to &quot;enhance the security&quot; of U.S. facilities. U.S. officials said a wide range of diplomatic, political and military options are being weighed, but that a decision on the matter wasn't imminent.    Panama's acting president said the country's defense forces had been &quot;ordered to abstain&quot; from using arms against the U.S. military unless attacked. Meanwhile, U.S. officials said the car of the U.S. envoy to Panama City was chased by local police. The incident was viewed as a further act of harassment of U.S. citizens in Panama.    ---   The Reagan administration will withdraw duty-free privileges from $1.1 billion in imports from such developing Third World nations as Taiwan, Singapore, Mexico and South Korea. The action, effective July 1, continues a congressionally directed policy of redistributing benefits to countries that need them most.    ---   Nicaragua's rebels said they would delay cease-fire talks with the Sandinista government for a week. The high-level negotiations, aimed at arranging a permanent truce in the seven-year-old civil war, were scheduled to begin Wednesday in Managua. The government called on the Contras to comply with the original timetable.    ---   Philippine troops were placed on alert for the fugitive leader of last August's violent coup attempt. Col. Gregorio &quot;Gringo&quot; Honasan escaped from a Manila prison ship Saturday with 14 guards said to be sympathetic to his cause. President Aquino warned soldiers against aiding the rebel officer, who nearly ousted her in the failed coup.    ---   Shevardnadze traveled to Kabul to confer with Afghan government leaders on policy options in case talks in Geneva fail to reach an accord leading to the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan. In Pakistan, Afghan rebel leaders said the U.S. has halted shipments of Stinger anti-aircraft missiles in anticipation of a pact.    ---   Iraq said its warplanes raided two Iranian refineries near the cities of Isfahan and Tabriz, but Tehran said the bombs struck residential areas, killing at least 10 civilians and wounding about 50 others. A senior Iranian official said Tehran would respond to the Iraqi attacks, the first in several days, by launching &quot;punitive&quot; ground offensives.    ---   South Korea's government has apologized and offered compensation for hundreds of people killed and wounded when its troops put down a 1980 civil revolt in the southern city of Kwangju. The statement, issued Friday by President Roh Tae Woo's new administration, was the first official apology for Seoul's handling of the uprising.    ---   India could surpass China as the world's most populous nation in less than 60 years, the Census Bureau estimated. The bureau's annual projection also showed that the world's population, which recently surpassed the five-billion mark, is expected to reach 10 billion people by the year 2040. </TEXT></DOC>