<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880623-0103 </DOCNO><HL> GAF Is Studied for Possible Violations Of U.S. Securities Laws, Sources Say </HL><AUTHOR> James B. Stewart and Daniel Hertzberg (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GAF UK JEFG </CO><IN> STK SCR CHM TNM </IN><G> SEC JUS </G><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   GAF Corp. is being investigated by the federal government for possible criminal securities-law violations in its accumulation of stock in Union Carbide Corp., people familiar with the investigation said.    GAF made a hostile 1985 takeover bid for Carbide and continued to threaten Carbide until it reached a standstill agreement with the giant, Danbury, Conn., chemical company late in 1986.    GAF and at least one of its top officials, James Sherwin, vice chairman and chief administrative officer, have been named as having participated in an alleged stock-parking and manipulation scheme by Boyd L. Jefferies, former chairman of Jefferies andamp; Co., a Los Angeles-based securities firm, the people said. Mr. Jefferies pleaded guilty last year to two felonies after being implicated in a stock-parking scheme by the now-imprisoned former takeover speculator Ivan F. Boesky.    GAF thus becomes the first industrial corporation to be identified as a target of the government's widening investigation of wrongdoing in the securities industry. The investigation is likely to cloud the proposed $1.27 billion leveraged buy-out of GAF led by its chairman, Samuel J. Heyman, and comes at an especially sensitive time for the chemical and building products concern, which is based in Wayne, N.J. GAF has just submitted to the Securities and Exchange Commission proposed offering documents for the buy-out.    A spokesman for GAF declined comment. Mr. Sherwin declined comment. Peter Morrison, an attorney for Mr. Jefferies, also declined comment.    Since Mr. Boesky's agreement to plead guilty and cooperate with the government in November 1986, the insider-trading scandal has spread from arbitragers to prominent securities firms, investment bankers and corporate raiders. Mr. Jefferies has already named arbitrager Salim B. Lewis and corporate raider Paul Bilzerian in alleged securities violations. Both have denied any wrongdoing, and no charges have been filed against the two men.    The people familiar with the GAF investigation said the government appears to be gathering evidence that Jefferies andamp; Co. accumulated a substantial block of Carbide stock pursuant to an undisclosed agreement between Mr. Jefferies and Mr. Sherwin in which GAF agreed to reimburse the Jefferies firm for any loss incurred on the stock.    While such agreements are often evidence of parking arrangements intended to conceal the true ownership of the stock, people with knowledge of the situation declined to provide details of the alleged arrangement or to disclose GAF's motive. Nor would they provide details of any alleged effort to manipulate the price of Carbide's stock.    GAF, advised and financed largely by Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., launched a hostile tender offer for Carbide in December 1985, but dropped the offer after Carbide responded with a $3.3 billion restructuring. GAF continued to threaten Carbide during 1986, and the alleged scheme could relate to that period, people familiar with the investigation said. In April 1986 Mr. Heyman estimated that GAF made $175 million on its Carbide investment.    If the government finds sufficient evidence to support the allegations, GAF could face multiple charges of securities-law violations, including market manipulation of Carbide stock. But the U.S. attorney's office in Manhattan, which is handling the investigation, doesn't appear to have decided whether it will seek criminal charges against the company or against individuals, or both, and apparently hasn't yet recommended any charges to a grand jury that is hearing evidence in the case.    Nonetheless, the existence of the criminal investigation suggests the seriousness with which the government views alleged securities-law violations in the context of takeover bids.    People familiar with the case note that GAF's Mr. Sherwin didn't derive any direct financial benefit from the alleged arrangement with Jefferies, an element of the case which might persuade prosecutors not to seek criminal charges against him. A spokesman for the U.S. attorney's office in Manhattan declined comment on this and all other aspects of this story.    Although GAF's chairman, Mr. Heyman, is said to have had contacts with Mr. Jefferies, and prosecutors have been questioning witnesses about what Mr. Heyman knew about the alleged scheme, Mr. Heyman doesn't appear to be a target of the investigation. Mr. Heyman, who quickly earned a reputation as an astute chief executive and corporate raider following his successful proxy fight for control of GAF in 1983, is himself a former federal prosecutor. He recently endowed, in his and his wife's names, a center for corporate governance at Benjamin Cardozo Law School of Yeshiva University. Among other topics, the Samuel and Ronnie Heyman Center has focused on corporate ethics. The GAF spokesman said Mr. Heyman wasn't available for comment.    Besides potential criminal charges, GAF could face civil charges from the SEC. As it did in its recent successful stock-parking case involving the Belzberg family in their accumulation of Ashland Oil Inc. stock, the SEC could seek disgorgement of all profits GAF earned on its Carbide stock, as well as penalties and injunctive relief. A spokeswoman for the SEC declined comment.    The investigation also appears likely to cloud the already star-crossed proposed leveraged buy-out of GAF. Securities lawyers said GAF will almost certainly have to disclose details of the investigation in its prospectus for the leveraged buy-out, which is currently being reviewed by the SEC staff. While the spokeswoman for the SEC said only that &quot;all material facts must be disclosed&quot; in such a prospectus, lawyers noted that other investigations, such as the SEC's continuing investigation of corporate raider and TWA chairman Carl Icahn, have been disclosed in prospectuses.    Depending on their assessment of the potential financial consequences to GAF, the disclosure could lead those financing the proposed GAF buy-out to reassess their commitments. Most of the money for the buy-out is being provided by a syndicate of banks led by Chase Manhattan Bank and by high-yield junk bonds to be underwritten by Drexel and Merrill Lynch andamp; Co.    Mr. Heyman originally proposed a $2.3 billion leveraged buy-out of GAF last September. After October's stock market crash, he canceled the proposal, citing rising interest rates. Mr. Heyman renewed the proposal at a lower price last December, and Wall Street investors have said they expect the buy-out to be completed later this year. Reflecting that optimism, GAF's stock price has stayed close to the proposed buy-out price of $51 a share. Yesterday, GAF shares closed at $48.125, up 12.5 cents in composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange. </TEXT></DOC>