<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881006-0001 </DOCNO><HL> Politics and Policy -- Campaign '88: Bentsen Outperforms Quayle in Debate --- Showing by Texas Democrat Is Strong, but Damage To GOP Is Uncertain </HL><AUTHOR> Gerald F. Seib and David Rogers (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> CNG EXE </G><TEXT>   The Democratic ticket was helped by a strong performance by Sen. Lloyd Bentsen in the vice presidential debate, but it wasn't clear whether Sen. Dan Quayle did so poorly as to undermine Republican chances.    The nationally televised debate in Omaha, Neb., was marked by sharp exchanges, the highlight of which came when the 41-year-old Sen. Quayle said his level of experience is comparable to that of John F. Kennedy when he sought the presidency in 1960. &quot;Senator, you're no Jack Kennedy,&quot; the 67-year-old Sen. Bentsen retorted.    Sen. Bentsen came across as a tough, mature Texan, who was in command for most of the evening as the candidates discussed qualifications and character at length and also argued over trade, Social Security, the deficit and campaign donations.    Sen. Quayle sometimes looked nervous, sometimes cocky. He had his most difficult time saying what he would do if he had to take over presidential duties in a crisis, a question the debate panelists asked three times. Sen. Quayle each time answered by listing his qualifications.    But Sen. Quayle didn't make any big mistakes and periodically took the offensive by assailing Democratic candidate Michael Dukakis rather than Sen. Bentsen on the environment, national defense and taxes.    The Indiana Senator tried to recover from Sen. Bentsen's cutting remark about former President Kennedy by responding icily: &quot;That was really uncalled for, Senator.&quot;    Although it seemed evident that Sen. Bentsen gave the far more polished performance last night, Republicans were hopeful that expectations were so low for Sen. Quayle -- who has been constantly criticized and even ridiculed since his selection -- that merely staying on his feet for 90 minutes and not making any embarrassing slip-ups will remove him as a liability for the GOP ticket.    The post-debate analysis fell along predictable partisan lines, with each side saying that its man did better. But Democrats seemed especially buoyant. &quot;If this had been an Olympics boxing match, they would have had to stop the fight,&quot; said Tennessee Sen. Albert Gore Jr.    For their part, Republicans insisted that Sen. Quayle had refuted critics who say he is a lightweight. &quot;Sen. Quayle was outstanding, commanding and assured,&quot; said Vice President George Bush. &quot;I couldn't be happier.&quot;    Other Republicans complained about both the questions and Sen. Bentsen. Martin Anderson, the former top domestic policy adviser to President Reagan, said an overriding impression will be that Sen. Bentsen's remark about John Kennedy came across as &quot;nasty.&quot; Wyoming Sen. Alan Simpson complained that the questioners were unfair in asking Mr. Quayle several times what he'd do if he became president, but not posing the same question to Sen. Bentsen.    But Democrats harped on the Quayle answer -- or, they alleged, nonanswer -- to the question. &quot;On the key question of the night -- what he'd do if he was president -- he said he'd say a prayer, have a meeting and know everybody's name,&quot; charged Dukakis campaign manager Susan Estrich.    The debate dwelt most extensively on questions of character and the qualifications of the two vice presidential candidates to serve in the Oval Office. Sen. Quayle repeatedly stressed that, despite his youth, his eight years in the Senate and four years in the House made him more experienced than many others who have been nominated for vice president.    In their closing remarks, both candidates dwelt on the future. &quot;The road of George Bush is the road to the future,&quot; Sen. Quayle declared in an appeal that seemed squarely aimed at his own Baby Boom generation. Ronald Reagan and Mr. Bush, he asserted, had &quot;saved America,&quot; while &quot;Michael Dukakis fought us every step of the way.&quot; He strongly attacked the Massachusetts governor, asserting that he would lead the nation toward higher taxes, economic stagnation and a weaker defense.    Sen. Bentsen stuck to a more thematic approach. He characterized the GOP ticket as one that urges the country to &quot;lower your sights, rest on your laurels.&quot; The GOP ticket, he said, would put the country on &quot;automatic pilot.&quot; By contrast, he said, the Dukakis-Bentsen ticket believes that &quot;America can't just coast into the future.&quot; Echoing the themes of Mr. Dukakis's own closing statement in his debate with Mr. Bush, the senator said, &quot;Michael Dukakis says the best America is yet to come.&quot;    Money -- both what the government raises and spends and what finances political campaigns -- was a recurrent theme in the debate. Mr. Bentsen was the aggressor in most cases, citing Mr. Quayle's voting record on cutting programs for child nutrition and health. But he was forced to defend the large contributions he receives from political action committees representing private interests.    &quot;I'm sure they weren't paying to have cornflakes,&quot; said Mr. Quayle in sarcastic reference to a breakfast club organized by Sen. Bentsen last year to solicit campaign contributions from lobbyists with a stake in legislation before the Senate Finance Committee that he heads. Though the club was quickly disbanded after its existence was publicized, Mr. Bentsen has raised nearly $2 million from political action committees to defend his Senate seat in November -- a record level of such contributions.    &quot;He's disbanded the club, but he's still got the money,&quot; said Mr. Quayle, provoking laughter. &quot;He is the number one receiver of political action money.&quot; Mr. Quayle ranks 25th in Congress with his career total of about $1.6 million from political committees.    After admitting again his error in establishing the club, Sen. Bentsen argued that Mr. Quayle opposed campaign &quot;reform&quot; legislation in Congress.    The Texan was clearly most comfortable when addressing domestic policy. He peppered his remarks with statistics, and despite his own patrician past, he portrayed himself as being on the side of working families.    When Mr. Quayle was asked about criticism that the Reagan administration was lax in enforcing occupational safety rules, the Republican answered that many businessmen still complain about the regulations. By comparison, Mr. Bentsen congratulated most employers for complying, but then pointedly faulted those who put profit above the safety of employees.    On Social Security, Mr. Quayle pointed to Mr. Bentsen's own votes in support of delaying cost-of-living increases for elderly recipients. But the young senator, who supported the repeal of minimum benefits in 1981, nevertheless found himself on the defensive. Sen. Bentsen said, &quot;He has been of no help at all when it comes to passing the most major welfare reform bill in the history of our country.&quot; Reciting a list of Mr. Quayle's votes against spending increases for child nutrition and immunization, the Democrat added, &quot;Now I don't really believe that is identifying with the concerns of people in poverty.&quot;    But Sen. Quayle countered, &quot;Poverty hasn't gone up in this administration.&quot; He argued that the government is spending more on poverty programs now than in 1981. In fact, the poverty rate is slightly below the level at which it stood when Mr. Reagan took office, but Census Bureau figures show that the number of persons below the poverty line has increased in the past eight years.    Sen. Quayle said, correctly, that federal expenditures, particularly in the area of health, have grown. But these increases came only after child nutrition programs were cut as much as 31% and welfare programs 12%, after inflation, in 1981.    Referring to the extensive media examination of his service in the National Guard during the Vietnam War and his mediocre academic record, Sen. Quayle called himself &quot;the most investigated person ever to seek public office.&quot;    He acknowledged his academic record in college was only average. &quot;I have never said that I was anything more than that, but it's not whether you're an average student, it's what are you going to do with your life,&quot; he said.    Though he seemed uneasy at times, Sen. Quayle didn't make any gaffes or serious misstatements, as Republicans feared he might. He remained calm and spoke carefully, though in an apparently well-rehearsed manner, under tough questioning.    Sen. Quayle did level some erroneous accusations, though. He repeated GOP charges that Mr. Dukakis raised taxes five times as governor of Massachusetts. In fact, even a Bush campaign fact sheet lists only four tax increases proposed by Mr. Dukakis during his 10 years in office -- and two of those were never enacted.    Sen. Bentsen repeatedly stressed the trade issue and cited his role as champion of a major trade bill that passed Congress this year, complaining that the Reagan administration fought the legislation &quot;every step of the way.&quot; Sounding more populist and more sympathetic to protectionist trade measures than Mr. Dukakis, he asserted that &quot;we're going to stand tough for America . . . and we're going to open up markets around the world.&quot;    And while he generally avoided attacking Mr. Bush directly, Mr. Bentsen charged that the Reagan-Bush administration has brought the country only the appearance of prosperity and that it has done so by running up big budget deficits. &quot;You know, if you let me write two hundred billion dollars worth of hot checks every year, I could give you an illusion of prosperity too.&quot;    Both men came armed with their joke writers' jabs. Mr. Quayle found a quick opening to dub Mr. Dukakis &quot;Tax-Hike Mike.&quot; Mr. Bentsen described former Interior Secretary James Watt and Anne Gorsuch, former head of the Environmental Protection Agency, as &quot;the Bonnie and Clyde&quot; of environmental protection.    Mr. Quayle, who stood with one foot resting on the base of his lectern, found himself on risky ground when he boasted, &quot;We are producing Hondas and exporting Hondas to Japan.&quot; But he appeared to rescue himself by playing off the laughter of Democrats in the audience. &quot;We are the envy of the world,&quot; he said. &quot;They laugh at that because they don't believe that the United States is the envy of the world. Well, I tell you, the American people think the United States of America is the envy of the world.&quot;    The one area where Sen. Quayle seemed to take charge and regularly score points was national security policy, a specialty of the Indiana senator. He chided Gov. Dukakis for opposing aid to the Nicaraguan rebels, a cause Sen. Bentsen has supported. And, in a move that seemed planned, he chided Gov. Dukakis for voicing doubts about the U.S. invasion of the Caribbean island of Grenada.    Sen. Quayle stressed his eight years of service on the Senate Armed Services Committee and his involvement in consultations with U.S. arms-control negotiators in Geneva, arguing that such experience made him better prepared to deal with the Soviets than the experience Mr. Dukakis has had as governor of Massachusetts. And, he said at one point, his Senate service has allowed him to become acquainted with such European leaders as Margaret Thatcher of Britain and Helmut Kohl of West Germany.    Sen. Bentsen, while pointedly citing his own war record as a bomber pilot in Europe in World War II, sidestepped any discussion of Mr. Quayle's National Guard service. But the Texan brought the debate back quickly to veterans' issues, when he challenged the Republican to defend a plan the Indiana senator once proposed that would have ended the tax exclusion for veterans' disability pay. Mr. Quayle never responded, but Dukakis campaign aides said the provision was included in versions of tax &quot;reform&quot; legislation backed by Mr. Quayle in his first term in the Senate.    Asked what experience had most shaped his political philosophy, Sen. Quayle gave an answer that rambled, but he tried to evoke an emotional response by recalling the &quot;common-sense&quot; advice of his 97-year-old grandmother, Martha Pulliam: &quot;You can do anything you want to if you just set your mind to it and go to work.&quot;    ---   John E. Yang and Ellen Hume contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>