<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870715-0100 </DOCNO><HL> Tracing a Scandal:Insider-Trading PlotUnraveled as ProfitsLured Copycat Buyers---Broker Couldn't Resist UsingThe Levine InformationAnd Tipping Off Others---How a Carpenter Was Paid---By James B. StewartStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><TEXT>   Dennis B. Levine was furious. It was the summer of 1985, and he was afraid that his $12.6 million insider-trading scheme was in danger of attracting attention. Bernhard Meier, his banker in the Bahamas, was steering a disproportionate number of Mr. Levine's trades to one broker: Brian S. Campbell.    As things turned out, Mr. Levine was right to be concerned. Mr. Campbell, then a broker at Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co. in New York, had copied some of Mr. Levine's trades in his own account and tipped two brokers in the Caracas, Venezuela, office of Merrill Lynch andamp; Co., his former employer. Unbeknown to Mr. Levine, an anonymous letter already had been sent in May 1985 from Caracas to Merrill Lynch headquarters complaining that the two brokers were trading on inside information. The letter triggered the investigation that led the SEC to Mr. Levine -- and the start of Wall Street's continuing insider-trading scandal.    Mr. Campbell was hardly a whistle-blower. But by generating trading volume in the stocks about which Mr. Levine had inside information, he did, inadvertently, lead investigators to Mr. Levine. In an SEC deposition and in interviews with congressional investigators, Mr. Campbell has repeatedly described himself as an innocent bystander who never knew that the Bahamian bank had a client who was trading on inside information.    Mr. Campbell's explanations and demeanor have been so convincing that in some quarters he has emerged a hero. In House oversight subcommittee hearings on the insider-trading scandal last December, Rep. John Dingell, a Michigan Democrat, hailed Mr. Campbell as a &quot;26-year-old whiz kid&quot; who &quot;cracked the code and piggybacked over 20 of Mr. Levine's insider trades&quot; at a time when the SEC, despite &quot;all the wonder of the most modern technology . . . , could not make a case.&quot;    A far different story emerges from information obtained by this newspaper from numerous people familiar with Mr. Campbell's activities and from a Freedom of Information Act request. That material suggests that although Mr. Campbell never met Mr. Levine -- and may not have even known his identity -- Mr. Campbell knowingly traded on inside information that Mr. Meier got from a third party. Further, Mr. Campbell may have formed a heretofore-undisclosed ring -- including Mr. Meier, a New York lawyer and members of the lawyer's family -- that traded on the information. Mr. Campbell apparently lied to protect himself and others.    Thus, the greed of others made it impossible for Mr. Levine to control the spread of inside information, a development that ultimately caused his downfall. The former investment banker is now serving a two-year sentence in federal prison at Lewisburg, Pa., after pleading guilty to four felony counts related to his trading on nonpublic information about corporate takeovers.    Mr. Campbell declined to be interviewed for this article. Informed of its contents, his lawyer, Peter H. Morrison, declined comment.    Despite the congressional praise, the pressure on Mr. Campbell appears to be intensifying. On June 17, he resigned under pressure from Smith Barney, where he had worked since February 1985. Also on June 17, the SEC called him in for additional questioning -- indicating that its investigation is continuing. Mr. Campbell invoked the Fifth Amendment and refused to answer the SEC's questions.    It was a different story the first time the SEC asked Mr. Campbell to testify. That was in August 1985, when the SEC, told by Merrill Lynch of the Caracas letter, had traced a pattern of suspicious trading to the Bahamian bank, Bank Leu International Ltd. Mr. Campbell, described by colleagues as tall, blond and boyishly handsome, proclaimed his innocence. He talked for three days, answering every question. Portions of that testimony have been made public.    &quot;Did it ever occur to you at any time that Mr. Meier {the Bahamian banker} had access to inside information?&quot; an SEC lawyer asked. &quot;No, I had no knowledge of that, no,&quot; Mr. Campbell replied, adding that he never even had any &quot;suspicion&quot; or &quot;indication&quot; that inside information was involved.    Mr. Campbell acknowledged trading in some of the same stocks as Mr. Levine, but he testified that he did so only after doing his own research, not because he suspected inside information. Mr. Campbell also said he told Mr. Meier he had traded some of the same stocks as the bank, but he testified that he was &quot;evasive&quot; in informing Mr. Meier and that he didn't mention any specific stocks to him.    Mr. Campbell had to explain a piece of evidence obtained by the SEC linking him to Mr. Meier: a $10,000 check received by Mr. Campbell and drawn on Mr. Meier's Morgan Guaranty Trust Co. bank account in New York. Mr. Campbell testified that it was a loan from Mr. Meier for a real-estate venture of Mr. Campbell's and said he had had no other loans from Mr. Meier. &quot;Have you had any other business dealings with Mr. Meier?&quot; the SEC lawyer asked. &quot;No, I've not,&quot; Mr. Campbell replied.    Mr. Campbell's testimony did little to advance the SEC's investigation. Soon afterward, however, Mr. Meier was served with a subpoena while staying at the Waldorf-Astoria Hotel in New York. After Mr. Meier returned to the Bahamas, Mr. Levine flew in to devise a cover story to deflect the SEC, according to SEC testimony given by Bruno Pletscher, Mr. Meier's superior at the Nassau-based bank, a unit of Zurich-based Bank Leu. Their plan was to say that the suspicious trading was in some &quot;managed accounts&quot; over which Mr. Meier had discretion. They created phony research materials to justify the uncannily prescient purchases.    At the time he was working out the cover story with Mr. Levine, Mr. Meier had numerous conversations with Mr. Campbell, Mr. Pletscher testified. Far from being &quot;evasive&quot; about his trading, Mr. Campbell had told Mr. Meier enough for Mr. Meier to inform Mr. Pletscher that Mr. Campbell &quot;had traded for his own account in large numbers.&quot; Mr. Pletscher added, &quot;I know that Mr. Meier had basically daily conversations with Mr. Campbell in regard to the bank's operations.&quot;    According to Mr. Pletscher, Mr. Meier had planned to lie to the SEC and to his own lawyers from Fried, Frank, Shriver, Harris andamp; Jacobson about Mr. Levine's trading. But other bank officials, over Mr. Meier's continuing objections, eventually told the SEC all they knew about the Levine scheme, including the information that Mr. Meier had made about $152,000 by copying Mr. Levine's trades in his own account at the bank.    After negotiations with the SEC and the Manhattan U.S. attorney's office, Fried Frank partner Harvey Pitt reached an agreement that the bank and all its officials, including Mr. Meier, would be granted immunity in return for cooperating in the Levine matter. Mr. Meier was to be the star witness. Everyone at the bank seemed immensely relieved by the settlement, with the exception of Mr. Meier. In November 1985, he insisted on altering his own account records at the bank and then left for Switzerland, Mr. Pletscher testified.    He never returned. Instead, Mr. Meier surprised his lawyers, his bank colleagues and the SEC by spurning the offer of immunity and refusing to return for his scheduled testimony. When Mr. Levine was arrested and charged in May 1986, Mr. Meier was also charged with trading on inside information by allegedly copying some of Mr. Levine's trades. Mr. Meier's decision to go into exile was baffling -- unless he had something more to hide than the copied trades in the Bahamas.    Mr. Pletscher replaced Mr. Meier as Bank Leu's representative at the SEC deposition, and investigators were curious about the records that Mr. Meier altered before fleeing to Switzerland. Mr. Pletscher told the SEC that Mr. Meier erased some stock trades from the bank's computerized records of Mr. Meier's own account. Another deletion was puzzling because it seemed to have nothing to do with Mr. Levine. What Mr. Meier expunged was a mysterious Aug. 13, 1984, wire transfer of $5,000 to Delaware National Bank in Delhi, N.Y.    Delhi, in Delaware County, is a college town nestled in the Catskill Mountains. In recent years, neighbors had complained about a house at 30 Main St. rented out to students prone to boisterous beer bashes, and they finally bought the house to stop the partying. According to records of the sale, Mr. Campbell was an owner of the house. County records indicate that he and co-investors owned at least two other houses in Delhi and one in Cobleskill, a town in neighboring Schoharie County.    During the summer of 1984, a Delhi carpenter named Mark Tuthill did some repair work on the Campbell properties. He was paid in a way rarely seen in such a small town: On Aug. 13, Delaware National Bank received a wire transfer of $5,000 for Mr. Tuthill's account from an unidentified person in the Bahamas, according to the bank's president. That was the transaction expunged by Mr. Meier.    According to records in Delaware and Schoharie counties in upstate New York, one of Mr. Campbell's co-investors in his real-estate venture is a Manhattan lawyer named Kevin Barry, whom Mr. Campbell met while playing basketball in a city league. Mr. Barry is in his early 30s, tall and athletic, say former colleagues at Tenzer, Greenblatt, Fallon andamp; Kaplan, a Manhattan law firm where Mr. Barry worked as an associate until late 1985.    Theodore Goldbergh, a former colleague there and now an entertainment lawyer in Manhattan, remembers talking with Mr. Barry just before he left. &quot;He told me about this fabulous farmhouse he was restoring upstate,&quot; Mr. Goldbergh recalls. &quot;He said it was beautiful and he planned to move up there.&quot; Asked where he would practice law in rural upstate New York, Mr. Barry replied that he didn't need to practice law anymore, Mr. Goldbergh recalls.    Mr. Barry explained that he was involved in a real-estate venture upstate. &quot;He mentioned that he'd had a chance to make a lot of money,&quot; Mr. Goldbergh recalls. Mr. Barry boasted that he had been &quot;amassing capital&quot; for the venture and added that he had a partner -- a stockbroker named Brian Campbell.    Mr. Barry didn't say how he and Mr. Campbell had amassed the capital. In his SEC deposition, Mr. Campbell estimated his own net worth at only $70,000. Mr. Barry's colleagues say they assumed that Mr. Barry's money didn't come from an associate's salary at Tenzer Greenblatt.    Some of the money apparently came from stock trading. In portions of Mr. Campbell's deposition that weren't publicly released by the SEC, Mr. Campbell testified that he passed stock tips to Mr. Barry, according to a person familiar with those parts of the deposition. Some of the stocks were ones in which Mr. Levine also traded, the person added. The SEC is also investigating Mr. Barry's mother, sister and brother, who may have received tips from him and are listed on an SEC subpoena.    Mr. Barry, through his lawyer, Michael Pelletier, declined comment on this. Mr. Pelletier also declined comment on behalf of Mr. Barry's mother. Other members of the Barry family couldn't be reached.    The $5,000 wire transfer that Mr. Meier concealed and the $10,000 loan suggest that Mr. Meier may also have been involved in the real-estate venture. And there is evidence of another possible source of capital for the real estate -- one that also links Messrs. Barry, Campbell and Meier -- according to people familiar with some of their activities. They say money for the real estate was available from a corporation that traded profitably in stocks, many of them the same takeover targets in which Mr. Levine traded.    The name of the corporation, which appears on an attachment to an SEC subpoena released by the government, is BCM Management Corp. According to a filing in the New York secretary of state's office, BCM was formed on Sept. 9, 1984, a time when Mr. Levine's insider trading was flourishing. The filing doesn't name any officers or directors and cites Mr. Barry's former law firm as the incorporating person and the address for service of process. Lyonel Zunz, the co-head of the corporate department at Tenzer Greenblatt, says he has never heard of BCM.    Mr. Campbell testified that only Mr. Barry was involved in BCM and that the initials stand for Barry Capital Management, according to the person familiar with his testimony.    Others find that explanation implausible, since BCM Management Corp. would translate into the redundant name of Barry Capital Management Management Corp. They say the letters BCM were chosen because of the last names of the people who formed the corporation: Messrs. Barry, Campbell and Meier.    Mr. Meier, reached at his home in Switzerland, denies knowing anything about a New York real-estate venture, Mr. Barry or BCM. He says he stayed abroad because he felt &quot;rushed&quot; into testifying and, as a banker, felt uncomfortable disclosing information about Mr. Levine.    Asked specifically about the $5,000 payment he erased and whether Messrs. Campbell and Barry figured in his move to Switzerland, Mr. Meier said: &quot;Why do you keep asking me these kinds of questions?&quot; and declined further comment.    The existence of BCM, say some people familiar with the matter, helps explain why Mr. Meier could trust Mr. Campbell with Mr. Levine's trades and why Mr. Meier fled to Switzerland. BCM indicates that Messrs. Campbell, Meier and Barry were involved in a separate scheme to profit from Mr. Levine's information.    By refusing to testify, Mr. Meier avoided questions that could have revealed the full scope of his dealings with Messrs. Campbell and Barry. If it was established that Mr. Meier told Mr. Campbell that he had access to inside information and had kept the information flowing in return for a share in the real-estate venture, Messrs. Campbell and Barry would be vulnerable to insider-trading charges. And apparently Mr. Meier feared that the immunity offered him wouldn't protect him from prosecution if the government discovered a separate insider-trading scheme that he hadn't disclosed.    The existence of such a separate scheme also would cast doubt on much of Mr. Campbell's sworn testimony. His denial under oath that he had any business dealings with Mr. Meier other than the $10,000 loan appears to be contradicted by Mr. Pletscher's testimony, the erased $5,000 payment and the existence of BCM Management Corp. For that testimony alone, Mr. Campbell could face charges of perjury -- an offense that Manhattan U.S. Attorney Rudolph Giuliani has vowed will be prosecuted vigorously in connection with the insider-trading scandal.    Neither the SEC nor the U.S. attorney's office would comment on the status of the investigations. But whatever the outcome, Mr. Campbell has been knocked from any pedestal that he might once have occupied as the man who &quot;cracked&quot; the secret of Mr. Levine's trading. Indeed, in testimony before the House subcommittee last December, the SEC's Mr. Lynch could barely contain his ire:    &quot;We put {Mr. Campbell} on the record, and he testifies . . . for three days and perjures himself apparently on the record. . . . It is very difficult to make a case when we run into this kind of perjury and these kinds of very orchestrated schemes to obstruct justice. . . . Unfortunately, it is a fact of life in the insider-trading area.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>