<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870721-0131 </DOCNO><HL> Business World:Biotech Has Goodies for Environmentalists Too---By George Melloan</HL><DD> 07/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MTCENVIRONMENT (ENV)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD) </IN><TEXT>   At Monsanto Co.'s new Life Sciences Research Center just west of St. Louis, technicians use paper punches to cut little green discs out of tomato-plant leaves. This innocent-looking activity is part of one of the most revolutionary, and controversial, scientific endeavors of all time, genetic engineering. Monsanto seeks a tomato plant that is toxic to the caterpillars that infest tomato fields. In other words, it would contain its own insecticide.    In pursuit of this objective, the researchers seek out the gene in a DNA molecule of a marigold plant that controls the marigold's natural toxicity to garden pests. Using a chemical process, they attempt to &quot;cut&quot; that gene out of the molecule and splice it into doughnut-shaped &quot;plasmid&quot; of an E. coli bacterium. The bacterium then is introduced to the tomato-leaf disc as a means of transferring the marigold gene to a tomato-plant cell. With the aid of special nutrients and hormones, the leaf part will start to grow, ultimately becoming a complete plant. If the work succeeds, a strain of tomato plants that no longer needs applications of pesticides will be the result.    Monsanto invested $150 million in this laboratory because, along with hundreds of other companies -- large and small, U.S. and foreign -- it wants to be part of the biotechnological revolution. It already has engineered a hormone, called Bovine Somatotropin (BST), that can increase the milk yields of productive cows by 20% to 40%. If it now can find a simple way to administer BST -- such as a time-release pill -- it expects to have a commercial product within two years, opening up a market that could be as much as $1 billion world-wide.    For farmers, Monsanto President Earle H. Harbison Jr. thinks &quot;biotechnology will be a major breakthrough, I think greater than the advent of the chemical era when we brought the pesticides to bear. You know what it looked like before thatwhole crops disappeared, eaten alive by insects. It will take us another five years to do it, but we're rapidly coming up with it.&quot;    One of the main benefits, he says, will be environmental. &quot;If you take the cotton crop, which may be the most dramatic example, you've got about six applications of herbicides and pesticides per crop. That's a lot of stuff going through the air, stuff you need or else nothing comes out the other end, because the boll weevils and other pests chew up the crop. If we in the industry can engineer a product -- and I'm sure we can as sure as I'm sitting here -- that can genetically resist insects, genetically provide some of its own nitrogen, genetically be resistant to maybe one general herbicide that can get rid of the weeds without killing off the crop, we have come a light-year in my book.&quot;    Ernest Jaworski, head of the molecular biology team at the science center, describes the present as the greatest time in all history to be working in biology. But how about those highly vocal and much-publicized biotech critics who say, in effect, it's not nice to fool with Mother Nature? One answer is that in nature itself, species undergo constant change. He believes that the danger of a genetic-engineering accident is extremely slight, since scientists are synthesizing only single genes with a simple function. That act cannot fundamentally change an entire, complex organism.    Biotechnology simply offers far more scope and precision than, say, cross-breeding or chemical synthesis for guiding natural processes in directions more beneficial to man. As Mr. Jaworski notes, cows were not put on earth to give milk for humans, but selective breeding has produced more productive animals for that purpose. Synthesized BST, which is produced naturally in the pituitary glands of cows, furthers that process.    But who needs more milk? &quot;Yes, if you're living in the U.S., there's too much milk,&quot; says Mr. Harbison. &quot;If you're living in other parts of the world it's not necessarily so. But that is a totally different issue to me than, therefore, let's find the most expensive way to produce milk and keep it going because there's too much of it. Why wouldn't you want to produce whatever quantity you need at the lowest price you can? What is the point of keeping 50% or 40% more dairy herd wandering around, with all the pollutant effects, to produce the same quantity of milk?&quot;    The U.S., Europe and Japan made a commitment of sorts at the Venice summit to stop subsidizing enormous agricultural surpluses. Mr. Harbison believes the commitment will be fulfilled simply because current policies make so little economic sense. What concerns him somewhat more is the regulatory and legal obstacles biotechnology faces in the U.S.    &quot;Some of these people who are the principal challengers are scientifically unqualified to judge and they essentially try to use the system to defeat the system. 'Genetic engineering of plants? God knows where it will all end,' they say. The tomato that ate New Jersey and all that nonsense. They will not win in the end because their arguments are not scientifically provable and the people who advance them I think know they're not provable because they always struck me as fairly bright people. But if the system is going to shut down every time one of those claims is made until it is scientifically disproved, which may take months or years, the answer is quite simple: Biotechnology will be developed elsewhere in the world.&quot;    Mr. Harbison believes President Reagan's decision last fall to divide up the regulatory responsibilities for biotechnical research was a very important step in the right direction. The Food and Drug Administration will have responsibility for human or animal drugs. The Environmental Protection Agency will supervise pesticides and the Agriculture Department will regulate research in plant genetics. He would like that to be backed up by the president and Congress with a message to the regulators and the industry: &quot;We don't want you to do dumb things. We don't want you to endanger the public. But don't foot-drag the system on us.&quot;    One source of encouragement to Mr. Harbison is what he sees as evidence that responsible environmentalists are coming around to his view that biotechnology can further their own goals by reducing the vast amount of chemicals that are dumped on farms each year. &quot;I think there is great concern around the world and I think it is appropriate about how much of these chemicals are being released into the environment. It is a lot of material. All of us in the business run every test known to man on them but nonetheless in the aggregate it's a lot. I think we can reduce that. I don't think we can totally exclude chemicals because there are some things chemicals can do that biotechnology won't or at least won't in the near term. But a combination of biotechnologically driven products will bring some genetic changes to plants and chemical applications that I think is on the whole much better.    &quot;I would think the environmentalists would stand up and cheer. I can't believe it doesn't go right down the alley we want to go down. I think the responsible ones are more and more coming to that feeling.&quot; Quite possibly so. But one suspects that this marvelous new technology unfolding at Monsanto and elsewhere faces many challenges in the years ahead. Whether it can surmount them will be yet another major test of the ability of the modern American political system to cope with discovery. </TEXT></DOC>