<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870608-0069 </DOCNO><HL> Walsh's Broad Stroke Approach in InvestigationOf Iran-Contra Affair Jars Legal Establishment---By Andy PasztorStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MDESTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Lawrence Walsh, the independent counsel trying to unravel the Iran-Contra scandal, has rocked the capital's legal establishment with the scope and aggressiveness of his investigation.    Less than six months after his appointment, Mr. Walsh and his staff are laying the groundwork to seek broad charges of fraud, obstruction of justice and perhaps misappropriation of government funds against current and former officials and others who participated in the affair. Law enforcement officials and others familiar with Mr. Walsh's thinking expect some of the prosecution's theories to break new legal ground by expanding interpretations of conspiracy and other criminal statutes that in the past have been primarily used in racketeering and narcotics cases.    Already, Mr. Walsh and his investigators have examined truckloads of White House documents, conducted some 900 interviews and infuriated many foreign diplomats by demanding records and information from more than 13 countries. To understand how sensitive foreign-policy decisions were made inside the Oval Office and the National Security Council, Mr. Walsh has delved into such disparate events as the secret 1984 mining of Nicaraguan harbors and the April 1986 U.S. bombing of Libya.    In the process, the special counsel is stirring questions and criticism about his approach. Even sympathetic lawmakers and veteran Justice Department officials acknowledge that his most controversial allegations will be difficult to prove. And prominent defense lawyers, including some who originally liked Mr. Walsh's appointment, now complain that he is abusing his authority.    Leonard Garment, who represents former White House National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane, complains that the prosecutor is taking such a broad approach that &quot;there may be endless technical possibilities for prosecution.&quot;    Such a risky, unconventional approach doesn't seem to fit Mr. Walsh's reserved and methodical public image. The 75-year-old former judge and corporate lawyer has a reputation for taking few chances, weighing his words carefully and -- above all -- refusing to be rushed. Unaffected by congressional complaints that his inquiry is moving too slowly, he jets home to Oklahoma almost every weekend to visit his family.    Yet in private, say associates and law enforcement officials, Mr. Walsh often reveals a far more intense and competitive side. They describe him as a courtly but tenacious and highly demanding boss, whose penchant for details has in the past extended to eliminating the tiny specks of dirt from photocopies. And it is clear from court papers and his negotiations with congressional leaders that Mr. Walsh intends to take a sweeping view of his mandate, as well as of federal conspiracy statutes.    A major strand in the prosecutor's strategy, according to sources familiar with his thinking, is to try to link the activities of a dozen or more defendants as part of a larger criminal scheme to provide help to the Contras.    Mr. Walsh appears to be leaning toward what could be a precedent-setting series of cases alleging that the overall pattern of behavior -- spanning a number of years and reaching into the top levels of the White House, the Central Intelligence Agency and other offices -- was intended from the beginning to circumvent congressional restrictions on aid to the Contras. Some of the individual statutes suspected of being violated carry only civil penalties, while others are open to a variety of interpretations.    Some suggest that Mr. Walsh is also considering using federal anti-racketeering statutes as part of his arsenal -- a tactic that, if successful, could alter the rules for prosecution of political corruption cases in coming years. Instead of having to prove that specific individuals perjured themselves or knowingly took actions that defrauded the government, for example, a prosecutor using such theories merely has to show that the defendants engaged in a &quot;continuing criminal enterprise.&quot; Participants may be criminally liable even if they weren't aware of the precise nature of the violations by co-conspirators.    Mr. Walsh hasn't identified the targets of his expanding probe, but law enforcement officials and others say they undoubtedly include fired White House aide Lt. Col. Oliver North, Mr. McFarlane and Rear Adm. John Poindexter, who stepped down last November as the president's national security adviser, along with current and former Central Intelligence Agency officials.    The prosecutor's aggressive strategy has drawn fire from many quarters. Col. North's attorneys are challenging the constitutionality of his investigation, asserting that the virtually unchecked discretion of court-appointed prosecutors has brought &quot;the judiciary into political areas, where they shouldn't be.&quot; Over the weekend, the Israeli government fumed at Mr. Walsh's latest effort to subpoena testimony from Israelis involved in the early dealings with Iran. Critics also fault Mr. Walsh and his aides for alienating potential witnesses, including Saudi Arabian middleman Adnan Khashoggi.    As the investigation moves forward, Mr. Walsh is gathering as much evidence as he can about potentially illegal profits, kickbacks or other financial sleight-of-hand by some of the key Americans and foreigners Col. North relied on to run covert operations. Some of these middlemen were known to law enforcement agencies as shady characters who engaged &quot;in all sorts of con operations,&quot; asserts Oliver Revell, an executive assistant director of the Federal Bureau of Investigation. &quot;Some of the most sleazy characters you can imagine were bilking people through this ad hoc process.&quot;    Among other things, Mr. Walsh and congressional investigators have documents and testimony indicating that Col. North and Robert Owen, who served as a courier to Contra groups, were aware of, and apparently condoned, plans to secretly siphon off profits to some Contra supporters. A Jan. 31, 1985, letter from Mr. Owen to Col. North specifically mentioned that procedures set up to funnel financial aid from U.S. groups to Nicaragua's Miskitos Indians provided certain individuals &quot;an opportunity to make a little on the side.&quot;    Nearly a year later, Col. North wrote Mr. McFarlane, his boss at the time, that Israeli government officials who helped set up the early arms sales to Iran &quot;willingly consented to a 'kick-back' arrangement which allows Israeli control over&quot; Manucher Ghorbanifar, a pivotal middleman in the transactions. After acknowledging that Mr. Ghorbanifar may be &quot;doubling us or simply lining his own pockets,&quot; according to a copy of the memo released by congressional investigators, Col. North nevertheless recommended continued use of the middleman.    Although no one yet knows just how the prosecutor plans to fit the continuing disclosures of fund diversions, destruction of documents and the like into his overall conspiracy theory, it seems to be just a matter of time before he files additional charges. &quot;It's clear that criminal action abounds in this case,&quot; asserts Sen. George Mitchell (D., Maine), a former judge who is a member of the Senate investigating committee. &quot;It's been obvious for several months.&quot;    (See: &quot;Corrections andamp; Amplifications: Leonard Garment&quot; -- WSJ June 9, 1987) </TEXT></DOC>