<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880119-0115 </DOCNO><HL> Donkeys and Elephants as Foxes and Hedgehogs </HL><AUTHOR> A. James Reichley </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   As we enter a new presidential election year, the question recurs: Does the outcome make much significant difference to anyone beyond the politicians directly engaged and their dependents? Does it really matter if Republican X or Democrat Y comes in first when the Electoral College meets next December?    Some who concede the importance of the next president's personal qualities and governmental preferences go on to argue that the chief executive's party affiliation has become largely irrelevant.    Certainly our Republicans and Democrats are not separated by the deep ideological divides that distinguish the major parties in most European democracies. Ideological purists on the right complain that Republicans in office are nowhere near as conservative as they promised to be in opposition. Dedicated liberals fume that none of the announced or potential Democratic candidates for president this year, except Jesse Jackson, who has no chance at election, offer a sharp alternative to the status quo.    Both Republicans and Democrats are primarily middle-class parties, supporting marginally differing versions of capitalist democracy. The U.S. has never had a major full-fledged socialist party, though the Democrats at times have edged fairly close to advocating a state-directed economy. And it has no anti-democratic right-wing parties of the kind that hover on the fringes of some European polities. It does not even have a church party like the various Christian Democratic parties in Europe, or the religious parties in Israel, though Pat Robertson and his allies seem determined to cast the Republican Party in that mold.    Some developments during the Reagan era, despite its ideological overtones, have drawn the major parties closer together. The great domestic problem hanging over this year's election is the size of the federal budget deficit.    The mix of spending cuts, revenue increases and monetary measures that are used to bring the deficit under control will surely make a difference to both the health of the overall economy and the well-being of individuals. But the budget's size for a time at least prohibits the Democrats from proposing substantial expansions of government services that otherwise would attract them. And Walter Mondale's fate in 1984 discourages Democrats from seeking to solve the budget problem largely through massive tax increases. On the other side, the weight of the deficit and the Reagan administration's success with tax reform inhibit bold initiatives of the kind the Republicans called for in 1980.    In foreign policy, too, the similarities between the two parties currently are more striking than their differences. Many Democrats are more prepared than most Republicans to bank on Soviet intentions and Sandinista weakness. But no one except Mr. Jackson (sometimes) is talking about a unilateral reversal of Ronald Reagan's defense buildup, and no Democrat electable to the presidency would allow the Ortega brothers to expand their revolution through military means beyond the borders of Nicaragua. Some Republicans believe that Mr. Reagan already has gone too far in negotiating nuclear arms reductions with the Soviet Union, but both George Bush and Bob Dole, far ahead of the pack in the race for the Republican nomination, now back the president's approach.    Of course marginal differences in policy emphasis can have huge consequences over the long run. But the early steps of a new administration led by any of the currently more likely Republican or Democratic nominees probably would be in broadly similar directions.    Nevertheless, there are profound underlying differences of social outlook and moral attitude between the major parties, deeply rooted in American history and human nature. To a greater extent than in most earlier periods, Republicans and Democrats now steer by clearly distinguishable social values and principles.    Liberal and conservative publicists, not surprisingly, characterize these contending principles differently. For many liberals, the choice is between a Republican Party exalting individual greed and social bigotry and a Democratic Party committed to human rights and social fairness. Many conservatives, on the other hand, regard the Democrats as pandering to social envy and personal license, while the Republicans promote economic opportunity and moral decency.    There is some truth to both these caricatures. But those who cherish either, for purposes of political propaganda or self-congratulation, obviously stress the positive aspects of their own perspective and emphasize the negative qualities of the other. Examined more objectively, the attitudinal differences between the parties seem to reflect contrasting views of social reality, neither necessarily wrong, and both probably incomplete.    Some political scientists and sociologists trace these differing perceptions of reality to the perceivers' divergent locations within society. Jo Freeman, in an article in Political Science Quarterly, writes, &quot;Republicans perceive themselves as insiders even when they are out of power, and Democrats perceive themselves as outsiders even when they are in power.&quot; Republicans, the article argues, &quot;represent the core of American society,&quot; whether or not they win a majority of votes in a given election. Democrats express the interests of various peripheral groups that may together constitute an electoral majority but usually have no unifying concept of a common national interest.    Social location, as the Freeman article suggests, has a good deal to do with political values. But we all know social insiders who are passionate liberals and outsiders who are staunch conservatives. Other forces, therefore, must also be at work.    Differing political values that rise from sources deep within human nature are best captured through metaphor. For more than a century, cartoonists have used the elephant and the donkey to represent some of the underlying qualities of the two parties.    Characters from familiar fables also provide political insights. In the fable of the tortoise and the hare, the methodical tortoise calls to mind the Republicans, while the more sprightly hare was no doubt a Democrat. In the tale of the ant and the grasshopper, the industrious though unexciting ant must have been a Republican, while the genial but shortsighted grasshopper was a Democrat.    Perhaps these ancient fables give too much credit to conservative values. A more balanced comparison rises from Sir Isaiah Berlin's modern distinction between foxes and hedgehogs (the European equivalent of our porcupines).    Sir Isaiah based his scheme of classification on a line from the Greek poet Archilochus: &quot;The fox knows many things, but the hedgehog knows one big thing.&quot; Political and literary hedgehogs, according to Sir Isaiah, &quot;relate everything to a single central vision, one system less or more coherent or articulate,&quot; while foxes &quot;pursue many ends, often unrelated and even contradictory, connected, if at all, only in some de facto way.&quot;    Some foxes turn up among political conservatives -- one thinks of Richard Nixon and Henry Kissinger. And there certainly have been hedgehogs on the left. Karl Marx, for example, was a kind of super hedgehog. In contemporary American politics, however, most foxes are liberal and Democratic, and hedgehogs are usually conservative and Republican.    Foxes point out the inequities and structural instabilities associated with free-market capitalism; hedgehogs remind us that economic free enterprise has released more people from want and produced a higher material standard of living than any other system in history. Foxes charge that the &quot;American empire&quot; props up repressive right-wing regimes in many parts of the world; hedgehogs insist that the U.S., for all its imperfections, remains the world's foremost sponsor and protector of free institutions. Foxes claim that mingling government with religion poses threats to civil liberties; hedgehogs observe that the foundations of social justice and liberty itself are ultimately based on religious values.    Both foxes and hedgehogs make worthwhile contributions to democracy. But in the end, one must choose. Writing from what I regard as a moderate bias toward the hedgehog way of looking at things, I would say that foxes are stimulating and useful; hedgehogs are essential. Whether in 1988 the voting public shares this evaluation we will know on the morning after the election.    ---   Mr. Reichley is a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution in Washington. </TEXT></DOC>