<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880120-0080 </DOCNO><HL> Next President Must Start Now To Mend the Office </HL><AUTHOR> Robert L. Bartley </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   A new presidential election year is upon us, and presumably the next president of the United States is out battling the snows of Iowa and New Hampshire. Whoever he is, he'd profit by making a little time to contemplate the current president's official admission that he signs bills into law without reading them.    &quot;I don't think any of us were aware of this amendment until it slipped out from under wherever it was hiding,&quot; poor Marlin Fitzwater had to tell the White House newshawks when it was discovered Teddy Kennedy had put Rupert Murdoch out of one business or another in Boston. The clause, he pleaded, was tucked into a 2,000-page &quot;continuing resolution&quot; covering for practical purposes a whole session of the U.S. Congress. President Reagan didn't have a chance to read the whole thing, but then, neither did anyone else.    The next president, whatever else may be on his agenda, needs desperately to think about this procedural problem. He will not accomplish much of substance unless he can get the government to reach decisions in some coherent fashion. On issue after issue -- spending, taxes, aid to the Contras, the value of the dollar, Midgetman or SDI -- matters have not really been decided but resolved through stealth, deadlock and sheer inertia.    Crisp decisions, of course, have never been the stuff of politics. But I have been opining on political issues for a national newspaper for a generation now, and I have never seen rationality and coherence count for less. Friends with far longer experience at the junction of politics and ideas say the same thing. The government has been slipping deeper and deeper into procedural quicksand, until we are now sunk in a profound institutional and even constitutional morass.    While the impasse in part reflects deep divisions in the body politic, and in part the collapse of Congress's internal discipline, the largest part reflects the decline of the presidency. My journalistic career has been one of watching the seriatim destruction of presidents -- John F. Kennedy physically and the rest politically -- Lyndon Johnson, Richard Nixon, Gerald Ford, Jimmy Carter and now even Ronald Reagan. Far from dominating or even guiding the Republic, presidents have been unable even to protect themselves.    Their critics of course say Presidents Johnson through Reagan all earned their fates through personal flaws or mistaken policies. But as one after another president falls, reasonable men have to consider the possibility that the tools of the office are insufficient for the task at hand. As Hamilton warned in Federalist 70: The president's part of the balance is to inject energy. &quot;A feeble executive implies a feeble execution of the government.&quot;    How much more feeble an executive could there be than one who scribbles signatures on he knows not what? Over the past generation Congress has brilliantly succeeded in eviscerating the veto power, while successive presidents have been unwilling to stand up for it. President Reagan, who came into office warning supporters that he always wore white hats in his movie roles, has been notably unwilling to exercise the veto. He vetoed 62 bills in his first seven years in office, against 181 in Dwight Eisenhower's two terms.    In particular, President Reagan has acquiesced in Congress's giving more and more unmanageable bills on shorter and shorter deadlines. Despite some plaintive complaints, he has repeatedly signed money bills under threat of deadlines, including in one instance crop-planting. Sometimes, as with the extension of the one-sided Ethics in Government Act, he has signed a bill while expressing a hope that the courts would veto it for him.    History's biggest mark against Ronald Reagan is likely to be that he passed along his office even weaker than he found it, though relative peace, relative prosperity and personal popularity gave him an opportunity to redress much damage. The next president needs to start thinking now about how to restore the balance of powers.    The obvious first step is the item veto, specifying that the president can veto parts of legislation without vetoing it all. Some 43 state governors have such power, and it has been supported by all presidents back through Franklin Roosevelt. All the current Republican presidential candidates favor it, as do Govs. Bruce Babbitt and Michael Dukakis and, gingerly, Sen. Paul Simon. Yet no candidate has much discussed how to get it passed, or what to do without it. It is not up to Congress, after all, to defend the rights of presidents.    The next president needs to weigh how to assert his rights. For openers, he could call for a commission to study the balance of powers. He certainly should promise to elevate the office of counsel to the president by appointing a constitutional scholar to serve as lawyer and advocate for the presidency in a way most attorneys general have not. He could threaten to start campaigning for a constitutional convention for a line-item amendment. And of course he could always simply start vetoing bills on explicitly procedural grounds, rejecting those with non-germane riders even if it means closing the government.    It would be a much less radical act, Stephen Glazier observes, simply to cross out a line of some bill and let the courts decide whether a president already has a line-item veto. Mr. Glazier, an energetic lawyer with a boutique securities-law firm in New York, has been writing about the second veto clause -- Article I, Section 7, Clause 3 -- in which the founders apparently had the foresight to provide an item veto no president has ever used.    Whatever course the next president sets, it's vital that he start talking about it now -- while the campaign is forming, rather than on inauguration a year from today. The next president needs to seek a mandate from the people to restore the balance of power. He could start with two campaign pledges: After vowing to defend the Constitution, I will veto anything that violates it. And I will not sign any bills I haven't had an opportunity to read.    ---   Mr. Bartley is editor of the Journal. </TEXT></DOC>