<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880422-0144 </DOCNO><HL> Medicine andamp; Health (A Special Report): Dialogue --- Waste Not, Want Not: Sidney Wolfe Attacks the U.S. Health-Care System For High Costs and Lack of Oversight </HL><SO> </SO><IN> PHA </IN><TEXT>   SIDNEY WOLFE RELISHES his role. A licensed physician, he has taken a relatively small salary for most of his career in exchange for being the country's pre-eminent critic of the American health scene.    Since 1971, when he co-founded with Ralph Nader the Public Citizen Health Research Group in Washington, Dr. Wolfe has peered over the shoulder of the federal government's health regulatory agencies, badgering them with petitions and lawsuits that demand stricter policing of the corporate impact on people's health.    Under Dr. Wolfe, the Health Research Group's investigations have led to federal bans on several prescription drugs with deadly side effects and Congressional inquiries into unnecessary surgery, pacemaker implants, and other health problems. For example, a lawsuit forced the federal government to require industry to notify workers of exposure to workplace hazards. The group also served as a clearinghouse for some product-liability cases, and publishes The Health Letter -- a widely read consumer-health newsletter -- and consumer-health books.    Over the years, industry and government critics have charged that Dr. Wolfe unnecessarily frightens the public and taxes the federal bureaucracy with exaggerated claims. Tall and angular at age 50 with a warm and casual personal style, he often resorts to strong rhetoric to make his points. But even Dr. Wolfe's detractors grudgingly admire his government and industry sources and concede that his group's research is often ground-breaking.    While the group concentrates on drug and workplace issues, it also investigates problems concerning health-care quality and cost. Wall Street Journal medical reporter Michael Waldholz joined Dr. Wolfe one recent morning in his cluttered, tiny office, to capture his decidedly spirited views of what's wrong with medicine in America.    Q. Recent news stories declare that health-care costs are exploding anew. What's going on?    A. We believe high costs, to a large extent, result from widespread unnecessary and inappropriate care. We estimate that as much as a third of all money -- something like $180 billion of the $540 billion spent on health care in the U.S. last year -- was wasted on unnecessary surgery, hospitalizations, and other services. Let me give you an example. Based on a study we just completed of Maryland hospitals and data from nine other states, we estimate that almost half a million Caesarean section births in the U.S. -- about half of all such procedures -- are unnecessary, wasting well over $1 billion a year.    Q. Why isn't this kind of waste being attacked elsewhere?    A. One of the things that's held back reform is that until very recently we weren't able to point the finger at a hospital or doctor and say, &quot;You have a C-section rate that's two-and-a-half times higher than what it should be. You can't justify it. Nothing about the patients in your hospital tells us that you needed to do that many C-sections.&quot;    But we are beginning to do that because health departments and the federal government are for the first time releasing hospital data, some of which is in very raw form and has to be massaged by powerful new software to get at these findings. But when that's done, insurers and employers who foot the big medical bills can say that based on facts from these databases, we know there is a wide discrepancy in the quality of care provided from hospital to hospital and doctor to doctor. And it will be clear to everyone that the wasteful providers are expensive as well as dangerous.    Q. You've said waste is only part of the cost problem.    A. Another problem is that there are too many people making too much money from health care. Without adequate regulatory restraints there's bound to be a lot of unnecessary services rendered.    I have a whole box sitting there that contains item after item mailed to me as a doctor asking me if I'd like to open up a new profit center in my office. &quot;Buy our testing machine, buy this, buy that -- it will pay for itself in two months.&quot; Hospitals with empty beds -- something like a third of all beds are unoccupied -- are doing the same thing, opening eating centers, sleeping centers, burping centers -- all to generate more revenue to justify their existence. Who's paying for this expensive care?    There's also the problem that in many states Medicaid just doesn't provide adequate coverage to the poor, and none at all for working poor who aren't covered by their employers. As a result, people don't enter the medical system until they are very sick -- at which point the cost of their care is higher than necessary. Treating a premature baby can cost $10,000 or $15,000 or even a lot more, but in many instances that could have been avoided with a few hundred bucks of prenatal care for the mother.    How much longer can the country afford to exclude a large portion of the population from health care?    Q. The government and employers are trying to reduce unnecessary care by increasing co-payments, the amount of the medical bill people must pay. Is this a good strategy?    A. Not if it limits access to needed care, and there's plenty of evidence that's what happens. The current reimbursement rates of Medicare, Aetna or Blue Cross are really high enough to cover the cost of care. Doctors ought to be required to accept those rates and people ought to tell their doctor that he or she shouldn't charge more. The doctor may say, &quot;Go to hell.&quot; In that case, people ought to remind the doctor there is a glut of doctors in America. There is a tradition in America for informed consumers taking their business elsewhere.    Q. What's behind the explosion of health-related information?    A. We like to think we have something to do with it; we first petitioned the federal government in the mid-1970s to release mortality data for doctors and hospitals. The government finally did release hospital data last year, and a lot of states also make available hospital discharge information on computer tapes that anyone can buy.    But all this is a result of the general push by us and others to give people information about their health providers and potential health risks in the workplace and in the environment. The public wants to know what industry and health-care providers have known or have kept quiet for years.    Q. How likely is it that consumers will have information soon to make the informed choices you talk about?    A. By sometime in the early 1990s, consumers -- I include employers and insurance companies -- will regularly use this information. It's going to revolutionize medicine. Doctors and hospitals no longer will be able to hide behind the anonymity of who's doing a good job or who isn't. A study we did a few years ago, also in Maryland, showed that in one hospital, for instance, a surgeon had a 10% death rate -- outrageously high -- among his prostate-surgery patients. That one doctor accounted for the entire hospital's high mortality rate. When the hospital's officials found out they finally addressed a problem they had underestimated.    Q. Do you think that just by being informed, consumers can change the system?    A. No. Those people who believe the marketplace forces such as competition and information alone can regulate the system are out of touch with reality. But people who think everything can be solved by government regulation are equally out of touch. What we need is a combination of both, including government rules to mandate a continual information flow. We had to force the federal government to require that industry notify workers if they are exposed to dangerous chemicals, which was the basis for worker right-to-know rules. Workers who use this kind of information now can help regulate the system, just as informed consumers can act as regulating forces every time they walk into the drugstore or the doctor's office. </TEXT></DOC>