<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880728-0018 </DOCNO><HL> Securities Powers in Banking Advance In House, But Insurance Limits Imposed </HL><AUTHOR> Robert E. Taylor (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> BNK SCR INS FND </IN><G> CNG SEC </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The House Banking Committee approved a broad range of securities powers for bank affiliates, but voted to impose insurance restrictions that banks oppose.    The committee worked into last night in a late bid to keep alive legislation to widen bank powers. A similar bill cleared the Senate last April. The House Energy and Commerce Committee is expected to review the House bill, so most lobbyists say it will require an 11th-hour push to win enactment this year.    Banks fared well in early votes yesterday, adding securities powers to the bill drafted by Chairman Fernand St Germain (D., R.I.).    But banks later lost crucial votes on insurance issues, and were negotiating with consumer groups last night in an attempt to dilute the effect of consumer-oriented requirements. Banks are deeply dissatisfied with requirements that they cash government checks of less than $3,000, offer low-cost checking accounts, and face tighter guidelines on making loans within their communities.    The securities part of the bill, as completed, would allow banks to underwrite commercial paper, municipal revenue bonds, mutual funds, asset-backed securities, corporate debt, and some kinds of convertible debt -- all through securities subsidiaries of the banks' holding companies.    Banking interests received setbacks on capital requirements and restrictions on cross-marketing by banks and their affiliates.    In a setback to all but the strongest money-center banks, the panel approved 29-21 an amendment barring any new powers to a bank that fails to meet risk-based capital standards that are expected to go into effect in 1992. The Federal Reserve Board has proposed that these standards require equity capital of 4%, and overall capital of 8%, of banks' assets weighted by their riskiness.    A broader setback for bankers was the panel's defeat of a bid to let banks' securities affiliates share their name, logo and premises. The amendment, offered by Rep. Barney Frank (D., Mass.), lost by a 26-25 vote.    Many banks would like to sell their securities products through their existing branch networks. The bar against that will greatly reduce synergies between their banking and securities businesses, said Karen Shaw, a bank consultant. Supporters of the restriction, however, warned that without it, consumers might think that the securities enterprises were covered by the banks' federal insurance.    The panel stopped just short of allowing corporate equity underwriting. By a 27-23 vote, it cleared underwriting of debt that is convertible into equity, but only if the stock price has risen 15% from the date the debt was issued. Members argued that the markup would prevent banks from using convertible debt to circumvent the ban against underwriting equities.    Support for broad securities powers was strong in the committee's votes. A move to strip bank affiliates of corporate debt underwriting failed by a 30-20 vote. The bill would allow affiliates to underwrite corporate debt six months after enactment.    While the bill initially let bank affiliates only sell mutual funds, the committee voted 35-14 to let them also underwrite the funds. And the panel relaxed a restriction that would have required banks to transfer to their securities affiliates the sale of mutual funds and discount brokerage that banks already are authorized to do directly.    Insurance agents duplicated their strong lobbying in the Senate. They successfully defended, by a 38-12 vote, provisions that would bar state-chartered banks from continuing to sell insurance if they are acquired by a bank holding company based in another state. The same restriction is in the Senate-passed bill. It was most bitterly opposed by acquisition-minded Citicorp.    The panel also approved a ban against any insurance underwriting by banks and their affiliates. Members said that about five states authorize bank underwriting of insurance, but few banks, if any, are doing it. The bill also would close loopholes that have allowed some banks to export insurance from sales bases in small towns or from states that allow their banks to sell insurance only in other states.    But insurance agents failed to win the approval of a flat ban against insurance sales by federally chartered banks and their subsidiaries.    In a suprising development, the committee voted to ease restraints enacted less than a year ago on the growth of limited-service banks. Last year's banking bill imposed a 7% growth cap on the assets of such banks, beginning in August 1988. The House bill would extend the unfettered growth period for two more years. An aide to Senate Banking Commiteee Chairman William Proxmire (D., Wis.) said Mr. Proxmire is expected to oppose this strongly in conference with the House.    Separately, the Senate Banking Committee approved by a voice vote a bill that would establish a bipartisan group to study the thrift industry's problems and recommend solutions.    The Senate panel also approved a separate bill aimed at helping the Securities and Exchange Commission deal with foreign-based violations of U.S. securities laws.    That bill would give the SEC powers it has requested to conduct investigations in the U.S. on behalf of foreign authorities, to keep confidential records it receives from those authorities, and to take action against securities industry members for violations of foreign securities laws. The bill is regarded as relatively noncontroversial, and may be enacted this year. </TEXT></DOC>