<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870713-0022 </DOCNO><HL> Wang Labs Looks to Founder's Son to Restore Luster---President Fred Wang Must ConvinceWary Customers of His Merits---By William M. BulkeleyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> WANBCOMPUTERS (EDP) </IN><DATELINE> LOWELL, Mass.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Last November, directors of Wang Laboratories Inc. named Frederick A. Wang, the eldest son of founder and Chairman An Wang, as president of the stumbling computer giant.    One director, Ernest Stockwell, a vice president of Bank of Boston Corp., came over after the meeting, slapped him on the back and said: &quot;Congratulations. And don't screw it up.&quot;    From the time he was a 20-year-old college student working on the assembly line in the summer, Fred Wang has been groomed for the top. He has worked as a programmer, marketing manager, head of research and development, head of manufacturing, treasurer and now president -- passing over more experienced executives all along the way.    Now he must prove he deserves it, and that won't be easy.    Bright and talented -- but naive and arrogant on his way up -- the 36-year-old Mr. Wang must turn around a large computer company still shellshocked by a sudden reversal after a decade of spectacular success. Wang went from record earnings of $210.2 million in the fiscal year ending June 30, 1984, to net of $15.5 million in 1985. After a modest rebound last year, the company expects to report a loss for all of fiscal 1987.    Mr. Wang also must move out of the shadow of his legendary father, an immigrant from Shanghai, China. &quot;I bet Fred spends the next 30 years of his business career being compared unfavorably to his father,&quot; says John Cunningham, who started an exodus of top Wang executives when he resigned as president of Wang two years ago after learning that Fred would eventually take over.    William Rosenberger, a former Wang product manager who is now chief executive officer of Control Key Corp., Peabody, Mass., says he thinks that Mr. Wang is a better administrator than his father and has been unfairly maligned by outsiders. But, he adds: &quot;Would Fred have the position if he wasn't Dr. Wang's son? It's unlikely.&quot;    Americans generally suspect that people who inherit their jobs don't deserve them. &quot;In some nations, there is an assumption that the family's skill and commitment will carry on,&quot; says Harry Levinson, a Belmont, Mass., psychologist and management consultant. &quot;In the U.S., however, particularly in publicly held companies, there is a feeling that it isn't quite a legitimate thing to do,&quot; he says.    But Wang, with its meteoric past and mediocre present, is different -- partially because of its Chinese tradition. Moreover, the Wang family controls the company through ownership of 78% of the Class C stock, which elects a majority of the directors. (The family's holding is currently valued at about $700 million, down from $2 billion two years ago.) And Mr. Wang's 67-year-old father, who remains chairman and chief executive officer, says family control means stability. Still, Fred Wang's promotion predictably caused skepticism -- both inside and outside the company.    Since then, Fred Wang has won over many employees. One marketing expert, who expressed fears last fall about the company's future if &quot;this kid&quot; took over, says now, &quot;Fred is making the right moves.&quot; Mr. Cunningham, who now heads Computer Consoles Inc., Waltham, Mass., says he sees many fewer resumes from job-hunting Wang workers than he did six months ago. Jerry O'Connell, president of Farmington, Conn.-based Structured Computer Corp., which writes software for Wang computers, adds: &quot;Everyone in Wang had trepidations. But they're coming around.&quot;    Associates give him high marks for his growth on the job. Says Samuel Gagliano, a former Wang vice president who worked closely with Mr. Wang: &quot;He might have been the young kid four or five years ago, but now he's much more polished.&quot; &quot;He listens more than most people do,&quot; says Ted Leonsis, a former public relations adviser. &quot;He's not a spoiled, rich kid.&quot;    Despite his youth, Mr. Wang, who plays soccer weekly in a Lowell industrial league and regularly beats associates at tennis, is a 15-year company veteran -- a lifetime in the computer industry.    Despite the revival of employee morale, Wang Labs still faces an uphill battle in the marketplace. &quot;Many of their large customers have become disaffected and said they'll only buy from IBM or Digital,&quot; says Patricia Seybold, a Boston-based consultant who advises companies on office automation. A March survey of large companies by Computer Decisions Magazine and New York-based PaineWebber Inc. found that one-third of Wang's customers had lowered their opinion of the company in the past year.    Wang executives have attributed the disaffection to complaints about service and delays in delivering new products. Analysts have cited Wang's reliance on sales of word processors -- machines that have become outdated as the use of personal computers has spread -- and problems expanding into office automation systems tying the word processors to computers. Moreover, Wang used resources developing products that few customers wanted.    Mr. Wang, who has never collected a paycheck elsewhere, would seem an unlikely turnaround artist. Although he has a Bachelor's degree in computer science from Brown University, his only business education was a 13-week executive course at Harvard Business School. But, Mr. Wang says, &quot;One thing I can do better than anyone else is transition from the Doctor running it.&quot;    His resume also includes few of the shining successes that often mark a fast-track executive's progress. Ten years ago, he headed a seven-person staff for Wang's preliminary marketing efforts with the word processor. Once the product took off, more experienced hands took over. When he ran research and development, he painfully reorganized the operation to reduce clashes among engineers for separate product lines; but, unlike his father, he was never a technical guru.    Moreover, he was blamed for some of Wang's debacles. As head of research, he announced a raft of new products in 1983. But some were delivered months late, leaving customers in the lurch, and others never sold well. Last year, he upset Wall Street by incorrectly forecasting earnings gains.    Nevertheless, when directors and senior executives persuaded An Wang last fall to share power in a period of sales shortfalls and customer uncertainty, Fred was the only candidate. And the earnest, 5-foot-6 Mr. Wang moved quickly after getting the president's job. The next day, he replaced the head of U.S. operations with Ian Diery, a dynamic one-time Australian rugby player who had led a Wang sales surge in Europe.    In January, when an unexpectedly large quarterly loss became evident, Mr. Wang cut the work force by 1,000 and announced a six-month, 6% salary cut, with employees who stayed two years promised reimbursement in stock. The company eked out a profit in its fiscal third quarter and expects to report &quot;solid&quot; profit for its fourth quarter ended June 30. But analysts are wary about the next two quarters, because of the end of the pay cuts and the likelihood of increased competition.    Mr. Wang also is making himself highly visible. In the 200 days since his promotion, he has spent one-third of his time on the road, visiting 33 of 35 U.S. field operations and talking with about 1,000 customers at their offices and in hotels around the country.    Mr. Wang, who is stocky with prematurely gray hair that springs into a cowlick, emphasizes candor. He tells customers he knows they sometimes find Wang slow to respond to complaints or straighten out billing errors. He tells workers not to expect pay raises next year unless results in the next six months are better than expected.    In contrast to his sometimes enigmatic father, he pushes clear communications. He sends a monthly letter to all employees and urges workers to question executives by electronic mail, promising replies within two days.    On a typical recent trip to Connecticut, he visited big customers in New Haven and Hartford, answered questions from the 85 employees in Wang's Farmington office and rose for an early breakfast with customers and Wang sales representatives.    To all, he gives variants of the same speech: Recent earnings and new products are evidence of a turnaround; Wang will regain its influence, increase its revenue 12% a year to become a $5 billion company, and surpass International Business Machines Corp. as No. 1 in the industry in customer satisfaction.    After lunching with Mr. Wang, William Harrison, senior vice president of Hartford Insurance Group, an ITT Corp. unit that is a big Wang customer, says his management has asked him if Wang can survive. &quot;I'm very encouraged with what Fred's done. He had to take steps to cut expenses, and he's done it quickly,&quot; Mr. Harrison adds.    Stephen Leggatt, a Wang salesman in Connecticut, says customers &quot;looked upon Dr. Wang as a real-life Horatio Alger. Meeting Fred shows them it's a real corporation that will go on.&quot;    Mr. Wang, whose preparatory-school tones are a sharp contrast to his father's still-accented English, says his eventual rise was planned for when he turned 40, but was accelerated as a result of Mr. Cunningham's departure. His 30-year old brother, Courtney, works at a Wang unit. His 23-year-old sister, Juliette Wang Coombs, doesn't work for the company.    Mr. Wang has surprised many by his willingness to delegate jobs -- a contrast to the centralized, charismatic leadership of his diminutive, bow-tied father. For example, when Wang's advertising agency designed a controversial and well-regarded series of ads featuring young Wang salespeople talking techno-babble in an effort to sell more $300,000 VS 300 minicomputers to data processing managers, Mr. Wang told the marketing vice president to make the decision.    Later, he says, he had to defend it to directors. &quot;Our only female board member -- who happens to be my mother -- asked directors to vote on the ads. She said, 'I don't even understand them.'&quot; Mr. Wang told her that she wasn't the target audience: &quot;She doesn't have many VS 300's in her budget.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>