<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880414-0092 </DOCNO><HL> Forbidden Tibet Looks Outward </HL><AUTHOR> William McGurn </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> LHASA, Tibet  </DATELINE><TEXT>   It's early afternoon here outside the Jokhang Cathedral, and every Tibetan knows that something's up. Ragged Buddhist pilgrims throw themselves to the ground in supplication before the temple entrance; the great brass prayer wheels continue to turn; but there is an edge to the day's activity: Someone important is coming. Has to be important, because almost every other person in the square is a plainclothes policeman.    The someone turns out to be four American congressmen here on a lightning visit. For about 45 minutes their entourage is let loose to wander about the market surrounding the Jokhang, to meet Tibetans and perhaps pick up a souvenir bracelet. As they do, however, a Chinese soldier perched high atop a roof overlooking the square quietly photographs any Tibetan bold enough to go up to the visitors.    Only a month ago the Jokhang and its surroundings were the scene of a demonstration that though initially was said to have been small, was -- as a visitor here quickly finds out -- the largest and bloodiest protest against the Chinese occupation since the abortive 1959 uprising. Coming on the heels of riots last fall, the violent March 5 protest reminded Peking that nearly four decades of colonial Chinese rule has failed to snuff out Tibetan calls for independence and the near-universal loyalty to their exiled god-king, the Dalai Lama.    These disturbances come at a particularly sensitive time for China. Not only do they jeopardize prospects for the badly needed foreign exchange China hopes to earn from opening the &quot;Rooftop of the World&quot; to tourism, they mar the image of a reformed and enlightened People's Republic that Peking is trying desperately to project to an anxious Hong Kong and a recalcitrant Taiwan. The result is a curious mix of carrot and stick, a startling public appeal to the Dalai Lama to come home coupled with an internal show of force that people here say is the most repressive since the days of the Cultural Revolution. As the ban imposed on the press during the October demonstrations indicates, the linchpin of the whole enterprise is to keep tourist money flowing in and as little information as possible going out.    &quot;The Chinese are afraid of the foreigner,&quot; says one Tibetan woman, her black hair braided with blue-and-white ribbons. &quot;The foreigner goes home and tells the world the truth.&quot;    The Chinese have good reason to fear this. A reporter who slips into Tibet on a weeklong tour finds that despite Peking's claims that abuses ended with the Cultural Revolution, the evidence supports Asia Watch's contention in February that &quot;a pattern of serious human-rights violations continues to characterize political and social life in Tibet today.&quot; A month after the demonstrations, for example, the authorities have yet to give a credible count of casualties. The Chinese now put the number of dead at five, though for weeks they admitted only to the killing of one policeman, who is being built up in the local press as a hero. But Tibetans say that in addition to the policeman and at least two laymen, between eight and 16 monks also were killed. &quot;A Chinese dies and he is a hero,&quot; says a 60-year-old woman bitterly, &quot;but Tibetans are nothing.&quot;    Peking could have saved itself that hero and avoided the bloodshed had it not ordered the annual March 5 prayer festival to go on and forced Buddhist monks to march past Chinese TV crews and photographers here to record the event as proof that China respects religious freedom in Tibet. The monks filed by all right, but then a group from Ganden monastery started chanting for Tibetan independence and the release of one of their brothers, Yulu Dawa Tsering, imprisoned after the last riots. The Chinese responded by rushing the Jokhang, and rumors flew through town that the Chinese were killing monks inside the cathedral, Tibetan Buddhism's most sacred site. Up to 10,000 people then took to stoning anything Chinese: shops, restaurants, even a doctor's office.    Although Chinese forces have now adopted a low profile with the advent of tourist season, this was not before letting Tibetans know who was still boss here. A monk in nearby Drepung monastery says that the evening after the latest protest about 60 military trucks came rumbling up to the grounds and four monks were taken away; two others, he says, died in or after the riots, and the Chinese have now stationed 50 policemen in the monastery itself. Other monasteries tell the same story, with a Ganden monk reporting that 100 were arrested at his monastery. Tibetans estimate that altogether at least 600 people were arrested. Based on word of mouth, the Tibetans tend to exaggerate numbers. But the Chinese simply lie.    Families, for example, have not been told where those arrested are being kept, and only recently have the next of kin been asked to come and collect the dead, their outrage compounded by the evidence of torture and Chinese demands for a &quot;storage&quot; fee of between $135 and $162 -- more than the average annual per-capita income here. The family of one man arrested after the riots, Tenzin Sherap, was asked around March 23 to come to the morgue. According to a Western report smuggled out of Tibet, his sister said she could identify him only by his clothes, so badly battered was his face. A man who helped with the funeral rites said that all the man's bones had been broken.    If the Chinese botched the prayer festival, they fared better on the more familiar ground of cracking heads, made all the easier by regulations imposed last time around that restrict individuals and forbid the press from coming here. But the start of tourist season has put Peking on a tightrope. Tourists are being let in, but only in groups and mostly on expensive tours ranging from $1,500 to $2,200 per person per week from Hong Kong. This way their money goes to Chinese-owned hotels and their movements are controlled by Chinese travel agencies.    Backpackers aren't as lucrative and pose risks. Their little money goes to Tibetan hotels and restaurants, and, more likely to speak some Tibetan, they find out things the government doesn't want the world to know. Were it not for these people, last fall's and last month's uprisings would have gone the way of those in the past, suppressed quickly, quietly and with impunity.    Yet for all Peking's Himalayan headaches it would be disastrous for Tibetans to conclude that they have a real shot at independence. For one thing, Tibet is just too important. Rich in many of the resources China lacks, the Tibetan plateau lies at the strategic heart of Asia, near the U.S.S.R., China and India. American diplomatic sources say that since 1950 China has built up a military presence here that includes a number of airfields, radar stations, about 100,000 ground troops along with thousands of paramilitary police, militia and reservists; the Americans refused to comment on reports of five missile bases here for China's nuclear arsenal. Indeed, most of China's modernization in Tibet revolves around a military infrastructure. Decked out in olive drab, Lhasa resembles more a set for the TV series &quot;MASH&quot; than the holy center of Tibetan Buddhism.    The Chinese case is that Tibet is an integral part of their country -- and, at a quarter of China's land mass, this is a sizable part. Peking dates its claim not from the 1950 invasion but the 13th century, when the Mongol Khans established an empire that ruled both China and Tibet. Although history leans to the Tibetan claims, and though Tibet was certainly a de facto independent nation from the fall of the Manchus in 1911 until the Communist invasion, there is enough ambiguity for the Chinese to make a case. A bad case, yes, but they believe it, and those who overlook this will forever underestimate Chinese reactions to a challenge.    The Dalai Lama himself understands this well, and he has consistently urged his compatriots not to resort to violence. He skirts the issue of independence, his one bargaining chip, preferring to speak of human rights and peaceful accommodation. &quot;Historically Tibet has never been a part of China,&quot; he says from London, where he is ending a pastoral visit. &quot;However, about the future I am leaving my options open. The real issue is the genuine satisfaction and happiness of the Tibetan people.&quot;    As the Dalai Lama knows, in the long term, Tibetan independence depends, as it has throughout history, on a China weakened and distracted by some outside power, a day that is a long way off if it comes at all. In the meantime, the land once known as the Forbidden Kingdom, for its refusal to admit foreigners, now depends on foreigners' presence as the only insurance that the heavy pendulum of Chinese policy will not swing against it yet again. &quot;If you leave,&quot; says one Tibetan, a small photo of the Dalai Lama on the wall behind her, &quot;they can kill us all.&quot;    ---   Mr. McGurn is deputy editorial page editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal. </TEXT></DOC>