<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871005-0100 </DOCNO><HL> Manager's Journal:Office Computers Create Glaring Problems---By James Trunzo</HL><DD> 10/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMPUTERS (EDP) </IN><TEXT>   For thousands of office workers today, the symptoms are all too common: headache, eyestrain, tension, even a rash, or hyperactivity or general malaise. As office environments become more attuned to the Video Display Terminal (VDT) than the typewriter, we have come to see an office landscape awash in what we now call &quot;stare glare.&quot; As early as 1980, a study by the National Institute for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH) found that VDT operators reported higher stress ratings than any other group of workers, including air traffic controllers.    When computers were first introduced into the office landscape we did not anticipate their effect on workers' well-being or capacity to work comfortably. But more recently, even those executives who tended to be insensitive to the problems caused by stare glare have had their computer consciousness raised as the PC finds its way into the corner office.    The president of a major toy company admitted to me that he used to attribute VDT complaints he received from his staff to typical office grumbling. But, once a computer was installed in his office and he spent hours studying sales and planning data projected on his VDT screen, the problem took on a new meaning.    We solved his problem by redesigning his office: The computer that had been by the window was relocated near his desk. Next to the window the contrast between the outside brightness and the low-level lighted screen tended to cause eye strain.    For similar reasons, millions of square feet of office space across the country are rapidly being rendered obsolete. Conventional office lighting, dominated by fluorescent light fixtures laid into suspended tile ceilings, is totally inappropriate for the computer age.    This is a costly fact of corporate life. A major cosmetics company recently called us after having spent more than $1 million &quot;redecorating&quot; its New York offices. The new designs were attractive but paid little attention to the expanded computer installations. Staff members were voicing typical stare-glare complaints. We found that not only were the clerical work stations incorrectly lit, but the conference room and the executive offices had been inappropriately designed for the increased role computers played in executives' work day.    As architects, we first became aware of the importance of lighting in the new electronic landscape when we were designing a television editing facility. We found that the interplay of light and color surrounding the TV monitors had a significant impact not only on the level of eye fatigue but also on the ability of an editor to make a 30-second program color perfect.    Months later the point was driven home. After we converted our own office to computers, our architects climbed onto desks to pull lights out of overhead fixtures because of the glare on their color VDTs. What was previously a well-planned, evenly illuminated environment simply did not work once computers were introduced.    Over the past three years we have studied prototype office landscape systems, tailored to the new worker/computer environment. Among the solutions we found to hold great promise are:    --New injection-molded acrylic lenses. For those who don't have the capital for a complete office revamp, these inexpensive retrofit devices are made for standard 2-by-4 recess-fluorescent fixtures. They help spread light and eliminate the direct overhead source of glare.    --Increased reliance on controlled task lighting to supplement an overall lower level of lighting. Most offices still depend on banks of fluorescents controlled at one central switch location. Most employees sit at open work stations and have little or no control or input into their environment. Task lighting lets them control their own space and find their own comfort level.    --Increased use of electronic dimming controls of indirect glare-reducing lighting. This proved to be a major part of the solution to problems we encountered designing the offices of an investment banking firm. Executives and traders who spent much of their day at Quotrons, for example, complained of glare and reported many of the symptoms experienced by other office workers. The dimming system enabled them to regulate and adjust the amount of artificial light throughout the day, as the natural light changed from intense light in the morning to soft, more indirect light in the afternoon.    A similar result was achieved in another set of offices when we installed window sensors that automatically adjusted the blinds to let in the optimal amount of light throughout the day.    --Wherever possible we recommend the inclusion of distant views, and preferably window views. This allows workers to look away from their VDT screens and reduce the constant eye strain.    Another approach that has proven valuable in open office landscapes to reduce employee discomfort was the development and installation of illuminated monitor visors (or &quot;surrounds&quot;) that complement the VDT screen and reduce background glare.    The greater dependence on computers as we move steadily into a service- and information-based economy demands understanding of the changing environment in which we work. The design of a workplace more compatible to the electronic output is a critical issue that ultimately will affect business productivity.    ---   Mr. Trunzo is an architect and president of Intratec Group Ltd., an office planning and architectural firm in New York. </TEXT></DOC>