<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881007-0156 </DOCNO><HL> Soviets Cover the U.S. Campaign </HL><AUTHOR> Anthony Gardner </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><IN> PUB </IN><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   Soviet leaders rarely make understatements. Yet Mikhail Gorbachev's declaration in his book &quot;Perestroika&quot; that &quot;we are currently expanding our perceptions of the American political process&quot; is an exception. The public and private opinions of Soviet journalists, analysts and academics about U.S. politics and the '88 presidential race are considerably more varied and objective than they were four years ago.    Articles on this year's race represent the first effort by the Soviet press to describe and analyze, rather than gratuitously insult, the American political system. Until last year, Soviet views of American politics and presidential elections were orthodox expressions of Marxist-Leninst philosophy and were simple to characterize. Alexander Yakovlev, secretary of the Central Committee and close adviser to Mr. Gorbachev, several years ago described U.S. elections as &quot;a well-developed way to confuse the masses&quot; and &quot;a method used in pursuing policies of the ruling forces.&quot; Mira Petrovskaya, a research associate at the Institute of U.S. and Canada Studies, wrote that &quot;the most important aspect of the American election system is the absence of a real choice.&quot;    Today, Soviet America-watchers are expanding their perceptions of the American political process and the two major parties. For the first time, articles present a factual, neutral description of how primaries and elections are conducted in the U.S. and describe the candidates' careers and personal lives.    Until recently, the majority of Soviet America-watchers preferred the Republican Party. It promises less than the Democratic Party on defense and foreign policy, the argument goes, but delivers more because of its relative immunity to right-wing charges of being &quot;soft on communism.&quot; Although Republicans frequently espouse anti-Soviet positions on the campaign trail, they tend to do so for tactical reasons and usually become more moderate in office. Moreover, as leaders of the party of big business, they are interested in expanding U.S.-Soviet trade.    Soviet America-watchers, however, mixed this pragmatic attitude toward the Republican Party with attacks on President Reagan himself, and four years ago Mr. Reagan was routinely criticized as a neo-Fascist warmonger who had plunged U.S.-Soviet ties into their postwar nadir. Today, in the afterglow of the agreement to remove medium-range missiles from Europe, some commentators wax lyrical about Mr. Reagan. &quot;He has considerable charm and will go down in history as a great president,&quot; declares Oleg Prudkov, foreign editor of Literaturnaya Gazeta.    It's clear, too, that the younger generation of Soviet America-watchers foresees an improvement of relations between the Kremlin and the Democratic Party. In the opinion of Irina Karaganova, top election analyst at the institute, Michael Dukakis, Jesse Jackson, Albert Gore and Gary Hart are &quot;new Democrats&quot; in the sense that they are more flexible, open-minded and pragmatic than their predecessors.    A few young America-watchers believe Mr. Dukakis possesses the vigor and readiness for change that qualify him as a worthy counterpart to Mr. Gorbachev. But others question whether the governor is committed to arms control in light of the important contribution made by defense contractors to the Massachusetts economy.    Some commentators are preoccupied by Mr. Dukakis's support for a Conventional Defense Initiative because they see it as a campaign tactic reflecting the Democratic Party's traditional vulnerability to right-wing criticism on security issues. Others see it as a potential threat to the Soviet effort to build a &quot;common European home.&quot; Many are troubled by his lack of foreign-policy experience and by his reliance on advisers from the Carter administration. Finally, many commentators fear that Mr. Dukakis may stress human rights if elected on account of his Jewish wife and in order to establish a &quot;tough&quot; image.    The Democratic convention received a mixed reception in the Soviet press. While the absence of anti-Soviet attacks attracted honorable mention, the convention frequently was depicted as an empty coronation ceremony. Commentators praised certain points in the platform relating to foreign policy and security -- such as the pledge to seek a peaceful settlement in Central America -- but criticized the document for being too short and abstract. They routinely discounted its attractive elements by stating that candidates usually ignore their campaign promises.    The Democratic primary placed older Soviet America-watchers in the awkward position of reconciling Jesse Jackson's strong performance with their incessant references to racism in the U.S. and the overriding importance of campaign financing and membership in the upper-class leadership establishment. They argued that Mr. Jackson's performance reflected heightened social tensions and the deepening crisis of American capitalism.    While younger America-watchers also noted growing strains in the lower middle classes, they highlighted the new political clout of ethnic minorities and described Mr. Jackson's candidacy as an exam of public consciousness that the electorate passed with honor. Few believe Mr. Jackson will ever attain his final objective. &quot;The choice of a black president for you is like 'perestroika' for us,&quot; cautioned a journalist at the Soviet news agency Tass. &quot;It will be a task for the next generation.&quot;    In 1984, after four years of the anti-Soviet rhetoric of the Reagan administration, some America-watchers privately expressed the hope that Walter Mondale would win. This year, even though America-watchers are vigorously debating the merits and demerits of both candidates, they believe that it doesn't make much difference who wins. Unlike in the past, however, when that conclusion was based largely on ideology, the lack of preference for party or candidate today reflects the conviction that the future of perestroika will have a far greater impact on the course of U.S.-Soviet relations than the outcome of the 1988 presidential race. &quot;You Americans,&quot; Boris Tumanov, a Tass reporter, told me, &quot;are condemned to better relations with us.&quot;    Nor is there a marked preference for one of the two candidates on a personal level. A July 27 article in Literaturnaya Gazeta, for example, describes the race as a &quot;contest between the dull and the boring.&quot; A commentary on the Democratic convention in an early August issue of a popular weekly magazine, Ekho Planeti, compares the governor's oratorical skills with those of &quot;the person who . . . announces arrivals and departures in American train stations.&quot; Mr. Bush frequently is dismissed as an elitist or a blind Reagan loyalist without the Reagan charm. In a recent political portrait in Pravda, writer Vitaliy Gan stresses that Mr. Bush is related to all of Europe's 60 royal families.    The more open coverage of the American political system as shown in these articles may be more than simply evidence of glasnost at work. It may form part of Mr. Gorbachev's campaign to introduce limited forms of democratic rule within the Soviet Union by heightening understanding of and even sympathy for certain institutions of Western democracy among the public. An article in the July Kommunist, the theoretical journal of the Communist Party, argues that serious political reform requires an independent judiciary and bar, multicandidate elections, limited terms of office, and tolerance of all behavior not specifically forbidden by law.    While there assuredly is no prospect that Pravda will wax lyrical about American democracy in the foreseeable future, it is possible that greater sympathy from Soviet America-watchers will influence public opinion and strengthen Mr. Gorbachev's position. As a final result, the U.S. and the Soviet Union may develop more compatible visions of the world as their political institutions become less dissimilar.    ---   Mr. Gardner, a law student at Columbia, just returned from Moscow, where he spent two months working at the Institute of U.S. and Canada Studies. He wrote an article for the Journal in 1984 on Soviet views of the U.S. election. </TEXT></DOC>