<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870316-0110 </DOCNO><HL> Mrs. Thatcher's Miniboom---By Peter Norman</HL><DD> 03/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP </IN><DATELINE> LONDON </DATELINE><TEXT>   Britain's chancellor of the exchequer, Nigel Lawson, will be able to cut taxes and lower public borrowing when he unveils his new budget tomorrow. That will put the ruling Conservative Party in a strong position as it prepares for the general election widely expected this year.    Surging tax revenues and steady economic growth have dumbfounded those people Mr. Lawson calls the &quot;City Scribblers&quot; -- the young, Porsche-driving analysts in London's financial district. Last summer, they predicted a grave economic crisis for Britain as the pound slumped and the country's current-account balance of payments moved into deficit.    But sterling has strengthened by about 5% in the past two weeks, bouncing the Bank of England into an interest-rate cut. That leaves Mr. Lawson with just one tricky problem remaining: finding an intellectual justification for his good fortune.    In 1979, as one of the government's leading ideologues, he set out to create consistency in its economic policies. His present maneuvering room, however, is the result of good luck as much as good management.    Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's economic policy has been transformed behind a rhetorical smokescreen that continues to stress consistency and discipline. In changing its approach, the government hasn't hesitated to steal the clothes of the rival Labor and Alliance parties.    Most dramatically, the government decided last November to relax its grip on the public purse. Bowing to political pressure, Mr. Lawson evoked memories of Keynesian policies to stimulate demand by raising the government's planned spending total for the fiscal year beginning April 1 by 4.75 billion pounds to 148.6 billion pounds and adding 5.5 billion pounds to tentative spending plans for the fiscal year beginning April 1, 1988. (The pound is currently equivalent to $1.57.) But the heart of the strategy already had been altered. The government's primary objective of reducing inflation and creating the conditions for stable growth was linked first to a target for sterling M3, Britain's broad measure of money supply. In the fall of 1985, the government ceased using precise monetary targets.    &quot;We are coming to an end of an era in policies,&quot; says Peter Shore, a Labor member of Parliament and former minister for economic affairs. &quot;The ark of the covenant in 1979 was to control the money supply and regulate sterling M3,&quot; allied to public-spending cuts, lower government deficits and cuts in personal taxes. Since then, Mr. Shore contends, sterling M3 has been abandoned and public spending has risen. The deficit has declined solely because of the sale of former state-owned companies, he says, while the tax burden has risen for all except those in the higher brackets.    In a recent study, the independent National Institute of Economic and Social Research concludes that the 100,000-person drop in British unemployment since last summer owes nothing to the original philosophy of the Conservative government. Strict monetarist policies failed to create full employment through pushing down inflation-adjusted interest rates and depressing real wages. Instead, according to the institute, the drop in the seasonally adjusted jobless total to about 3.1 million reflects special training and job-creation schemes paid for by the public sector.    In place of former strictness, &quot;policy is now permitting, even encouraging, a rapid growth of consumer demand helped by easy credit conditions and fast growth of real earnings, not least in the public sector itself,&quot; the institute says.    The covert change in policy worries some government supporters. The forecasting unit of the London Business School, normally sympathetic to the government's policies, has noted that &quot;contrary to the stated aims of the government, public expenditure as a proportion of gross domestic product is higher now than in 1979.&quot;    Late last year, a House of Commons committee dominated by Conservatives concluded that the government's medium-term financial strategy lacked &quot;a coherent framework for the setting of fiscal policy.&quot; The committee said &quot;a substantial change in policy&quot; had occurred in public expenditure control, money supply and the use of interest and exchange rates. These changes should be &quot;openly explained and avowed,&quot; it said.    But most of Mrs. Thatcher's supporters probably prefer her chancellor to pursue a pragmatic policy, particularly if it holds the hope of reelection. The dogmatic monetarism of Mrs. Thatcher's early years is now viewed widely as a mistake and a major cause of industrial closures in the early 1980s, when companies were caught between an unsustainably high exchange rate and interest rates approaching 20%.    It also fit badly with the traditions of modern Conservatism. It's no coincidence that a large oil painting of Benjamin Disraeli takes pride of place in the hall of Mr. Lawson's official Downing Street residence. Mr. Disraeli was a supreme pragmatist who launched the modern Conservative Party on the strength of stealing and adapting rival Liberal plans for parliamentary reform in 1867.    Since abandoning the rigid policies of Mrs. Thatcher's early years, Mr. Lawson has permitted a major devaluation of sterling and apparently ignored a shift in the current-account balance of payments from a surplus of 2.9 billion pounds in 1985 to a deficit of 1.1 billion pounds in 1986.    But senior Treasury officials claim that the essentials of the government's &quot;medium-term financial strategy&quot; have been preserved. In particular, Mrs. Thatcher's government has put an end to the previous &quot;stop-go&quot; cycle of short-term fiscal stimulus and credit squeeze, the hallmark of British policy for much of the 1960s and 1970s. Labor governments back then tried several fiscal packages a year as they struggled to fine-tune an economy wracked by rampant inflation.    The financial markets, which for much of 1986 suspected Britain was headed for rising inflation and a balance-of-payments crisis, now appear to be giving the government the benefit of the doubt. By bidding sterling higher after the March 10 half-percentage-point cut in British bank base rates to 10.5%, the foreign-exchange market has given Mrs. Thatcher's government a vote of confidence ahead of the budget.    The British economy still has plenty of black spots. The 3.1 million unemployed compare with only 1.3 million when Mrs. Thatcher came to power. Of the unemployed, some 40% have been without work for more than a year, compared with only 10% in the 1960s. Britain's annual inflation rate of about 4% is low in historical terms, but higher than in most competitor countries. The nation continues to bear the scars of the deep recession of 1980-81 with a depressed northern region and manufacturing production still 4% below the peak level of the previous business cycle.    But Britain also has been able to maintain steady economic growth over six years of such major shocks as the Falklands war, the miners strike and last year's halving of oil prices. The government can take credit for creating the framework for far-reaching changes in the economy. The Thatcher years have seen the eclipse of trade-union power, widespread deregulation, the sale to private investors of state-owned industries and the encouragement of new entrepreneurs.    For the moment, financial markets see a country where projected real growth of 3.5% this year probably will exceed that of its major industrialized trading partners; where industrial productivity is rising rapidly and where a sudden surge of tax revenues should enable Mr. Lawson to concoct an election-winning budget.    Confidence has grown as government revenues have surged. Corporation tax income has soared, thanks to increased company profits and the impact of 1984 reform lowering rates and closing out of shelters. The consumer boom has prompted a surge in value-added tax receipts. The greatly increased volume of securities transactions since October's deregulation in the City is expected to boost stamp-duty payments.    For Mr. Lawson, the markets' newly discovered enthusiasm for Britain is a vital piece of good news. When he takes his secret tax plans from the antique red wood-and-leather &quot;budget box&quot; next Tuesday, he will be under fewer economic constraints than any chancellor since the Conservative Party took power in Britain under Mrs. Thatcher in 1979.    Many analysts now believe the chancellor will have at least five billion pounds to &quot;give away&quot; on a combination of tax cuts, increased public spending and a reduced government deficit. The City consensus is that a two-percentage-point cut in the basic income-tax rate to 27% and a two billion pound reduction to five billion pounds in the next fiscal year's deficit will most likely be at the center of the chancellor's plans.    Some analysts like David Wileman, senior economist at ANZ Merchant Bank Ltd., believe that by approving the March 10 interest-rate cut the authorities were signaling &quot;that there will be no nasty surprises&quot; in the budget. Although Mr. Lawson's long-term ambition is to cut the basic rate of British income tax to 25%, he is expected to resist the temptation so that he can appear prudent and reap the benefits of further interest-rate declines.    But he also must meet great expectations, not least from the prime minister, his next-door neighbor in Downing Street. Although the election deadline is June 1988, party activists are champing at the bit and the country in general is in a pre-election mood. Tomorrow's announcement could determine whether Mrs. Thatcher will choose to go to the polls as early as this spring for a mandate to build on the suprise successes of her pragmatic economic policy.    ---   Mr. Norman covers European economic news for the Journal. </TEXT></DOC>