<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870707-0015 </DOCNO><HL> Illegal Immigration Seems on ReboundFueling Doubt About New Law's Impact---By Dianna SolisStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAMJUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   Illegal immigration appears to be on the rebound after a seven-month decline, raising fresh skepticism about the effectiveness of the nation's eight-month-old immigration law.    Previously, U.S. immigration authorities reported sharp, monthly declines in the number of people trying to cross the U.S.-Mexico border illegally. The reduced number of apprehensions along the border -- down roughly 50% from year-earlier levels -- was evidence, authorities said, that the new law had begun to reduce illegal immigration.    The centerpiece of the new law for the first time makes it a federal offense for employers to knowingly hire illegal immigrants -- in theory, removing a major incentive for illegal entry.    But a recent surge in the number of apprehensions of illegal immigrants has led some officials of the Immigration and Naturalization Service to speculate that growing Latin American poverty has overpowered the new law's disincentive to immigrate illegally. They note that the recent increase in illegal border crossings coincides with widespread reports of labor shortages in U.S. farm fields and garment factories.    &quot;What is their option?&quot; an INS spokesman asked. &quot;To sit at home and not have food on the table, or come north and find work despite the fact that there is a law that might not provide that job.&quot;    After declining throughout 1987 on a year-to-year basis, the number of apprehensions along the U.S.-Mexico border in the first 20 days of June surged to an indicated monthly rate of 90,000 -- nearly one-third more than for May. For the preceding four years, the border has experienced its heaviest flow during March, April and May.    In San Diego, the border's busiest crossing point, the number of apprehensions for the first five days of July continued to jump, exceeding those of a year earlier.    &quot;We have just seen a complete turnaround,&quot; said Gene Smithburg, assistant chief Border Patrol agent in San Diego. Sunday, he said, was the first day this year that the agency apprehended more than 3,000 people.    Moreover, other important factors, besides the immigration law, also may have accounted for the decline in apprehensions through May. The Rio Grande, Mexico's border with Texas, is flowing at its highest level in 45 years, discouraging crossings. Its deep, silty water has claimed at least 40 lives this year. The number of apprehensions rose much faster in San Diego, where crossing doesn't involve the risks of the Rio Grande, than they did in El Paso from May to June.    Apart from the statistics, last Thursday's deaths of 18 Mexican illegal immigrants bound for Dallas from El Paso in a broiling railroad car illustrated that the pressure continues to immigrate illegally. The would-be workers, who died from suffocation, unwittingly chose an airtight boxcar that was locked from the outside by a labor smuggler. One 24-year-old Mexican survived.    &quot;The boxcar tragedy is a symbol of a daily reality,&quot; said Rick Swartz, president of the National Immigration, Refugee and Citizenship Forum, a Washington, D.C.-based immigrant-rights group. &quot;People are willing to take risks all the time, whether it's Mexicans in boxcars or Haitians in boats that aren't seaworthy.&quot; By attempting to damp the immigrants' willingness to embrace risk and employers' eagerness to hire them, he added, the new law is nothing less than &quot;a test in mass psychology.&quot;    Currently, apprehension statistics are the only method of scoring this test, but their usefulness is limited. For instance, the same immigrant worker may be apprehended as often as four or five times in a day.    Another factor in the decline in apprehensions earlier this year may have been the perception of increasing border violence. While the Border Patrol has been lauded for its efforts in protecting illegal immigrants from gangs who rape and rob, it also has its critics.    In San Diego, for instance, the Quaker Church's American Friends Service Committee contends that immigration agents increasingly are striking illegal immigrants with government vehicles as they pursue them.    Dissatisfied with the results of an initial investigation, the Quakers and the Mexican consulate in San Diego have requested a further inquiry into the injuring of Eustacio Zamona, whose shoulder allegedly was fractured in a chase.    An official with the Border Patrol's Office of Professional Responsibility in San Diego refused to confirm that an investigation had been initiated, but an INS official in Washington, D.C., said that such complaints are never dismissed without investigation.    In El Paso, the League of United Latin American Citizens is asking for a congressional investigation into alleged violence against Mexican nationals. In one case, on June 8, Armando Valenzuela of Mexico drowned when his raft tipped in the high waters of the Rio Grande. His relatives and Chicano leaders have accused immigration agents of shaking a rope, fastened to the U.S. riverbank, that Mr. Valenzuela was using to guide his raft across the water.    &quot;It was an act of violence against someone who was not posing any violence,&quot; says John Garcia, who heads a Texas immigration committee of the Latin American citizens' group. The Border Patrol in El Paso and the Federal Bureau of Investigation say they are investigating but decline to comment further.    Last week's Texas boxcar deaths may send a powerful warning to would-be immigrants. In Dallas, radio talk-show host David Gold, known for his polemics, touched off a controversy by declaring on the air that &quot;those people got what they deserved.&quot; He added: &quot;It's open season on the border. And maybe this will be a message to stay where you are.&quot;    Meanwhile, almost 200 illegal immigrants were arrested at El Paso freight yards last weekend. </TEXT></DOC>