<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880613-0140 </DOCNO><HL> Liability v. Damages: A Fair Trail Often Means a Split Trial </HL><AUTHOR> Stephen B. Middlebrook </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Smart business people understand that large, complex problems become more manageable when broken into units and addressed one piece at a time. The technique has become a First Principle of executive success. Yet, in the big business of managing civil litigation (RAND Corp. estimates that between $27 billion and $34 billion was expended in 1985) we muddle along with an unnecessarily complex and inefficient trial process.    The norm for most trials is for the jury to hear in one unified process all the issues pertinent to the liability of the defendant and the value of the damages. This often results in a marathon of expert witnesses and exhibits on a diverse set of issues. The typical results: confused juries, courts congested with trials that last longer than necessary, and excessive transaction costs in the form of legal fees, expert witnesses and court costs.    A simple alternative is to bifurcate, or split, issues of liability from issues of damages and to try them separately. If the issue of liability is heard alone, and no liability is found, none of the evidence relating to the extent and value of the damages need be presented. The savings would be at least some of the time the lawyers would have spent developing their client's case on the damage issues, the time the court would have spent hearing the related evidence and arguments, and the costs of expert witnesses. Without liability, all the issues of damages become moot. If liability is found, experience teaches us that litigants are more likely to reach settlement, thus again avoiding the added expense and burden of a separate trial.    Juror effectiveness can also be improved. Narrowing the questions for immediate consideration sharpens the jury's focus and increases the likelihood that jurors will comprehend complex legal or technical issues. Presenting the issues in shorter phases also enhances juror recall (of particular value in courts where notetaking is prohibited).    The current process was carried to its most absurd extreme in a trial involving Monsanto Co., which concluded last fall. An award of $16.2 million in punitive damages was made to 65 plaintiffs exposed to one teaspoon of dioxin, despite the jury's conclusion that the plaintiffs suffered no ill effects. The verdict followed a complex trial of three years and eight months. The legal costs generated by this lengthy process, which included more than 200 witnesses and 6,000 exhibits, must have been staggering. Other litigants awaiting trial before the same court were denied access over this nearly four-year period -- clearly a major disservice.    In the case that Texaco defended -- and lost -- against Pennzoil, Texaco chose not to enter any evidence regarding the value of potential damages out of fear that such evidence would undercut the credibility of its position on the liability issues. Had the case been split, Texaco would have presented the damage-related evidence it intentionally withheld. The damages -- $10.5 billion -- might well have been smaller, and Texaco might not have had to file for bankruptcy.    Other famous cases have been split. In a class-action suit in which Merrell Dow defended against charges that its drug Bendectin caused birth defects, the jury first heard the issues of scientific causation -- whether the drug was capable of causing the harm alleged. The jury concluded it was not, obviating the need to hear any discussion of damages.    In a hazardous waste case tried in 1986 in Woburn, Mass., against W.R. Grace Co. and Beatrice Foods Co., the court split the trial into four phases. After the first phase was completed (in which the court found that Grace was, and Beatrice was not, responsible for the contamination of the wells in question) Grace settled with the plaintiffs. Although Grace maintained that it was not responsible for the contamination, the jury determination was a likely stimulus to settlement.    Judges strongly support the value of bifurcating trials, according to a Louis Harris poll released in April of 800 state and 200 federal trial court judges. Of those judges who had used bifurcation, an overwhelming majority -- 94% at the federal level and 82% at the state level -- said its effects were positive. Most judges believe that it reduces transaction costs (79%, federal; 70%, state), that it speeds up the trial process (82%, federal; 77%, state), that it expedites settlements (85%, federal; 80%, state), and that it improves the fairness of the outcome (80%, federal; 77%, state).    Yet that same poll confirms that bifurcation is not used very often. More than half the polled judges who presided in jurisdictions where bifurcation is permitted and who have granted bifurcation have granted it less than five times over the past three years.    The explanations for this contradiction between opinion and action are largely a matter of conjecture. One possibility is that it just may not occur to overworked judges to split a trial without special prompting by the litigating parties.    A second possibility could be opposition from the plaintiffs' bar. Why? Some attorneys may seek to cloud the question of liability by emphasizing their clients' misfortunes. Experience suggests that juries may overlook weaknesses in the liability side of the case when sympathy is aroused by vivid evidence of damage.    The plaintiffs' bar recognizes this dynamic. For example, an article in the March issue of Trial magazine (&quot;Bifurcated Trials, How to Avoid Them -- and How to Win Them&quot;) discusses a 1963 study published in the Harvard Law Review. The study shows that split trials take less time and plaintiffs are less likely to win them. For the latter reason, the article recommends that plaintiffs' lawyers develop strategies opposing bifurcation.    There will always be cases, of course, that do not lend themselves to bifurcation. Issues such as liability and damage are not always separable. Also, issues may not be sufficiently complex to warrant this treatment. And, in eight states (including Illinois, the site of the Monsanto trial) there are no statutes or judicial rules permitting bifurcation. However, in those cases in which a split trial is appropriate, it is a sensible technique for streamlining civil litigation. A fair trial on liability, with any compensation delivered quickly and efficiently, advances the rights of all the litigating parties. Bifurcation should be one item on a broad agenda of reform of court procedures.    ---   Mr. Middlebrook is vice president and general counsel of Aetna Life andamp; Casualty. </TEXT></DOC>