<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880226-0061 </DOCNO><HL> Accountants Who Specialize in Detecting Fraud Find Themselves in Great Demand </HL><AUTHOR> Daniel Akst and Lee Berton (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> FIN </IN><TEXT>   Douglas Carmichael normally deals with numbers. But when he discusses one particular facet of his work, he sounds more like a man who deals with murder.    &quot;When the death of a company (occurs) under mysterious circumstances, forensic accountants are essential,&quot; he says. &quot;Other accountants may look at the charts. But forensic accountants actually dig into the body.&quot;    So-called forensic accountants -- investigators who specialize in uncovering fraud in the ledgers of businesses -- are finding their talents much in demand these days. Huge fraud cases -- like the one involving ZZZZ Best Co. in California -- and an increase in the number of malpractice suits against mainstream accounting firms have brought Mr. Carmichael, an accounting professor at City University of New York-Baruch College, and his fellow investigators into the limelight.    &quot;Forensic accounting is big business,&quot; says James Loebbecke, an accounting professor at the University of Utah.    Ideally, a company's regular accountants are supposed to guard against financial finagling. Indeed, the Auditing Standards Board of the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants recently adopted rules that specifically require auditors to look for fraud.    But critics say accountants often muzzle themselves; they are too dependent on the big audit fees that come from the clients they are supposed to police. And when fraud is suspected or a big accounting firm is sued for malpractice, other accounting firms are usually reluctant to assist prosecutors. The reason: Opposing a big firm can jeopardize business opportunities.    That's when forensic accountants are called in. Such individuals are often retirees or professors or are found in small accounting firms. But their work goes far beyond routine auditing.    In a standard audit, accountants test samples of inventory, receivables and payables. They ask banks to confirm the amount of cash in a company's account and send form letters to outside firms that have contracts with the company being audited. The idea is to make sure the other company exists and the contract is real.    But a firm like John Murphy andamp; Associates Inc. in Santa Ana, Calif., goes much further. Digging into the affairs of a hypothetical Jones Corp., for example, Murphy accountants and investigators in many cases will examine each and every document. If there is a contract between Jones Corp. and an equally hypothetical Smith Corp., Murphy will find out who owns Smith. And then the questions begin. Is that person related to someone inside Jones? Is there collusion? Kickbacks?    Last May, the Murphy firm was hired to unravel the tangled affairs of ZZZZ Best, the Reseda, Calif., carpet-cleaning company. Murphy's efforts in that case illustrate the difference between a routine audit and the sleuthing done by forensic accountants to uncover fraud.    Now bankrupt, ZZZZ Best left lenders and shareholders with as much as $70 million in losses, prosecutors say. Its founder, Barry J. Minkow, is in prison, awaiting trial on charges of fraud, money laundering and racketeering.    The Murphy firm was hired after ZZZZ Best board members unaligned with Mr. Minkow became aware of credit-card abuses within the company. The president of the Murphy firm, John Murphy, assigned accountants and conventional investigators to the case.    The investigators first prepared a written profile of every key person involved with the company, including corporate officers, employees and vendors. The investigators relied heavily on vast computer data bases, which are available commercially and can be tapped using a personal computer. Those data bases allowed Mr. Murphy's team to track, among other things, licenses, property records, civil and criminal court cases and liens.    Mr. Murphy says the background work enabled his investigators to learn that several individuals involved with ZZZZ Best had a shady past. He further determined that two key figures in the case owned a separate business, and that one of them lied about it on his 1985 federal income-tax return. The individual who falsified his taxes, Mr. Murphy alleges, teamed up with a third ZZZZ Best figure to try and defraud a major insurance company.    The accountants then began their work in earnest, scrutinizing ZZZZ Best ledgers, contracts, and bank statements. Company checks -- there were thousands -- were particularly suspect, says William A. Davey, a Murphy accountant, because they tended to be written by hand, in large round numbers, and were often payable to cash.    To facilitate the investigation, the information from every check was entered into a computer equipped with special software. The computer was then able to list and total checks by payee, bank-account number, endorser, amount, or date.    That made it easy to see who received what: Checks made out to different people or firms but paid into the same account could be discovered, and the amounts matched to other documentation, says Drew Maconachy, another accountant on Mr. Murphy's team. The resulting information was then compared with the profiles prepared earlier.    Mr. Maconachy and his associates also analyzed the flow of funds in and out of ZZZZ Best and to two other companies: Interstate Appraisal Services, which gave ZZZZ Best the lucrative building refurbishing jobs that accounted for nearly 90% of its business, and Marbil Management Co., a contractor that was supposedly working on jobs for ZZZZ Best.    The investigative accountants paid close attention to the timing of deposits and withdrawals and soon became convinced there wasn't much in the way of genuine sales at ZZZZ Best. Says Mr. Murphy: &quot;I felt what we had was a monstrous check kite. It was a cash race track.&quot;    Murphy accountants say the amounts, dates, and destinations of various checks and deposits indicated that the same money-obtained from ZZZZ Best investors and lenders-was going around and around: from ZZZZ Best to Marbil, back to Interstate, and apparently back yet again to ZZZZ Best. But Mr. Maconachy says it still isn't clear how much money was siphoned off during the transfers.    The purpose of all this movement was to make ZZZZ Best look like a legitimate business, investigators say. Based on that appearance, the company persuaded Drexel Burnham Lambert last year to raise a reported $40 million for it. But the financing fell through last May.    Perhaps the most unsettling discovery made by Mr. Murphy's team was that ZZZZ Best's major source of revenue -- its building-refurbishing contracts -- appeared to be bogus.    Purportedly, ZZZZ Best had major contracts to refurbish buildings that had been damaged by fire. So Murphy investigators visited supposed refurbishing jobs in Sacramento, San Diego, Santa Barbara, and Dallas. They also contacted local fire and police departments. Their conclusions: There were no fires and no jobs.    Ernst andamp; Whinney, ZZZZ Best's regular auditor, resigned last June after it suspected that one of the company's major contracts was nonexistent. The firm is now one of about 50 defendants being sued by disgruntled shareholders for alleged violations of federal securities and state law. Ernst andamp; Whinney denies wrongdoing and says there isn't any basis for the suit. </TEXT></DOC>