<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881018-0101 </DOCNO><HL> Administration Misses an OPIC Opportunity </HL><AUTHOR> Thomas M. Lenard </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LABOR GOVMT </CO><IN> FIN </IN><G> EXE CNG </G><TEXT>   One of the Reagan administration's initial privatization proposals recently picked up active support from an unlikely ally, when the AFL-CIO backed legislation that would have drastically curtailed the operations of the Overseas Private Investment Corporation. The labor-supported proposal was introduced by Sen. Howard Metzenbaum (D., Ohio) as an amendment to legislation extending OPIC's operating authority beyond the fiscal year that ended on Sept. 30. It would have blocked OPIC from assisting any project that was competitive with U.S. production, if 10% of that project's output would find its way back to the U.S. Assistance to hotels, energy-related projects, and financial institutions also would have been prohibited.    By reducing the scope of OPIC's activities, the proposed restrictions might ultimately have led to OPIC's privatization -- either by a complete phase-out, or by its sale to the private sector. The proposal was defeated, however, in part because the administration had changed its position and was supporting the renewal of OPIC's charter without change. At the midnight hour, OPIC was reauthorized. Thus, the issue is dead for this session of Congress, but may well be revisited next year.    Established in 1969, OPIC is a government corporation that provides political risk insurance-against losses due to expropriation, currency inconvertibility, and land-based war -- to U.S. companies making investments in friendly developing countries. Last year, OPIC insured a record 144 projects. Its assistance primarily has supported projects undertaken by large corporations and has been concentrated in middle- to upper-income developing countries. OPIC also operates a much smaller direct loan and loan guarantee program for companies investing in developing countries. Not surprisingly, OPIC has the solid support of business groups, which are the principal beneficiaries of its largess.    Organized labor, on the other hand, has long believed that OPIC contributes to the exportation of jobs. Although OPIC's mandate has always included a general charge not to back projects that reduce U.S. exports or employment, the proposed amendment was much more restrictive and, according to OPIC officials, would have brought the agency to a virtual standstill. That, however, would not have been a shame.    The Reagan administration proposed privatizing OPIC in its fiscal 1987 budget. This proposal was sound, for several reasons.    First, political risk insurance is available in the private sector, although the coverage offered is understandably not as extensive as that offered by OPIC. For example, no private company offers coverage against land-based war or for 20 years. Only OPIC is willing to undertake these risks, because only OPIC:   --Is backed by the full faith and credit of the U.S. government.    --Enjoys a line of credit from the Treasury.    --Pays no taxes.    --Is able to sell its inconvertible currency to the U.S. government at the official exchange rate.    Nonetheless, the private market has grown substantially in recent years. Estimates of its size range from $150 million to $300 million in premium income annually, compared with about $15 million in the late 1970s. (OPIC's 1987 premium income was $32 million.) It is reasonable to assume that it would have grown more if private insurers did not have to compete with a company with OPIC's advantages.    OPIC also does not appear to have had a large beneficial impact on development. It insures only about 10% of U.S. investments in developing countries, and it is likely that a significant portion of these investments would have been made anyway. U.S. investment trends in LDCs where OPIC has been active do not appear to be significantly different from the trends in LDCs where OPIC has been inactive. Survey data suggest that only 25% to 50% of OPIC-insured projects would not have been undertaken in the absence of OPIC assistance.    Even if the overall impact were sizable, however, it is not clear that subsidizing risk coverage to LDCs is good policy. Developing countries should be encouraged to create a stable political environment that is favorable to investment. The incentive to create such an environment is diminished if the U.S. subsidizes insurance against those risks.    It is likely that OPIC's insurance business could be sold on the private market, especially if the government retained some responsibility for existing policies. Then, over time, OPIC's ties to the government could be cut completely.    The one solution that should be avoided at all costs is to privatize OPIC while allowing it to retain continuing ties to the government indefinitely. That is, new policies should not be backed by the taxpayers, either explicitly or implicitly. Such an arrangement would allow OPIC to maintain its advantage over its competitors. More important, perhaps, a continuing tie to the government would provide OPIC with incentives to take on too much risk, knowing that if the cards turned up right it could be a big winner, and if they turned up wrong -- well, then the taxpayers would get the bill. We should learn from our current problems with the federal depository insurance system not to repeat that mistake.    It would, of course, be preferable to support a straightforward OPIC privatization bill, based on the premise that political risk insurance is not a necessary government function, and that in providing it we are exposing taxpayers to potentially large risks. But in the absence of such a vehicle, the administration should have recognized an opportunity for an indirect privatization victory, and sided with labor and Sen. Metzenbaum on this one.    ---   Mr. Lenard is vice president of Heiden Associates, a Washington economics consulting firm. He was adviser to the OMB director on privatization issues, 1985-87. </TEXT></DOC>