<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870423-0004 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 04/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE SUPREME COURT UPHELD the death penalty despite possible racial bias.    Rejecting a major challenge to the death penalty, the justices refused to accept statistical evidence of possible racial bias in death sentences as proof that an individual defendant's rights were violated. Opponents of the death penalty have said the case may be the last broad challenge to the constitutionality of capital punishment in many states. The court, voting 5-4, upheld a death sentence imposed in Georgia against a black man convicted of killing a white policeman in Atlanta.    Law enforcement and conservative groups praised the ruling, saying rejection of the Georgia law could have prompted a slew of challenges.    ---   Sri Lankan planes bombed Tamil rebel strongholds on the Jaffna peninsula in apparent retaliation for a terrorist bombing Tuesday of Colombo's main bus terminal. Near Trincomalee, separatist rebels attacked government troops. The assaults left more than 100 people dead, bringing the toll to nearly 400 in six days of civil war.    ---   South African police killed six blacks during street battles after the government-owned railroad dismissed 16,000 striking black workers, officials said. The clashes were described as the worst violence in Johannesburg since the government imposed a nationwide state of emergency last June to quell anti-apartheid unrest.    ---   A group of U.S. physicists said it may take &quot;a decade or more&quot; to determine whether lasers and other high-energy devices can be used in a space-based antimissile system. A study also warned against accelerating the research, as recently suggested by some Reagan officials.    ---   A senior U.S. official said Gorbachev was backing off from arms-control understandings reached in Moscow, but said the superpowers still were nearing a treaty. Kenneth Adelman expressed disappointment at remarks Tuesday by Gorbachev, who proposed talks on short-range missiles in Asia after reaching a pact on arms in Europe.    ---   A federal appeals court ruled that the U.S. Customs Service's drug-testing requirement for certain job applicants is constitutional. The 2-1 decision in New Orleans reversed a lower federal-court ruling. Arguments in a separate case involving Reagan's order to test all federal employees are to begin next week.    ---   Poland accused a U.S. diplomat of spying and said he left the country after police caught him trying to pass a briefcase filled with money, secret codes and maps to a Polish contact. A Warsaw spokesman played a videotape of the diplomat's alleged rendezvous. The White House protested the detention and interrogation of the diplomat.    ---   Iran said an American accused of spying has been sentenced to 10 years in prison. Jon Pattis was arrested last June, but the Iranian government hadn't previously reported trying or convicting the 50-year-old telecommunications engineer, who had been working in Tehran.    ---   U.S. officials were fully aware as long ago as 1979 that the Soviet KGB had placed electronic listening devices in the new U.S. Embassy in Moscow during its construction, a State Department official said. The aide told a House panel that U.S. officials had a strategy for finding the spy devices, but he conceded that the plan fell short.    ---   The House Iran-Contra panel voted to grant immunity to former National Security Adviser Poindexter. The panel, however, delayed action on a former CIA officer at the request of special prosecutor Walsh, who said any criminal cases stemming from the affair are bound to stretch into the 1988 election campaign.    ---   A federal study concluded that workers exposed to airborne benzene vapors at levels permitted by the U.S. run an increased risk of developing leukemia and a rare bone cancer. Separately, researchers reported that fetuses exposed to very low levels of lead may later encounter learning disabilities.    ---   President Sarney's chief of staff resigned to assume control of Brazil's conservative Liberal Front Party. The move by Marco Maciel could open the way to other ministerial changes, including the departure of Finance Minister Funaro.    ---   The commander of Iran's navy said Tehran will &quot;intercept and check&quot; any Soviet vessels escorting cargo ships in the Persian Gulf or Strait of Hormuz, the South-North News Service reported. Moscow said last week that it would escort Kuwaiti vessels. Iran said any effort to prevent the checks would be &quot;regarded as hostile.&quot;    ---   Argentina announced that a new military chief of staff and 15 commanders would be installed today. The move follows three military revolts against human-rights prosecutions. The Buenos Aires government said the country was calm, but a top military source said Argentina can expect additional military mutinies during the next few months.    ---   An NRC board rejected Public Service Co. of New Hampshire's request to narrow the emergency planning zone around its Seabrook nuclear power plant. The panel dropped consideration of a plan to narrow the zone to a one-mile radius of the plant from the 10-mile zone used for all commercial nuclear plants.    ---   PLO officials said Mohammed Abu Abbas, wanted by the U.S. for masterminding the 1985 Achille Lauro hijacking, has been removed from the group's governing committee. At a meeting in Algiers, one official also called for renewed ties with Egypt, but said Cairo's Camp David accords with the U.S. and Israel should be canceled. </TEXT></DOC>