<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880819-0051 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS: Adult Tennis Camp for Uncle Al's Boy </HL><AUTHOR> Joel Henning </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> McKellar, Ontario  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Thirty-eight summers ago at Tecumseh Lodge in Eagle River, Wis., my riding instructor was &quot;Uncle&quot; Al Dorfman. He had a commanding presence. When Uncle Al said, &quot;Shovel out the stable,&quot; I shoveled out the stable. It wasn't just canteen privileges I feared losing. Al went on to head the Teamster's pension fund and to consort with mighty Mafia chieftains. His name often came up before federal grand juries on the subject of rubouts and other questionable activities. A few years ago, he was gunned down in a restaurant parking lot just outside of Chicago.    Uncle Al aside, I didn't like camp. I wasn't really good at the sports and crafts that filled the schedule, and didn't feel easy with other campers who were. No wonder I didn't go back to summer camp until this year. The wonder is why I went back so soon. But, at least, this time it was my own idea; no parents muscled me out of the house for the summer.    This year's camp is a member of the classy Relais andamp; Chateaux group. No metal bunk beds in primitive lodges. Instead, we got junior suites with private saunas. Nobody could force us grownup campers to do anything. But Uncle Al stayed with me. I remained a good camper.    I chose willingly to be at the mercy of 15 aggressive young tennis pros for six hours a day. When the pros at the Inn andamp; Tennis Club at Manitou, Ontario, said &quot;Let's do a pickup,&quot; I picked up every ball in sight. When one of them drilled 10 impossibly placed balls at me in rapid succession, I went after them all, even those most hopelessly beyond my reach or skill. Yes, I knew they couldn't take away my canteen privileges. Nor did any of them give off the extra menace of Uncle Al. They were in fact a talented and cheerful lot who really wanted us to improve our games. But as they rounded us up for silent stroking, warmups, drills, instruction, demonstrations, videotaping or tournaments, we began to call them tennis police, not tennis pros.    When, dismayed with our late afternoon lassitude, they ordered us to drop rackets and jog around the court, we obeyed. Sidestepping to meet a sharply hit forehand off a pro's racket, I twisted my ankle and went down. When I staggered to my feet, I saw my silhouette (in perspiration) on the Har-Tru, and was reminded of those ghostly apparitions on sidewalks and walls that were the only remains of some Hiroshima victims.    After walking off the first flush of pain, however, I finished the lesson. My companion already had pulled a back muscle going for a two-handed backhand return. She stayed with the clinic for another day and a half before the injury sidelined her.    Why would 30 men and women in or near their middle years, successful enough to afford stiff high-season resort rates, willingly be pushed around by a gaggle of callow young athletes? Why are most of us anxious to return here or visit similar facilities? I think there are two reasons, one to do with the spirit, the other with the body.    As kids at Tecumseh Lodge, we were driven by fear of Uncle Al and other less formidable figures of authority. But we were driven even harder by pride, by the fear of falling short-dropping the ball in right field, placing last in the swimming race, being shorter or fatter or skinnier than the others. But now, as a much older boy, I can suspend my pride and disregard that old fear of athletic mediocrity. That was the biggest lesson I learned at the Inn andamp; Tennis Club.    A few of the grownup campers were terrific club players with USTA rankings that they wouldn't let the rest of us forget. They came here to bolster their pride, win the tournaments, and hone their edge. They enjoyed the camp much as they might have enjoyed Tecumseh Lodge. But most of us had a different perspective, a different standard of success. Those high-energy pros gave the orders, but each of us duffers had to pass those orders on to our aging flesh. We willingly left our pride at the office.    &quot;Have you heard that it is good to gain the day?&quot; sang Walt Whitman in celebrating himself. &quot;I also say it is good to fall, battles are lost in the same spirit in which they are won.&quot; Whitman was at least 37 years old when he wrote that passage in &quot;Song of Myself.&quot; I don't think he could have written it much earlier. For most of us just managing to &quot;gain the day&quot; at tennis camp, the victory was in showing ourselves that the years and their trials had not taken away our spirit.    So much for the spirit. The flesh, after all, took the punishment. Its reward came from Jean-Pierre Challet, a chef from Lyon who privileged our canteen with meals that included lavish and refined preparations of wild mushrooms with pine nuts, snails with apples and Roquefort, veal and morels, saddle of rabbit in caul fat with thyme butter.    Spending six hours a day on the courts, we never had any guilt at consuming it all, every lunch and dinner. Come to think of it, though, I detected little guilt among the inn's guests who never got nearer to the tennis courts than the swimming pool. Adults learn to work with their guilt as well as with their pride.    One night, Chef Challet laid on a special dinner of his own inventions for a small group of us. It began with a foie gras that must have been nurtured by God, included a lobster salad with herbs, red mullet, Muscovy duck and, finally, three desserts including a three-meringue vacherin with golden raspberries, a heavenly chocolate souffle and petit fours.    At first, I balked at the desserts. Gilding the lily, empty calories and all that. Then, the chef approached our table and urged us on. Maybe it was the wine, but Chef Jean-Pierre became Uncle Al. Good camper to the last, I finished my desserts.    ---   Mr. Henning is a law-practice management consultant and writer in Chicago. </TEXT></DOC>