<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880331-0031 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE HOUSE APPROVED a $47.9 million package of &quot;nonlethal&quot; Contra aid.    The aid plan, cleared 345-70, would sustain the Nicaraguan rebels while details of a cease-fire are completed by the Sandinistas and Contras. A preliminary truce was reached last week. The package, sent to the Senate, also would provide funds for children injured in seven years of civil war. In addition, House Speaker Wright pledged &quot;orderly&quot; consideration of any Reagan request for further aid.    House leaders portrayed the package as a gesture of support for the truce, and as a way to assure the Contras that they continue to have U.S. support.    ---   ARABS DEFIED a clampdown and battled Israeli troops in the occupied lands.    At least four Palestinians were reported killed and about 70 others were injured as the Israeli curbs failed to contain violence that erupted as the Arabs marked &quot;Land Day&quot; in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. The day commemorates a 1976 confrontation when Arabs in the territories protested the forced sale of land to Jewish settlers. Israel also closed an Arab-owned news service, a vital source of information on the unrest.    Israel's envoy to the U.N., Benjamin Netanyahu, resigned his post. He is regarded as a candidate to succeed Shamir as head of the Likud bloc.    ---   A SENATE PANEL CLEARED a superpower pact on intermediate-range missiles.    On a 17-2 vote, the Foreign Relations Committee sent the missile treaty to the full Senate, where it appears headed for lengthy debate but probable ratification. Under the pact, signed by Reagan and Gorbachev, the U.S. and Soviets would eliminate intermediate-range and shorter-range missiles from their arsenals. The Senate Armed Services panel voted Monday to recommend that the treaty be ratified.    The Warsaw Pact urged Washington and Moscow to approve a pact reducing long-range missiles and called on NATO to open talks on conventional forces.    ---   Meese dismissed mounting calls to resign, saying, &quot;There's no reason to.&quot; And Reagan reiterated support for the attorney general despite Tuesday's resignations of two top Meese aides. Meese is the focus of an 11-month-old criminal investigation into his role with defense contractor Wedtech and in an Iraqi pipeline project.    ---   Noriega has offered to leave Panama by May if government and opposition negotiations on electoral changes produce an acceptable accord, an aide to Venezuela's president said. Meanwhile, a strike aimed at the military leader's ouster faltered as supermarkets, pharmacies and small shops opened for the first time in 10 days.    ---   Jackson held talks with top Democratic Party officials in a meeting that was described as &quot;a bonding&quot; of party members. A Southern party official, however, acknowledged &quot;an awful lot of apprehension&quot; over Jackson's candidacy. The meeting followed Dukakis's victory in Tuesday's Connecticut primary. Bush won on the GOP side.    ---   The Persian Gulf war appeared to expand as Kuwait said its forces clashed with Iranian soldiers on the Kuwaiti island of Bubiyan. It was the first such skirmish in the nearly eight-year-old Iran-Iraq conflict. In Baghdad, Iraq said its jets crippled a tanker carrying Iranian oil and inflicted damage on Iran's Kharg island oil terminal.    ---   Armenians threatened to continue a strike in the Nagorno-Karabakh region of Azerbaijan until the Kremlin agrees to give control of the disputed area to Armenia, Soviet newspapers reported. It also was reported that Communist Party activists visited strikers' homes to persuade them to return to work. The strike began last week.    ---   Moslem guerrillas rejected an offer by Afghan President Najibullah to share power by forming a coalition government ahead of a possible Soviet withdrawal of troops from Afghanistan. In Geneva, a U.S. official said an accord leading to a Red Army pullout was still possible despite Moscow's insistence on continuing military aid to Kabul.    ---   A South Korean official said the younger brother of former President Chun &quot;admitted most of the embezzlement&quot; accusations against him and is to be charged with corruption. But he denied peddling influence as head of the semi-official Saemaul rural-development agency, the official in Seoul said.    ---   Evangelist Jimmy Swaggart plans to return to the pulpit May 22, his lawyer said, defying national Assemblies of God church officials who suspended him from preaching for at least a year. The date coincides with a more lenient three-month suspension given by the church's Louisiana state council.    ---   Arizona's Senate dropped the most serious impeachment charge against Gov. Evan Meacham -- that he concealed a $350,000 campaign loan. Officials, who moved toward considering a verdict on two charges already heard, said they wanted to avoid prejudicing Meacham's criminal trial.    ---   A bomb exploded near the South African Embassy in Paris, hours after police arrested more than 80 people protesting Tuesday's slaying of an African National Congress official. There weren't any injuries reported from the blast. In Marseille, guns were fired near South Africa's consulate.    ---   Indian troops in Sri Lanka killed at least 11 Tamil rebels and captured three others in fighting in jungles in the north-central part of the island nation, military officials said. In Colombo, the Sri Lankan government announced a ban on all opposition meetings about next month's provincial elections.    ---   Died: Edgar Faure, 79, French statesman who had held a number of high-ranking government posts, in Paris. </TEXT></DOC>