<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870223-0102 </DOCNO><HL> House Panel Jurisdiction Over Economy, BusinessCould Increase Rep. John Dingell's Political Clout---By Jeffrey BirnbaumStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In the anteroom of the House Energy and Commerce Committee hangs a poster-size photograph of the earth taken from the moon. Lawmakers joke that the picture depicts the committee's jurisdiction as seen through the eyes of its chairman, John Dingell.    Rep. Dingell won't take over the world, but he is poised to increase control over his own part of it. As one of the most aggressive masters of oversight hearings in Congress, the 60-year-old Democrat from Detroit is well positioned to steal the limelight from the Reagan administration, which is increasingly on the defensive. His committee covers almost every aspect of the nation's business and economy. More important, he has formed a significant alliance with Speaker James Wright (D., Texas) that makes him part of a cadre of Democrats who are likely to exercise broad influence in the House.    &quot;Dingell has always been powerful because he's had an independent power base,&quot; says Rep. Charles Schumer (D., N.Y.). &quot;His power is now magnified because he is regarded as one of the people closest to the speaker.&quot;    Rep. Dingell will be a principal player in the movement in Congress to slow the corporate-merger frenzy and to end abuses stemming from the Ivan Boesky insider-trading scandal. He may even call Mr. Boesky to testify, and to push legislation to hinder what members of his committee call &quot;paper-profiteering.&quot; In addition, he is sure to make waves on topics as diverse as telecommunications, clean air and international trade.    &quot;Big John&quot; Dingell's role in the House clearly is widening. The speaker recently appointed him to the Steering and Policy Committee, which makes committee assignments and thus is the chief dispenser of patronage in the House. And with the speaker's help, Rep. Dingell won the appointment to his committee of the three young Democrats he supported, which is likely to strengthen his control there.    For years, Rep. Dingell, who was first elected to Congress in 1955 to fill the term of his father, who died, has been a controversial figure with a mixed record of legislative achievement. The combative, fast-talking lawmaker made enemies of several of his fellow committee chairmen because of his constant grabbing for turf. Now, he'll have a sympathetic ear in the speaker's office when he asks for more.    The congressman is closer in his views to the moderate Rep. Wright than he was to the liberal former speaker, Thomas O'Neill of Massachusetts. &quot;We had a good relationship that was better some days than other days,&quot; Mr. Dingell says of his association with Mr. O'Neill. &quot;Wright and I have a relationship that is good almost all the time.&quot; Rep. Dingell helped cement this relationship by privately assuring the Texan early that he wouldn't oppose him one-on-one in his bid for the speakership.    Mr. Dingell's stature is augmented by other important associations. One is with the cigar-chomping Rep. Jack Brooks (D., Texas), who was a friend of Rep. Dingell's father when he was a congressman. The two men share a passion for hunting, and have teased each other for years that the other is the meanest man in the House. Rep. Brooks also is one of the few House members whom the intensely private speaker is known to listen to. Some call him Mr. Wright's confidant.    Indeed, the Wright-Brooks-Dingell combination is widely acknowledged to be the new &quot;first team&quot; of the House of Representatives.    The new names at the top of the House also are held together by a friendship among their wives. The Wrights, Brookses, Dingells and Majority Whip Tony Coelho (D., Calif.) and his wife spent last New Year's Eve together at the Dingells' suburban Virginia home. &quot;The women are very close friends,&quot; says the petite Deborah Dingell, 34, who is often mistaken for Phyllis Coelho's sister, so often are they seen together. &quot;It's a power group,&quot; Mrs. Dingell says.    Friends say that the energetic Mrs. Dingell, who is a descendant of the founders of Fisher Body Corp., now a part of General Motors, has mellowed her husband and made him more sociable. But this man who has a wild boar's head mounted in his office, and who was once described by a newspaper writer as &quot;the junkyard dog of Congress,&quot; is still a very tough customer.    Dingell-directed oversight hearings, of which there will be several this year, are likely to wreak even more havoc than usual among lackadaisical federal regulators. In the past, Rep. Dingell's in-depth inquiries -- some critics call them inquisitions -- have exposed excesses in military procurement and helped instigate resignations of top Environmental Protection Agency officials, including former EPA administrator Anne Burford.    The crusty legislator makes a habit of subjecting his witnesses to a swearing-in ritual, no matter how vaunted their titles. His critics claim his research sometimes is slapdash, but his methods get results. More than one bureaucrat has been cowed into action by a mere letter from the chairman asking questions.    During the last Congress, for example, the Food and Drug Administration decided to demand tough labeling on preservatives called sulfites, which keep aging vegetables fresh-looking, just hours after the chairman conducted a scathing oversight hearing.    In addition, the whole tone of the military-buildup debate was changed by his 1985 oversight hearings on allegedly wasteful spending. &quot;Dingell's hearings turned it around more than anything else,&quot; Rep. Coelho says. The hearings exposed, among other things, that General Dynamics Corp. billed to the government dog-boarding charges and country-club fees. Aides say the next target of Dingell oversight hearings on government procurement, scheduled for next month, is TRW Inc.    Rep. Dingell is expected to be one of the chief congressional curmudgeons on the issues of insider trading and corporate raiding in the wake of the Boesky scandal. His aims include strengthened federal regulation of the securities markets, and restricting &quot;greenmail&quot; -- a company's buyback of stock at a premium from an unwanted suitor, a practice that many shareholders have called unfair. &quot;Everyone thinks I'm anti-merger, I'm not,&quot; he says. &quot;I'm not pro-merger either. I strongly support one-vote, one-share.&quot;    In telecommunications, he is expected to favor giving the regional Bell phone companies more areas in which they may compete with other companies, including American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co., from which they were spun off in 1984. But at the same time he intends to press the Federal Communications Commission to stiffen its regulatory resolve.    An emerging topic for Rep. Dingell is international trade, in which he will face off against his old nemesis in turf battles, Rep. Dan Rostenkowski (D., Ill.), chairman of the House Ways and Means Committee. They managed to avoid serious run-ins on the trade issue last year, and Rep. Wright has made several overtures to Rep. Rostenkowski to help keep the peace.    The three new committee members that Rep. Dingell helped appoint this year probably will aid him in his long battle with Rep. Henry Waxman (D., Calif.) over acid rain. Rep. Dingell opposes the strict air-pollution and acid-rain restrictions favored by Rep. Waxman, and early efforts at compromise are under way.    But at the ever-busy Energy and Commerce Committee, enemies one day are allies the next, and its jurisdiction is vast. &quot;Everything that matters to the nation's economy, except the tax issues,&quot; says committee member Rep. Ron Wyden (D., Ore.), &quot;ends up going to the Commerce Committee.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>