<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870928-0013 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 09/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   IRAQ SAID IT MOUNTED missile attacks on six Persian Gulf tankers.    Shipping sources confirmed hits on four of the tankers, Iranian vessels shuttling oil along Iran's coast, in the weekend attacks. Baghdad, which appeared to time the raids to coincide with Weinberger's tour of gulf states, said Iran faced &quot;all-out&quot; war. Iran vowed to retaliate. The secretary of defense, in Bahrain, said the Iran-Iraq war won't end unless an arms embargo is imposed on Tehran's &quot;irrational, fanatical&quot; regime.    Iranian crewmen, following their release in Oman, said they were mistreated by the U.S. after the Navy captured their mine-laying ship last week.    ---   Bush met with Polish leader Jaruzelski and said the U.S. would support moves to reschedule part of Poland's $35 billion debt. The vice president, the highest-ranking U.S. official to visit Poland since President Carter's trip in 1977, also met with Walesa and other Solidarity leaders and expressed support for Poland's opposition.    ---   Nicaraguans demonstrated in Managua against the Sandinista regime, demanding the restoration of constitutional freedoms. An estimated 3,000 took part in the rally to mark the founding of the Social Christian Party. Meanwhile, Ortega denounced the House and Senate for approving $3.5 million in nonmilitary Contra aid last week.    ---   U.S. and Canadian officials agreed to meet in Washington today to try to overcome an impasse in negotiations on a free-trade pact. Canada's finance and international trade ministers and Treasury Secretary Baker are to take part. The talks broke down last week over a Canadian demand for a binding way to resolve disputes.    ---   Former CIA chief Casey agreed to secret Saudi Arabian operations to achieve U.S. goals, one of which ended in the deaths of 80 bystanders in a 1985 car-bombing assassination attempt on the leader of an Iranian-backed group in Beirut. The dislosures came in excerpts from a new book on the CIA by Washington Post editor Bob Woodward.    ---   Shevardnadze began a tour of South America, the first visit to the region by a high-level Soviet official. The foreign minister, in Brazil, was expected to prepare the ground for a visit to the region by Gorbachev, probably in 1988. Shevardnadze is also expected to visit Argentina, Uruguay and Cuba during his two-week tour.    ---   Fighting broke out 30 miles north of Manila between government troops and communist rebels, and residents of the Philippine capital were warned they may face electricity shortages following guerrilla raids on power stations. The government also said it overran a rebel base in a major offensive in a southeastern province.    ---   The U.S. reimposed Pentagon review of shipments of sensitive U.S. products to Communist-controlled companies in non-Socialist countries. The Pentagon review, which was suspended in June, could mean months of delays for U.S. companies that want to ship products to any of about 100 firms in this category.    ---   Pretoria's homeland policy faced renewed criticism following last week's bloodless coup in Transkei, one of the apartheid system's tribal homelands that are recognized by no other nation. The release of a corruption report on Transkei leaders, who are virtually hand-picked by Pretoria, sparked the coup.    ---   An ethnic Indian was killed and two others hurt when a bomb they were carrying went off near Fiji's main military base less than two days after a second coup. Coup leader Col. Rabuka, who also mounted the first one May 14 following an election defeat of ethnic Fijians, said he would make the Pacific island nation a republic.    ---   A Tunisian court sentenced to death seven of 76 Moslem fundamentalists convicted of plotting to overthrow the government, five in absentia. Three were also accused of involvement in a recent series of hotel bombings in Tunisia. In Beirut, an Iranian-backed group said it would kill Tunisian officials if the executions take place.    ---   Opposition Social Democrats urged Chancellor Kohl to use a new Franco-German defense council to persuade France to stop aiming 44 battlefield nuclear weapons, intended for use against Warsaw Pact forces, at West German soil. The formation of the new joint council was announced last week by President Mitterrand.    ---   Indian troops wounded two Tamils in Sri Lanka when they fired into a stone-throwing crowd protesting the weekend hunger-strike death of a young Tamil guerrilla. Two other Tamil separatist militants began protest fasts following the death.    ---   The Justice Department said white-collar crime convictions increased 18% in the first five years of the Reagan administration, while convictions for other kinds of crime rose nearly twice as fast. In a study, the department also said the average length of prison sentences for white-collar criminals rose 20% in the period.    ---   Died: Mary Astor, 81, U.S. film actress, Friday, in Woodland Hills, Calif. . . . Emlyn Williams, 81, Welsh-born actor and playwright, Friday, in London. </TEXT></DOC>