<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861209-0002 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/09/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   SHULTZ SAID he knew &quot;zero&quot; about the diversion of funds to Nicaraguan rebels.    The secretary of state told the House Foreign Affairs panel that the plan to funnel profits from U.S. arms sales to Iran to antiSandinista fighters was &quot;illegal,&quot; but he later backed off that claim. Shultz also testified that the U.S. envoy to Lebanon discussed with Reagan aides the use of arms sales to Iran &quot;as an inducement&quot; for the release of U.S. hostages, but didn't inform his State Department chiefs. Separately, former National Security Adviser McFarlane testified that Reagan authorized an &quot;indirect&quot; shipment of arms to Iran in August 1985.    Meese released documents supporting his request for appointment of an independent counsel to probe the Iran-Contras affair. The four-page filing didn't name any senior Reagan aides or identify specific laws that may have been broken.    A U.S. official said the Justice Department probably will ask to question Israelis who took part in the transfer of U.S. military gear to Tehran.    ---   FIGHTING APPEARED to subside along the Nicaraguan-Honduran border.    A military source said Tegucigalpa's forces, who were ferried to the border area by U.S. helicopters, were searching for Nicaraguan stragglers who crossed into Honduras over the weekend. The Hondurans also were acting to prevent further incursions by Sandinista soldiers. Managua has denied making any raid. Meanwhile, Nicaragua and Honduras moved to avert an escalation of the situation.    The U.S. envoy to Costa Rica, who reportedly has been linked to covert U.S. efforts to supply the Contras, submitted his resignation, Reagan officials said.    ---   French Premier Chirac withdrew an education measure that sparked what were considered the worst riots in France since 1968. One protester died Saturday. Despite the move, students called for more demonstrations tomorrow. Opponents of the education bill said it would make tuition more expensive and college entrance more difficult.    ---   Communist rebel envoys insisted that U.S. military bases in the Philippines be closed, and said the issue would be raised in future peace talks with Manila. The insurgents also pressed their challenge of the right of the military to patrol rebel-held areas and seize arms, threatening to delay a 60-day truce that is to begin tomorrow.    ---   The Supreme Court agreed to consider dismissing a lawsuit by a former Army sergeant who, without his knowledge, was given the hallucinogenic drug LSD in 1958 in government tests on chemical warfare. The justices said they would review a lower court's ruling that chipped away at the military's broad legal immunity.    ---   A Labor Department panel recommended establishing a sweeping program to aid dislocated workers, possibly financed by a payroll tax shared by employers and employees. The task force's draft report likely will be completed at a meeting Thursday and submitted to Labor Secretary Brock before month's end.    ---   South Africa said 256 children under the age of 16 were in jail without charge, detained under the state of emergency imposed June 12. Monitoring groups estimated that 1,300 to 4,000 black children under 18 years of age are in custody. Separately, troops conducted house-to-house searches for suspected activists in black townships.    ---   The Soviet Union said its decision to continue observing the unratified SALT II pact &quot;for the time being&quot; didn't mean it would permit a change in the nuclear balance in favor of the U.S. Washington breached the accord last month. Moscow said any move to upset the strategic balance could lead to to an unrestrained arms race.    ---   Weinberger announced that the Pentagon awarded to Britain five contracts totaling $10.1 million for research into Reagan's space-based antimissile project, bringing to $34 million the value of London's participation in the program. The secretary of defense also met with Thatcher, but details of the meeting weren't disclosed.    ---   Israeli troops fired on demonstrators in a Palestinian refugee camp in the occupied West Bank, killing a 12-year-old boy and wounding at least four other people, Palestinian news reports said. The incident came on the fifth day of clashes between Israeli soliders and Arabs in more than a dozen sites in Israeli-occupied territories.    ---   Palestinian guerrillas fought Shiite Moslem militiamen at a hilltop village near the southern Lebanese port of Sidon, despite an Iranian-mediated truce to end nine weeks of fighting. In Tunis, Arab League officials held an emergency meeting to find ways to obtain a lasting cease-fire.    ---   Authorities in La Paz said suspected drug traffickers shot down a Bolivian military helicopter in the cocaine-producing area of Chapare, killing one occupant of the aircraft and wounding three others. Officials said they would launch a sweep through the area in central Bolivia &quot;to try to exterminate all these delinquent people.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>