<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870922-0097 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):The Pigskin Conference</HL><DD> 09/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   A House-Senate conference begins to negotiate the trade bill this week, and we wouldn't be surprised if the members decide to rent out Washington's RFK Stadium for the big event. The 150 or so congress-persons who will have a seat at the festivities may need a very large place just to hold all of the lobbyists who want a piece of this action. In fact, with a strike threatening the pro football season, we can't think of a more appropriate group to supplant the Redskins at RFK. Both teams know how to carry the pigskin.    For months, Capitol Hill's trade warriors have been saying they are engaged in the noble task of giving Americans a fair shake against foreign competition. But upon inspection, the Omnibus Trade and Competitiveness Act of 1987 looks less like a fair-trade bill than it does an omnibus bonanza for any special interest with a checkbook and a congressional phone list. If this bill doesn't deserve a presidential veto, it's hard to imagine what other bill would.    It is true that the Senate and House bills do contain a few items that can reasonably be called fair-trade provisions -- for example, the authority for the U.S. to negotiate in the new GATT round. But in the constant logrolling process that now passes for congressional deliberation, this foundation has been so pounded and scraped that you can barely find it amid the reconstruction. The Senate bill alone, now 1,033 pages long, contains more gargoyles than Notre Dame Cathedral.    Consider what the bill does for that great symbol of American competitiveness, the sugar-refining industry. U.S. quotas on sugar imports already mean Americans pay more than three times the world price for sugar, but of course these quotas also hurt U.S. sugar refiners by raising the cost of raw sugar. So at the urging of Senators Bennett Johnston and Patrick Moynihan (there's a refinery in New York), the Senate voted to let the refiners reclaim any Customs duties against the value of the sugar in their exported products for a long 14 years. This will cost the Treasury some $500 million over the first five years.    As it happens, this sugar subsidy was so outrageous that it almost didn't pass the Senate -- until the sugar lobby joined forces with the tobacco lobby. Jesse Helms and Mitch McConnell agreed to support the sugar protection so long as sugar's supporters voted to approve a provision that would effectively exempt tobacco growers (whom taxpayers already subsidize) from close to $100 million a year in excise taxes on their exports. Senator John Chafee, who admirably led the stand against these two provisions, was rolled faster than you can say competitiveness.    With no real opposition, the pols have been really piling on. Senator David Boren bulled through a provision to help an Oklahoma company that makes a steel product known as farm-fence panels. Senator Max Baucus made sure lamb growers got a procedural change that will help protect them from cheaper foreign lamb. California legislators led the way to subsidize a consortium of computer-chip makers known as Sematech, to the tune of $500 million over five years. Wheat, soybean and sunflower interests will get special marketing loans in 1990, while Big Labor has several favorite provisions.    The trick-play prize, however, has to go to the National Corn Growers Association, and its attorneys, the Washington firm of Bishop, Cook, Purcell andamp; Reynolds. It seems that Canada filed suit against U.S. growers last year, claiming that America's corn subsidies were an unfair trade practice. The U.S. growers had to hire lawyers to defend themselves, naturally, so they have now persuaded both the Senate and House to include provisions in the trade bill that would in effect require taxpayers to pay up to $500,000 for the growers' legal fees and expenses.    Now, it will be said that this is just the normal congressional give and take, that you have to accept a little pork to get a good bill. But the Washington trade fetish has become divorced from reality, political or economic. Foreign countries, in particular, look at this trade bill in horror. Unsophisticated in the fine points of Washington deal-making, they tend to look at the economic substance -- violations of GATT, mandatory retaliation, U.S. abandonment of any pretense to world economic leadership.    Someone in Washington has to get a handle on this mess. The president is the obvious candidate. Congress may now be home to 535 special-interest fiefdoms, but someone has to represent the general interest.    Some Washington sophisticates are arguing that the White House must sign a compromise bill because a veto would damage Republicans in 1988. But it's that kind of thinking that recurrently makes voters the fall guys in Washington's cynical political games. Voters deserve to know who actually benefits from this bill. If, as we suspect, the Democratic leadership wants a veto, the president should oblige them by blowing a loud whistle on the trade bill. </TEXT></DOC>