<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890801-0098 </DOCNO><DD> = 890801 </DD><AN> 890801-0098. </AN><HL> Business World:@  A Business Group Tries to Get the Pentagon Back on Track@  ----@  By George Melloan </HL><DD> 08/01/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><IN> AEROSPACE (ARO) </IN><GV> CONGRESS (CNG)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </GV><TEXT>   One unfortunate consequence of federal expansion is that the bureaucracies often are distracted from their primary responsibilities. Lawmakers constantly are finding new missions for federal agencies. For most departments this diversion of effort is not of major consequence. But when it happens to the Department of Defense, the primary function of the federal government, national security, is at risk.    The bureaucratic problems of the DOD are no secret even though, by most accounts, its pool of managerial talent is of higher quality than that in other federal departments. There are long delays in developing weapons systems. Costs often balloon and systems sometimes don't work well. The Bradley fighting vehicle is an oftcited case.    Yet Congress seldom focuses on this problem, as it is demonstrating once again while grinding out a new defense authorization bill. When it comes to weapons procurement, lawmakers often take a butterfly approach, lighting on expensive projects then flitting away, cutting back financing and sharply raising the cost of each weapon. The Stealth bomber is getting that treatment now.    Instead of focusing on the problems caused by its spread-the-wealth approach to procurement, Congress has been compounding them. The Pentagon has been drawn into what can only be called industrial policy, although few politicians are brave enough to call it that. The DOD is being used to funnel federal money into various industry consortia, theoretically to make the U.S. more competitive against the Japanese. For example, the DOD is helping fund Sematech, a semiconductor industry consortium that will try, if it ever gets untracked, to develop more advanced methods of producing microchips. It never has been clear how Sematech could be expected to do a better job than, say, IBM, but that question didn't deter anyone.    Some corporate executives simply shrug and take the federal money, but complacency about this diversion of Pentagon financial and managerial resources isn't shared by everyone. A lobbying group called Business Executives for National Security (BENS) is applying some political muscle to the task of getting the Pentagon back to its knitting.    Stanley A. Weiss, chief executive officer of an El Paso minerals-processing company called American Minerals Inc., started BENS seven years ago. Mr. Weiss, a product of Georgetown's foreign-service school and a onetime fellow at Harvard's Center for International Affairs, wanted to bring influences to bear in every congressional district that would be counter to the normal quest for Pentagon pork. Today, BENS has some 5,000 members with a wide range of political views but with a common desire to get better results from defense spending. Among the members are J. Peter Grace, who ran the Grace Commission study of government waste, and Felix Rohatyn, the investment banker who figured out how to refinance New York after its virtual bankruptcy.    BENS has no position on industrial policy as such. What Uncle Sam's role in &quot;competitiveness&quot; should be is a partisan issue. &quot;But where we have no problem coming down,&quot; says Mr. Weiss, &quot;is that we think the Department of Defense should not be involved with it.&quot;    The Pentagon has quite enough problems just doing its job, Mr. Weiss thinks, without getting into trade, mergers and acquisitions, or other business issues where lawmakers are seeking influence. BENS lobbied to get the Pentagon to set up a five-year spending plan, noting that a minimum requirement for a $300 billion enterprise should be a long-range business plan of some sort. One thing learned: What the Pentagon figures it will need to spend in five years for programs now in the works far exceeds what the federal budget is likely to be able to accommodate.    That discovery made it imperative that some programs be dropped. Secretary of Defense Richard Cheney proposed killing the F-14D fighter and the vertical takeoff troop carrier called the V-22 Osprey, only to have them voted back into being by the House at the expense of cutting back the Stealth bomber to a less economic level of funding. At least the House was willing to kill one project, the Midgetman missile, but the latest exercise shows that defense authorization remains, at heart, a matter of distributing goodies.    Another BENS success was the creation of an office of independent operations testing in the Pentagon. Mr. Weiss hopes to see that office strengthened so that it can, in practice as well as theory, challenge projects that are not going well. Why, he asks, should the Bradley fighting vehicle have been 10 times more costly than its predecessor?    For one thing, Mr. Weiss theorizes, the Pentagon is not good at managing innovation. Business, with its focus on markets and competition, is far more agile. Things would work better, he says, if contractors took charge of innovation and the Pentagon bureacracy &quot;filled in the squares,&quot; which is what bureaucracies do best.    One way of making that happen, says Mr. Weiss, is to spend the taxpayer's money up front to finance prototype competitions. Indeed, the highly successful F16 fighter was developed that way. The producer of the best prototype would then be awarded a production contract and held to contract commitments. If the contractor failed, he would be allowed to go broke or, more likely, go into Chapter 11 reorganization. If he made a better-than-expected profit he would be allowed to keep that money. One of the worst mistakes Congress makes is trying to restrict contractor profits, thereby destroying incentives for good performance, Mr. Weiss thinks.    Contractors often are in an impossible position. Their shareholders naturally want earnings. Government contract managers fear they might look bad if the contractor makes too much money, even if the government saves money too through good results. BENS is &quot;trying to work out the kind of system that could best satisfy the concerns of a business and at the same time be best for the national good.&quot;    Of course, anti-contractor politics is rife in Washington. Some is generated by forces that don't like either private business or military spending. The Pentagon must &quot;look tough,&quot; for the benefit of the critics while at the same time trying to actually get things done. The &quot;look tough&quot; approach, backed up by reams of legislation, has had the upper hand almost to the point of self-parody. There are some 500,000 people engaged in acquisitions in the DOD, trying to live by 30,000 pages of laws and rules.    Two-thirds of what the Pentagon buys could be off-the-shelf items, purchased in the market through competitive bidding. You don't need 30 pages of specifications for a whistle, for example. But open-market buying cuts the influence of politicians, which is why there is so little of it.    BENS, as it continues to build membership and influence, hopes to reduce such perverse influences. The best &quot;industrial policy&quot; the federal government could have would be one that would reduce waste of resources by government itself. There again, that entails keeping the political focus on the problems of government, rather than sending the DOD out to reshape American industry. </TEXT></DOC>