<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870812-0115 </DOCNO><HL> Reagan's World-Finance Failures---By Morris B. Goldman</HL><DD> 08/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGNMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   Almost five years of non-inflationary growth of the U.S. economy attest to the success of the Reagan administration's management of domestic economic affairs. Unfortunately, its record of managing international financial affairs is anything but successful.    What is puzzling is that sensible economic policies have often stopped at our borders. It is not only that the U.S. has had difficulties in exporting its goods and services; it has also encountered difficulties in exporting its ideas about what makes economies work.    Consider these events: The administration has suffered through two severe international debt crises, in 1982 and 1986, that threatened world financial institutions, trade and the political and social stability of some friendly countries. But while the first debt crisis was inherited, the second resulted from mismanaging the first. U.S. commercial banks have been &quot;jawboned&quot; by administration officials into involuntary lending to high-risk debtors in the developing world. International financial institutions, such as the World Bank, have been allowed to fund decidedly non-Reagan programs with increasing amounts of U.S. tax dollars and capital guarantees. The same can be said for the bilateral U.S. foreign-aid program, run by the federal Agency for International Development.    The administration has failed in many other important areas of international finance. It has intervened in foreign-exchange markets, presuming that in international matters it knows better than markets what prices ought to be, and it has allowed itself to be cornered on trade issues by a protectionist Congress. Moreover, economic policy coordination among the major industrialized allies largely has been a failure. The U.S. role as a leader in international financial matters has continued to decline.    The record is not totally bleak. The administration's rhetoric on the value of spreading market-oriented mechanisms to the developing countries usually has been correct, even though not necessarily followed by deed. The White House has declined to participate in the severely flawed Law of the Sea Treaty, which would have given developing countries control over the activities of American companies mining the sea beds. This administration has even taken such unusual steps as suspending funding to some of the more misguided international organizations, such as the Inter-American Development Bank. Yet, on the whole, the failures have far outweighed the successes. The area of development aid provides many examples.    Consider the administration's handling of the World Bank. This premier international development institution had been turned into a statist international welfare agency by Robert McNamara in the 1970s. His 1981 replacement was A.W. Clausen, in whose selection by a lame-duck Jimmy Carter, Reagan acquiesced. Mr. Clausen, chairman of the financially troubled BankAmerica at the time of his appointment and again today, proved ill-equipped to turn the World Bank into an institution promoting growth-inducing policies for developing countries; facing non-reappointment, he chose to resign in 1986.    Mr. Clausen's successor, former Republican Rep. Barber Conable, had little expertise with international economic development issues but was expected to be a powerful, positive force in lobbying a reluctant Congress for higher World Bank appropriations. Mr. Conable's first year at the bank has been a disaster, with policies drifting back toward those of the McNamara era while scarce political capital was spent on a botched, acrimonious internal reorganization plan that caused high-quality staffers to leave.    Despite boastful promises by early Reagan administration officials to either &quot;turn the bank around&quot; into a growth and market-promoting institution or to withdraw U.S. funding, little has changed. The bank has received a $40 billion general capital increase and large replenishments for its concessional lending window, the International Development Association. Indeed, despite publicly announced policies declaring that future IDA funding levels would be reduced, the opposite has occurred.    The administration recently negotiated a 38% increase for IDA. This is a $12.4 billion replenishment for a body that makes zero-interest loans to such countries as China and India. Not only are these nations creditworthy, but they dispense their own foreign aid and have foreign policies contrary to U.S. interests.    It is even more ironic that nearly all the World Bank's funds go directly as loans to Third World governments or to their instrumentalities, such as typically inefficient state-owned enterprises. While the world's financial markets are actively engaged in such innovative financial techniques as privatization and debt-equity swaps -- techniques that are undoing some of the World Bank's past work of promoting statism and saddling the Third World with debt -- the bank continues its business as usual, but at an even faster rate.    The Asian and African development banks have also recently received large funding increases. These institutions are similarly guided by a &quot;have money, must lend&quot; approach to development. This June, the African bank received administration approval to triple its size, despite the fact that the bank is not managed in a way that results in growth-oriented economic policies for African nations. This large replenishment is necessary to fund past lending explosions made in anticipation of Western donor nations joining the bank.    At the United Nations, the administration was unable to stop the U.N. Development Program from sending U.S. tax dollars, in the name of economic development, to Cuba, Vietnam, North Korea, Nicaragua, South Yemen, the Palestine Liberation Organization and the Soviet-backed government in Afghanistan.    In 1983, the administration negotiated and obtained a $42 billion quota increase for the International Monetary Fund. This appropriation was vigorously attacked by many in Congress as a bailout for commercial banks with unsound Third World loans and as throwing good money after bad. The administration defended the expansion of IMF lending as necessary for resolution of the worsening debt problem.    But the debt problem is overwhelmingly due to developing countries' not using their borrowed funds for endeavors productive enough to generate income for the servicing of the debt, let alone its repayment. Instead, the money is often used for excessive consumption, corruption, graft, capital flight, inefficient state enterprises, financing untenable government policies, and investment projects of low quality. Nothing in the 1983 bailout ensured against a repetition of such misuse of funds. Thus, the debt problem lingers on, albeit now at a higher level.    Congress correctly balked at this international financial drain and was very reluctant to approve the increase. It did so only after Herculean administration efforts to shift votes. The administration's main debt strategy still is to encourage more lending to uncreditworthy debtor nations by reluctant commercial banks and overeager development institutions.    The conduct of the U.S. bilateral foreign-aid program has also been problematic. U.S. foreign aid has helped Israel become the most statist democracy in the world and given birth to that nation's economic oddity of government expenditures exceeding gross national product. In 1984, Israeli government expenditures totaled 102% of GNP. In Egypt, the U.S. foreignaid effort is exemplified by funding the construction of a large public hospital in Cairo, where there already exist more than 20 uncompleted or unopened public hospitals. In El Salvador, the U.S. has imposed and funded a land-reform program with a state-controlled marketing board that has reduced agricultural productivity. Aside from this, countries that are often hostile to the U.S. -- such as Mozambique, Greece and Zimbabwe -- also benefit from America's bilateral aid programs.    Why has the administration produced such a dismal record in development aid and finance? The answer is partly found in the political pressures to implement foreign policy. To buy influence for U.S. foreign-policy makers, the U.S. uses its foreign-aid budget to please leaders in other countries, such as Egyptian President Hosni Mubarak and then-President Ferdinand Marcos of the Philippines. Sound international economic policy is often not consistent with &quot;getting along&quot; and getting things done in international forums.    According to the former Democratic chairman of the House committee overseeing foreign-aid spending, Clarence Long of Maryland, &quot;the foreign aid bill is simply walking around money for the secretary of state.&quot; He was right. And this approach has remained unchanged in the Reagan era. The question remains whether the achievements of foreign policy require the costs imposed on U.S. taxpayers.    ---   Mr. Goldman, an international financial consultant, directs the Heritage Foundation's Center for International Economic Growth. </TEXT></DOC>