<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870603-0011 </DOCNO><HL> Change at the Fed:Volcker Leaves Behind a Fed That Walks TallFor Curbing Inflation, Shepherding Growth---By Kenneth H. BaconStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The inflation rate was 13.3% in 1979, when Paul Volcker became chairman of the Federal Reserve Board. Last year it was 1.1% and this year it's expected to be about 4%.    That's Mr. Volcker's primary legacy: He guided the country back toward moderate inflation after three years of destabilizing double-digit inflation and restored a sense of control after a period of rampant price speculation and economic uncertainty. In the process, he rebuilt confidence in the Federal Reserve and laid the foundation for a long recovery.    The U.S. still faces difficult economic problems. The huge budget and trade deficits, the pressures against the dollar, fears that the economic recovery may be waning and the Third World debt crisis continue. But Mr. Volcker leaves behind him a Federal Reserve Board that enjoys as much respect and power as it has at any time since Congress set up the central bank in 1913.    Under Mr. Volcker's leadership, &quot;the Fed has accumulated a tremendous stock of political freedom&quot; and flexibility to attack the nation's economic problems, says Charles Schultze, who was chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers when President Carter appointed Mr. Volcker.    Sen. Bill Bradley (D., N.J.), a leader in efforts to deal with the Third World debt issue, said that Mr. Volcker deserves &quot;the Nobel Peace Prize as the party responsible for keeping the world economy together . . . during a very volatile time.&quot;    But Mr. Volcker, who stuck with policies that plunged the economy into a deep recession in order to tame inflation, has detractors as well. House Speaker James Wright said that under Mr. Volcker &quot;we've had the longest sustained high interest rates in our history.&quot; Asked to describe Mr. Volcker's term as chairman, the Texas Democrat said: &quot;Long.&quot;    When Mr. Volcker, who had gained respect as a Treasury Department official and president of the New York Federal Reserve Bank, took office on Aug. 6, 1979, the U.S. economy was in turmoil. Surging inflation had triggered a speculative binge of borrowing and buying that subsequently propelled the price of gold to $875 an ounce in early 1980. The dollar was plunging.    In September 1979, Mr. Volcker barely won a vote to boost the Fed's discount rate -- a key fee it charges on loans to member banks -- to 11% from 10.5%. The financial markets, fearing weak leadership, panicked. This helped convince Mr. Volcker that the Fed needed a change in policy.    On Oct. 6, the Fed announced a new operating procedure: Rather than follow its traditional practice of nudging interest rates up or down, the Fed would concentrate on controlling the money supply. The decision to slow monetary growth and inflation by setting and meeting monetary targets meant that interest rates would swing widely, and they quickly shot up.    The change was &quot;a political stroke of genius,&quot; Mr. Schultze says in restrospect. &quot;Its (the Fed's) public posture was, 'We just set the dials . . . if rates go up, that's just the market, not us.'&quot;    Mr. Volcker and the Fed made a number of miscalculations. First, they thought the high interest rates would quickly produce lower inflation. But they underestimated the public's lack of faith in the Fed and the tenacity of inflationary expectations. Inflation remained virulent and, in March 1980, the Carter administration and the Fed imposed credit controls. Inflation slowed quickly and the Fed, sensing success, eased. But the relaxation was premature. Inflation sprang back.    Mr. Volcker feared that another failed attack against inflation would irreparably damage public confidence in the Fed. In the fall of 1980, shortly before the presidential election, the Fed began a period of relentless tightening that drove interest rates to new highs. The economy plunged into a recession so deep that some analysts, including Alan Greenspan, Mr. Reagan's choice to succeed Mr. Volcker, began to raise the possibility of a depression that could rival the shock of the 1930s.    In the summer of 1981, Mr. Volcker told Congress that &quot;we're at a critical point in the fight against inflation. We see the first stirrings of progress.&quot; But he warned that &quot;turning back the inflationary tide isn't a simple, painless process. Dealing with inflation is essential to our future well-being as a nation, and the Federal Reserve means to do its part.&quot;    Despite growing public pain and political opposition, the Fed stuck with its money-targeting, high-interest policies. Among other things, the Fed wanted to counter-balance the stimulative impact of the Reagan tax cuts and budget deficits. &quot;The administration forced the Fed into a much more prominent position in policymaking by taking a rather extreme position in fiscal policy,&quot; former Fed vice chairman Frederick Schultz explained.    By the middle of 1982, inflation was down sharply and the financial system began to show signs of cracking. The failure of a small government-securities firm, the closing of Penn Square Bank and Mexico's near-default on its international debt showed how heavy the interest-rate burden had become.    In July the Fed began to ease and in October it announced that it was suspending strict adherence to its monetary targets, triggering a huge rally in the financial markets.    While the Fed was easing, Mr. Volcker warned that &quot;concern about inflation and monetary discipline isn't something we can turn on and off. It will be a continuing priority concern.&quot; And it has been. Throughout the lengthy economic recovery, the Fed has been quick to tighten at the earliest hint of inflation.    After his three-year, single-minded attack against inflation, Mr. Volcker turned to other problems: nurturing a recovery, helping to craft a solution to the Third World debt crisis and working to address the high dollar and the nation's trade deficit. But he has deftly balanced these concerns with continuing attention to inflation.    Although the Fed helped return the nation to a period of subdued price increases and greater financial stability, challenges remain. &quot;The huge increase in our debt, both in terms of domestic debt and our debt to those outside the U.S., has enormous implications for the future,&quot; former vice chairman Schultz warns. &quot;We are consuming more than we're producing. To finance this debt service, we're going to have to produce more than we consume.&quot;    The transition will test the country and the Fed. But Charles Schultze says Mr. Volcker's legacy is &quot;a residue of good will and political capital.&quot; Because of the way Mr. Volcker rebuilt the Fed's credibility and protected its independence from political pressure, &quot;for some time, it can take unpopular steps.&quot;    ---   THE VOLCKER YEARS AT THE FEDERAL RESERVE   Aug. 6, 1979: Volcker is appointed Fed chairman by President Carter, succeeding William Miller.    Oct. 6, 1979: Fed changes operating procedures to target money supply instead of federal funds rate.    Jan. 22, 1980: Gold price hits $875 an ounce.    March 6, 1980: Congress passes banking-deregulation law that phases out interest-rate controls on deposits.    March 14, 1980: Credit controls imposed.    Summer 1980: Fed eases, credit controls scrapped.    Sept. 25, 1980: Fed raises discount rate by one full point five weeks before election.    Dec. 19, 1980: Prime rate hits 21.5%, an all-time high.    Jan. 20, 1981: Reagan takes office.    Aug. 13, 1981: Reagan tax-cut and spending-restraint legislation signed.    May 1982: Drysdale Government Securities collapses, and the Fed offers to serve as lender of last resort to avert further financial problems.    July 1, 1982: Fed votes to ease.    July 6, 1982: Penn Square Bank closed, triggering losses for other banks.    August 1982: U.S. helps Mexico avoid default on its debts, and the Third World debt crisis emerges as a major issue.    Oct. 5, 1982: Fed suspends money-supply targets.    December 1982: Unemployment rate hits 10.7%, a post-war high. Consumer price index declines 0.3%.    Spring 1983: Economy begins to show signs of recovery.    May 24, 1983: Fed starts to tighten again. The economy surges at 9.7% annual rate in second quarter but inflation remains around 3%.    June 18, 1983: Reagan nominates Volcker to second term.    May 1984: Commercial banks, backed by Fed, announce $4.5 billion plan to rescue Continental Illinois bank. Reagan administration attacks Fed's policy as too tight, threatening economy's expansion.    February 1985: Dollar hits high of 260.28 yen.    Sept. 22, 1985: Major industrial nations, led by the U.S., launch major effort to lower the dollar.    Oct. 8, 1985: Treasury Secretary Baker announces plan to aid Third World debtors.    February 1985: Reagan's appointees gain a majority on the Fed and force Volcker to accept a discount-rate cut he initially opposes. He considers resigning but stays after a compromise to delay the cut.    March 1986: The discount rate takes effect as part of a coordinated effort to lower the dollar that involves rate cuts by the West German and Japanese central banks as well.    Summer 1986: Volcker, increasingly worried about the impact of the high dollar and the record U.S. trade deficit, leads Fed in lowering the discount rate.    Winter 1987: Volcker beings to worry about the dollar, which is falling rapidly.    April 30, 1987: Volcker announces that the Fed had raised short-term interest rates to stem the dollar's fall.    Spring 1987: As interest rates rise, dollar stabilizes and then begins to rise. Inflation fears return.    June 2, 1987: Reagan announces that Volcker doesn't want a third four-year term. </TEXT></DOC>