<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870324-0064 </DOCNO><HL> Supreme Court Rules Utah Cable-TV LawOn 'Offensive' Shows Is Unconstitutional---By Stephen WermielStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TL WUTELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)MOVIES, RECORDS, RECORDING STUDIOS (FLX)SUPREME COURT (SUP) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court ruled that a Utah law regulating cable television is unconstitutional because it restricts broadcasts of sexually oriented material that isn't legally obscene.    The high court ruled 7-2 without opinion and without hearing argument, simply issuing a three-line order upholding a federal appeals court ruling that the law is unconstitutionally broad.    But the result is important despite this summary handling. Many states are wrestling with the question of how to regulate cable television in order to protect children and viewers who object to programming that shows sex and violence. The ruling yesterday means the states will have to look for other, narrower ways to regulate the content of cable programs.    Under the Utah law, passed in 1983, the state or a city or county may file a civil suit seeking a fine for cable operators broadcasting indecent material. This is defined as material that is &quot;patently offensive&quot; according to &quot;community standards,&quot; based partly on the broadcast time.    The state attorney general interpreted this to mean that programs that may be indecent, but not legally obscene, could be restricted to broadcasts between midnight and 7 a.m. The attorney general explained that a late-night restriction would aid the state's interests in protecting minors and the privacy of unwilling adult viewers.    A federal district court in Salt Lake City struck down the Utah cable decency law in 1985. A federal appeals court in Denver affirmed the district court ruling last September, and the state appealed to the high court.    The high court's quick disposition of the case suggests that most of the justices didn't find it a difficult question. Past rulings make clear that some forms of communication may be offensive or indecent, but are protected by the First Amendment unless they fall within a legal definition of obscenity. Utah officials argued that simply restricting the broadcast time for non-obscene material was a reasonable regulation.    The law was challenged by Community Television of Utah Inc., Community Cable of Utah Inc., Utah Satellite Inc. and Wasatch Community TV Inc., all units of Telecommunications Inc. The challenge was joined by Home Box Office Inc., a Time Inc. unit. The cable companies argued that the law was lacking in standards to determine what is permissible.    In its appeal to the Supreme Court, Utah gained support in a friend-of-the-court brief by the states of Arizona, Kansas, Mississippi, Missouri, New Hampshire, New Mexico, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Washington and West Virginia.    The states said laws like Utah's are necessary so that states may &quot;protect . . . the welfare of minors, the privacy of the home, the interests of numerous cable television subscribers who object to the intrusion of sexually explicit programming at any time, on any channel.&quot;    Chief Justice William Rehnquist and Justice Sandra O'Connor, suggesting that the case should be argued, dissented from the high court's summary action.    The justices let stand a ruling that federal law gives the owners of baseball teams the right to exclude players from a share of the profits from televised games. A federal appeals court in Chicago ruled last October that the team owners have the copyright on games under a 1976 federal copyright law. This copyright, the court ruled, gives the owners the right to proceeds from games. Any traditional right of the players to control their own publicity or use of their likenesses is preempted, the court ruled.    A similar issue arises in other sports, and the Major League Baseball Players Association urged the high court to hear the case because of its importance for the sports and entertainment industries.    The battle over the right to royalties from televised baseball games has gone on for years. In 1982, the owners and players went to court separately to try to settle the matter.    ----   Western Union Victory   The justices refused to consider reinstating a $36 million verdict for Olympia Equipment Leasing Co. in its antitrust lawsuit against Western Union Corp. The verdict in the 10-year-old dispute was thrown out last July by a federal appeals court in Chicago.    Olympia sued in 1977, charging that it was driven out of business by Western Union's monopolization of the market for teletype terminals used with Telex service. Olympia, which sold such terminals, contended that Western Union in 1975 quietly scrapped a policy it had begun in 1973 of telling customers that they could purchase access to the Telex system and separately purchase terminals for the system.    A federal jury awarded Olympia $24 million, tripled by law to $72 million. The trial judge halved that damage award to $36 million. But the appeals court threw out the award, saying Western Union can't be penalized for choosing to stop fostering competition.    Lawyers for Olympia asked the appeals court for a rehearing, and sharply criticized the ruling's author, Judge Richard Posner, an antitrust expert appointed by President Reagan. The lawyers said Judge Posner ignored a 1985 Supreme Court decision that, they argued, justified the jury's verdict. But the appeals court refused to rehear the case, and two judges issued an opinion attacking the lawyers for criticizing Judge Posner.    ---   State Film Law   The high court let stand a Pennsylvania law that regulates the distribution of films to movie theaters in that state. The law requires distributors to screen the films for theaters before they bid on them, limits the length of exclusive first-run showings and restricts the rent that can be charged.    The law was challenged by nearly all major movie production and distribution companies, which argued that federal copyright law and the First Amendment give them the freedom to decide how to distribute their films. A federal appeals court in Philadelphia last September upheld the law. </TEXT></DOC>