<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880725-0081 </DOCNO><HL> Turf Defenders: The Mood Gets Nasty In City Neighborhood As Racial Tension Rises --- Working-Class Bensonhurst, Next to New York Ghetto, Fears Drugs and Crime --- Basketball, Encounter Groups </HL><AUTHOR> Roger Lowenstein (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   White women grip their handbags tighter when they see Walter Weston headed their way. This no longer surprises him. He is husky, 19 years old, and black.    Walter Weston lives in the Marlboro Housing Project, a shabby, high-rise, predominantly black enclave in Gravesend, Brooklyn. Outside the project, on the streets of Gravesend and nearby Bensonhurst, young black males are regarded with a certain baleful wariness by their working- and middle-class white neighbors living in neat, two-family brick homes with yards enclosed by chain-link fences. Few of the neighbors know that Walter is an honors student and a football player at Lafayette High School, and soon will enter college on a scholarship.    Joe Cantatore, a friend and teammate of Walter's, knew all that. They were in the same honors classes, and Walter had visited the Cantatore home. Thus, one day last January it came as a surprise to Walter, marching through the streets of Bensonhurt to protest an alleged racial beating, when he spotted Joe Cantatore.    Joe was part of a crowd of whites who were waving Confederate flags and screaming &quot;niggers&quot; and other racial insults at the marchers. Walter says he looked at Joe and saw hatred in his eyes. &quot;That,&quot; he says, &quot;shocked me.&quot;    If police hadn't been at the demonstration, Sgt. Daniel Vanata says, &quot;there would have been a massacre.&quot;    Joe says he doesn't hate anybody, but he resents people stirring up trouble in Bensonhurst. &quot;I was surprised to see Walter there, too,&quot; Joe says. &quot;I didn't think he went in for that stuff.&quot;    The Gravesend-Bensonhurst area is what Jonathan Rieder, the author of a book on race in Brooklyn, calls a &quot;defended neighborhood.&quot; Whites feel threatened by poverty, drugs and black people. Blacks feel threatened by poverty, drugs and white people. Brooklyn is hardly unique in this respect. In Boston, Philadelphia, Chicago, Baltimore and Gary, Ind., among others, &quot;you have the same racial and ethnic Balkanization,&quot; Mr. Rieder says.    In New York, as minority groups approach the numerical dominance they already have achieved in some other places, middle-class &quot;ethnic&quot; residents have felt increasingly threatened. Many were simply raised to fear black people, a fear recently aggravated by the spread of drugs, especially crack, in big-city neighborhoods. And the number of reported racially motivated crimes in New York has risen sharply in the past few years.    Several celebrated cases of racial violence elsewhere in the city also have aggravated the tension here. A case in Howard Beach, a community in the borough of Queens, adjoining Brooklyn, has become a metaphor for this city's race relations. There, in 1986, a black youth running for his life from a gang of bat-wielding whites was struck by an automobile and killed. The earlier case of Bernhard Goetz, a white technician who became a celebrity by shooting four black youngsters he feared were planning to rob him on a subway, also arouses strong passions.    &quot;My overall feeling is that race relations are much better than 10 years ago,&quot; says Mayor Edward Koch. While that may be true, few believe that the improvement has continued in the past two years. &quot;Apart from the more notorious cases, on a gut, street level there is more racial tension,&quot; says Richard Kahan, former head of the state Urban Development Corp. Says Carmine Santa Maria, president of the Bensonhurst West End Community Council, &quot;To have fear of blacks is natural. It's all over the city.&quot;    Much of the tension lies beneath the surface. It has been years, for example, since a white mob killed a black transit worker in Gravesend. But less serious incidents aren't uncommon in this area.    Joe Cantatore's Bensonhurst is closeknit and proud. Many families own their homes. The average family income is estimated at more than $20,000. In Walter Weston's housing project, by contrast, it is $10,703, and nobody owns his home.    The boundary line between Bensonhurst and the black section of Gravesend is well-defined -- an elevated train line and a broad boulevard. When whites and blacks walk across the line, it is usually in the daytime and often with trepidation. Whites, some in BMWs and Cadillacs, drive across to crack dens. &quot;The only true integration we have is through drugs,&quot; says Sara Lee McWhite, a city worker who lives in the Marlboro project.    Bensonhurst is old Brooklyn. Manhattan lies across the East River, but it seems as remote as Manhattan, Kan. Bensonhurst's population is about 155,000, of whom 87,000 are Italian-Americans. The smell of pasta and street-stand fruit washes 86th Street, the main shopping strip. In a pork butcher's shop, thick lengths of sausages dangle above sun-dried tomatoes. Old men gather at a cappuccino bar to talk in Italian -- as many in the neighborhood do. There are a few thousand Asians in Bensonhurst. There are only 700 blacks.    In Bensonhurst, says Gina Palladino, a Brooklyn College student, your mother accuses you of being &quot;too Americanized&quot; if you stay out late. Social life centers on 32 Italian-American clubs that sponsor exchange visits with sister towns in Italy. The clubs promote the Italian language, Italian culture and Italian saints.    Bensonhurst children grow up and stay. Vinnie LaRocca lived in the same house until adulthood and then moved across the street. Donald Weber, a school superintendent, has his hair cut by the son of the barber who cut his hair as a boy.    In Gravesend's Marlboro project, people devote their lives to getting out. Kurt Young, for one, seems likely to make it. He is a computer-science student at Brooklyn College. Some residents observe that John Franco made it out, too; he now pitches for the Cincinnati Reds. But he is white.    Marlboro's 28 buildings sit in a bend formed by the elevated line and a train yard. Barbed wire fences in the project on two sides. The buildings are structurally sound. But door handles are missing, windows are broken, and shattered glass is strewn about. Crack users terrorize the mustard-colored hallways. Empty drug vials with brightly-colored caps litter the stairs.    Tenants feel unwelcome outside the project and endangered inside it. Terrie McFarlin, 20, who hopes to become a professional baseball player, stays at the home of his coach elsewhere in Brooklyn, just to get away. &quot;I hate it here,&quot; he says of Marlboro. Louis Faison, sitting near Marlboro's playgrounds and basketball courts, says: &quot;There is no place that's mine -- not even a movie theater. There is no place to take a girl to.&quot;    Across one street from Marlboro there is a grocery, a liquor store and an Army recruiting center. But the project's 7,500 residents -- 30% of whom receive public assistance -- don't have an ice cream shop, a swimming pool or a library of their own. On another street across from Marlboro is a specialty food store, Pastosa Ravioli, owned by Donna LoRusso. She says blacks ignore her place as if the street were &quot;a hidden wall. They don't come here.&quot;    People in Marlboro don't vote in large numbers or join community or school groups. At the Marlboro Community Center, on the project's edge, where senior citizens gather every day for a 10-cent breakfast and a 25-cent lunch, all but five of the 300 regulars are white. They dance, play cards and gossip until closing time in midafternoon. Then they leave en masse for Bensonhurst in buses and cars. Elderly blacks feel unwelcome. The small talk at the poker table is in Italian.    When the state-owned, city-run project opened in 1958, 93% of its residents were white. Early tenants of both races fondly recall those days: The floors were waxed, the windows were cleaned, and tenants were fined $2 for walking on the grass. In the early 1970s, the state began forcing out higher-income tenants. Poor blacks who had lost their homes to urban renewal replaced them.    Whites felt terrorized by some of the newcomers. Tom Berger says his family was threatened and &quot;pressured by blacks to leave.&quot; He was robbed at knifepoint in an elevator. In 1976 the Bergers left. Today, whites number only 16% of Marlboro's residents.    Practically overnight, it seemed to white Bensonhurst and Gravesend residents, a ghetto of poor blacks had formed in their midst and threatened to engulf the rest of the neighborhood. The Rev. Anthony J. Failla, a Catholic priest, says many of his Bensonhurst parishioners had moved from neighborhoods that had earlier declined. Marlboro, he says, is an island. &quot;It's there as a reminder of what they left, or of what they thought they left,&quot; he adds.    For a while in the 1970s, racial violence in the area's schools was common. It has greatly diminished, and more black and white students have become friends, visiting one another's homes.    Still, says Pat Vasta, a contractor, if a black were to move to an all-white street, &quot;I think everyone would get nervous. First the whites would leave, then little by little they&quot; -- blacks -- &quot;would ruin the neighborhood, just like in the project.&quot;    Luke Zucco, a retired longshoreman standing outside his home in a New York Yankees cap, is harsher. In Marlboro, he says, &quot;You can't use copper fixtures because they pull 'em out and sell 'em. With a nigger, as long as it's not his, he don't give a damn.&quot;    Eddie DeCicco seems more typical; as a youth he took black friends home for pizza, and he now coaches black basketball players. He says he wouldn't want to live next to blacks because &quot;society is prejudiced.&quot; But as he talks about it more, Mr. DeCicco, a muscular, 22-year-old mechanic, concedes the possibility that he shares the prejudice.    He joined the whites who heckled January's march of blacks, he says, &quot;saying stuff with the crowd.&quot; He feels at home in Bensonhurst, but he says he has been rejected for white-collar jobs elsewhere in New York because of his strong Brooklyn accent. While he grudgingly accepts the rebuffs, he says, blacks seem to think the government owes them a job. &quot;It's 'We need this; we want that,'&quot; he says.    Most whites are reluctant to talk about racism with a reporter. Both blacks and whites acknowledge their own racial antagonisms only sheepishly. It becomes more open in groups. Shawn Doughtery, a 21-year-old black man who lives in Marlboro, says he was leaving a party in a white neighborhood a few years ago when a white youth approached him and said, &quot;If anyone on the street gives you trouble, tell 'em you're a friend of Joey.&quot; Nothing happened, but a few weeks later, walking to the subway, he was threatened by a gang of whites. &quot;Nigger, you don't belong here,&quot; one shouted. It was Joey.    On the other hand, some residents vigorously reject bigotry. Among his family's friends, says Charlie Prinzivalli, a 28-year-old shoe-store manager, &quot;racism was a way of life,&quot; learned in part from his family. Mr. Prinzivalli says he thought it was wrong, a conclusion that was strengthened in high school. There he was influenced by a teacher, a tough Italian-American who insisted on treating blacks with respect.    Joe Russo, an owner of the Roma pizzeria next to Marlboro, caters to both blacks and whites. As a boy, he says, he had opened his door to blacks pursued by white gangs. His mother, dishing out pizza beside him, says, &quot;When my boys bought this shop, I was scared. My friends said I was crazy. But if you treat them like human beings, they treat you the same.&quot;    Whites sometimes pay a price for such convictions. Mr. Prinzivalli says he was beaten by police after a fight broke out at a school dance; he had blocked the way of the police, who were chasing blacks mistakenly presumed at fault. Just last April, two white men in a bagel shop punched a third in the face for bringing a black companion into the neighborhood.    Wherever blacks venture in white Bensonhurst, their race is likely to be noted. In the home of one of her white friends, says Karen Murrell, 17, she is expected to laugh at the joke when she is asked, &quot;Why don't you sing a Negro spiritual?&quot; Evelyn Brothers, a black woman in her 50s, recalls walking past a white-owned home when a boy around 10 years old said, &quot;We don't want you passing through here.&quot;    Yvonne Johnson, driving to her job at an ambulance service, stopped at a traffic light in Bensonhurst one day in January when three young white men approached her car. Pulling at the front-door handle, one shouted, &quot;Nigger, get out of the car! Nigger, get out of the neighborhood!&quot;    Just last week, a homeless black man collecting returnable bottles and cans to redeem for petty cash was beaten in Bensonhurst by two white men for no apparent reason other than his race.    James Freeman says he was walking home from a gym recently with two friends when a white woman emptying garbage saw them, dropped the garbage, ran into the house and locked her door. &quot;They think we're all criminals,&quot; he says. &quot;When {whites} do that it makes you want to act out.&quot;    Indeed, some do act out. &quot;There is a lot of hate coming out of some of these blacks,&quot; says Florence Murrell, a member of the Marlboro tenants' association. James Fisher, president of the association and a counselor at Lafayette High, says many black youngsters resent the relative affluence of their white peers, especially their &quot;Dadillacs,&quot; luxury cars borrowed from parents.    Glen Ladner, a white, 25-year-old lab assistant at Lafayette, was leaving his job in Bensonhurst one day last November when he saw about 50 black teen-agers headed his way. He crossed the street but was trapped and beaten for no apparent reason.    Young black toughs stake out the fringes of Marlboro, stealing gold chains and harassing people who try to short-cut through the project. Miriam Lopez, a blond Puerto Rican who lives in the project, says &quot;I'm afraid to walk around Marlboro because I look white and I'm female.&quot; Her white boyfriend was mugged as he was leaving the project. &quot;Black kids put on an attitude of toughness to scare the whites,&quot; she says. &quot;They say 'Howard Beach, Howard Beach,' like they want revenge.&quot;    In a quiet corner of the project, Pierre, as he chooses to be called, fondles a switchblade and brags, &quot;I used to go out and rob white boys.&quot; Like other Marlboro youngsters, he detests the place. Another, a Lafayette High dropout called Anthony, ushers a reporter into his gloomy Marlboro apartment and sullenly voices his resentments. &quot;I get angry about cops,&quot; he says. &quot;They arrest you for nothing. Me and teachers don't mix.&quot; It becomes clear that Anthony mixes easily with no one. He abruptly tells a companion to leave &quot;'fore I put a gun to your head,&quot; and, fixing the reporter with a glare, orders him out, too.    Virginia Shaw is the mother of a disruptive child who is performing poorly in school. She blames her son's white teacher. She adds: &quot;With the white race, you stay a certain distance. I don't want to be like that. It's not healthy. But when you are in a sea of them, certain incidents make me get hateful.&quot;    Some blacks in Marlboro cling to what they see as their group identity, which makes whites outsiders in the same way that their neighbors' Italian consciousness makes blacks outsiders. &quot;Whites can't relate to the way we blacks be speaking,&quot; says Kenggie Myles, who is 18 years old. &quot;They aren't home boys. We're too much into be-bop.&quot; &quot;Home boys&quot; are blacks. &quot;Be-bop&quot; refers, among other things, to a black street patois.    On the Marlboro playground, a reporter finds himself involved in an informal seminar when he raises the subject of racism. Blacks seem eager to discuss it. To Louis Faison, &quot;It seems like things come easier to whites. Like how do they get cars and jobs?&quot; A friend mutters: &quot;Contacts.&quot; Heads nod. Contacts with whom? they are asked. Nobody knows precisely; but they have a vague sense of a network out there that doesn't include them.    On a Friday evening at Marlboro, young men sip beers against the sound of bouncing basketballs and the roar of elevated trains. Salsa and rap music pour out of the windows. People shriek across courtyards. Litter swirls in the wind. As darkness falls, people move in and out of shadows, clinging mostly to the lighted doorways. Youngsters move in groups. A firecracker explodes. Glass shatters on the pavement. A voice from above shouts a curse and adds: &quot;Get away from this building.&quot;    A few blocks away, white youths in Bensonhurst are performing a rite in celebration of turf. Beneath the elevated tracks on 86th Street, they are driving cars up and down the street at a snail's pace, windows open, radios blasting, bringing traffic to a halt. There are cars with no mufflers, with whitewall tires, with sparkling crystal panels and flashing lights. There are white convertibles, Cadillacs, jalopies, Mercedeses, Corvettes, TransAms and limousines driven by boys with peach-fuzz cheeks and ducktails. The youths shuttle the cars for hours, honking to see and be seen.    No blacks are in sight. &quot;People should be able to go anywhere,&quot; says Ray Troiso, a police community affairs officer. &quot;But if I were black I don't think I'd be there at 11:30 at night.&quot;    Basketball is bridging the gap a bit. This largely owes to Gerard Papa, a Bensonhurst lawyer who runs a basketball club called the Flames. When he started it in 1974, race relations were scarcely on his mind. The first year's players were all white. The next year, a few blacks joined. Minutes after they showed up at a schoolyard to begin practicing, a van filled with whites armed with bricks drove into the yard. Mr. Papa and the Flames fled in his car, running red lights to escape the gang in the van.    The next few years, says Mr. Papa, were &quot;living hell.&quot; Flames were taunted and beaten by white gangs on their way to practice. Mr. Papa was threatened, his car vandalized. &quot;Everyone I knew told me to give it up,&quot; he says.    Although a Catholic parish sponsored the Flames, they were so unpopular in Bensonhurst that they played no home games. Most of the white members quit.    The turning point came in 1978, when the Flames won a Catholic Youth Organization championship. White players drifted back, and tensions eased. In 1980, the Flames resumed home games. The club now fields a number of teams for various age levels.    During last January's protest march, when 1,000 police were keeping whites and blacks from each other's throats, about 250 Flames, watched by one cop, crammed peacefully into a nearby gym for a basketball tournament.    Mr. Papa refrains from sermonizing or lecturing on racism. &quot;When someone makes a racist remark,&quot; he says, &quot;you minimize it. You make a joke out of it.&quot;    For Mr. Papa's mother, Elena, his work has been an eye-opener. As she came to know some black people, she says, &quot;I saw they wanted the same things for their kids that we want. I saw their homes were clean as ours. When you don't go inside, all you see is the graffiti.&quot;    Another effort to bridge the gap is Bob DeSena's. An English teacher at John Dewey High School, he runs Council for Unity, a group that combines civic activities with emotionally charged encounter sessions.    In the Dewey cafeteria, students gather by color. But in the council room, black, white, yellow and brown joke and flirt with each other. Rocco Ferraro, an 18-year-old junior, says:   &quot;I had a big head when I came into the council. I didn't trust black people. In here I met this black girl who didn't talk to anyone. I asked her why, and she started crying. We became good friends. I've learned to see beyond color. Look around here: It's a little United Nations.&quot;    On a recent morning, Mr. DeSena is casting students for a play about an Italian family and a Chinese family. The play is a response to anti-Asian fliers distributed in Bensonhurst a few months earlier. As he coaxes a reluctant Asian girl to play the lead, Mr. DeSena declares, &quot;The purpose is to throw back in the teeth of these bigots that they are going to lose.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>