<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871222-0121 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> FORGNMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><TEXT>   The World Bank is preparing to create a Multilateral Investment Guarantee Agency (MIGA) to &quot;guarantee&quot; foreign investment in developing countries. But the main effect of the bank's new program could be to subsidize expropriation by greedy governments.    Since 1981, direct foreign investment in the Third World has plunged to roughly $8 billion from $17 billion. The World Bank is concerned about this decline and wants to correct it. Rutherford M. Poats, a senior Bank official, says: &quot;There is vastly more demand for political risk coverage and trade investment credits than the sum total available.&quot;    But most Western governments and several private entities, such as Lloyd's of London, already offer insurance for foreign investments. The problem is not that private insurance is not available, but that its costs accurately reflect the true risk of placing one's money in a kleptocracy -- a government by thieves. MIGA will attempt to boost foreign investment in many countries suffering from severe capital flight. But if the countries' own citizens don't trust the government, isn't that a clue that investment there is unsafe?    MIGA would counter the decline in private investment not by making foreign investment safer, but by having Western governments pay for the costs of Third World expropriations.    MIGA's articles of agreement are appallingly pro-expropriation. If a country with a nonconvertible currency, such as Poland, nationalizes a MIGA-insured investment, MIGA will accept compensation from the government in non-convertible currency. It will even accept government bonds of an expropriating country as compensation. This would encourage lesser-developed countries to trade their worthless paper for valuable Western assets.    Manfred Holthus of the Hamburg Institute for Economic Research, in a study commissioned by the West German government, concluded that MIGA would provide less legal protection against expropriation than already exists in bilateral agreements between capital-exporting and capital-importing nations. Stefan Sinn of the University of Mannheim concluded that MIGA would make expropriation more advantageous for Third World governments.    A World Bank publication recently declared, since &quot;capital-exporting and capital-importing countries have an equal stake in private foreign investment . . . it is therefore appropriate to give equal voting power to each of the two groups&quot; in the governance of MIGA. Another bank publication promises that MIGA &quot;contains a number of safeguards which ensure control by the host governments over investment activities in their territories.&quot; MIGA's approach to foreign investments seems to be based more on a protection of greedy host governments than on a respect for property rights.    The World Bank has a bad track record on expropriations. It seems to see them as events that involve no human responsibility or blame. The World Bank refuses to loudly condemn Third World governments for seizing Western property.    When a Marxist military clique took power in Ethiopia in the mid-1970s and nationalized all foreign assets, the World Bank led the charge to give the Marxists new credit long before they had made any recompense to Western corporations. Countries throughout Africa that have nationalized foreign corporations have afterward received World Bank loans to help run the new state-owned industries.    MIGA's defenders argue that it could perform a valuable role in improving the investment climate in the Third World. But MIGA would likely be as ineffective at changing Third World investment policies as it has been at changing Third World economic policies.    A confidential Aug. 28, 1986, Treasury Department memo noted: &quot;We can expect LDCs to actively oppose a policy reform role for MIGA. Developed countries will be neutral or lukewarm.&quot; Even the U.S. State Department appears opposed to a vigorous policy reform role for MIGA. A confidential State Department memo dated Sept. 9, 1986, from Shari Villarosa in State to Rhonda Bresnick in Treasury, argued: &quot;We should avoid penalizing a good project and private entrepreneurs {by not providing subsidized insurance} for bad government policies over which they have limited influence. . . . Restrictions on eligible countries {receiving insurance subsidies, because of their doubtful investment policies,} will decrease MIGA's volume of business and spread of risk, making it harder to be self-sustaining.&quot;    The World Bank is launching MIGA not because it wants to increase the efficiency of international capital allocation, but because it wants to increase the flow of Western capital to Third World countries. The World Bank, The State Department, and most of the Third World see MIGA as another welfare scheme, not as a business venture.    Some countries, like South Korea, Taiwan, and Hong Kong, have done very well at attracting foreign investment. MIGA would play down the differences in how governments treat investors, thus penalizing nations that honor property rights and rewarding nations that violate them. MIGA is to operate on a businesslike basis, but that means everything and nothing.    If the World Bank really wants to improve the investment atmosphere in the Third World, it could simply stop giving buckets of money to Third World governments that subvert their own development by robbing foreign investors. But, once again, the World Bank is more interested in redistributing money than in helping lay the foundations of development.    The U.S. government already has an agency to provide subsidized insurance for doubtful foreign investments, the Overseas Private Investment Corp. Washington supports creation of MIGA because OPIC is barred from providing subsidies to multinational companies.    Both the House and Senate trade bills include provisions for a $22 million U.S. direct contribution, with $200 million more in callable commitments to set up MIGA. MIGA's fate in the short term is largely reliant on the fate of the trade bill, though it is certain that, even if the trade bill languishes, the Treasury Department will come charging back next year asking for money for MIGA. As if President Reagan did not already have enough reasons to veto that flounder, MIGA is one more.    Subsidizing investment insurance will tend to produce less efficient investments. American taxpayers should not be forced to subsidize the expropriation of American property. It is senseless to run an investment insurance program like a welfare agency for Third World governments.    ---   Mr. Bovard is an associate analyst with the Cato Institute in Washington. </TEXT></DOC>