<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870408-0007 </DOCNO><HL> Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> IBM LABORCOMPUTERS (EDP) </IN><DATELINE> GREENCASTLE, Ind.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The &quot;Wall of History&quot; is now bare at the big plant that long anchored this town of 8,000 people.    International Business Machines Corp. closed the plant last month. It stored away the plaques and photographs that had adorned the wall along a main corridor, depicting the facility's beginnings 33 years ago as a maker of punch cards for tabulator machines and its later days as a major parts-distribution center. Only the marks on the wall remain. Phone lines have been cut, offices emptied.    The center's 985 workers, stunned by the closing, face unpleasant choices: They can head for an IBM job elsewhere, retire early if they qualify, or quit and hunt for a new job, probably at lower pay.    &quot;There's emotional trauma if you go or stay,&quot; says Ted Bock, who worked here 25 years but missed qualifying for early retirement by five weeks. Now, he must move to an IBM facility in Mechanicsburg, Pa. -- and must sell the farm that has been his home since birth. &quot;I still don't want to move,&quot; he says. The plant managers are &quot;sorry,&quot; he adds, &quot;but they can't do anything about it.&quot;    Mr. Bock was swept up in the biggest restructuring in IBM history and one of the largest retraining and relocation efforts ever undertaken by any company. Stung by two years of earnings declines -- the first since the Depression -- the computer giant is pushing more than 15,000 of its 237,000 U.S. employees into new jobs. An additional 10,000 are taking early retirement.    Most affected employees work in manufacturing, where IBM is scaling back output. Others hold staff jobs that are being eliminated. In a bet that more salesmen and more-meticulous customer service will increase orders, IBM is moving most of the transferred employees -- about 9,000 -- to its 200 U.S. sales branches. That is more than the entire sales force of most rivals. Overseas, an additional 1,500 headquarters people are being moved into sales.    The restructuring program is a big gamble. Including early retirements, it could wind up costing $1 billion or more, and analysts disagree about whether it will pay off in the long run. IBM has blamed the slump in its earnings, which fell 27% to $4.79 billion last year, principally on tight customer budgets and problems in the overall economy -- not on too few salesmen. It also has been slow to upgrade its minicomputers and personal computers; it introduced a new PC family last week, but the top model won't be out until late this year and crucial software is a year away. Redeploying people won't fix such weaknesses.    Moreover, the restructuring strains the IBM ethos of &quot;respect for the individual.&quot; &quot;Respect,&quot; a culture pervading IBM since the days of founder Thomas J. Watson, rules out pay cuts, forced transfers and layoffs. This irritates many on Wall Street, who prefer that IBM cut staff. But IBM uses the no-layoffs ideal as a key incentive and coyly calls it a &quot;practice&quot; -- not an indelible policy -- that could change if things get bad enough; then, it urges employees' cooperation to avoid that trauma.    Some IBMers say the company is violating the spirit, if not the letter, of the Watson ethos. &quot; 'Respect for the individual' is becoming an empty slogan,&quot; contends Lee Conrad, who assembles printing devices at the Endicott, N.Y., plant and hopes to unionize it. Others term the moves &quot;invisible layoffs&quot; aimed at prodding people to leave.    IBM vehemently denies that charge, but, unquestionably, the changes dismay many employees. In cutting the headquarters staff, for example, IBM stripped the titles of more than 40 staff directors, a high rank in the company. The jobs of 400 managers were scratched, and many who wouldn't switch to sales lost rank (but no one's pay was cut). The restructuring &quot;is being done in a way that's insensitive, almost savage,&quot; a 29-year veteran complains.    Such harsh views seem rare inside IBM, however. Many employees say IBM tries hard both to ease the pain of change for its employees and to get the most out of it for the company. The upheaval opens new careers for the young -- though for older employees, it can be a sharp turn they never planned. But even when their lives are turned upside down, few employees seem bitter.    Anne Lake, a 50ish switchboard operator who pulls back her hair in an old-fashioned bun, got &quot;itchy feet late in life,&quot; after 18 years at IBM's East Fishkill, N.Y., semiconductor plant. She signed up for a transfer, wanted Florida but settled for Missouri.    Last June, she packed up, said goodbye to her four grandchildren and moved. Her only companion was Sammy, her black-and-white cat. Three months later, IBM offered early retirement. Mrs. Lake, who is widowed, will retire in June -- and will have to live on less. She isn't sure where to go next. Maybe Florida. But she isn't angry at IBM. &quot;I'm not going to let it throw me that things might not be better later,&quot; she says. &quot;If you knew what was going to happen in the future, a good many of us might give in to suicide right now.&quot;    IBM spends millions to help transferring workers through what Walton E. Burdick, the personnel vice president, calls &quot;the bathtub effect. The most difficult time is when you're going into it and getting out of it.&quot; The company provides home-buying assistance, retirement advice, job-hunting trips and more. Managers spend hours out of each day counseling transferees.    At the Greencastle plant, David Kennedy, the manager, doesn't know how much the closing cost because IBM didn't limit his budget. He had a jet fly 200 people to Mechanicsburg to check out IBM's other big U.S. distribution center. Everyone stayed in a Sheraton hotel for a week. Some didn't want to leave elderly parents behind; so, IBM paid for them to go, too.    Gary Coil, a 24-year-old programmer who became engaged two days before the shutdown was announced, says IBM paid for his fiancee to join him on a weeklong trip to IBM's Raleigh, N.C., plant. Now, he works there on telecommunications software. &quot;That was a personal touch. It said the company is really behind me and wants to make me happy,&quot; he says.    In the end, only 44 workers quit; 400 retired with up to two years' pay as a bonus tacked onto augmented pension plans. The rest, more than 500 employees, moved to other IBM jobs.    But some had a hard time. Sherry McMains, who began as a secretary and moved up fast in four years, couldn't bring herself to move. She quit and took a new job at a 20% pay cut. Joe W. Taylor, 52, retired after 33 years and found another job at 40% lower pay. Even with his IBM pension, he lives on $5,000 a year less.    IBM woos transferring employees as if they were revelers at a party, not refugees from a restructuring. It stages Job Fairs and Career Days at plants trying to persuade employees to leave. Beaming recruiters coax &quot;volunteers&quot; -- all the moves are supposed to be voluntary -- who visit interview booths and fill out forms listing where they might willingly go. Slide shows set to music play up pretty locales. On a freezing day in Rochester, Minn., workers are tempted by shots of the sun-bathed campus and swimming pool at IBM's Rolm unit in Santa Clara, Calif.    Branches compete fiercely for recruits. Thomas Pietraszek, who runs the Jefferson City, Mo., sales branch, visited four plants and told one boss: &quot;I'm gonna take your best people.&quot; He hands out Chamber of Commerce kits and shows slides of Lake of the Ozarks. &quot;Missouri isn't on the tip of everyone's tongue,&quot; he concedes, adding, &quot;We got some pretty country here.&quot;    So far, Mr. Pietraszek has lured 15 &quot;redeploys&quot; to join his branch of 130 people. He wants more. But he still laments one that got away. A recruit from Boulder, in his first day of classes at IBM's Atlanta education center, called that evening and said he just didn't feel right. Mr. Pietraszek told him to go home.    However much IBM calls the transfers voluntary, the pressure to move can be great, and the company isn't bashful in persuading the reluctant. It tells staffers that few promotions are left at headquarters and that the best jobs will go to those who sign up first for sales.    Barbara McNaughton, who had been at a Boulder plant for 10 years when her production line was moved last April, says, &quot;A lot of people constrained themselves by saying they wouldn't leave Boulder. On the other hand, the price I was going to pay&quot; for moving up was to move out. She went to Detroit and switched from production to a new sales team that works with Chrysler, studying how lasers can track automated production. Her expertise in automation brought rival offers from IBM branches in Chicago and Connecticut.    The management cheerleading continues once transferees have taken jobs in sales. At a Detroit branch, ceiling speakers rasp with a rock tune -- &quot;The Future's So Bright, I Gotta Wear Shades&quot; -- as IBMers gather for a &quot;Coach's Corner&quot; meeting. Jack Magoon, the manager, gets to the point: recognizing new redeploys. He has 30, nicknamed &quot;The 'R' Team.&quot; The room crackles with applause as Mark Anason, a 26-year-old engineer, is singled out as the first to complete sales training.    Mr. Anason, who moved 10 months ago from an automated printer plant in Charlotte, now will sell automation to auto makers. &quot;When 150 people are clapping for you, you've accomplished something. It's a great feeling,&quot; he says. Another redeploy, John Acciaioli, watches with admiration and says, &quot;That's where I'm going to be one day.&quot; But the 27-year-old from Tucson has barely begun 10 months of mock sales calls, classroom lectures and training. Impatient, he spends weekends in the office studying technical manuals.    The transition to sales can be even harder for older employees. Fifty-year-old Andy Cosby took a demotion to join the Missouri branch. Back in California, he had trained top executives of customer companies. Now, Mr. Cosby, whose handshake is painfully enthusiastic, heads a new-account team and visits a dozen prospects a week. For each of his eight salespeople, he has a list of 200 to 300 firms never called on by an IBM salesman.    &quot;What made IBM great is we care about customers. We had taken our eye off that for a while,&quot; Mr. Cosby says.    That mea culpa, echoed companywide, is at the heart of IBM's effort to expand the sales force. &quot;We allowed our priorities to get a little out of balance,&quot; says Edward Lucente, the head of U.S. marketing.    From 1981 through 1985, the sales force shrank 4% while sales rose 72%. Yet IBM let its staff swell so much that selling and administrative expenses, which in 1983 equaled 26% of its $40 billion revenue, grew to more than 30% of last year's $51.25 billion revenue. Salespeople spent less than half their time with customers and the rest of it pushing paper, attending meetings and so on. Now, the sales ranks will grow 20% in two years to 28,000 salesmen and engineers by year-end. Mr. Lucente wants his salespeople to spend 70% of their time with customers.    Salespeople call it &quot;face time.&quot; In Missouri, they rue &quot;windshield time&quot; -- the hours spent driving to get to customers.    IBM is targeting new salespeople at small businesses; at department managers as well as data-processing chiefs; at facilities using rival equipment, and at unautomated factories. In addition, almost 1,000 IBMers now work full time at large companies' data centers. Last year, IBM added 70 special teams to the 130 that each serve one major customer; it is adding 200 more.    Richard E. Imershein, a 33-year IBMer now with the Gartner Group consulting firm, says the expanded sales force will offer new expertise and cover smaller accounts IBM now loses. Other analysts aren't impressed. The no-layoffs pledge is smart public relations, says Ulric Weil, a Washington-based analyst, but &quot;if you have 40,000 too many people, you let them go -- you don't pussyfoot around.&quot;    Some critics believe that IBM's real aim is to cut its work force and preserve its image at the same time. Russell Forquer, an IBM salesman in Erie, Pa., until he angrily quit two years ago, charges that the company raises sales quotas and lowers job ratings to dump older salespeople. Richard Hudson, fired in 1980 for revealing secret salary data, complains that IBM pushes people into sales with the idea of firing those who fall short.    IBM denies that. It notes that overall employee turnover, excluding early retirements, is below 3% annually and that firings haven't increased. And IBM says it spends more than $50,000 to relocate each worker, plus thousands more for retraining. &quot;If our objective were to drive people out,&quot; says Mr. Magoon of the Detroit branch, &quot;we'd be a lot more proficient and just drive them out of the business.&quot; He adds: &quot;I wouldn't take anyone into the branch who was going to out and out fail. It's a waste of my time.&quot;    However, even some loyal IBMers who never doubted the no-layoffs &quot;tradition&quot; are worried. Says one redeploy: &quot;You can break tradition; you don't break policy. Clearly, we've got to have a good year, or someday it could come to that.&quot;    Greencastle ran out of luck. Richard Andis, a 32-year IBMer, spent his final weeks with IBM helping shut down the plant that had employed him for most of his adult life. &quot;IBM always told me they'd treat the individual fairly -- and they have,&quot; he says. The closing hurt anyway. The night Mr. Andis heard of the decision, he drove to the airport to meet the plant's two top executives, who were returning from headquarters. Alone, he waited in the darkness of his car and cried. </TEXT></DOC>