<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880107-0064 </DOCNO><HL> The Right Lessons of INF Treaty </HL><AUTHOR> Richard R. Burt </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST EUROP </CO><IN> NUK ARO </IN><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   The debate over the new Soviet-American treaty eliminating intermediate nuclear missiles is now upon us. Over the next 100 days or so, U.S. senators, administration spokesmen, European politicians, and pundits on both sides of the Atlantic will address an array of questions ranging from how the accord affects the NATO-Warsaw Pact military balance to whether it can be adequately verified.    These are important questions and they deserve the attention they undoubtedly will get. But it is vital that the ratification debate go beyond what the INF treaty does and does not do with U.S. and Soviet nuclear forces, and focus also on another important issue -- the question of what lessons politicians and publics in the West draw about the agreement and the process of achieving it.    Experience has shown a disturbing tendency in both the U.S. and Western Europe to draw the wrong conclusions about arms-control agreements. This was true 15 years ago, when the U.S. and the Soviet Union concluded agreements limiting strategic offensive forces (the so-called Salt-I or &quot;interim&quot; agreement) and severely restricting antiballistic-missile deployment, the ABM treaty. At the time, many observers, including some Nixon administration spokesmen, hailed these accords as proof positive that the Soviet Union had adopted both the American concept of &quot;sufficiency&quot; in force numbers and the nuclear doctrine of Mutual Assured Destruction.    But this proved not to be. During the decade of the 1970s, while U.S. military programs such as the MX and B-1 languished, the Soviets proceeded with an unprecedented strategic buildup designed to provide them the capacity to wage, and possibly win, a nuclear conflict with the West.    Both left-of-center and conservative politicians in Europe, including supporters and critics of the treaty alike, have already begun to draw the wrong lessons about the new INF treaty. Does this mean that it would be a strategic blunder to go forward and ratify the INF treaty? Not at all. The &quot;double-zero&quot; accord, with its favorable 4:1 ratio in long- and short-range intermediate missile reductions and its provisions for on-site inspection, serves Western interests. It is important, however, that the ratification debate helps alliance publics on both sides of the Atlantic spot the wrong lessons, and learn the right ones.    On the left side of the political spectrum, socialist spokesmen in northern Europe have begun to argue that the treaty is the product of Soviet moderation and the peace movement's persistent push for nuclear unilateralism. But nothing is more scandalous and politically Orwellian than the peace movement's last-minute efforts to gain some credit for the treaty. Having bitterly opposed both NATO's original INF decision in 1979 and the actual deployment of missiles in 1983, the peace movement opposed the very decision that made an INF agreement possible. Had Western governments listened, in the early 1980s, to the protesters in Europe or their friends in America, the Geneva negotiations would have stagnated and the Soviet Union would today continue to enjoy a total monopoly in INF missiles.    It is also difficult to understand why Moscow should receive much credit for the agreement. Mr. Gorbachev finally accepted Ronald Reagan's 1981 proposal for eliminating all INF missiles only after the Soviet Union exhausted every alternative to serious negotiation. Prior to U.S. deployment in 1983, the Soviets sought to intimidate Western Europe with threats of a new &quot;Ice Age&quot; in East-West relations while they quietly encouraged the work of European nuclear unilateralists. Following deployment, they stomped out of the negotiations in Geneva and implemented &quot;countermeasures,&quot; such as the stationing of SS-22 missiles in East Germany and Czechoslovakia, in a last-ditch effort to intimidate NATO into reversing course. Only after the Soviets recognized that their threats had totally failed did their negotiators finally get down to business in Geneva.    The real credit for the INF accord, then, does not belong to either the peace movement or Mr. Gorbachev; it belongs instead to Ronald Reagan and his allied colleagues -- Margaret Thatcher, Helmut Kohl, Bettino Craxi, Wilfried Martens and Ruud Lubbers -- the leaders who together faced down the Soviets and the unilateralists during the difficult &quot;Year of the Missile&quot; in 1983.    Elements of the European left are also drawing another dangerous military lesson from the INF accord: that the treaty paves the way for the ultimate &quot;denuclearization&quot; of Europe. With the ink hardly dry on the &quot;double-zero&quot; accord, left-wing politicians in West Germany and elsewhere are already arguing that the next arms-control priority should be negotiations on short-range nuclear forces, with the aim of achieving a triple zero -- the removal of U.S. and Soviet missiles with ranges under 500 kilometers. Indeed, some members of West Germany's Opposition Social Democratic Party have already suggested that the INF accord means that Western Europe could do without the presence of U.S. nuclear weapons altogether.    denuclearized Europe would represent the height of Western strategic folly. By stripping away NATO's nuclear deterrent, Western Europe would be exposed to the full brunt of the Soviet Union's conventional invasion capability. The INF treaty, by removing some 400 U.S. nuclear warheads from Europe, does not alter the alliance's strategy or flexible response. Nor was it meant to. The U.S., after the treaty is fully implemented, will continue to deploy some 4,000 nuclear weapons throughout Europe.    If the left has some mistaken ideas about what the treaty means, so do many on the conservative side of the European political spectrum. It has become popular for West German conservatives, for example, to argue that the treaty strategically &quot;singularizes&quot; their country by virtue of the fact that after INF reductions, shorter-range Soviet missiles in East Germany will still be able to strike targets in West Germany. It is also noted that under the accord, many of the remaining U.S. nuclear weapons in West Germany will be nuclear artillery shells that could, in a conflict, be used on German soil. &quot;The shorter the range, the deader the Germans,&quot; is the phrase coined by Volker Ruhe, a leading German Christian Democrat, to describe this seemingly unjust situation.    But West German &quot;singularization&quot; is a myth. The INF treaty has essentially reestablished the status quo in Europe as it existed in the mid-1970s, prior to SS-20 deployment. West Germany was as vulnerable then as it is now to Soviet short-range missiles, the number of which has not changed significantly in the interim. Yet nobody argued then that West Germany had been singled out as a nuclear target.    In fact, the singularization argument vastly exaggerates the impact of the INF accord for better or worse. While West Germany, after INF elimination, will still be vulnerable to Soviet nuclear attack, so will the rest of Western Europe and, indeed, the U.S. The idea that the remaining U.S nuclear weapons in Europe could be used only on German soil is also wrong. After INF withdrawals, the U.S. will still possess a considerable number of nuclear munitions based in Europe, at sea and in the U.S. that can threaten targets throughout Eastern Europe and in the Soviet homeland.    It is true that West Germany, because of its &quot;front-line&quot; geographic position and its non-nuclear status, finds itself uniquely exposed in Central Europe. The presence of U.S. nuclear forces has been an important means of reducing this exposure. If NATO starts down the road to eliminating this presence, West Germany could find itself genuinely &quot;singularized.&quot;    Some Europeans, especially in France, have drawn another, equally fallacious, conclusion from the INF outcome: that it represents the first step of perhaps an inevitable wind-down of American power in Europe. Citing budgetary constraints in Washington and an alleged new unilateralism in American policy, they are predicting that INF reductions will soon be followed by a substantial withdrawal of American troops.    There is little in the INF experience to justify the fears of the right or the hopes of the left, for an American disengagement from Europe or the removal of the American nuclear umbrella. Concern over European security led the Carter administration to endorse INF deployment, and concern over alliance integrity led the Reagan administration to see it through. Over this period, both administrations have given priority to strengthening U.S. conventional as well as nuclear forces in Europe. Even now, with defense-spending cuts on the horizon, U.S. forces in Europe remain a top military priority. The INF treaty, then, does not signal a diminished U.S. interest in Europe. Just the opposite is the case. The treaty is the result of American strength rather than weakness; leadership rather than unilateralism.    In sum, the INF accord will not lead to the denuclearization of Europe, nor to an American disengagement, nor to a greater exposure of West Germany to Soviet military power. In the aftermath of this accord, 100% of the American troops and 90% of U.S. nuclear weapons now in Europe will remain. The alliance strategy of flexible response will continue to be valid and credible. West Germany will be less exposed to nuclear attack than it is today. The Western alliance will have demonstrated that unity and resolve pay.    These are the right lessons of the INF experience. These are the lessons that should prevail in the INF ratification debate. These are also the lessons that should shape the West's future approach to arms control and defense.    ---   Mr. Burt is U.S. ambassador to West Germany. </TEXT></DOC>