<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881101-0106 </DOCNO><HL> Corporate Focus: RJR Employees Fret Amid Buy-Out Talks --- Stock Price Tempers Anger Of Staff Facing Takeover </HL><AUTHOR> John Helyar (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> RJR SLH AXP SB </CO><IN> TOB FOD TNM PRO </IN><TEXT>   While the top executives of RJR Nabisco Inc. try to pull off the biggest business deal ever, rank-and-file employees try to go about their business -- with difficulty.    Many are angry at their leaders and fearful for their jobs. They are swapping rumors and spinning scenarios for the ultimate outcome of the battle for the tobacco and food giant. Headquarters staffers in Atlanta know so little about what's happening in New York that some call their office &quot;the mushroom complex,&quot; where they are kept in the dark.    Yet they are cheered by a 50% jump in RJR stock in little more than a week, increasing their wealth and easing their pain. To an extent, they are also inured by two years of the leadership style of president F. Ross Johnson, a style that has included numerous restructurings and headchoppings. &quot;The general attitude is, 'Here we go again, only bigger,'&quot; says a consultant to the company.    The contemplated leveraged buy-out of RJR would, in fact, be the biggest business transaction ever. Kohlberg Kravis Roberts andamp; Co. has bid $90 a share, or $20.6 billion. An RJR management group, led by Mr. Johnson, is trying to put together a competing bid, together with Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc. and Salomon Brothers Inc.    At a certain level, all seems normal. Managers at the Nabisco Brands Inc. unit last week were huddled in planning meetings for 1989. Construction on a new biscuit bakery went on in Garner, N.C., while, Del Monte unit executives were inspecting a new port site in Florida. Yet, admits Dolph W. von Arx, head of the U.S. tobacco business, &quot;I would be foolish to think it hasn't affected the morale and attention of people. We're just trying to keep their attention on business.&quot;    The greatest distraction and fear may be in RJR's Atlanta headquarters, whose 350 employees include many of the very number-crunchers, planners and support personnel who get axed after a leveraged buy-out. Most have moved here only within about the past year, and many are carrying big mortgages on fancy houses in a shaky real estate market. Some have wasted no time in putting out feelers for other employment. &quot;Everybody wants to take me out to lunch and talk about how to find another job,&quot; says a former staffer.    The greatest anger may be in Winston-Salem, N.C., where resides the company's heritage. This city was still bitter at Mr. Johnson's moving the headquarters from here last year, and many regard the impending leveraged buy-out and breakup of RJR as this carpetbagger's final blow to a great company. A bumpersticker has begun to appear that says RJR on the left side with a thumbs up, and Nabisco, with a thumbs down, on the right. Mr. Johnson and most of his top aides came in from Nabisco, when that company was acquired by R.J. Reynolds Industries Inc. in 1985.    It's not that the tobacco business that is this city's lifeblood would be whisked away. RJR's cigarette-making plants are concentrated here, and the company in any form would be a big employer. But it probably wouldn't be as big a one. R.J. Reynolds Tobacco Co. has been a rich, fat operation, which absorbed 400 people from the old corporate headquarters staff with hardly a burp. Many positions could be subject to slashing by a cash-conscious, post-LBO company.    In other ways as well, this company -- for 113 years rock-solid and a community benefactor -- may never be the same. Lyons Gray, whose family ran R.J. Reynolds for years and who is now running for Congress from this area, has been inundated on the campaign trail by questions from longtime employees and retirees. &quot;They're asking me, 'What's going to happen to the pension?' and 'Will they continue the health plans?'&quot; says Mr. Gray, himself a former RJR marketing executive. &quot;There are a lot of people who have given their lives to this company, and this has created a lot of uncertainty.&quot;    RJR officials say the pension is secure no matter the outcome. But addressing employees' fears doesn't necessarily assuage their anger at not only Mr. Johnson but Edward A. Horrigan Jr., chief executive officer of the tobacco company. He is the only other publicly identified member of the management group, which can make out handsomely no matter the outcome. As equity partners in a private company, they could become very wealthy. And by merely hanging out a for-sale sign, they stand to reap big, quick profits on their RJR holdings. Messrs. Johnson and Horrigan each own about 235,000 shares, according to the 1988 annual meeting proxy statement. A jump in stock price from the $56 before the company was put into play to yesterday's close of $83.75 already amounts to a gain of $6.6 million each.    An aide to Mr. Johnson dismisses personal gain as the driving force behind the action. &quot;As has been characteristic in his career, his concern was to significantly enhance shareholder value, and that was the primary motivation,&quot; he says.    Some managers are also livid because they tendered their stock options to the company in August, thus missing out on what could have been some hefty profits of their own. The company offered to buy out options for $53.50 a share, then, at a time the stock was trading in the high $40s. Holders of stock options who went for that deal lost out on the big gains. Some speculate that Mr. Johnson knew he was going to launch a buy-out bid, at the time, and are muttering darkly about filing suit. The Johnson aide denies that, saying it wasn't considered until much more recently.    But those mutterings are at least symptomatic of a widely held belief that top management is out mainly to take care of itself. &quot;The whole problem can be summarized in one word: greed,&quot; says an RJR retiree, who says that that idea was the common theme in conversation at the company's health maintenance organization clinic last week. &quot;I heard that word from two or three physicians.&quot;    Some employees and former employees in Winston-Salem would rather see KKR emerge the victor. In part, that's because it could trigger the triumphant return of former RJR executives, who were ousted in corporate politics battles but could be enlisted by an outside bidder. Some of the most prevalent rumors around the RJR empire involve that theme: Gerald Long, former head of domestic tobacco, returning to run the tobacco company; Sam Gordon, former head of Del Monte fresh fruit, taking that business back over; and, most delicious of all, J. Tylee Wilson, RJR's former chairman and chief executive officer, returning to run the whole thing.    The Wilson rumor picked up steam Friday, when he met with KKR officials in New York. Mr. Wilson said Saturday he isn't working for KKR, but that after the three-hour conference the door was still open for further discussion. Mr. Wilson lost his job to Mr. Johnson in 1986, and has since become a management consultant in Jacksonville, Fla. He says one of his goals is seeing that the interests of &quot;stakeholders,&quot; as he calls employees, are considered as well as shareholders'.    Of course, many &quot;stakeholders&quot; are also shareholders, giving them decidedly mixed emotions about developments. Winston-Salem is awash in paper gains on RJR stock, and brokers are swamped with employees' queries on whether to sell or hold. A Del Monte employee says the stock is a constant subject of discussion, and &quot;Some people are very happy and not seriously thinking about the long-term consequences.&quot;    The second favorite topic of discussion at Del Monte is where this business will finally land, with speculation ranging from a Japanese conglomerate to a leveraged buy-out within the leveraged buy-out, to be led by the unit's chairman Robert J. Carbonell. Says the employee, &quot;It's distracting, but interesting.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>