<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871204-0003 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN SAID chances were good for an accord on strategic nuclear weapons.    The president, in a televised interview, said he was hopeful that the superpowers will complete a treaty next year halving their arsenals of long-range missiles. He also said he would be &quot;very disappointed&quot; if next week's summit with Gorbachev doesn't lead to another summit in Moscow next year. Reagan said he hasn't changed his mind about the Soviet Union, which he once called an &quot;evil empire,&quot; but indicated he believes Gorbachev represents a new breed of Soviet leader.    Reagan strongly defended the pact banning intermediate-range missiles, saying conservative opposition was based on &quot;lack of knowledge.&quot;    ---   CUBAN DETAINEES AGREED to end an 11-day standoff at an Atlanta prison.    Federal negotiators said the tentative pact, approved by Attorney General Meese, had been put to a vote and accepted by a majority of the 1,105 inmates. A Cuban-born bishop was reported to be on his way to the prison to preside over a signing ceremony. No details of the settlement were disclosed and none of the 89 hostages have yet been released. An exile leader at the prison said inmates were shouting, &quot;Tomorrow the suffering will be over for everybody.&quot;    A Justice Department spokesman cautioned that hostages weren't freed for several days following settlement of a similar standoff in Louisiana.    ---   Cardinal Obando said he was returning to Managua today after an initial round of Nicaraguan peace talks in the Dominican Republic. The cardinal, who is acting as go-between, said he would try to force Sandinista and Contra delegations to meet face-to-face, but a Nicaraguan government spokesman said that was out of the question.    A Salvadoran rebel leader said rightist death squads are intact, preventing his return to political life in his native land. Guillermo Ungo made the remarks in New York after visiting El Salvador for the first time since he went into exile seven years ago.    ---   Iran's Larijani ended two days of talks with U.N. Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar aimed at implementing a Security Council resolution calling for a cease-fire in the Persian Gulf war. The deputy foreign minister called the talks fruitful but reiterated Tehran's demand that Iraq be branded the aggressor in the seven-year-old war.    ---   Cambodian rivals agreed on the outline of a peace accord following talks in France. Prime Minister Hun Sen, leader of the Vietnamese-backed government, and Prince Sihanouk, the deposed monarch and leader of a coalition fighting the Phnom Penh government, are to sign the agreement today. Details are being withheld until the signing.    ---   Sri Lankan officials said Indian troops fired heavy weapons into a town in the eastern Batticaloa district after an ambush by Tamil separatist rebels, killing 37 people, including 19 civilians. An Indian official said the civilians were caught in a cross fire during the ambush and Indian troops had no alternative but to return fire.    ---   A bombing suspect awakened in Bahrain after a failed suicide attempt, but was refusing to answer questions about her role in the destruction of a South Korean airliner carrying 115. Fingerprint identification is expected soon. Separately, the incident is increasing tensions in South Korea's presidential campaign.    ---   A Haitian opposition leader again called for a general strike, beginning today, if the military government didn't resign following canceled elections and the killing of 34. The San Francisco Examiner said a witness claimed 46 people were massacred Saturday at an army prison outside Port-au-Prince. The government denied the report.    ---   A Senate panel voted to ban the sale of Stinger anti-aircraft missiles to Bahrain. The Appropriations Committee rejected White House pleas that the ban be lifted to reward Bahrain for allowing U.S. forces in the Persian Gulf to use its main harbor.    ---   AIDS researchers will present results of preliminary studies on Ampligen, a new drug they believe may delay the onset of the disease, tomorrow in Washington. A doctor at a Philadelphia university where studies were conducted said no claims are yet being made for the drug and that expanded testing will be necessary.    ---   A federal judge sentenced two members of a neo-Nazi group to 150 years in prison each for violating the civil rights of a Jewish radio talk-show host by shooting him to death outside his Denver home in 1984.    ---   A Bhopal strike virtually shut down the Indian city on the third anniversary of a gas leak at a Union Carbide pesticide plant that killed more than 2,800 people. About 200 children marched and 2,500 people rallied at the plant's gates to mark the anniversary.    ---   A Moscow journal published a long-suppressed letter from Nikolai Bukharin, a lieutenant of Lenin executed in 1938, pleading for future Soviet leaders to reinstate Bolshevik victims of Stalin's purges. Gorbachev, in a speech on the Bolshevik revolution's 70th anniversary referred favorably to Bukharin but did not call for his rehabilitation. </TEXT></DOC>