<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890726-0110 </DOCNO><DD> = 890726 </DD><AN> 890726-0110. </AN><HL> Back in Business:@  Mexican Conglomerate@  Cuts Costs and Learns@  There's Life after Debt@  ---@  Alfa Won More From Banks@  Than Government Did,@  Soon Saw Profit Rebound@  ---@  Now, Ready to Borrow Again@  ----@  By Matt Moffett@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 07/26/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><IN> MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)BANKS (BNK) </IN><DATELINE> MONTERREY, Mexico  </DATELINE><TEXT>   On a sweltering day last summer, 10,000 employees of the conglomerate Grupo Industrial Alfa S.A. thronged a baseball field for an elaborate outdoor mass. Presiding were a dozen priests and the local archbishop, who read a telegram from the pope. Mexico's biggest private company was giving thanks for what seemed a miracle.    Weighted down with massive debt, Alfa, after seven years of intense negotiations with 134 foreign banks, had succeeded in slashing its burden by more than half. The company was hoping to resume growth after what had been virtually a lost decade. &quot;We end a period of great trial and uncertainty,&quot; Alfa chief executive Rafael Paez told the crowd, &quot;while we begin another of hard work and hope.&quot;    One year later, Alfa's prayers seem to have been answered. In 1988, the company recorded the most profitable year in its history. Exports are growing as never before: steel-making technology to India, petrochemicals to Japan, auto parts to Detroit. Alfa has done so well, in fact, that its family owners were able to buy back much of the equity they had surrendered to banks and pay down even more loans; debt now is down to less than one-seventh of the $2.7 billion owed in 1987.    While the government of Mexico struggles, managing to negotiate a debt-relief plan but one that will probably reduce its principal very little, the country's private sector is having much better success in getting out from under debt burdens. Since 1982, the Mexican private-sector debt has fallen to just a few billion dollars from around $20 billion. In the same span, the Mexican government's debt has swollen to $81 billion from $52 billion.    And a similar pattern is evident elsewhere: The private-sector debts of Brazil and Argentina have also fallen sharply while the two countries' governments have become further mired. &quot;Throughout Latin America, amounts of debt reduction conceded by the banks were significantly greater in the private sector than they were in the Mexico deal,&quot; says Jeffrey Sachs of Harvard University.    Latin American leaders complain that banks haven't yet accepted reductions on public-sector debt because they're more likely to get a taxpayer-funded bailout on public debts than they are on private ones. Also, any concession creditors grant to one debtor nation would set a precedent for all the others.    But bankers have maintained that the Mexican government simply isn't as deserving of debt reduction as the reform-minded private sector. Even some Alfa officials feel the government could do more; &quot;the private sector got out of the crisis first because it made economic adjustments that cut much deeper than those the government was willing to make,&quot; says Alejandro Cumming, one of Alfa's outside directors. Since 1981, Alfa has nearly halved the number of its divisions and employees, has sacked several family board members and replaced them with respected businessmen, and has imposed stringent production standards that made it internationally competitive and raised exports fivefold.    In any case, at a time of third-world economic gloom now brightened somewhat by the bank agreement with Mexico, the turnaround at Alfa suggests what is possible for a seemingly destitute debtor. And Alfa's case is more than merely illustrative; Mexico, trying to make a fresh start through a market orientation, is counting on its private sector to be the new engine of economic growth. No private company is more important to Mexico's hopes than Alfa, a sprawling company whose 1988 revenue of $1.85 billion amounted to 1.3% of the country's gross domestic product.    &quot;It's been a long painful process, but we've learned our lesson: You have to be lean and efficient,&quot; says Bernardo Garza Sada, the company's chairman.    The Alfa story began almost a century ago in a red-brick brewery run by two brothers-in-law, Isaac Garza and Francisco Sada. The brewery expanded vertically, producing everything from the glass for its bottles to the grain for its brew, and then branched out into steel. In 1974, the founders' heirs split the company into two firms, Alfa and Grupo Industrial Visa (which went its own way).    As Mexico emerged as an oil-producing power in the 1970s, Alfa symbolized the country's go-go spirit. Launching an aggressive diversification program, it swallowed up resort hotels on the Pacific coast, bought an interest in Mexico's only private television network, and went into manufacturing ventures in everything from industrial steam turbines to mopeds. Assets, revenue and profits all more than quadrupled between 1976 and 1980.    But as the size of the company was growing so was the debt load, and meanwhile earnings of many of the new units were stagnating. &quot;No one noticed then, but it was a false prosperity,&quot; says Guillermo Barba, director of Alfa's food operations. When the collapse of oil prices provoked two steep peso devaluations in 1981 and 1982, the dollars needed to service foreign debt became seven times more expensive. Alfa's equity was wiped out.    Leading Alfa's roll of creditors were Citibank and Continental Illinois (now Continental Bank), each owed $100 million. In December of 1981 Alfa called an emergency meeting with bankers to inform them of its crisis -- the same sort of debt squeeze that would envelope the Mexican government nine months later.    Many bankers were angry at Alfa, claiming they had been given misleading earnings projections that led them to lend more than they would have otherwise. (Alfa says the situation deteriorated so rapidly that it was hard to make accurate projections.) Nevertheless, Alfa immediately took a tough negotiating stance, suggesting to bankers why Mexicans sometimes call the businessmen of Alfa's home city &quot;the cheapskates of Monterrey.&quot; When Alfa and other indebted Monterrey conglomerates began pressing banks for strikingly similar terms, bankers added an appellation of their own: the &quot;Monterrey debtors' cartel.&quot; Alfa's relations with the banks would reach their nadir when the company pulled out of a tentative debt restructuring that had taken months to negotiate, saying falling oil prices changed the economic outlook too much.    While negotiations moved at a crawl, Alfa acted urgently to overhaul its inefficient operations, selling off manufacturing ventures in television sets, bicycles and tractors. It reduced the bloated corporate staff to 400 from 3,000, cut its work force in half to 25,000, tightened up on working capital and cut energy use in its steel division by one-third. Alfa even eliminated most of its subsidy to the Alfa Cultural Center, a major Mexican museum, by levying an admission fee and installing money-making gift shops and cafeterias.    It got help from the government too, in the form of an emergency $250 million loan, an easing of price controls, and a program that protected indebted companies from currency devaluations.    Alfa also saw that it had to strengthen money-losing operations, such as its food division, which sells processed meats. In the boom days, proud Alfa would never have considered marketing its products in Mexico's ubiquitous mom-and-pop stores, or &quot;changarros.&quot; But now Alfa makes them a priority.    In one tiny, concrete-block store in a working-class neighborhood of Mexico City, Alfa salesman Alejandro Palapa stands silently hearing the owner's litany of complaints about her health, the weather and the government. But Mr. Palapa's patience has its reward. The woman not only buys several Alfa meat products, but allows Mr. Palapa to festoon the store's battered walls with Alfa advertisements.    &quot;In a depressed economy even the smallest sales are important,&quot; says Mr. Palapa. These days, meat sales to the once-ignored changarros in Mexico City average 1,600 tons a month, and sometimes exceed sales to supermarket chains.    To earn dollars, Alfa also has made an all-out push to promote exports from subsidiaries such as Nemak, a maker of auto cylinder heads. Nemak's quality controls once were so weak that one in five cylinder heads it made wound up on the scrap heap, and at the start of the debt crisis Alfa's lenders pressed for liquidation of the subsidiary. Alfa resisted, knowing, as Nemak director general Manuel Martinez recalls, that &quot;we had a big, big market if we could improve the product.&quot; Partner and customer Ford Motor Co. agreed, gave Nemak a loan to keep it going, and soon Nemak was able to hire some Italian quality-control experts to whip the factory into shape.    Now, foundry workers nimbly unload the red-hot, newly forged cylinder heads from a huge rotating turntable at a rate of precisely one per minute. &quot;This is like doing a dance -- you have to have the rhythm just right,&quot; says Angel Francisco, a worker who barely sweats in the 100-degree factory heat. Nemak workers have gotten the choreography down so well that the scrap rate has fallen to less than 1%, and the unit's exports will total $85 million this year. Similar improvements in Alfa's petrochemical operations have pushed exports to $280 million from $40 million in 1980.    Turning around its operations gave Alfa the wherewithal to win its war of attrition with creditors. In late 1986, Alfa reached preliminary agreements to swap debt for equity in its holding company, its steel unit and its food division. In the largest of the three transactions, the holding company gave up $25 million in cash, $200 million in Mexican government debt and 45% of its equity to the banks, which, in turn, agreed to slash Alfa's debt to them to $200 million from $1.02 billion. For each dollar of debt, the banks ended up with 22 cents and a portion of a share in Alfa.    Some feared a glitch, and rushed to the secondary market to sell their rights to a payment and stock. They got the 22-cent payment up-front, but surrendered their shares for nothing. These banks came to regret their haste. Just a few days after the restructuring deal finally closed in December 1987, the Mexican government stopped gradual devaluations of the peso. The move, which caused the peso's value to increase against that of the dollar in relative terms, worked to the advantage of companies such as Alfa that had debt in dollars. And Alfa was further strengthened by a surge in international petrochemical prices, as well as by government-granted increases in steel prices.    Much faster than even its own executives had expected, Alfa was back on its feet. In 1988, operating income was a record $425.1 million. Special gains related to the debt restructuring and the fixed exchange rate added $574.8 million more.    Thus, last May, Alfa wasn't greatly strained to pay $220 million to the banks for 27% of the holding-company equity -- especially since the buy-back price was 38% below the stock's book value. Banks that had hung on until May recovered about 60 cents for each dollar they had lent. Some banks are still holding Alfa stock, and are glad of it. The stock that some banks judged worthless less than two years ago has soared more than 800% since the restructuring was completed.    Not all the strategies Alfa used are feasible for an indebted central government such as Mexico's. Drastic public sector belt-tightening risks the kind of upheaval that recently erupted in Venezuela and Argentina following government austerity programs. Mexico has made distinct efforts to become more efficient, but Miguel Mancera, the governor of its central bank, says that &quot;for the public debt to have been diminished along with that of the private debt, it would have been necessary to run much larger {budget} surpluses, which implies even further sacrifices by the Mexican population.&quot;    Mr. Cumming, the Alfa director, agrees. &quot;Businessmen don't have to worry about politics when they're running their companies, but governments do,&quot; he says.    The independent-minded people of Monterrey have hailed &quot;the Mexicanization&quot; of their home-town flagship. But Alfa chairman Garza Sada isn't letting himself get carried away. &quot;The debt crisis doesn't end completely for Alfa until it ends for Mexico,&quot; he says.    Nevertheless, reducing the passive investment of the banks has already given Alfa new operating flexibility. The company now has more room to attract productive foreign investments without exceeding legal limits on foreign ownership in Mexican companies. Alfa recently sold a 49% stake in its paper-producing subsidiary to Chicago-based Stone Container Corp., which is providing a major infusion of capital.    And in the biggest sign yet of its resurgence, Alfa is seeking bank financing for about one-third of the cost of a new $120 million petrochemical plant. Though this might seem like heading down the same road that led to trouble before, the company says it's a different story now: The dollar loans would be backed by dollar revenues from the plant's exports.    Some bitter foreign bankers say they will never consider making loans to Alfa again. Mr. Garza Sada thinks they'll come around eventually. &quot;Bankers are business people,&quot; he says, &quot;and if they see an attractive opportunity they will surely take it, no matter what the history is.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>