<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880721-0148 </DOCNO><HL> Back to the Lab: Big Chemical Concerns Hasten to Develop Biodegradable Plastics --- Companies Are Being Pushed Into Research by Increase In Bans on Ordinary Plastic --- Providing a Feast for the Bugs </HL><AUTHOR> Amal Kumar Naj (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> DOW ICI XON EUROP </CO><IN> CHM ENV </IN><TEXT>   Wayne Maddever knows just how to pitch his company's new product. As he extols its virtues, he produces pictures to prove how easily the product rots. They show, among other things, colonies of mold on a slimy pink surface.    Mr. Maddever says actual samples of the product decomposing are too disgusting to put in his briefcase. Anyway, the photos seem to do the trick. Sales, he says, have taken off.    The product, believe it or not: plastic.    For decades, chemical companies have invested fortunes to make plastic more durable. They succeeded to an extreme degree. Now, ironically, they are going back to the lab to develop plastics that rot.    They aren't doing this by choice, exactly. Victims of their own success, the companies created a product that is ubiquitous and nearly indestructible. Plastic is clogging the nation's dumps and killing wildlife. As the waste crisis worsens, laws aimed at curbing the use of plastic are proliferating.    Several communities in California and New York have banned certain plastic packaging. About a dozen states are considering restrictions on plastic products such as egg cartons, disposable diapers, and grocery bags. Anti-plastic sentiment isn't confined to the U.S., either. Denmark is considering legislation to ban all plastic packaging. In Italy, certain types of plastic bags will be outlawed after 1991. Similar restrictions are being sought in Britain, Switzerland and Austria.    At the moment, the anti-plastic movement doesn't appear to be a big threat to the hugely profitable $15 billion market for plastic packaging. But the chemical industry fears packagers may turn to paper, aluminum or glass if restrictions on plastic increase. The paper industry, in particular, has been capitalizing on environmental concerns to promote paper as a substitute for plastic.    Kenneth P. Heinze, a securities analyst at Eberstadt Fleming Inc., says a number of chemical companies are already factoring a previously expected decline into their sales outlooks. Karl Kamena, manager of state and local regulatory affairs for Dow Chemical Co., adds: &quot;If we don't solve the solid-waste problem, it will hurt our bottom line. We're going to suffer as an industry.&quot;    So the chemical industry is reluctantly pouring millions into developing biodegradable plastics. The research has yielded several promising first-generation technologies, and scientists believe more breakthroughs are possible. Among the companies at the forefront are Dow Chemical Co., Exxon Corp., Bayer AG of Germany, Imperial Chemical Industries PLC of Britain, and Enichem of Italy.    &quot;Legislation will ultimately make this a big business,&quot; Lawrence Powers, chairman of Spartech Corp. in St. Louis, says. Spartech, a maker of plastic packaging, is banking on his hunch. With St. Lawrence Starch Co., a closely held milling concern based in Mississauga, Ontario, it recently launched a joint venture to develop biodegradable plastic products such as bags, bottles and even automotive parts.    St. Lawrence markets an additive that it claims enables plastic to fully decompose in 15 years. In contrast, conventional plastics remain intact for up to four centuries.    Here is how it works: Conventional plastics are composed of repeating hydrocarbon molecules, called polymers, which are derived from petroleum. (The lengthy chains are too long for micro-organisms to eat; that is what makes plastic so resistant to decay.)    St. Lawrence's additive is composed of cornstarch and an oxidizing agent. Mixed with plastic resins, the agents become interspersed within the plastic polymers. When buried in landfills, the oxidizing agents react with metal salts in the soil, and the links between the polymers are destroyed. Simultaneously, bacteria feed on the cornstarch.    Gradually, the long chains of hydrocarbon molecules break down into smaller and smaller fragments. Within two years, the plastic becomes porous and brittle. Over the next decade, the plastic decays into fragments too small for the eye to see. Eventually, the molecules become tiny enough to be eaten by micro-organisms.    The biodegradable plastic typically costs about 15% more than conventional plastics. &quot;Two years ago, when we began to market the product, the packaging manufacturers said it's a great idea but customers won't pay for it,&quot; Mr. Maddever says. Mr. Maddever, the salesman with the photos, is business-development manager of St. Lawrence.    Now, demand for the novel plastic is growing, especially among trash and grocery-bag makers, he says. The company says it also has had inquiries about the product from cosmetics concerns and diaper manufacturers.    Competitors are pursuing other technologies. In one of the boldest research efforts to date, Imperial Chemical, the big British chemical manufacturer, is testing a natural plastic produced by a type of bacteria found in the soil. The bacteria produce the plastic as a future source of energy, much as humans store fat. Similar in appearance and texture to petroleum-based plastics, the plastic decomposes into water and carbon dioxide when attacked by certain enzymes in the soil.    Imperial says it has had &quot;terrific unsolicited interest in the material from all areas of plastics uses.&quot; But the cost of manufacturing the natural plastic is prohibitively expensive: $15 a pound, compared with roughly 65 cents a pound for conventional plastic. However, the company says it hopes to reduce manufacturing costs enough to begin marketing the plastic in two to five years.    Meanwhile, Exxon Chemical, a unit of Exxon Corp., is testing a plastic to which iron and nickel compounds have been added. The compounds eventually cause the plastic to break down. &quot;We're evaluating and talking to our customers,&quot; a spokesman says, &quot;but it is not clear what role biodegradable plastics will fill.&quot;    In any case, chemical companies still have technical problems to overcome in developing biodegradable plastics. The new plastics generally aren't as strong as conventional plastic. Scientists also fear that the new plastics could prove unreliable -- that is, prone to decay before the job is done. That raises the specter of unhappy consumers with half-full trash bags disintegrating in their basements.    Decomposing plastics create chemicals that may contaminate groundwater. The decaying plastics also give off gases such as methane, which in large concentrations is flammable. Though it is unlikely the gases would become concentrated enough to ignite in landfills, the possibility still raises concerns. Some scientists also aren't sure whether they can develop biodegradable plastics that won't infect food with bacteria or impart smells to food.    Aside from the technical problems, the new plastics pose other dilemmas for the chemical industry. For one, the industry has poured a fortune into advertisements designed to promote plastic bags, trashcan liners and other household products that are, as the television commercial goes, hefty, hefty, hefty.    And the industry has billions invested in plant and equipment. Large-scale degradable plastic production would require a huge investment in manufacturing and handling facilities. Dow Chemical estimates that adding the new silos, holding tanks and other manufacturing equipment needed to make biodegradable plastic would add 10% to 20% to production costs.    Even companies that have developed plastics that decay are reluctant to market them aggressively. A number of years ago, when states began to outlaw the plastic connector rings that hold six-packs of soda or beer together, Dow developed a photodegradable plastic. Environmentalists pressed for the laws because birds and other animals were choking and strangling on the rings. Dow is a big manufacturer of resins for the rings.    Photodegradable plastic essentially disintegrates when exposed to the sun for long periods. Manufacturers have sought to use Dow's plastic in making trash bags and even kites. But, fearful of endangering the market for conventional plastic, Dow says it won't sell the plastic except for use as connector rings.    Marketing the photodegradable plastic more widely would only play into the hands of the anti-plastic movement, B.A. Geisert, Dow's director of business development, says. &quot;If we don't think the use is appropriate,&quot; he adds, &quot;we'll refuse to sell.&quot;    In what it calls a &quot;defensive move,&quot; Dow says it, too, began research into other types of biodegradable plastics this spring, although officials declined to elaborate on the company's efforts. Dow's Mr. Kamena says the company didn't want to be &quot;the last guy on the block&quot; in the new field.    Even as it is pursuing research into new plastics, the chemical industry is hastening to defend conventional plastic. Mobil Corp., for instance, recently launched a high-profile public-relations campaign to argue the folly of anti-plastic laws and to press for other solutions to the solid-waste crisis, such as garbage incineration and recycling.    Mobil came out swinging earlier this year, when New York's Suffolk County was considering legislation that would ban certain plastic products, such as grocery bags. The company took out full-page ads in several magazines and newspapers, lambasting the proposed bill. Despite Mobil's efforts, the measure passed; it will take effect in mid-1989.    But Mobil says it won't be a sore loser in the battle over plastic, if its foes prevail. At the same time it is rallying to defend conventional plastic, the company says it is conducting research into biodegradable plastics at its laboratories in Edison, N.J.    If the market for biodegradable plastic takes off, &quot;we will also make the stuff,&quot; a spokesman says. &quot;We have to stay in business.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>