<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870429-0109 </DOCNO><HL> Divided Right:Conservatives FaceA Bitter StruggleIn Shaping Movement---They Must Choose WhetherTo Emphasize EconomicsOr Socially Related Causes---Major Quandary: AIDS Issue---By David ShribmanStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The banner behind him says &quot;1990s and Beyond,&quot; but Russell Wittenberg, a political activist who is here for a gathering of conservatives, says he worries that his movement won't survive the 1988 election.    &quot;As conservatives, we're all individualists,&quot; says the airline pilot from Carefree, Ariz. &quot;We don't march in lock step.&quot;    For most of the past decade, conservatives have dominated the domestic- and foreign-policy debates. They have seen their leading political figure elected to the presidency by a substantial margin and then reelected by a landslide, have begun to assume a permanent presence in the Washington bureaucracy, and have amassed a substantial financial base for their activities.    And yet there is despair in their ranks. For one thing, polls show that the two leading Republican presidential hopefuls, Vice President George Bush and Sen. Robert Dole, aren't the favorites of most conservative activists. More important, a bitter struggle to shape conservatism in the post-Reagan era is already getting under way, and there is little hope of any resolution before the first political tests early next year.    &quot;It's been relatively easy to be a conservative the last few years,&quot; says Republican Rep. Dick Cheney of Wyoming. &quot;But now we're going to have to make choices.&quot;    Today, six years after the Reagan tax and budget cuts and a year after the president prevailed in the tax-overhaul battle, conservatives have to choose whether to retain the economic tint that their movement acquired in the 1980s or to emphasize social issues.    They have to choose whether to give a greater voice to the religious right or to young professionals who 20 years ago might have been lured into the liberals' camp but who today worry about issues of economic growth.    They have to choose whether to focus on the old social agenda of winning prayer in the schools and banning busing and abortion or to move to new issues centered on quality and discipline in the schools and overhaul of the welfare system.    They have to choose how to address the AIDS issue, fight crime and reduce the number of teen pregnancies; how much priority should be given to early deployment of the Strategic Defense Initiative; and how to respond to apartheid in South Africa.    And perhaps most fundamental of all, conservatives must choose whether they want to continue to shrink the role of government or to fashion a new sort of government activism.    &quot;Reagan gave us a coalition with a lot of internal contradictions,&quot; says Republican Rep. Vin Weber of Minnesota, one of the young, vocal conservatives in the House. &quot;Reagan gave us an excuse not to resolve them. Now they've burst out in the open, and we have to deal with them.&quot;    To a great extent, conservatives are grappling with their own success: The schisms among them are a testament to how far they have come from the time, only two decades ago, when they defined themselves primarily by their opposition to the proposals of liberals. Today, it is conservatives who are fashioning much of the national agenda.    Yet many conservatives worry that they didn't move swiftly enough after they gained the offensive to consolidate their support, iron out their differences and unite for the future.    &quot;The conservative movement needs to be organized,&quot; says William Kennedy, the publisher of Conservative Digest. &quot;It's a mess. The ideas are strong, but we failed to do what the unions did for the liberals: We sat around talking about issues, issues, issues, and they organized people.&quot;    Adds GOP presidential hopeful Rep. Jack Kemp of New York: &quot;We have a tendency to have think tanks and institutes and organizations to disseminate the true faith, but we're lacking the means of popularizing our ideas.&quot;    Many of the fissures in the conservative movement are as cultural as they are political. There are continuing tensions between those who were drawn to the movement by economic self-interest and those who were drawn to it by ideology. Many younger, more aggressive self-styled populists remain suspicious and resentful of wealthier, more traditional Republicans. And many Democrats, Catholics, ethnics and workers who were lured into the Reagan coalition at the beginning of the decade are wondering whether they will still have a place in the post-Reagan era.    &quot;You have a group of people who do the work, raise the money, make the phone calls and go to the conventions, and then you have a different group that actually runs the government, particularly in foreign policy,&quot; complains Howard Phillips, the chairman of the Conservative Caucus. &quot;It is a conflict of the activist forces and the Wall Street forces who, by virtue of economic power and experience, end up running the world. We want to break that.&quot;    At the same time, the role of the religious right -- with its uncompromising insistence on its own issues and priorities -- has never been fully resolved. &quot;The conservative movement is split in lots of ways, and when you add one other element, evangelicals, you've got grave divisions on the most emotional, hot issues around,&quot; says Gary Orren, a Harvard University expert on voting behavior. Some conservatives worry that the religious right could become disaffected when, as many believe, the Rev. Pat Robertson's presidential campaign fails.    The battles among conservatives are often less over the specifics of an issue than over emphasis and priorities -- questions that take on enormous importance in determining the movement's future.    Some leading conservatives, such as Rep. Kemp, make the obligatory bows toward the social agenda but are uncomfortable with some elements of it and still prefer to emphasize economic issues like growth, imposing a gold standard and fixing exchange rates. Other conservatives, though, argue that with the approaching twilight of the Reagan era, economic issues should be secondary.    &quot;We feel that any conservatism that is tied to numbers is bound to fail, because sooner or later we are going to have a recession,&quot; says Paul Weyrich, a New Right leader who urges a focus on social issues. &quot;We can't ignore problems in society and hope they go away. The truth is that some of us believe in government activism.&quot;    Those who see the social agenda as the greatest opportunity for movement often talk about forging an alliance between two conservative constituencies, evangelicals who are troubled about moral content in the schools and more traditional conservatives who are troubled about the quality of the schools.    &quot;When you put those people together, you have a pretty formidable force,&quot; says Education Secretary William Bennett, who is emerging as an important new conservative voice. &quot;There are some conservatives -- country-club types who think of this as not very interesting. But there's a strong political group who does. Everybody cares about their kids.&quot;    The AIDS issue poses a special quandary for conservatives, who must find ways of dealing with the health problem without condoning homosexual behavior or highlighting general issues involving homosexuals. In practice, the issue is one that divides the movement along religious-right and libertarian lines.    On one side are those arguing that the problem highlights the social and public costs of the breakdown of the family and the promiscuity often associated with homosexuals. Many, particularly in the religious right, want a campaign against homosexual behavior and don't want explicit sex education in the schools; they have bitterly assailed Surgeon General C. Everett Koop's proposal that schools teach the proper use of condoms.    Phyllis Schlafly, the president of the conservative Eagle Forum, charges that Dr. Koop is &quot;covering for&quot; homosexuals and adds: &quot;We're not going to let homosexuals come in and dictate to us laws or make us accept them or recognize them as someone entitled to just as much respect as a family. I do not feel that they are just like ordinary people. If they had stayed in the closet like adulterers do, nobody would bother them.&quot;    But other conservatives express qualms about such a hard line. &quot;The problem is in the area of compassion and the danger that, in checking the spread of AIDS, we're encroaching on civil liberties,&quot; says Jeffrey Bell, a conservative activist now working as the Kemp campaign coordinator. &quot;The problem is that we might be seen to act without sympathy to the victims in the course of trying to preserve the fabric of the larger society.&quot;    There is also ferment within the movement on the issue that more than any other has defined it for the last decade: economics. Both Mr. Kemp and former Gov. Pierre du Pont of Delaware, another presidential contender, argue that growth fostered by lower taxes is the answer to the nation's economic problems. But others, such as Republican Sen. Phil Gramm of Texas, believe that unless the deficit is eliminated, no new conservative vision will be relevant and, as Sen. Gramm puts it, &quot;the gains of the Reagan revolution will not be secure.&quot;    Social Security is another sticking point. Some conservatives have long harbored doubts about the program -- 1964 presidential candidate Barry Goldwater proposed making it voluntary -- and now Mr. du Pont is pushing a plan to allow people to set aside personal accounts to augment retirement in exchange for relinquishing Social Security benefits.    But other conservatives, particularly Mr. Kemp, regard such positions as flirting with political suicide. &quot;Something's happened to Jack Kemp,&quot; says Mr. du Pont, who plainly is trying to lure Mr. Kemp into a confrontation by portraying himself as more willing to question the ruling political orthodoxies. &quot;He's become a status-quo person.&quot;    For his part, Mr. Kemp breaks with those in the movement who focus primarily on shrinking the role of government. &quot;'Getting the government off the backs of the American people' will be no one's slogan in 1988,&quot; he says. &quot;Making government efficient and effective will be the thing this time. I've never understood why conservatives positioned themselves against government.&quot;    On foreign policy, conservatives generally agree on a tough, anti-Communist, big-defense foreign policy but are finding divisions on some specifics.    &quot;There is a consensus among conservatives that we ought to continue the Reagan Doctrine of helping democratic resistance organizations,&quot; says Republican Rep. Jim Courter of New Jersey. &quot;There is agreement about the Soviet threat. But we're still disagreeing over South Africa. We still really don't know what to do about it.&quot;    And while there is agreement over the concept of Mr. Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative, or &quot;Star Wars,&quot; there is still contentiousness over how quickly to develop and deploy it. Republican Sen. Malcolm Wallop of Wyoming says the president's plans are &quot;thin gruel&quot; that must be accelerated. This spring Mr. Kemp pledged to transform the 1988 presidential campaign into a &quot;national referendum&quot; on the anti-missile plan.    The bottom line, as the 1988 campaign gears up, is that conservatism faces a challenge no less formidable than the one it conquered in 1980 by thrusting Mr. Reagan into the White House: proving that its earlier triumph was one of ideology rather than personality and that the ideology itself is still fresh.    &quot;These people were hailing Ronald Reagan as the beginning,&quot; warns Larry Berg, the director of the Institute of Politics at the University of Southern California, &quot;but unless they can fix these things, Ronald Reagan is the end.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>