<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880609-0125 </DOCNO><HL> Speaking of Business: China Must Avoid the 'Marble-Boat Syndrome' </HL><AUTHOR> Lindley H. Clark Jr. </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><TEXT>   In the late 19th century, foreign nations were invading China almost at will, so some leaders decided it would be a good idea to raise money for a bigger imperial navy. Empress Dowager Ci Xi, however, had a better idea. She used the funds to build a sumptuous summer palace on a lake near Beijing.    To express her contempt for the big-navy advocates, perhaps, she ordered that an extravagant marble boat be built on the edge of the lake.    The marble boat, now a tourist attraction, is an extreme example of misallocation of a nation's resources. For the past four decades, the People's Republic of China has been trying to improve allocation of the nation's material and human resources -- trying, in effect, to avoid new marble boats. Up to now, the efforts haven't been especially successful.    In the 1950s, Mao Tse-tung at least realized that the central government couldn't make all the economic decisions for the huge country. But his solution was to farm out some decisions to local bureaucrats, and that didn't help much.    Over the past decade, Deng Xiaoping, Mao's successor, has been giving local officials a freer hand and even trying a small measure of free enterprise. Farmers can sell some of their produce in free markets -- after they first meet state-imposed quotas. Businessmen, carefully licensed by the government, can sell clothing and some other items on such markets. Managers of state-run enterprises have been given wider leeway to plan their own production and marketing, set their own budgets, hire and fire. Provided, of course, that this conforms with the state plan.    But things still go wrong, often because of local bureaucrats, as happened at the Xian Food Machinery Factory in Shaanxi Province. The factory had been troubled by poor management, but after 1979 became very profitable under a new director, Wu Changhai.    Success, however, got Mr. Wu into trouble. His immediate superior, the Xian Municipal Second Bureau of Commerce, first demanded 20% of the factory's profits, then 40%. Mr. Wu refused, calling the demands unreasonable. So the bureau harassed him, sending in inspection teams, holding meetings and encouraging workers to denounce Mr. Wu. He was removed from his job for more than a year.    Not surprisingly, profits and production plunged. The report offered no details, but the situation apparently is now in hand, and people have been asked &quot;to draw lessons&quot; from the case.    The central government would like to get -- and keep -- good managers such as Mr. Wu. As an incentive, a recently established entrepreneurs association has named 20 managers of state-run companies as the top entrepreneurs of 1987.    The top bosses ranged in age from 44 to 69, perhaps reminding the government of the need for younger managers. But there are problems. As Julia Leung reported in this newspaper last week, China has sent many young people to the U.S. to get master's degrees in business administration, but graduates often come home to jobs that make little or no use of their training. Managers in many cases are so used to a noncompetitive environment that they have little interest in new ideas.    China at least has recognized that pure communism isn't the answer. In a recent column I quoted a young Chinese who said that the socialist-stressing the word &quot;socialist&quot;-idea is, &quot;From each according to his abilities, to each according to his work.&quot; He might have been surprised by this from &quot;Perestroika,&quot; the new book by Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev:   &quot;Socialism has nothing to do with equalizing. Socialism cannot ensure conditions of life and consumption in accordance with the principle 'From each according to his ability, to each according to his needs.' This will be under communism. Socialism has a different criterion for distributing social benefits: 'From each according to his ability, to each according to his work.'&quot;    I have absolutely no way of knowing who got the idea first.    Basing income on work allows room for rewarding achievement -- plus a lot of latitude for bureaucrats who evaluate the work. One rationalization heard in China is that pure communism was fine during the revolution but is unsuited to the &quot;construction&quot; phase.    Mr. Deng's reforms are real and moving in the right direction, but the central government still firmly controls the &quot;construction&quot; phase. Some decisions are hard to understand. Recently, for instance, the State Commission for Restructuring the Economy announced a program for controlling investment. A key element was a check on &quot;excessive investment.&quot; Even a casual visitor can see that the nation needs more, not less, investment.    It's likely that &quot;excessive&quot; investment involves projects of which the government doesn't approve. An agency, presumably worrying about rising imports, recently listed 100 products, ranging from minibuses to air conditioners, that it wants to see produced in China, not imported.    Advances in technology are a key part of Deng Xiaoping's plan to modernize China. The planners, however, face a major obstacle. In the U.S. and other industrial nations, technology is supposed to enable a country to economize on labor. It's the way to increase productivity: Fewer people produce more and that's supposed to be good for everyone.    But China has more labor than it needs. In agriculture, efforts to increase productivity have centered on using existing labor -- all of it. In some areas, work that in the U.S. would be handled by tractors is still done by men and women -- and an occasional water buffalo.    A nation with more than a billion people doesn't lightly adopt labor-saving devices. Nor does a country long accustomed to central economic control quickly adopt anything like a true free market. The government recognizes it set farm prices too low to encourage output, so it is raising them. That forces it to increase wages to pay for the food. That increases inflationso now, in this poor country, there is talk of government moves to discourage consumption. Sometime someone may see that the market, with all its imperfections, does things better.    But that will take time, and Deng Xiaoping is in his 80s, with not much time to wait. In his haste he may give China a few new marble boats. </TEXT></DOC>