<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870120-0017 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 01/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   PEKING EXPELLED a leading scientist from the Communist Party.    Continuing its campaign against capitalist tendencies, the party announced the ouster of astrophysicist Fang Lizhi for allegedly inciting recent student protests. Fang had been fired last week as vice president of a university in Hefei. Meanwhile, nearly 1,000 Chinese studying in the U.S. signed an open letter to the Peking leadership expressing &quot;deep anxiety&quot; over the recent removal of Hu Yaobang as Communist Party chief and government suppression of free speech.    Premier Zhao said Hu had been dismissed because he had tried to implement economic changes too quickly and was soft on &quot;bourgeois liberalism.&quot;    ---   Iranian forces appear to have made no significant gains in their drive to capture the Iraqi port city of Basra, despite Tehran's claims of fresh advances, U.S. officials said. In the Persian Gulf, Iran said its forces overran Iraqi defensive positions about seven miles from Basra, but Baghdad claimed that Iran's troops were repelled.    ---   West German politicians cautioned Bonn officials against swapping a Lebanese suspect in the 1985 hijacking of a TWA jetliner for a West German businessman abducted in Beirut. As Bonn's Foreign Ministry renewed a warning against traveling to Lebanon, the politicians said such an exchange would inspire more terrorist attacks.    ---   Anglican envoy Terry Waite said he has made contact with the captors of U.S. hostages in Lebanon and planned to begin negotiations to win their freedom soon. He also expressed fear of being abducted. In Paris, French aides met with an Iranian official in an effort to improve ties and gain the release of Frenchmen held in Lebanon.    ---   The Soviet Union has launched two missile-carrying submarines, paving the way for the Kremlin to exceed the limits of the unratified SALT II arms accord, administration sources said. Once sea trials for the two vessels begin, likely this spring or summer, the subs and their missiles could be counted as additions to the Soviet arsenal.    ---   The White House said a request for Reagan to meet with a special panel investigating the National Security Council is pending. A spokesman denied reports that the panel's requests had been &quot;rebuffed.&quot; Separately, Israel reportedly has told two arms merchants to stay away from the U.S. or risk a summons to testify before Congress.    ---   Americans observed the birthday of Martin Luther King Jr., with Secretary of State Shultz saying the slain civil-rights leader's example &quot;shines through the most downtrodden corners of the Earth.&quot; The U.S. government and 37 states marked the holiday.    ---   Ecuador's president said that his military kidnappers tried to kill him last week, and that he wouldn't permit indiscipline in the armed forces. He didn't elaborate. Leon Febres Cordero, who was released Friday in exchange for an imprisoned general, also said congressional foes were trying to exploit the turmoil and have him impeached.    ---   Latin American diplomats met with Nicaraguan President Ortega in an effort to revive stalled Central American peace talks. The delegation, which includes U.N. Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar, is on a two-day, five-nation tour of the region.    ---   Philippine President Aquino dismissed speculation of a new plot against her government, and officials said a precautionary alert in and around Manila had ended. An armed forces spokesman said the alert had been declared over the weekend because of fears that Moslem violence in the southern Philippines might spread to the capital.    ---   A snowstorm moved across the Midwest, and authorities said there have been at least 32 weather-related deaths since Thursday. The snow, ice and heavy rains stranded travelers, collapsed roofs and caused the closing of schools in the Plains states.    ---   A Pakistani newspaper reported that as many as 150 shoulder-fired Stinger antiaircraft missiles are being shipped to Afghan guerrillas from the U.S. The guerrillas, who rejected the Kabul government's recent cease-fire bid, reportedly are to receive the missiles before the next round of Afghan peace talks opens Feb. 11 in Geneva.    ---   Israeli gunboats fired rockets at Palestinian guerrilla positions overlooking southern Lebanon's port of Sidon, wounding at least four guerrillas, Lebanese police said. Israel denied the report, but a military spokesman in Tel Aviv said Israeli troops killed four &quot;terrorists&quot; Sunday in Lebanon.    ---   Sikh extremists assassinated a leader of Indian Prime Minister Gandhi's Congress (I) Party in Punjab state. The official's bodyguard also was killed in the machine-gun attack, and police said that at least four other people were killed in Sikh violence throughout the northern state. </TEXT></DOC>