<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880609-0112 </DOCNO><HL> Violent Losses: In Gaza, on West Bank, The Agony Becomes A Big Financial Toll --- Israel's Bill Nears $700 Million; Arabs Shun Jobs Now, But Future Links Likely --- Hold the Ketchup and Mayo </HL><AUTHOR> Geraldine Brooks and Tony Horwitz. (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST LABOR </CO><IN> MON </IN><DATELINE> ISRAELI-OCCUPIED GAZA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   At Yossef Dayan's factory, only one of 50 Arab workers is on the job.    The dejected Israeli stares at a television monitor that shows a workshop full of idle sewing machines. Another monitor shows why: a convoy of Israeli jeeps hurtling past the factory to enforce curfews at Gaza refugee camps. &quot;The army is keeping us both very quiet,&quot; says Mr. Dayan, who can't meet demand for the military gear he usually produces.    In the Arab town of Ramallah, Yacoub Zietoun also has lost business -- by choice. The Palestinian, a distributor for an Israeli food company, severed ties with it four months ago and joined an Arab boycott of Israeli goods. Now, he spends his days tending chickens in newly built coops behind his home.    &quot;We are still peasants,&quot; says the 38-year-old manager, whose company handled more than $1.5 million of Israeli products last year. &quot;Whatever happens now, we aren't going to starve.&quot;    As the Palestinian uprising in the occupied territories reaches the half-year mark, the focus is shifting from the human toll to the financial one. The cost of the chaos -- in lost economic opportunity, declining tourism and military expenses -- already totals close to $700 million for Israel alone, according to Israel's Ministry of Economy. To cover this cost, Israel will have to cut services or raise taxes -- or send the bill to Uncle Sam.    &quot;There's always this assumption that you can go to the U.S. and get more whenever you need it,&quot; says an American Embassy official in Tel Aviv. &quot;We've never disappointed them.&quot;    Israel's government, ever mindful of the mood of U.S. taxpayers, is unlikely to ask for additional financial aid this year. But, on the assumption that American memories of harsh Israeli tactics will fade, Israel may well seek an increase next year in the $3 billion it already gets from the U.S. annually.    Palestinians presented their bill to Arab backers this week; a major item on the agenda at the Arab summit in Algiers is a request for additional assistance to Palestinians in Gaza and the West Bank. Yasser Arafat, the Palestine Liberation Organization chairman, came to the conference saying the uprising cost the Palestinians more than $1 million a day. Although he has sought an explicit pledge of financial support, he may be disappointed. So far, most Arab nations have been very tightfisted, and the trend at the conference points toward ringing rhetoric rather than a big cash commitment.    Meanwhile, the economic hardship for both Israelis and Palestinians grows. Ever since the 1967 war, when Israel occupied the West Bank and Gaza, the Israelis have used the territories as both a labor pool and a market for their products. Now, Palestinians are determined to break their economic dependence, just as they are trying to end their political subservience with the creation of an independent state.    Thus, the economies of Israel and its occupied territories are being pulled apart. Israelis say that, with or without increased U.S. aid, they will pay whatever price their security requires. Palestinians, close to one another and to the land, also say they won't be broken, even if outside Arab support isn't forthcoming.    &quot;People feel they are in one boat -- unfortunately, a sinking boat -- and we all have to help each other,&quot; says Hisham Awartani, a Palestinian economist at an-Najah University on the West Bank. &quot;We have to cut down our standard of living to what's compatible with our indigenous economic base.&quot;    In a West Bank village near Hebron, Azmi al-Khayil is doing just that. &quot;When I walk past the butcher shop these days, I have to turn my face away,&quot; says the 48-year-old stonemason, who worked 18 years on Israeli building sites. His family's staples now are lentils and rice, cooked on a wood fire to cut electricity bills.    In February, Mr. al-Khayil quit his $30-a-day job in Tel Aviv for several reasons: what he calls abuse from his Israeli boss, pressure from militant Palestinians to observe strikes, and fears for his family's safety during repeated riots. Now, the only building work he does is on his home.    &quot;We are ready to eat leaves,&quot; Mr. al-Khayil says, gesturing at his blossoming grape arbors. &quot;We can suffer as long as it takes to get a solution.&quot; His family of 14 has suffered already. From the folds of her long dress, his wife, Fatmah, produces a well-thumbed Arab magazine that she has carried around for two months. The cover shows her 15-year-old son, Khalid, his cheek torn open by a rubber bullet. Three older brothers have been jailed, and Mr. al-Khayil spent $1,000 -- most of his savings -- paying the fines.    Earlier in the uprising, a family such as the al-Khayils would have sent a friend to the PLO office in Jordan with receipts for these outlays and would have been reimbursed within days. Families who lost a child could expect to receive up to $6,000, according to need. But in recent months, Israel has cracked down on all fund transfers; even Western travelers report soldiers leafing through paperback novels in search of hidden banknotes.    If any money has made it through, it hasn't reached Ibrahim Shweiheh, whose 22-year-old son, Mohammed, was killed by soldiers in February. Mr. Shweiheh, frail, toothless and almost blind, relied on his son to work his few acres of stony ground. Soldiers sweeping through the village after riots shot up the Shweihehs' water tank. Too poor to replace it, family members now drink from their donkey's water trough.    Cut off from outside income and aid, West Bank villagers hope that a strong summer crop will keep them going. But many talk of one day returning to their jobs in Israel. &quot;When there is peace and when we are equal,&quot; Mr. al-Khayil says. &quot;Not before.&quot;    To some Israelis, the question is whether Mr. al-Khayil's job should be waiting for him when he returns. Palestinians from the occupied lands make up only 7% of Israel's work force, but that figure belies their importance to industries such as construction; two-thirds of laborers on building sites come from the territories, typically earning half to three-quarters the Israeli wage.    Yoram Shechter's $40 million condominium project in Tel Aviv was nearing completion when the uprising nearly halted work. As the cost of delays &quot;ran into millions,&quot; Mr. Shechter says, the firm petitioned the government to allow the import of foreign workers. Now, 18 Portuguese cart wood and shift sand beside the Gazans who report irregularly for work. Elsewhere in the city, workers from south Lebanon also fill the gap. As a further measure, the government is offering a one-time bonus of $1,200 to discharged soldiers who work for six months in hard-hit sectors.    Moshav Mav Ki'im, a cooperative farm 10 miles north of Gaza, has found a different substitute for the 200 Arabs it once employed picking melons and oranges. The moshav didn't plant melons this winter, opting instead for crops such as cotton and wheat that can be harvested by machine. &quot;The uprising forced us to make changes we should have done years ago,&quot; says Shmulig Kraus, a manager.    But Mr. Kraus rues the drop in everyday commerce between the moshav and nearby Gaza. Until December, Arabs commuting to Tel Aviv often bought eggs and ice cream at the moshav's grocery store, while Israelis took advantage of cheap auto-repair shops in Gaza. In Jerusalem, many Jews also have stopped shopping at the Arab fruit and vegetable market in Bethlehem, where stores stayed open on the Jewish Sabbath and offered products such as nonkosher meat.    Yossef Dayan's military-equipment and camping-gear factory in Gaza also may not survive the uprising. The riots could have been a windfall as army demand for equipment such as helmets soared. But because he didn't have enough workers, the army went elsewhere.    Mr. Dayan has shifted some production to a rented workshop in Israel, but state-required benefits balloon his labor costs there. He is five months behind in payments on a $500,000 bank loan. &quot;I tell them to wait, maybe things will get better. If they don't, I may not be here for long,&quot; says Mr. Dayan, who is asking the government for a financial bailout.    All these costly readjustments come on top of the expense of putting down the uprising. Some reservists are being called up for double their usual yearly duty -- which drains productivity and penalizes the selfemployed. The army estimates military costs so far at more than $250 million and has requested a sharp budget increase.    News reports of how this money is being used have blighted tourism. &quot;In past years, there'd be a bad headline and you'd lay low for a few weeks, but now you've got a headline that won't go away for months,&quot; says Vera Golovensky, assistant general manager at the King David Hotel, where 30% of the bookings have been canceled this year. Now, the industry is lowering its forecast of visitors for 1988 by 20% to 25%, and the number could plummet if any tourists get caught in the violence.    For the territories' economy, which is one-thirteenth the size of Israel's, the impact of the uprising could be devastating. A third of the Palestinian work force labors in Israel, and recently Israel has been using punitively the controls with which it has long stifled Palestinian businesses.    But far from being cowed, Palestinians are using what little leverage they have to strike back. The territories are Israel's second-largest export market, after the U.S., and the idea of a boycott of Israeli goods is slowly spreading.    At a grocery store in Ramallah, on the West Bank, Jaleel Zabaneh calls out the origin of each product as he totals a customer's bill: &quot;Yogurt from Hebron; eggs, local; Swiss jam; plastic bags, orange juice -- both from Ramallah.&quot; A woman who purchased some Israeli sliced turkey asks for a bag. &quot;I'm ashamed to be seen with Israeli goods,&quot; she says.    But for many Israeli products, such as long-life milk and most canned goods, the Palestinians don't have substitutes. A spokesman for Israel's Osem foods company says sales have been &quot;only marginally&quot; affected.    Mr. Zabaneh used to place orders with Mr. Zietoun, the former Osem distributor, and the two often debate how far Palestinians should push the boycott. &quot;A lot of my customers have lived in America, and when they come back, they want ketchup and mayo,&quot; Mr. Zabaneh says. &quot;I'd like to keep them living here.&quot; Counters Mr. Zietoun: &quot;If all that's keeping them is ketchup, who needs them?&quot;    But even hard-liners acknowledge that Israelis and Palestinians can't live completely apart; after 21 years of working together, their current split is like a divorce with children involved.    Whatever happens politically, says Ephraim Kleiman, a Hebrew University economist, &quot;we are not going to see a complete cutting of ties.&quot; Just as the Palestinian economy can't go it alone, he reasons, Israel would be hurt by having poverty and instability on its doorstep.    While Palestinians are prepared to retrench their living standards, most hope that economic ties with Israel can resume once their political goals are achieved. As Mr. Zietoun ambles out to collect eggs from his back-yard coops, he looks forward to the day he can reopen his distribution business. &quot;When we have a Palestinian government,&quot; he says, &quot;we'll make a feast of these chickens and go back to work.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>