<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870715-0048 </DOCNO><HL> McFarlane SaysNorth ExceededAuthorized Role---Ex-Security Adviser DeniesGiving Marine ApprovalTo Begin Contra Airlift---By David Rogers and John WalcottStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MDEST GOVMTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Former National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane and Lt. Col. Oliver North contradicted one another repeatedly in sworn testimony regarding their roles in the Iran-Contra affair, and the authority given Col. North to carry out covert activities.    Returning before House and Senate committees investigating the controversy, Mr. McFarlane yesterday portrayed his former aide as going &quot;over the line&quot; to an operational -- instead of advisory -- role in assisting Nicaraguan insurgents during a two-year ban on U.S. military aid to the guerrillas.    Mr. McFarlane denied ever giving authority to the Marine officer to begin a covert airlift on behalf of the Contras in 1985, or to use the U.S. Embassy in Costa Rica to facilitate the opening of a military front for the Contras in southern Nicaragua.    On both points, Col. North had testified only hours before that he received approval from Mr. McFarlane. And in contradiction to his former mentor, Col. North said he had no recollection of Mr. McFarlane's ever saying that the restrictions on military aid applied to National Security Council staff.    Mr. McFarlane's appearance and the conflicts in testimony cast a shadow over Col. North's six days on the witness stand, which ended yesterday. &quot;Everything I have testified to is exactly the way it happened,&quot; the Marine officer told lawmakers, yet the record only underscores the problems facing investigators in reaching a judgment on the tangled affair.    &quot;I recognize that honesty can be difficult in the conduct of government,&quot; said House committee Chairman Lee Hamilton (D., Ind.). &quot;But I am surprised that policy was driven by a series of lies.&quot;    Col. North offered no rebuttal to Rep. Hamilton. But in his brief concluding remarks, the former White House aide chose again to reach beyond the committees to address those among &quot;the American people&quot; who have supported him. &quot;I salute them,&quot; he said.    Mr. McFarlane's testimony refuted Col. North's claim that he never acted without the approval of his superiors, and it set the stage for the crucial testimony today of Rear Adm. John Poindexter, Mr. McFarlane's successor as national security adviser.    Administration officials and congressional investigators said Adm. Poindexter had less control over Col. North than Mr. McFarlane did. They said Col. North's close, personal relationship with former Central Intelligence Agency director William Casey sometimes enabled him to bypass his superiors. Moreover, they noted that the former White House aide had established his energetic operating style before Adm. Poindexter became head of the NSC staff.    &quot;Ollie was off and running before Poindexter took over,&quot; said a former White House official. &quot;Poindexter never caught up with him.&quot;    Besides the tangled lines of authority at the NSC, the major question still facing the committees is whether President Reagan knew of his administration's role in arming the Contras. Mr. Casey died in May, and Adm. Poindexter is the chief witness to Col. North's activities. Adm. Poindexter is expected to testify today that he made a conscious effort not to tell the president about plans to divert Iran arms-sales profits to the Contras in order to protect Mr. Reagan in case the diversion scheme became public.    A friend and political adviser to President Reagan, the late CIA director was an ardent supporter of the Contras, and Col. North has testified that Mr. Casey became a driving force behind the plan to use profits from U.S. weapons sales to Iran to assist the insurgents.    Col. North said Mr. Casey directed the CIA station chief in Costa Rica to lend support to the Marine. In addition, the former NSC aide disclosed that it was the late director who initiated an unsuccessful effort to have the agency buy the assets of the covert airlift when Congress voted to resume military aid last summer.    Col. North, normally a diligent note taker, said the rules in dealing with Mr. Casey made it difficult to document that relationship. &quot;He would tell me to put the notebook away,&quot; said the Marine officer. He also testified ruefully that he could remember only one instance when he hadn't followed Mr. Casey's direction. &quot;I didn't get a lawyer soon enough,&quot; Col. North said of Mr. Casey's suggestion that the Marine seek legal counsel.    Mr. McFarlane left the government in late 1985, before Col. North expanded his Contra-aid activities with the influx of funds from the arms sales last year. The former adviser expressed skepticism at the depth of involvement ascribed to Mr. Casey.    During his tenure, Mr. McFarlane testified that Col. North had regularly informed him of activities undertaken by the insurgents. The former security adviser, however, had only limited recall of any White House involvement in a raid on a Managua military installation on March 6, 1985.    Col. North said yesterday that private operatives linked to a British security firm provided support for the action. News reports at that time described a series of explosions at the El Chipote armory, and though the Sandinista government reported no casualties, patients at a nearby military hospital had to be evacuated.    Col. North said David Walker, a veteran of British military special operations, played an instrumental role in the raid through his organization. Compensation for the raid was paid either by the Nicaraguan Democratic Force, the main Contra group, or the same private arms network used in the covert airlift, Col. North testified.    Mr. McFarlane suggested that Mr. Walker may have played a role as well in later efforts by Col. North to equip the insurgents with British-made Blowpipe missiles to counter the Soviet helicopters used by the Sandinista government. Mr. Walker has had political ties to Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher, and his firm, KMS Ltd., has a history of working closely with the British government, though not always with its direct blessing.    Documents released by the committees underscore a close working relationship that developed between Col. North and Israeli intelligence officials, even before the Iran initiative gained momentum in 1986. Entries in Col. North's notebooks show that among the options considered was essentially to cast retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord as an agent for Israel. And in his testimony, Col. North has repeatedly referred to Iranian middleman Manucher Ghorbanifar as an agent for the Jerusalem government.    Col. North testified yesterday that he was discouraged by prospects for the initiative in late January 1986, and that Mr. Ghorbanifar, sensing that the sales might fall through, offered the ex-aide a $1 million bribe if he would pursue the policy. The colonel said that after he sharply rebuffed Mr. Ghorbanifar, the middleman then proposed that excess profits on the sales could provide a source of funding for the Contras.    Mr. Ghorbanifar's lawyer in Washington, Stuart Pierson, said he couldn't reach his client and therefore had no comment on the alleged bribe. But Mr. Pierson said his client previously has denied proposing to Col. North that Iran arms-sales proceeds be diverted to the Contras.    Mr. Ghorbanifar promised to pursue a meeting with U.S. and Iranian officials in February 1986 as part of the wider diplomatic initiative sought by the administration, said Col. North, who also made clear that the prospect of funding to sustain the Contras was a major attraction.    Questioned by Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman Sam Nunn, the Marine acknowledged that he returned from the Ghorbanifar discussions with new enthusiasm for the venture and communicated this to Adm. Poindexter. When the Georgia Democrat said the security adviser had an &quot;acute obligation&quot; then to take the revised plan to the president, Col. North refused to be drawn into a comment on his former superior.    &quot;I had expectations throughout my tenure,&quot; he said, &quot;that when . . . appropriate my superior solicited and obtained the president's permission.&quot;    More than any witness before him, Col. North provoked emotions that severely strained bipartisan alliances in the committees. In an embarrassing display of bickering, lawmakers delayed the morning proceedings before agreeing on a presentation of slides collected by the colonel in his efforts to boost the Contra cause. When he finally gave an abbreviated version of the talk, the Marine's voice choked as he described the grave of an insurgent killed in the war.    Senate committee Chairman Daniel Inouye, a World War II veteran, summoned his own set of emotional memories of combat and the code of uniformed officers. Col. North's lawyer, Brendan Sullivan, bitterly protested when the Hawaii Democrat made reference to the Nuremberg trials, but Sen. Inouye said pointedly that the code insists that officers obey only lawful orders.    ---   Edward T. Pound contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>