<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861223-0127 </DOCNO><HL> Career-Criminal Prediction Is Uncertain Science---By Mark R. Thompson</HL><DD> 12/23/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   Spotting future hard-core criminals isn't nearly as easy as it is supposed to be. In fact, for practical purposes, the feat may be impossible, according to two reports released this fall. But crime-forecasting enthusiasts have ignored doubts raised in the past about the reliability of &quot;prediction technology,&quot; and probably won't listen this time either.    You can hardly blame them for succumbing to the lure. After all, if social scientists -- armed with a handful of facts about offenders, and a set of statistical tables about the prevalence of certain characteristics among known felons -- could spot those destined to become the worst criminals, the courts could incarcerate the would-be &quot;super-felons&quot; before their careers started to blossom, and for longer periods of time. And the much larger number of occasional offenders could be sentenced to relatively short terms, reducing the need for costly prison space.    The sheer logic of concentrating limited and costly law-enforcement resources where they'll do the most good -- on the hard-core minority of criminals -- is hard to resist. That's what Harry Lee, the Chinese-American sheriff of Jefferson Parish, La., was convinced he was doing when he recently announced that his deputies would stop all young blacks entering white neighborhoods that had been plagued with burglaries. His strategy (since rescinded) was to focus on those characteristics most often associated in his department's past experience with criminals. However, the problem with crude prediction systems such as Mr. Lee's -- and according to the recent studies, even with far more sophisticated, multiple-variable ones -- is that they sweep up many innocents along with the truly potentially guilty. That's not so bad when the consequence is simply tighter surveillance. When the outcome of the prediction is a longer prison term, the results of a wrong guess are far more serious.    The theory of selective incapacitation, as the prison-sentencing strategy is called, is based on a high-tech version of the rating systems used for decades by some judges and parole boards to help set criminal sentences and prison-release dates. But the more refined system purportedly can weigh elements in an offender's background to determine the frequency, not just the possibility, of future crime.    In the May issue of Reader's Digest, a senior editor of the magazine, Eugene Methvin, wrote a beaming account of how a &quot;violent-predator profile&quot; developed by Rand Corp. criminologist Peter Greenwood can pinpoint potential chronic offenders. Mr. Methvin wrote that the results of questionnaires collected from several hundred California prison inmates prove that &quot;locking up one high-rate burglar for a year will prevent as many crimes as locking up 40 of the intermittent burglars.&quot; Mr. Methvin went on to note that in a test run on prison inmates, the profile miscast as high-rate offenders only 4% of those who told researchers they were low-rate offenders.    The Justice Department's Office of Juvenile Justice Delinquency Prevention has put a type of prediction system into practice in the Serious Habitual Offender-Drug Involved Program. Youths with a history of drug use and the requisite number of convictions, arrests or even &quot;police contacts&quot; are tagged with the &quot;serious habitual offender&quot; label. Though they never may have been convicted of a crime, the rating system indicates they warrant higher police surveillance and tougher-minded prosecution, once they're brought into court. The district attorney's office in Charlotte, N.C., and the police department in Washington, D.C., employ similar systems.    Many of the practitioners who use them have an unabashed faith that the prediction systems work. Michael Schumacher, the chief probation officer of Orange County, Calif., writing in a 1983 issue of California Journal, praised the National Institute of Corrections Model Probation System. The system assigns scores to facts about offenders, ranging from the number of their prior felony convictions (two points for one) to how many times they changed addresses during the previous 12 months (three points for offenders who moved more than twice). Those scoring 25 points or more are considered &quot;serious risks.&quot; &quot;Rather than build all the new state prisons that seem needed now,&quot; Mr. Schumacher suggests, &quot;we can use the NIC Model to select many more criminals for safe holding at the local level.&quot;    The two major studies on predicting criminal careers that were released this fall offer decidedly more pessimistic accounts of what the theory of selective incapacitation can accomplish. One of them, published by the Rand Corp., tested five different models by using them to make predictions based on the records of several hundred inmates in prison in the 1970s -- who were later released and whose actual criminal histories in subsequent years were known. The authors concluded that the carefully constructed mathematical models &quot;simply did not work very well.&quot;    The other recent study, published by the National Research Council of the National Academy of Science, resulted from a comprehensive three-year review of the research conducted on criminal careers by a panel of 15 top criminologists. The report states that the gain in crime-control efficiency from scientific targeting of career criminals would be &quot;modest at best.&quot; And even that humble claim is qualified with warnings about the models' shaky statistical underpinnings. For example, the studies on the dimensions of criminal careers -- the basis for the choice of factors considered the best predictors of future crime -- are in turn based on the notoriously unreliable self-reports of prison inmates.    These downbeat assessments are nothing new. Even the authors of the theory downplay its immediate practical importance. Mr. Greenwood, for example, wrote in a 1983 law-review article that he was spending much of his time &quot;cautioning audiences against over-hasty implementation of selective incapacitation, and warning them about the problems they will face if and when they try to implement it.&quot; In a study published last year, he suggested that if predictions are going to be made, it would be safer for the results to be used to guide rehabilitation efforts rather than prison-sentencing strategies, given the unavoidable danger of mislabeling innocuous delinquents as serious criminal threats.    Despite the limitations of prediction technology, there is clearly a place for it in the criminal-justice system. As it is, police, prosecutors and judges make seat-of-the-pants risk assessments anyway, the NAS study points out. Prediction systems can assist decision makers in the criminal-justice system in making those decisions as scientific and bias-proof as possible.    But the giddy faith that many have in prediction systems is not warranted by the evidence. The scientific studies themselves mostly offer suggestions, not answers, and typically conclude with a call not for implementation but for further research.    ---   Mr. Thompson, an attorney, writes for the Los Angeles Daily Journal. </TEXT></DOC>