<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870224-0105 </DOCNO><HL> Self-Regulation Dies on the Street---By Richard E. Rustin</HL><DD> 02/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><TEXT>   The government's campaign against insider trading has reached Wall Street's high ground. And with investment banking bastions like Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co. and Kidder Peabody andamp; Co. under siege, some in Congress are talking about curbing corporate takeovers and the professional stock market speculation that goes with them.    But those efforts apparently would attack only the symptoms -- and not certain important causes -- of the Street's current mess. Given the failure of the nation's securities markets -- and the New York Stock Exchange in particular -- to respond adequately to obvious warnings of insider trading, a more fundamental question begs to be answered: Should the job of front-line stock market surveillance be taken away from the securities industry and given to the Securities and Exchange Commission? In short, is self-regulation dead?    There are persuasive arguments for a prompt funeral. There were the abusive trading events and the self-regulatory nonevents of the 1980s takeover boom. Until the government's campaign opened last May, announcement of almost every major takeover was preceded by huge price and volume surges in stocks of target companies. But it took an anonymous letter from Venezuela to Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. a year earlier about suspicious trading at a Bahamian bank to set the government's drive in motion. The Big Board looked at questionable trading at the same bank a few years earlier, but did nothing.    Wall Streeters professed shock when the government charged Martin A. Siegel, a former top investment banker at Kidder Peabody, with joining with arbitrager Ivan F. Boesky in massive inside-trading schemes. Yet for years the Street was awash with rumors that Mr. Siegel was passing inside dope to Mr. Boesky. Last week, in an assault on the proverbial barn door, the Big Board ordered member firms to adopt tougher reporting and surveillance safeguards for employee and firm trading.    And while many of the people following the current scandal may be too young to remember, history has repeated itself. Almost 20 years ago, when Wall Street's back-office and financial crises were in the making, the Big Board was just as oblivious to danger signs.    It would be a mistake to conclude that such self-regulatory lapses merely are failures to wash Wall Street's own dirty linen. They have direct impact on the public. Just ask anyone who in 1969 tried to get his cash or securities out of a brokerage house strangling in paper work because it took on more business than it could handle. Or a small investor subjected to the high-pressure sales pitches of a First Jersey, Rooney Pace or John Muir.    It was a further setback for advocates of self-regulation that Richard Wigton, the arbitrager who was led in handcuffs from Kidder Peabody about two weeks ago, only last month was installed as a governor of the National Association of Securities Dealers, self-regulator of the over-the-counter market.    Of course, the stock markets haven't been entirely asleep. Through sophisticated market-tracking computer systems, self-regulators have flagged many scams; where the malefactors were outside a market's jurisdiction, evidence was turned over to the SEC. But rarely, if ever, have self-regulators landed hard and in timely fashion on their own members when enforcement would mean a big loss of volume.    The logic for self-regulatory laissez faire is simple: Self-regulation means that a stock market is the entity primarily responsible for detecting and punishing violations by its individual members and the people who work at its member firms. Foxes and henhouses aside, members bring in trading volume. Volume means money for members and market share for an exchange. Suppose an exchange starts raising nasty questions about big chunks of its volume. Either the volume is curbed and members lose business, or members forsake the exchange for a more tolerant market.    Ever since it emerged relatively unscathed from the back-office and financial crises in the early '70s, the Big Board has been billing itself as a quasi-public institution. In the mid-1970s it reorganized as a not-for-profit corporation and markedly increased the number of public members on its board. But there is nothing to suggest that this veneer has made the exchange any more responsive to the public when financial interests of exchange members are at stake. Indeed, the flip side of the incorporation is that exchange members have limited liability for any trespasses by fellow members.    Today you don't need a hearing aid to pick up howls from the corporate community about the rampagings of takeover-hungry arbs and investment bankers. Ironically, a decade ago, when members' control of the exchange was severely threatened, the Big Board got an unwitting but important assist from corporate America in reestablishing that control.    As a result of the crises, Congress authorized Treasury-backed insurance for brokerage-firm customers. But that meant that the government piper also began to call the tune. With Big Board prestige and credibility at their lowest ebb since the 1929 crash, Congress mandated more competitive stock markets, a direct threat to the Big Board's primacy.    Enter corporate America. At the behest of the Big Board, many top executives joined in a form-letter campaign to persuade Congress not to make radical changes in the structure of the stock markets. The result was a series of market-structure compromises that allowed the Big Board to keep its turf, and members to reassert control of the exchange.    So, the lessons of the past 20 years are clear: The SEC should take direct control of the systems that track stock volume and prices, and it should have greatly expanded responsibility for monitoring brokerage firms' sales practices and finances and for disciplining wrongdoers. If necessary, experienced exchange and NASD regulatory people should be federalized; that would be the kind of conscription that few investors would object to. Even members shouldn't gripe (although some might): They would be relieved of the direct cost of self-regulation, which instead would be spread throughout the investing public. Brokerage-house compliance officers could remain at their posts, monitoring sales practices. But they would be directly monitored by the SEC -- an arm's length arrangement that currently doesn't exist.    For crooks and cops alike, the insider-trading scandal has shown that where there's a will, there's a way.    ---   Mr. Rustin is chief of the Journal's financial news bureau in New York. </TEXT></DOC>