<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881115-0179 </DOCNO><HL> International: The Army Watches Closely as Pakistan Goes to the Polls --- Military Men Have Little Faith In Civilians Vying to Form New Governments </HL><AUTHOR> Mary Williams Walsh (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> KARACHI, Pakistan  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Three weeks ago, army troops began building hundreds of cinder block bunkers on the streetcorners of this fractious city, Pakistan's most populous. Soldiers set up automatic rifles, aimed out into the traffic, and have been poised ever since with their fingers on the triggers.    Karachi residents wonder: Is the army there, as it says, to quell potential violence surrounding Wednesday's national elections? Or has the army positioned itself to take over the country once again?    The army may be Pakistan's most pervasive institution but it is also one of the most obscure. It prides itself as a disciplined and apolitical force in the mold of its British creators, yet, paradoxically, it has ruled Pakistan for most of the nation's 41 years. Pakistan's most recent president, Gen. Mohammed Zia-ul-Haq, was also army chief-of-staff; he had governed Pakistan for 11 years when he died in a still-unexplained plane crash in August.    In the final years of his presidency, Gen. Zia experimented with ways of handing back partial power to civilians. But none worked to his liking. In May, he disbanded the civilian parliament he had assembled three years earlier, accusing the politicians of bringing Pakistan to the brink of bankruptcy.    He had scheduled the new elections before he died. Now that a civilian government looms large, the new army chief-of-staff, Gen. Aslam Beg, has been making clear statements of support. But the Pakistan army plays such a primary role in national life that a full transfer of power is hard to imagine.    &quot;The military penetration of civil society has become sufficiently pervasive that it is likely to be given up only under duress,&quot; wrote Rodney W. Jones, an authority on small military powers, in an article on the Pakistani army published before Wednesday's election was called.    Army bootprints are all over Pakistan. Army engineers sandbag riverbanks against floods. Army pilots spray the nation's cotton crops. The army built the difficult Karakoram highway, with Chinese help, over a 15,000-foot pass to China.    During a wheat shortage in 1978, the army overhauled Karachi port and set up a trucking company. In 1979, it expanded into cotton and rice transport. Today, the trucking company has 1,600 vehicles and blankets the country so thoroughly that railway officials complain.    Army officers run prep schools where young Pakistanis go sculling on the Indus River and dress for dinner in blazers and ties. There are army medical and dental schools, a college of electrical and mechanical engineering, and an army language institute. The poshest neighborhoods in Pakistan's cities are often the &quot;defense colonies,&quot; where lots are developed by military housing authorities, sold cheaply to officers -- and then resold to civilians at a lucrative markup.    Army companies retread tires, make fertilizer, cornflakes and porridge, mill sugar, run dairy farms, and market livestock stud across Asia and the Middle East. The army is digging a 270-mile drainage trench in southern Pakistan to relieve soil salinization. The army sells greenhouses to farmers, helping them grow off-season crops so they don't flock in desperation to the choked cities.    Directly and indirectly, the army plays an incalculable role in keeping Pakistan's distorted economy perking. Mr. Jones, the author, notes that 500,000 Pakistani households -- 4% of the economically active ones -- have sent young men into the army. Add in the households involved in services for the military and nearly 10% of the nation's households are involved.    &quot;The army, over the past 11 years, has established in the minds of the people that it alone can do anything,&quot; says Arif Hasan, a Karachi architect and social critic. &quot;That is why people are demoralized, and that is why this is a lifeless, depressing election. We are holding elections only because the army wants us to.&quot;    Army men aren't supposed to air their opinions of the polls. Still, an occasional viewpoint leaks through.    &quot;I hope you aren't for 'the little girl,'&quot; sniffs a major, who has been chatting with a visitor when a campaign parade passes. &quot;The little girl&quot; is Benazir Bhutto, the young leader of the Pakistan Peoples Party, or PPP, an election favorite.    The major's condescension is widespread among military men. After all, Gen. Zia unseated Ms. Bhutto's father, Zulfikar Ali Bhutto, as prime minister when he staged his 1977 coup. Mr. Bhutto had held elections that year amid strong allegations of rigging. To the army, Mr. Bhutto's performance just added to the evidence that civilian politicians can't do anything right.    Class differences reinforce the attitude. Pakistani politicians tend to come from rich, landed families that have held semifeudal power for generations. They go into politics now because the feudal system is breaking down, and the ballot box is a way to hold on to power.    The military, on the other hand, recruits its officers from the lower-middle class. The typical young officer today comes from a small town, and has parents who scraped their way up through hard work and sacrifice. The army gave him his break, and he is apt to be loyal. Such men have little patience for the landed notables.    But contempt works two ways, and as problems mounted in 11 years of military rule, the army's image has tarnished.    &quot;Who are they to look down on civilians?&quot; asks Dorab Patel, a judge who resigned during martial law when asked to take a loyalty oath. &quot;It's the pot calling the kettle black. We have all failed.&quot;    Part of the failings stem from Pakistan's ethnic tension. The British decided in colonial times to recruit their Indian army largely in the province of Punjab, in the belief that Punjabis were born to fight. Today, Pakistani soldiers still come overwhelmingly from Punjab. Punjab has also become Pakistan's most prosperous province. Residents of the other three provinces, Sind, Baluchistan and the Northwest Frontier Province, resent it. They view the Punjabi army as an occupying force.    Military spending is also a sore point. Mr. Jones notes that while military spending grew 168% between 1974 and 1981, personnel grew only 22%. &quot;During those years, Pakistan procured relatively small amounts of arms,&quot; he writes. &quot;Some of the increased investment, therefore, almost certainly went into satisfying the material wants of personnel.&quot; No one knows for sure, though. Not even the auditor-general can look at the military's books.    The public has also chafed at the rising cost, in Pakistani lives, of the military's commitment to help the Afghan resistance, known as the &quot;mujahedeen,&quot; topple the Soviet-backed regime in Kabul. Terrorist bombs and shootings have afflicted Pakistan since its army began supplying and giving sanctuary to the mujahedeen.    Resentment peaked last spring when an ammunition dump, kept for the Afghans in the heart of an Islamabad suburb, blew up, killing hundreds of civilians.    The army recognizes these problems and their effect on public perception of military rule. Officers say they know they can't hope to rule alienated non-Punjabi civilians forever. Whether they can make good on their word won't be clear, though, until after Wednesday's election. </TEXT></DOC>