<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880407-0103 </DOCNO><HL> Lift Export Ban on Alaskan Crude </HL><AUTHOR> Alan Bayless </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> PET MON </IN><TEXT>   With U.S. oil production declining and imports rising, some legislators in Washington are casting about for ways to stimulate the oil industry. The best policy would be to lift the ban on the export of Alaskan crude.    The U.S. could learn from Canada's example. In 1983, Ottawa decided to phase out the export restrictions it had imposed in 1975. The restrictions, and a decision to leave some Alberta oil in the ground, made Canada increasingly dependent on imports -- contrary to the government's goal. As the nearby graph illustrates, Canada, which was a net crude exporter in the early 1970s, became a net importer in 1975 and remained one until 1983 (see accompanying illustration -- WSJ April 7, 1988).    Along with the restrictions, Ottawa forced Alberta crude to move through a subsidized pipeline to Montreal and from there by subsidized tankers to the Maritime provinces. &quot;It was inefficient. The best netback for Alberta oil producers was to sell in Chicago,&quot; admits David Oulton, director general of the Oil and Emergency Planning Branch of Canada's Department of Energy, Mines and Resources.    To be sure, the turnaround since 1983 isn't due only to the lifting of the export restrictions. Deregulation and higher prices also stimulated the oil industry and encouraged Canadians to use much less crude. Even so, Canada's re-emergence as a net oil exporter amazed energy experts, who had underestimated the country's ability to respond to market forces.    Lifting the export ban on Alaskan crude won't make the U.S. a net oil exporter, but it could increase U.S. oil output by up to 500,000 barrels daily in the early 1990s, according to a recent study by Arlon Tussing, a Seattle-based energy consultant, and his colleague Samuel Van Vactor.    Asia is the natural market for Alaskan crude, but in 1973, before the state's huge Prudhoe Bay field was developed, Congress decided to keep the supplies for the domestic market to promote oil self-reliance. Under the Jones Act of 1920, only high-cost, U.S.-flag tankers can carry Alaska crude to Panama, where it is unloaded, moved through an 80-mile pipeline, and reloaded onto more U.S.-flag tankers for shipment to Gulf Coast refineries.    Mr. Tussing, also an adjunct professor at the University of Alaska, and Mr. Van Vactor, formerly a senior economist with the International Energy Agency, say that removal of the ban would likely boost oil production by 300,000 barrels a day in Alaska and by 200,000 barrels a day in California, assuming world oil prices of about $15 a barrel. The U.S. trade deficit would be cut by up to $3 billion a year and the federal budget deficit by up to $1 billion a year, while Alaska would gain $1 billion a year and state and local governments in California would get $500 million a year.    All this extra wealth would be created, they say, because the export ban depresses the wellhead value of all crude produced in Alaska and California by up to $4 a barrel. California's crude prices are hurt because Alaska producers flood that market to minimize the costly transit through Panama. Moreover, Messrs. Tussing and Van Vactor conclude that the California-crude discounts benefit refiners, not consumers, because refined products aren't subject to trade restrictions and are closely linked to world prices.    Of course, exports of Alaskan crude would force Gulf Coast and East Coast refiners to increase imports of foreign crude, a prospect that alarms many Americans even if there is a net trade benefit. From a security perspective, however, the U.S. has only exchanged one vulnerability for another, as demonstrated last month when a political strike closed the Panama pipeline for two days. Moreover, contracts could be worded to allow U.S. oil companies to divert Alaskan crude back to the domestic market if the U.S. faced a supply cutoff.    In any event, lifting the ban wouldn't lead to gas lineups, even in a crisis, as long as Washington didn't repeat the 1970s policy of imposing price controls and rationing. The U.S. would pay more for oil imports, but could charge more for exports. As with Canada, greater domestic production would be available before and during a crisis.    Removal of the U.S. export ban would hurt U.S. shipowners and seamen, since Alaskan crude could be moved less expensively in foreign tankers. Until now, the maritime industry has protected its position by asserting that the export ban has little impact on U.S. crude production and prices, even though the marginal cost of shipping Alaskan crude to Japan is as little as 50 cents a barrel, according to Mr. Van Vactor, compared with $3.50 or more to the Gulf Coast. The maritime industry also claims that a U.S.-flag tanker fleet is needed for national emergencies, but Mr. Tussing argues that an oil-supply crisis would create a surplus of foreign tankers, because higher world prices would reduce global oil demand. He says the foreign tankers -- many of them controlled by U.S. companies -- could readily be hired to serve U.S. interests on a commercial basis.    Although Alaska favors lifting the export ban, Gov. Steve Cowper is reluctant to press the issue, fearing it will hurt efforts to convince Congress that the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge should be opened to oil exploration. &quot;People don't want to support the development of oil if it is going to be exported to foreign countries,&quot; he says.    Nevertheless, the Reagan administration has managed to put one chink in the ban by permitting exports from Alaska's relatively small Cook Inlet oil deposit. A second chink is contained in the proposed U.S.-Canada Free Trade Pact, which would permit the sale to Canada of 50,000 barrels of Alaskan crude daily.    Even though the crude would first be landed in the lower 48 states and would use U.S. tankers, a pro-maritime lobby group called the Coalition to Keep Alaska Oil opposes the exports to Canada. In recent testimony before a congressional subcommittee, coalition spokesman Howard Marlowe expressed concern that the opening will set a precedent when the export ban comes up for review again next year.    Judging from Canada's experience and the political volatility in Panama, Congress should overlook the coalition's concerns and permit all Alaskan oil to be exported. The prospect of 500,000 barrels a day of additional crude production ought to outweigh the interests of the maritime industry.    ---   Mr. Bayless is a Journal reporter based in Vancouver. </TEXT></DOC>