<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880909-0133 </DOCNO><HL> The SEC's Case Against Drexel: Details of SEC's Drexel Case </HL><SO> </SO><CO> PEC </CO><IN> STK SCR BON </IN><G> SEC JUS </G><TEXT>   Here is a summary of charges in the Securities and Exchange Commission complaint.    CHARGE: Insider Trading   TRANSACTION: Diamond Shamrock/Occidental Petroleum   DREXEL ROLE: As Occidental's investment banker, knew that the company was proposing to merge with Diamond Shamrock.    BOESKY ROLE: Under instructions from Michael Milken of Drexel, purchased Diamond Shamrock shares and sold Occidental shares short.    REMARKS: Drexel and Boesky agreed to split the profits from the illegal trading. Diamond Shamrock's board voted not to approve the merger.    TRANSACTION: Storer Communications/Kohlberg Kravis Roberts   DREXEL ROLE: As KKR's investment banker, Drexel knew of a contemplated increase in a buy-out offer for Storer.    BOESKY ROLE: Under Drexel's instructions, purchased Storer stock before the increased offer was made public.    REMARKS: Drexel's profits from the insider trading exceeded $1 million.    TRANSACTION: Lorimar/Telepictures   DREXEL ROLE: Milken, as adviser to both companies, was informed that a merger between the two was likely. Acting before that information was public, Drexel bought Lorimar stock for its own account in which it previously had maintained a short position.    BOESKY ROLE: None.    REMARKS: Drexel was able to avoid a loss of approximately $568,000 and obtain a profit of about $1.23 million.    TRANSACTION: Viacom   DREXEL ROLE: Milken was asked to help finance a management buy-out. Before the buy-out was made public, Drexel eliminated a short position in Viacom stock by purchasing Viacom stock for its own account, and bought an additional amount of Viacom convertible subordinated debentures.    BOESKY ROLE: None.    REMARKS: Drexel was able to avoid a loss of about $1.78 million.    CHARGE: Fraud Against Drexel Clients   TRANSACTION: Maxxam Group/Pacific Lumber   DREXEL ROLE: Acted as investment banker for Maxxam. On the day Maxxam publicly announced a tender offer for Pacific Lumber, a dispute developed between Maxxam and Drexel over Drexel's compensation.    BOESKY ROLE: Under instructions from Drexel and Milken, purchased Pacific Lumber stock, sometimes at prices that exceeded Maxxam's tender offer price.    REMARKS: Drexel failed to disclose its secret purchases, and received $22 million in fees from Maxxam, reflecting, in part, the increased cost of the tender offer.    TRANSACTION: Wickes/National Gypsum   DREXEL ROLE: Consulted by Wickes on the possible acquisition of National Gypsum.    BOESKY ROLE: Under instructions from Drexel, purchased National Gypsum stock before Wickes's offer was made public.    REMARKS: Drexel failed to disclose to Wickes its purchases, some of which were made at prices higher than the Wickes offer. Boesky's purchases resulted in profits for Drexel of about $6.7 million. In addition, Drexel was paid about $1 million in connection with the attempted acquisition.    CHARGE: Stock Manipulation   TRANSACTION: Stone Container   DREXEL ROLE: Underwriter and manager of an offering of Stone securities that were to be convertible into common stock at a fixed premium over the closing price of Stone common stock on the day of the offering. (Stone told Drexel that it did not want to proceed with the offering until Stone shares reached $46-$48.)    BOESKY ROLE: At the instructions of a Milken aide, purchased Stone Container stock. On the day before the securities were eventually offered, Boesky's purchases accounted for over 37% of the volume in Stone shares.    REMARKS: The transactions in Stone common stock were done to create apparent active trading in, raise the price of, and induce the purchase of Stone stock and convertible securities.    TRANSACTION: Wickes Cos.    DREXEL ROLE: Underwrote an offering of Wickes convertible preferred stock that could be converted into common stock if Wickes common shares closed above a set price for at least 20 of any 30 consecutive trading days. (Wickes management wanted to call the preferred for conversion as soon as possible.)    BOESKY ROLE: Acting under the instructions of a Milken aide, purchased Wickes common stock after it had closed above the threshold on 19 of the previous 27 trading days.    REMARKS: The purchase allowed Wickes stock to close above the threshold price for conversion, and Wickes management was able to redeem the preferred stock. Drexel earned a fee of $2.3 million for agreeing to be stand-by underwriter for the redemption.    CHARGE: Failure to Disclose Beneficial Ownership   TRANSACTION: Fischbach   DREXEL ROLE: Arranged through Milken for Boesky to purchase 10% of Fischbach shares.    BOESKY ROLE: Purchased the shares and filed a schedule 13D reporting that his organization was the beneficial owner of the shares.    REMARKS: The purchases were part of a scheme that would allow Pennsylvania Engineering Corp., controlled by Victor Posner, to get around an agreement that limited its ownership of Fischbach to 24.9% unless a third party acquired 10% of the company. The 13-D should have listed Drexel and Pennsylvania Engineering as owners. Eventually, Pennsylvania Engineering acquired 51% of Fischbach's voting stock, and Victor Posner was made the company's chairman.    TRANSACTION: Harris Graphics   DREXEL ROLE: Drexel, Milken and various affiliated companies held substantial positions in Harris, much of which was acquired at $1 a share.    BOESKY ROLE: Under instructions from Milken, who guaranteed the Boesky organization against any loss, purchased 5% of Harris stock. Then, also at Milken's request, approached Harris management and offered to acquire the company.    REMARKS: Boesky should have stated in his 13D filing that Drexel was the beneficial owner of the shares. In addition, Milken reportedly did not care whether the Boesky offer was accepted; he was encouraging other Drexel clients to attempt to acquire the company. Eventually, AM International, a Drexel client, acquired Harris for $22 a share.    TRANSACTION: MGM/UA   DREXEL ROLE: Represented both MGM/UA and Turner Broadcasting in a deal for Turner to acquire MGM/UA for $29 a share and then sell UA.    BOESKY ROLE: Under instructions from Milken, purchased MGM/UA securities when the deal was announced and again when the deal had to be restructured. The profits or losses on the purchases were to be shared equally by Drexel and Boesky.    REMARKS: Boesky's filings failed to properly disclose that Drexel and Milken were the beneficial owners of the MGM/UA shares. Drexel received about $66 million in fees in connection with the TBS-MGM/UA transactions.    CHARGE: False and Misleading Books and Records -   TRANSACTION: MCA/Golden Nugget   DREXEL ROLE: In 1984, Drexel purchased Golden Nugget's stake in MCA after Golden Nugget, following Milken's advice, dropped a planned takeover bid for MCA.    BOESKY ROLE: At Milken's request, Boesky's broker-dealer Seemala Corp. agreed to purchase the MCA shares from Drexel. Drexel agreed to compensate Seemala for any losses in open market sales of the stock.    REMARKS: Drexel and Seemala's books didn't reflect Drexel and Milken's beneficial ownership of the securities.    TRANSACTION: Wickes Short Sales   DREXEL ROLE: At the direction of Milken and for the benefit of Drexel, Boesky's organization sold Wickes common stock short and engaged in covering transactions. Milken guaranteed Boesky's group against any losses.    BOESKY ROLE: Through Drexel, Boesky made a short sale of five million when-issued shares of Wickes common stock to Reliance Insurance.    REMARKS: Books kept by Drexel and Boesky's Seemala Corp. failed to reflect Drexel and Milken's beneficial ownership of the Wickes shares.    TRANSACTION: Tax-Loss Trades   DREXEL ROLE: In a series of rigged and prearranged March 1985 transactions, Drexel, Milken and Boesky sought to create fictitious tax losses for Boesky's Seemala Corp.    BOESKY ROLE: Drexel made purported sales of certain securities to the Boesky organization before the dividend record date, and immediately thereafter bought back the securities.    REMARKS: Drexel bore all market risk on the securities but neither it nor Seemala's records reflected Drexel's beneficial ownership.    TRANSACTION: Lorimar Short Sales   DREXEL ROLE: In 1986, while Lorimar was on its restricted list, Milken instructed Boesky to sell Lorimar common short for Drexel's benefit.    BOESKY ROLE: After the Lorimar-Telepictures merger, and its removal from Drexel's restricted list, Drexel sold short shares of the merged company to Boesky to cover Boesky's short position.    REMARKS: Drexel failed accurately to reflect on its books and records its beneficial ownership of Boesky's short position.    CHARGE: Aiding and Abetting Net Capital Violations   TRANSACTION: Phillips Petroleum   DREXEL ROLE: Bought Phillips stock in non-bona fide transactions from Seemala Corp., Boesky's company. Drexel held the stock in its own account or in customer accounts.    BOESKY ROLE: Seemala had sustained substantial losses in connection with some of its transactions undertaken for Drexel and in its own trading of Phillips common stock. The losses created a net capital deficiency of more than $50 million.    REMARKS: Milken and Boesky agreed that Drexel would be guaranteed against any loss and that any profits would be divided evenly between them. The Phillips transactions enabled Seemala to show a smaller capital deficiency, and Seemala was compensated for profits made on the Phillips transaction.    CHARGE: Fraud in Offering Materials   TRANSACTION: Hudson Funding Corp.    DREXEL ROLE: Drexel was placement agent and Milken was responsible for reorganization and debt offering in connection with the reorganization of Boesky's arbitrage operations.    BOESKY ROLE: Sold certain assets to Drexel at below market prices and arranged to pay Drexel a $5.3 million fee for consulting services.    REMARKS: The below-market sales and the consulting payment were actually a way for the Boesky organization to pay Drexel its share of trading profits from transactions undertaken by Boesky at Drexel's request. The offering materials falsely described the $5.3 million payment and did not report that Milken, Drexel and Boesky had violated securities laws.    Additional Charges Against Victor and Steven Posner   In addition to the Posners' violations involving Fischbach, Steven Posner contacted the Boesky organization and asked it to buy and hold shares in Burnup andamp; Sims as a favor to Victor Posner in return for a 20% return on the investment. At the time, Victor Posner and companies he controlled held over 5% of Burnup andamp; Sims common stock. Later, a Posner representative told an official of Burnup andamp; Sims that Burnup would have to buy shares owned by persons other than the Posner group as a part of any settlement. The schedule 13-D filed by the Posner group failed to disclose his ownership of Burnup shares held by the Boesky organization.    (See related story: &quot;The SEC's Case Against Drexel -- Street Fight: SEC Accuses Drexel Of a Sweeping Array Of Securities Violations --- Michael Milken, Victor Posner Are Also Cited as Agency Files Its Civil Complaint --- Using Ivan Boesky as a Front?&quot; -- WSJ Sept. 8, 1988)</TEXT></DOC>