<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870218-0045 </DOCNO><HL> Widening Horizons:Lawyers Lead HuntFor New GroupsOf Asbestos Victims---With Offers of Free X-Rays,Attorneys Solicit Seamen,Tire Workers and Others---Just Chasing Ambulances?---By Bill Richards and Barry MeierStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR GR FIR UK PFE NL FMC CYPMPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)RUBBER (RUB)INDUSTRIAL EQUIPMENT, MACHINE TOOLS (IND)TEXTILES AND APPAREL (TEX)TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA) </IN><TEXT>   Among the bills and throwaways stuffed in his mailbox one day last June, Joseph Abela found a letter about asbestos. &quot;You may be in danger of death,&quot; it warned.    Mr. Abela, a 60-year-old former merchant seaman in Detroit, says the idea of dying from asbestos poisoning hadn't crossed his mind up to then. Nor had the prospect -- also prominently mentioned in the letter -- of a damage award &quot;in the six-to seven-figure range.&quot; Following the letter's instructions, Mr. Abela joined other veteran seamen at a local medical clinic for free chest examinations. Within weeks, the clinic informed him his lungs showed asbestos damage.    &quot;It was a big word they used to say what I got,&quot; Mr. Abela says, struggling to pronounce &quot;asbestosis,&quot; a disease that can disable and kill. In any event, he adds, &quot;They told me my case is in the hands of the lawyers now.&quot;    In fact, Mr. Abela's recruitment into the ranks of asbestos litigants was engineered from the start by lawyers, not doctors. His case and thousands of similar lawsuits filed recently mark what legal and medical experts say is a major shift in product-liability tactics.    For the first time, lawyers are replacing research scientists at the head of the hunt for new asbestos victims. With tactics ranging from dragnet medical screenings to direct-mail solicitations, they are sweeping new groups of workers and companies into the asbestos fray and swamping court dockets, just as the 10-year flood of asbestos litigation seemed to be ebbing.    &quot;This is new-product development for asbestos litigators,&quot; says Calvert Crary, a litigation analyst for Bear, Stearns andamp; Co. With asbestos court awards averaging around $70,000, Mr. Crary says, asbestos lawyers &quot;are naturally looking to widen their sphere.&quot;    The lawyers say they hold out hope of treatment and legal redress to thousands of workers whose asbestos exposure has long been ignored by employers, government agencies and unions. But as the attorneys cross the line between law and medicine, their tactics are generating controversy as well as lawsuits. Critics say the screenings are nothing more than a sophisticated version of old-fashioned ambulance-chasing. Some medical experts also raise questions about the accuracy of the tests.    Nevertheless, the tactics are having a broad impact. &quot;There's no question we're concerned,&quot; says Floyd H. Knowlton, the vice president for casualty claims at Travelers Insurance Co. Mr. Knowlton says that until about six months ago, most of Travelers' asbestos claims came from shipyard workers who had worked directly with asbestos. &quot;Now,&quot; he says, &quot;they're coming from all over.&quot;    Two West Coast lawyers, for example, started a screening program last year that dispatched three rented vans equipped with mobile X-ray units to test tire workers at 72 union locals around the U.S. The result: nearly 1,000 new asbestos lawsuits with thousands more being readied. In another instance, lawyers were posted at a Seattle clinic where sheet-metal workers were being screened for asbestos problems. Unions representing steelworkers, machinists and school janitors are setting up similar screening programs.    Asbestos hazards, of course, have been known for decades. In the late 1920s, British researchers blamed the fibrous mineral for lung cancers and other respiratory diseases among textile workers who wove asbestos and inhaled its dust. Asbestos is now considered the leading cause of workplace-related cancer deaths, says William Nicholson, an epidemiologist at Mount Sinai School of Medicine in New York. And despite recent regulatory action sharply limiting asbestos use, the AFL-CIO estimates 2.5 million U.S. workers are still exposed to the deadly material.    Yet much of the asbestos epidemiology -- the scientific effort to identify groups at risk -- has been spotty. Medical investigators have aimed their efforts at presumed high-risk workers -- those who fabricated asbestos or installed it as insulation in ships and buildings. Most of the some 40,000 workers who have filed asbestos claims to date have been members of those groups.    &quot;In the past, a researcher might decide to study a certain occupational group or a guy in that group might decide to go see his local doctor,&quot; says Edward J. Carlough, the head of the Sheet Metal Workers International Association, which recently hired a South Carolina law firm to direct asbestos screenings for 33,000 sheet-metal workers. &quot;If the doctor was trained to spot asbestos problems, the worker might end up going to his lawyer.&quot;    The lawyers' new tactics seek to shorten that process. For example, Mr. Abela and other merchant seamen are now being tested by the Maritime Asbestos Legal Clinic, run by Detroit-based maritime lawyer Leonard Jaques. Mr. Jaques believes the sailors face special risks because they spend weeks at a time cooped up on ships filled with asbestos insulation.    Since September, Mr. Jaques has filed asbestos claims on behalf of more than 1,500 seamen in federal district court in Cleveland -- three times the number of asbestos cases filed in that court in the past three years. He plans to test 20,000 more seamen for asbestos damage.    Gordon Stemple, a Los Angeles-based plaintiffs' lawyer, stumbled on asbestos problems among tire workers in 1985. He says he was looking into allegations of chemical contamination of groundwater around a former Firestone Tire andamp; Rubber Co. plant in Salinas, Calif., at the time. Tire making hadn't previously been linked to asbestos, but X-rays of former tire workers who lived near the plant showed 54 of 84 workers had asbestos-like lung damage, Mr. Stemple says.    The lawyer believes the problem stemmed from industrial talc, a floury material used to make tires. Some talcs contain tremolite and anthophyllite, two fibrous minerals that can cause lung damage similar to asbestos.    Mr. Stemple quickly sent vans offering free chest X-rays to tire-worker union halls in 25 states. Should a worker's X-ray indicate lung damage, the lawyer urges him to sue. If workers use another lawyer, Mr. Stemple charges them $250 for the test. Most choose Mr. Stemple.    Richard L. Brown, a 41-year-old tire worker, was examined last June, after Mr. Stemple's van set up shop opposite Firestone's tire plant in Des Moines, Iowa. Technicians X-rayed Mr. Brown's chest from three directions and checked his lung capacity during the 30-minute exam. The test results came back four months later. Mr. Brown's wife, Sharon, opened the envelope. The diagnosis: asbestosis.    &quot;She was really shook up,&quot; recalls Mr. Brown, who is also a local union president. &quot;She kept saying, 'How come you never told me working in the plant was dangerous?' I told her no one ever told me until the lawyer showed up.&quot;    After his doctor confirmed the finding, Mr. Brown decided to hire Mr. Stemple to sue a group of industrial-talc manufacturers. &quot;Just because we make good money,&quot; Mr. Brown says angrily, &quot;that doesn't give people the right to endanger our health.&quot;    Tire makers and producers of industrial talc dispute claims that the compound causes asbestos damage or that tire workers were even exposed to talc containing asbestos. However, one major tire producer, B.F. Goodrich Co., says it uses asbestos to make adhesives at its big Akron, Ohio, tire plant. Both Goodrich and Firestone say they haven't found unusual numbers of lung disease cases among workers at their plants.    That hasn't deterred some 30 law firms from signing on with Mr. Stemple and his partner, San Diego attorney Richard F. Gerry, to take tire workers' cases. &quot;We're looking at the potential for more than 30,000 {tire-worker} cases,&quot; says Mr. Gerry, a former president of the Association of Trial Lawyers of America.    The tire workers' suits are aimed at many companies that haven't been linked to asbestos before. Among the targets named so far: Union Carbide Corp., Pfizer Inc., NL Industries, FMC Corp. and Cyprus Minerals Corp., all identified by workers as suppliers of talc or asbestos. Lawsuits filed by Mr. Jaques on behalf of merchant seamen name as defendants American Steamship Co., Lykes Brothers Steamship Co., U.S. Lines and other shipowners, more newcomers to such litigation.    Companies sued by the tire workers all deny wrongdoing or say they never made or sold talc containing asbestos to tire companies. Shipping companies also deny liability.    What's more, at the behest of some shipowners, the U.S. Coast Guard recently asked legal-ethics boards in the District of Columbia, Michigan and Pennsylvania to investigate the lawyers' links to direct-mail solicitations of seamen. Many letters feature an appeal from a retired Coast Guard admiral for seamen to seek free X-rays and legal help but don't mention Mr. Jaques's involvement. The Coast Guard regulates merchant shipping. The ethics boards declined to comment.    Maritime-union officials, meanwhile, complain that Mr. Jaques's mailings are laced with questionable claims. One letter, for example, attributes the 1980 cancer death of actor Steve McQueen to asbestos. Mr. McQueen was a merchant seaman for several years prior to his Hollywood career. &quot;We know what happened to Steve is happening to seamen of all waters,&quot; the letter warns. Although Mr. McQueen's relatives blamed asbestos for the actor's death, doctors said cigarette smoking and chemical exposure may have also played a role.    Mr. Jaques makes no apologies. He says his tactics are designed to counter efforts by shipowners and others to undermine his work. &quot;We're trying to ring a warning bell to seamen and we're going to ring it as loud as possible,&quot; he says.    Indeed, one of Mr. Jaques's allies is Irving Selikoff, a world-renowned researcher who first linked asbestos to lung cancer among U.S. workers. Recent research by Dr. Selikoff, financed by Mr. Jaques, found signs of asbestos-related disease in about 35% of some 2,300 former U.S. seamen tested.    Yet several attorneys, after reviewing Mr. Jaques's mailings, say the lawyer's enthusiasm may be carrying him overboard. In particular, they say, Mr. Jaques, by offering asbestos claimants visions of &quot;six-to seven-figure&quot; awards, might be violating the American Bar Association's model code of ethics, which bars lawyers from, among other things, creating &quot;unjustified expectations about the results a lawyer can achieve.&quot; Mr. Jaques rejects any suggestion of impropriety and maintains that large awards have been granted to asbestos victims in the past.    Medical experts have also challenged the results of some tire workers' asbestos tests. Since asbestos damage, especially in its earliest stages, is difficult to diagnose, trained experts, called B readers, usually interpret X-ray results. But critics say some B readers hired by plaintiffs' lawyers function as &quot;case finders&quot; as well as interpretive specialists.    Kaye H. Kilburn, an asbestos researcher at the University of Southern California School of Medicine, says a review of some tire-worker diagnoses showed they contained &quot;an outstanding number of errors.&quot; An Iowa law firm recently turned down nearly 1,000 tire-worker cases after a pulmonary specialist reexamined some workers and didn't find any problems.    But Messrs. Gerry and Stemple, who have spent over $2 million of their own money on the tire-worker program, stand by their test results. By spring, they say, their X-ray vans plan to start rolling again in the U.S. and Canada. The 1987 goal: screenings of 75,000 more tire workers. &quot;If we prove these cases in court, we make lots of money,&quot; Mr. Stemple says. &quot;If we don't, we lose big.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>