<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870312-0094 </DOCNO><HL> Under a Cloud:Tesoro and ChairmanFace a Host of ChargesIn a San Antonio Trial---Shareholder Suits for $1 BillionAccuse Robert V. WestOf Stock Manipulation---Case of the $3,100 Prostitute---By Steve FrazierStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TSO LATAMPETROLEUM (PET)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><DATELINE> SAN ANTONIO, Texas  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Finance ministers prefer blondes.    That was the message given to Peter Detwiler, the vice chairman of E.F. Hutton andamp; Co., when he undertook an unusual investment-banking assignment for a major client, Tesoro Petroleum Corp. According to court testimony, Tesoro's chairman, Robert V. West, instructed his investment banker to hire a prostitute -- preferably a blonde -- for the finance minister of Trinidad and Tobago, who was raising a tax matter that threatened to cut into profits.    Mr. Detwiler had a friend set up an interview at New York's Summit Hotel, where a prostitute was chosen, according to testimony by two former Tesoro officials and to information gathered during an internal company investigation. The woman traveled to Ottawa, Canada, for the encounter requested by George Chambers, Trinidad's finance minister, who later became the prime minister of the oil-producing island nation. To reimburse Mr. Detwiler, Tesoro's president signed an invoice attributing the $3,100 expense to &quot;professional services.&quot;    The oil concession became a cornerstone of Tesoro's growth -- &quot;the Trinidad success story,&quot; the company called it -- helping build Tesoro into an enterprise whose annual revenue eventually topped $3 billion. Its distinguished corps of directors included not only Mr. Detwiler but also Adm. Elmo R. Zumwalt Jr. and eventually former President Ford.    Today, as one of the nation's largest independent oil companies, Tesoro is struggling amid weak energy prices to live up to its name -- Spanish for &quot;treasure.&quot; Moreover, a federal-court case under way here threatens to dislodge Mr. West from his gilded perch.    The prostitute incident, which occurred a dozen years ago, is but one event in a pattern of unseemly activities unearthed by the plaintiffs. Mr. Detwiler declines to comment on the affair, and efforts to reach Mr. Chambers in Trinidad were unsuccessful. Mr. West has referred all questions to Tesoro's lawyers. But the incident remains unrefuted in the court record -- part of the public testimony, affidavits and internal documents showing a management that used questionable methods to build and then defend a corporate fiefdom.    The record in the federal-court trial, which began Feb. 11, is replete with stories of foreign payments to mysterious &quot;consultants,&quot; evidence of improper political contributions and tales of board-room dissent over alleged cover-ups. Other evidence describes the corporate lavishments of Mr. West, including his apartment in Tesoro's headquarters, where, according to testimony by one of his former secretaries, he carried on an affair with another former secretary that provoked angry outbursts by his wife in company hallways.    Even the limited, bland public disclosures of Tesoro's actions over the years were bound to draw the attention of litigation-minded shareholders. In the trial here, they are represented by Paul Rosen of Philadelphia, a combative, self-described &quot;corporate crime fighter&quot; who once sued a movie theater for admitting his underage daughters to an R-rated film.    In two suits seeking a total of $1 billion in damages, Mr. Rosen is trying to convince a jury of six that Mr. West secretly manipulated Tesoro's stock in 1982 in an abortive effort to take the company private at the cheapest possible price. According to Mr. Rosen, Mr. West was doing so mainly to avoid having to make further embarrassing disclosures about a federal grand jury investigating Mr. West for perjury and other charges. The grand jury never returned an indictment and dropped its investigation. But Mr. Rosen is trying hard to make issues of other alleged misdeeds by the company and its 65-year-old chairman, a Ph.D. in chemical engineering.    &quot;We will show you the sinister, dark side of Dr. West, not the side he shows the public,&quot; Mr. Rosen told the jury when the trial began. Mr. West was part of a &quot;cancer&quot; in Tesoro management, the lawyer charged, adding that the company's officials were &quot;racketeers&quot; consumed by &quot;greed, power and money.&quot;    But Mr. Rosen's own clients, the plaintiffs, also are under attack. Tesoro's chief trial lawyer, Richard B. Miller of Houston, has called them speculators who tried to make a killing in Tesoro stock by illegally using inside information. Tesoro hasn't yet had the opportunity to tell the jury its side of the story in detail. However, as the trial continues over the next several weeks, Mr. Miller, who is best known for representing Texaco Inc. in its $10 billion courtroom defeat by Pennzoil Co., plans to portray Tesoro as the hapless victim of greedy corporate raiders and slumping energy prices.    As for the charges against Mr. West and Tesoro, Mr. Miller concedes, &quot;Some of that stuff can't be defended on moral grounds.&quot; Mr. Miller says the prostitute incident, for example, occurred because Tesoro felt pressure from Trinidad officials. He also says any questionable payments were made to obtain profitable overseas business that benefited shareholders.    Nevertheless, Mr. Miller notes that Mr. West has never been charged with a crime. And the plaintiffs' contention that Tesoro set out to hurt shareholders is &quot;phony,&quot; Mr. Miller says. &quot;I think that our case is strong enough to survive all of this mud.&quot;    Already, the four-year-old lawsuits have cost Tesoro well over $7 million in legal fees and have become nearly as notable as the issues being litigated. Tesoro filed a separate suit in state court here charging that dissident shareholders stole documents from the company. (Tesoro lost the case.) And the plaintiffs failed in a bid to disqualify Mr. Miller from representing Tesoro; they had argued that, as Mr. West's longtime personal attorney, he should be called as a witness.    During a pretrial hearing, the mercurial Mr. Miller invited Mr. Rosen outside the courtroom to settle the matter by force. &quot;He called me a liar,&quot; Mr. Miller recalls. &quot;I don't let wimps like that say such things about me.&quot;    In any event, the jurors won't learn that Mr. Miller was Mr. West's personal attorney; after Judge H.F. &quot;Hippo&quot; Garcia denied the motion to disqualify Mr. Miller, he ordered both sides to refer to the Tesoro lawyer throughout the case as &quot;Randall Murphy.&quot; If the issue of &quot;Mr. Murphy's&quot; competence arises, Mr. Miller has an opinion ready: &quot;He did a hell of a job.&quot;    Mr. West began a drive to build Tesoro into a major company in the late 1960s, after several years of buying marginal oil properties. Tesoro joined with the government of Trinidad to buy British Petroleum Co.'s oil properties there. It also assembled an impressive portfolio of oil-service operations and refineries. And along the way, Mr. West's efforts brought him into contact with some intriguing characters.    Among the most shadowy was James Morgan, a weapons inventor introduced to Mr. West by a management consultant at Booz Allen andamp; Hamilton Inc. Mr. Morgan was seeking financing to build a super-rifle supposedly capable of destroying tanks. Tesoro initially declined to finance the venture, but the relationship didn't end there. Mr. Morgan's girlfriend had served in the Bolivian government and had high-reaching connections there with the potential to help expand Tesoro's domain of foreign oil properties. Her name was Sara LeSignour (the spelling varies in the documents).    &quot;Every story should have a mysterious woman, and I think Sara LeSignour is the mysterious woman in this story,&quot; Charles Roberts, Tesoro's former general counsel, testified. Nevertheless, Tesoro engaged the couple, and, Mr. Miller, Tesoro's lawyer, says, &quot;They opened doors down there right and left.&quot; Tesoro and its partners soon obtained valuable oil concessions.    To compensate Mr. Morgan, according to voluminous court testimony and SEC filings, Tesoro paid him a total of $400,000. In 1974, it guaranteed a $200,000 loan, which he never has repaid, for his weapons company. In addition, Tesoro's financial department was one day startled to receive an urgent phone call from the vault at Security Pacific National Bank in Los Angeles, where Mr. West was helping Mr. Morgan get a $200,000 Tesoro check cashed.    Later, Mr. Morgan held a meeting at his home for Mr. West, Miss LeSignour and the head of Bolivia's national oil company. According to testimony given by Mr. Morgan to the federal grand jury and later described into code by a federal court, Mr. West handed the Bolivian official a briefcase containing the $200,000 in cash. &quot;Here's your two hundred thousand,&quot; Mr. West said, according to Mr. Morgan's testimony to the grand jury. &quot;We counted it at the bank, but we can count it again if you want.&quot;    Tesoro denies bribing Bolivian officials; it terms the $200,000 a legitimate finder's fee for the weapons inventor.    However, Tesoro's defense is limited by the absence of any contracts documenting the couple's role as &quot;finders.&quot; Mr. Miller told the jury that it wasn't unusual that Tesoro never put the arrangement in writing. &quot;People in the East,&quot; he said in his opening argument, don't understand that &quot;even today, there are big deals struck in the oil business on a handshake.&quot; It was an ironic comment from Texaco's former trial lawyer who, in 1985, spent months disparaging Pennzoil's contention that it had a contract to buy Getty Oil Co. even though the detailed paper work never was completed.    Tesoro's largess went far beyond Bolivia. The testimony by Charles Roberts, Tesoro's former general counsel, and pretrial and trial documents described questionable payments in Trinidad, including a $2 million &quot;finder's fee&quot; to obtain the company's original investment -- which itself had cost only $50,000. Other evidence, including notes made during the company's internal investigation, describes the procurement of &quot;paid female companionship&quot; -- Judge Garcia has banned the words &quot;hooker&quot; and &quot;prostitute&quot; from his courtroom -- and the purported use of a slush fund administered by a well-connected Swiss lawyer whom the plaintiffs call &quot;Lucky Pierre.&quot; In the U.S., Tesoro improperly reimbursed company officials for political contributions and made available its assets -- from its jet plane to postage stamps -- to Republican political candidates favored by Mr. West, according to the company's later reports to the Securities and Exchange Commission.    Then, in 1976, came an Internal Revenue Service questionnaire asking multinationals about payments abroad. The IRS demand for disclosure rattled many companies, but in few did it set off such strife as at Tesoro.    Mr. Roberts, then Tesoro's general counsel, had heard rumors about bribes to Bolivian officials and urged his colleagues to report everything, he testified. Mr. West refused; instead, Mr. Roberts testified, Mr. West tried to silence him.    &quot;Bob West chewed me out in no uncertain terms because he said I was acting like a prosecuting attorney,&quot; Mr. Roberts testified. &quot;Bob West got very, very heavy with me.&quot; During the dispute, Mr. Roberts prepared a memorandum saying, &quot;Bob West continues to insist he does not know where the money went and does not care and is not interested in finding out.&quot;    Meanwhile, Mr. West was facing increasing problems, business and personal. The company's investment in Commonwealth Refining Co. had soured, producing gushers of red ink; Tesoro reacted by selling valuable properties. And, according to testimony by Maureen Bates, one of Mr. West's secretaries, he had moved out of his house and into a penthouse apartment at company headquarters with another secretary, Helen Boecking. Mrs. Bates testified that Mr. West's wife would sneak up nine flights of stairs to bypass a receptionist and burst into Mr. West's office, interrupting meetings and demanding to know what was going on between him and Miss Boecking.    Mr. West's private life might never have become an issue, except that it began to concern the company's board. In an angry telegram to fellow directors, John Rote, the chairman of the executive committee, protested that the use of corporate property for Mr. West's personal affairs was disrupting company business as well as risking shareholder suits. &quot;I am further proposing that our chief executive officer voluntarily and quietly arrange the immediate removal of a certain person from the company's payroll.&quot; Miss Boecking eventually became the new Mrs. West. Mr. Rote soon afterward left the board.    Meanwhile, more information about Tesoro's overseas payments was being unearthed by an internal investigation begun in 1977 under SEC pressure. The SEC inquiry reawakened the IRS, which reviewed the information obtained by the SEC and decided that Mr. West might have lied in his initial denials of foreign payoffs. The IRS turned over evidence to a grand jury, which began investigating Mr. West for perjury, obstruction of justice and conspiracy to defraud the government.    Once again, Mrs. Bates, the chairman's previous secretary, was ensnared in controversy. When she informed her boss that the IRS wanted copies of his desk diaries, Mr. West erupted in anger, she testified. He demanded that she leave them with him; they disappeared, she testified.    There weren't any indications to the public that Tesoro's board questioned Mr. West's handling of the federal investigations. Indeed, a plaintiffs' lawyer told the jury that when Mr. West was forced to pay the IRS $100,000 for personal use of company assets, the board gave him a $100,000 bonus.    Clearly, Tesoro remained largely a one-man show. And Mr. West, it appears, was intent on keeping it that way.    By 1980, rising oil prices lifted Tesoro's fortunes. The huge losses at Commonwealth Oil were abating. Tesoro's oil-field-equipment rental business was thriving. Tesoro suddenly became a takeover target. Acquisition-minded Diamond Shamrock Inc. quietly made an offer of $35 to $38 a share, a premium of about 40% over Tesoro's stock price, Mr. Rosen says the testimony will show.    Although Tesoro was the subject of widespread takeover speculation, shareholders were never told the details of the Diamond Shamrock offer, nor about an overture from Occidental Petroleum Co. Tesoro called on its friends in Trinidad, including several officials who had received questionable payments from the company, to issue a statement warning off potential suitors. As takeover speculation eased, Tesoro's stock price sank, angering shareholders. Mr. West called in Lazard Freres andamp; Co., an investment-banking concern, to formulate a restructuring proposal.    All this time, Tesoro had been waging a secret court battle to avoid handing over documents to the grand jury investigating Mr. West. Finally, in April 1982, a federal appeals court handed down an unusual decision -- written in code to keep the grand-jury investigation secret. The court ordered an unidentified &quot;corporation&quot; to hand over documents prepared by former corporate counsel &quot;Y.&quot; The decision quoted an affidavit by &quot;X&quot; saying the chairman of the &quot;corporation&quot; had given $200,000 in cash to a foreign official.    The publication of the opinion touched off this newspaper's search for the identity of the anonymous &quot;corporation.&quot; Eventually, the paper identified it as Tesoro, although details of the payments and the countries involved remained obscured.    Amid the unwanted publicity, a restructuring plan promised to shareholders a few months earlier began to unravel. Part of the plan called for Mr. West to take control of a big portion of the company, which would become privately held. But according to Adm. Zumwalt's deposition and other court filings, a special board committee headed by Adm. Zumwalt was told by outside counsel that the going-private aspect of the plan would require full-blown disclosure of the grand-jury investigation. And if indictments were handed up, the lawyers told Adm. Zumwalt, the company could risk seizure of its assets in countries where questionable payments had been paid.    Meanwhile, Mr. Miller, the attorney now defending Tesoro, apparently was urging Mr. West to resist further disclosures. Mr. Miller was saying &quot;the very existence of the disclosure would create an enhanced risk of indictment and, therefore, his personal liability,&quot; Robert Osborne, counsel to the Zumwalt committee, testified in a pre-trial deposition.    Although the committee concluded that the plan should be scuttled, the plaintiffs insist that Mr. West continued to favor going private. In a meeting with an outside lawyer, Mr. West &quot;noted that the company has experienced a number of problems because of its high profile in the press,&quot; according to a memo written by the lawyer. He quoted Mr. West as saying that the grand-jury matter &quot;could be handled more effectively by a low-profile, private company.&quot;    The plaintiffs contend that Adm. Zumwalt's decision not to endorse the going-private plan led Mr. West to develop a new proposal for Tesoro to buy back its own shares in a self-tender offer. Such a repurchase wouldn't require additional disclosures and would help Mr. West's purported drive to head a privately held company.    But instead of announcing the share-buyback plan right away, Tesoro disclosed a plan to split the company into two parts. The plaintiffs call it a &quot;sham&quot; restructuring plan that, they say, was intended to disappoint investors, drive down the stock price and make the real plan, the share repurchase, less expensive. The publicly announced plan, in fact, couldn't have been carried out until the grand-jury matter had been settled, but that condition was never disclosed to investors. The board agreed that there would be &quot;nothing in writing&quot; about this contingency, according to an internal memo filed with a pre-trial motion.    The two-company plan was announced May 27, 1982. The plan was vague, investors complained, and Tesoro's stock quickly plunged more than 25%. By July, the plan was abandoned. That month, the company went ahead with a self-tender for five million shares at a price well below what the company would have had to pay only a few months earlier.    After sustaining hundreds of thousands of dollars of losses, two shareholders with a combined investment of nearly $5 million in Tesoro stock contacted Mr. Rosen, who filed suit in September 1982. Before long, Mr. West asked Adm. Zumwalt to decline to run for reelection to the board, explaining that their &quot;very friendly relationship&quot; had deteriorated because of &quot;friction&quot; over disclosure issues, according to the admiral's deposition.    Tesoro denies that disclosure issues dominated the company's plans in early 1982. In a pre-trial motion to have the case dismissed, Tesoro argued that it had already mentioned the grand-jury investigation in its SEC filings and that &quot;even a child could understand from that information that Dr. West was under investigation.&quot; But when former President Ford replaced Adm. Zumwalt on the board, he testified in a deposition, he read the SEC filings and never got the impression that Mr. West was the target of the criminal investigation.    In 1984, the grand jury dropped the investigation without indicting Mr. West. The case, the company's Mr. Miller says, was &quot;less than flimsy.&quot; He adds that any additional disclosures about the fruitless investigation would have harmed shareholders more than informed them.    As pre-trial maneuvering continued in courts from Philadelphia to San Antonio, several defendants were dropped from the case. Among them were Adm. Zumwalt and Irving Kristol, a conservative writer who is a contributor to this newspaper's editorial page and is another former Tesoro director. Lazard Freres settled out of the case by returning to Tesoro a $1 million investment-banking fee paid for its work on the aborted restructuring plan.    Mr. Miller admits to worrying about the &quot;cumulative effect&quot; on the jury of the stories of corporate corruption. But he remains confident of proving that falling oil prices -- not some secret, convoluted manipulation -- depressed Tesoro's stock. If Mr. Miller knocks down the complicated stock-manipulation charges, the rest of the plaintiffs' case could quickly unravel. Fresh from the Pennzoil-Texaco case, Mr. Miller has another &quot;bet-the-company case&quot; -- his specialty -- on his hands. In the Tesoro litigation, &quot;Our case isn't perfect,&quot; he says, &quot;but it's pretty strong.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>