<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871117-0086 </DOCNO><HL> The Reagan Legacy -- Mixed Report:Reagan's Fiscal PolicyMay Blight the FutureDespite Current Gains---Huge Debts Due to Budget,Trade Deficits Are SeenCutting Living Standards---But 'Misery Index' Is Down---By Alan Murray and Ellen HumeStaff Reporters of The Wall Street  Journal</HL><DD> 11/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMT TAXESECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>      {First of a Series}   WASHINGTON -- Seven years under President Reagan have brought increased prosperity to the majority of Americans. But the uncertainties reflected in the stock-market crash raise a question: How sound are the gains?    To the Reagan administration, the president's legacy is clear and lasting. The economy has been growing since November 1982, in the longest peacetime expansion in U.S. history. The &quot;misery index&quot; -- inflation plus unemployment -- is down to about 11% after reaching a peak of 20.6% at the end of the Carter years. Millions more Americans are employed than ever before. Affluence is at an all-time high.    However, the benefits of recent growth have fallen disproportionately on the wealthy. The pretax-income gap between rich and poor has widened substantially, leaving the distribution of cash income &quot;more unequal than it has been at any time since World War II,&quot; says Isabelle Sawhill of the Washington-based Urban Institute. The poverty rate, at 13.6% of the population, remains higher than it was during the Carter, Ford or Nixon administrations. And the number of children living below the poverty level has soared.    Moreover, Mr. Reagan has presided over changes in the economy, including unprecedented budget and trade deficits, that could blight the future. &quot;Morning in America may involve a pretty rough hangover,&quot; says Lawrence Summers, a Harvard economist.    The most lasting monuments to the Reagan economic policies are likely to be the twin mountains of debt caused by the budget and trade deficits of recent years. &quot;There's no way President Reagan can escape the legacy of leaving office with a multitrillion-dollar government debt and a multibillion-dollar foreign debt,&quot; says Ruben F. Mettler, the chairman of TRW Inc. &quot;The consequences are unquestionably serious.&quot;    The uncertainty created by that debt raises fears that the current prosperity will prove fleeting. If the stock-market crash turns out to be a precursor of recession, many of the economic gains under President Reagan may disappear before he leaves office. And even if a recession is avoided, the need to pay off the accumulated debt suggests that Americans' standard of living will grow more slowly in the future than it has in the past.    Surprisingly, Mr. Reagan's economic policies have frustrated even some staunch supporters. The president promised a revolutionary reduction in the federal government's role. But Murray Weidenbaum, former chairman of President Reagan's Council of Economic Advisers, says &quot;the great disappointment&quot; of the Reagan presidency &quot;is that the federal government, objectively measured, is a bigger presence in the American economy today than when Jimmy Carter left office.&quot;    Adds William Niskanen, another former member of the president's council: &quot;In the end, there was no Reagan revolution.&quot;    Treasury Secretary James Baker, however, argues that President Reagan changed the terms of the debate on government spending. &quot;It became not a question of whether but of when and how&quot; to cut spending, he argues. And while acknowledging that deficits are a problem, Mr. Baker blames Congress, where Democrats have controlled the House for Mr. Reagan's entire two terms and now control the Senate as well. &quot;We have a government of shared power,&quot; Mr. Baker says. &quot;Congress spends money, the president doesn't.&quot;    When Mr. Reagan came into office in 1981, he pledged to restore economic growth by conquering inflation, slashing tax rates, cutting government spending, reducing regulation and raising the U.S. standing in the world economy. As he approaches the last year of his presidency, here are some of the economic successes and problems that he will leave for his successor.    Economic Growth   The Reagan years began with the deepest recession since World War II, but that has been followed by an unusually long recovery. As a result, the average annual growth rate during the past seven years has been about 2.5%, slightly above the average growth of 2.2% during the previous seven years, although still well below the average for most of the postwar period.    Income per person, adjusted for inflation, grew at an average annual rate of 1.8% during the first six Reagan years. That trails the growth through most of the postwar period but tops the annual average in the inflation-ridden Carter years.    Olivier Jean Blanchard, an economist at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, believes that deficit spending is partly responsible for the length and strength of the current economic expansion. Though publicly disavowing the prescriptions of John Maynard Keynes, the British economist who advocated deficit spending to spur growth, the president appears to have put Keynesian policies into action.    The outlook for growth remains clouded. The president said tax cuts would spark a surge of investment and savings. But in fact, investment has been lackluster, partly because of world-wide gluts of productive capacity in many industries. And the personal savings rate dropped to 3.9% in 1986 from 7.1% in 1980, partly because many Americans are trying to maintain standards of living that they can no longer afford.    Inflation   Among business people and economists, taming inflation is usually cited as the premier accomplishment of economic policy over the past seven years. The consumer price index was rising at a 13.5% annual pace in 1980 and seemed to be spiraling out of control. Last year, the annual inflation rate got as low as 1.9%, but now it has rebounded a bit to a range of 4% to 5%.    Much of the credit goes to Paul Volcker, the recently departed Federal Reserve Board chairman appointed by President Carter. But the Reagan administration did generally support Mr. Volcker's tough anti-inflation policies, at least until the latter half of 1982. &quot;We had a president who hung in there with him and for most of the time did not accede to those in the administration who wanted to do weekly Fed-bashing,&quot; Treasury Secretary Baker says.    &quot;I give a lot of the credit to Paul Volcker for busting the back of inflation,&quot; says Willard Butcher, the chairman of Chase Manhattan Bank, &quot;but it was not inconsistent with the Reagan administration's policies.&quot;    Some conservative economists question whether inflation can remain so low as long as budget deficits are so high. &quot;Until the deficit is dealt with, you really haven't licked the inflation problem,&quot; says Robert Lucas, a University of Chicago conservative. &quot;Inflation arises from the tendency of government to use the money machine to fill the gap between spending and taxes. Sooner or later, that may happen.&quot;    Taxing and Spending   Perhaps the most dramatic accomplishment of the Reagan years has been the sharp reduction in the top personal-income-tax rate from 70% when the president took office to 28% effective next year (33% for some upper-income taxpayers). Many economists believe that change, over time, could spur economic activity and entrepreneurship. &quot;It's a big plus,&quot; says Mancur Olson of the University of Maryland.    But the president's success in cutting taxes hasn't been matched by success in cutting spending. Although administration officials blame Congress, lawmakers in fact granted much of what the president asked for during the early years of his administration. The problem arose because the administration wanted huge increases in defense, which accounts for nearly a third of the budget, at the same time it was trying to reduce overall spending. &quot;The federal government was being put on a diet while the Defense Department was raiding the refrigerator,&quot; says Alan Blinder, a liberal economist at Princeton.    For most of his two terms, moreover, the president ruled out as politically impossible any cuts in Social Security; that took an additional one-fifth of the budget off the cutting table. And he found himself inescapably saddled with rapidly rising interest payments on a gross federal debt that has grown to $2.3 trillion this year from about $900 billion in 1980. By 1986, interest payments were soaking up 14% of the federal budget, compared with 9% in 1980.    &quot;I don't think you can say what the Reagan legacy is,&quot; says Robert Reischauer of the Brookings Institution, a Washington think tank, &quot;until you see how the deficit problem is resolved.&quot;    Regulation   President Reagan promised to scale back government regulation. He started out with a splash by imposing an immediate moratorium on all new federal regulations, appointing anti-regulation administrators to agencies and establishing a regulatory-relief task force headed by Vice President George Bush.    But for all the early activity, the results have been marginal. President Reagan couldn't match the big successes of the Carter and Ford administrations, which deregulated the airline and trucking industries. And the huge trade deficits partly created by his policies, coupled with a desire to head off broad protectionist legislation by Congress, forced him to adopt some severe curbs on various sectors of international trade. &quot;Although there was some decrease in the regulation of business,&quot; Mr. Niskanen says, &quot;this was offset by an increase in the regulation of trade.&quot;    Michael Fix, a regulatory expert at the Urban Institute, concludes that the administration's high-priority efforts to cut back health, environmental and safety regulations backfired. &quot;If anything,&quot; he says, &quot;they've set in motion a counter-revolution which will reduce the discretion available to regulators in the future.&quot;    Nevertheless, some businessmen say President Reagan deserves credit for at least slowing the growth of new business regulation. &quot;When somebody has a blowtorch on you and then they turn it off, it feels pretty good,&quot; says Roger Smith, the chairman of General Motors Corp.    International Economy   During President Reagan's first term, as throughout most of American history, the U.S. pursued independent economic policies with little regard for their effect on the rest of the world. The Federal Reserve tightened credit to fight inflation, while the administration generated huge budget deficits as a result of its tax cuts and its inability to reduce spending. The result was high interest rates, which in turn drew money from all over the world, pushed up the dollar's value and created yawning trade deficits.    U.S. manufacturing industries were badly battered, in part by the soaring dollar, and the nation quickly became addicted to foreign capital. The U.S. trade deficit quadrupled to $156 billion in 1986 from $36.2 billion in 1980. To finance those deficits, the nation has become more dependent than ever on money provided by the Japanese, the Europeans and other foreigners. The U.S. has been transformed almost overnight from the world's largest creditor nation into its largest debtor, with total debt owed to foreigners likely to hit a trillion dollars by the early 1990s.    &quot;The long-run implication of Reagan's policies was to make the U.S. a genuinely interdependent part of the world,&quot; says Robert Z. Lawrence of the Brookings Institution. &quot;That's the exact opposite of their intention.&quot;    New York Democratic Sen. Daniel Moynihan put it succinctly earlier this year, when he said history will remember the Reagan years of the 1980s as a decade when the U.S. &quot;borrowed a trillion dollars from the Japanese and threw a party.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>