<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871216-0124 </DOCNO><HL> Season's Tidings:Christmas Sales' LackOf Momentum TestsStore Manager's Mettle---Marshall Field's Linda KoslowDeals With UncertaintiesCaused by Stock Market---'Tis the Time for Promotions---By Francine SchwadelStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> RETAILING (RET) </IN><DATELINE> OAK BROOK, Ill.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Imagine throwing a party and not having a clue about how many guests will show up.    That predicament faces Linda Koslow almost every day of this Christmas shopping season. As general manager of the Marshall Field's department store in this affluent Chicago suburb, she depends on being able to predict shoppers' whims. But this year has been an unusual challenge for retail managers like Miss Koslow: No one knew how much consumers' spending would be affected by October's stock-market crash.    &quot;It's not something we had a whole lot of experience living through before, so we didn't know what to expect,&quot; says the 37-year-old Miss Koslow.    In this uncertain season, jittery retailers around the country started slashing prices so aggressively that Christmas 1987 is one of the most promotional in recent memory. But the discounts so far are producing only spotty results, with overall sales only marginally above last year's.    The five-week Christmas season is usually a pressure-packed period for retailers. At Field's in Oak Brook, it accounts for about a quarter of the store's $90 million in annual sales and an even larger share of profits. Miss Koslow works 10 hours a day, six days a week. In retailing, she says, &quot;The first 10 months of the year are a dress rehearsal for the last two.&quot;    But sales this season have been more erratic than usual, testing the limits of retailers' Christmas spirit. On the Friday after Thanksgiving at Miss Koslow's Field's store, when special two-hour discounts drew big crowds that produced a spectacular double-digit sales increase, she was ecstatic. The following day, when the crowds thinned and sales fell below last year's, her mood darkened.    Her store's poor performance in early November made her so apprehensive that, on Thanksgiving night, she dreamed about a day when strong winds prevented shoppers from carrying their packages out to their cars.    Miss Koslow's job as general manager of the third-largest emporium in the 25-store Field's chain puts her on the front lines of the retail industry's biggest battle of the year. It means overseeing a staff that swells by over 400, to more than 1,300 people, at the height of the holiday season. Her biggest responsibility is keeping expenses in line with sales trends. Since she doesn't control prices, she mostly adjusts staffing levels to accomplish her goals. She also tries to bolster sales by pumping up morale, moving hot merchandise to prime locations and reacting to the competition in the shopping mall where the Field's store is situated.    Even before the stock-market debacle, Miss Koslow, a snappy dresser known around the company as the always-approachable Kos, wasn't expecting sales this year to rise as robustly as they did last Christmas. In 1986, Miss Koslow was so thrilled by her totals that she toasted her managers with champagne on Christmas Eve.    Executives at Marshall Field's, a unit of B.A.IT Industries PLC of London, were sobered by the Oct. 19 market crash. Like other retailers, they concluded that consumer confidence would plunge along with stock prices and that sales would suffer.    So they started revamping their Christmas plans in anticipation of an even tougher selling climate in the first half of 1988. To make way for fresh merchandise that will be the key to their strategy next year, they decided to liquidate as much inventory as possible in December. That meant discounting many items more aggressively and earlier than usual. It also meant shaving a few percentage points off their original forecast of holiday sales rising 6% to 8% above last year's.    Miss Koslow had drawn up her holiday staffing plans on the assumption that her store's sales would rise 7% above last year's. But in early November she cut her forecast to a meager 3% gain -- not even enough to cover the increase in prices -- and she decided to hire about 50 fewer seasonal sales clerks than she had planned.    The stock market wasn't the only bad news. An Election Day coat sale on Nov. 3 had flopped, partly because of warm weather, which depressed sales of winter goods.    The same week, the store's consumer electronics department was dismantled when Field's ended its leasing agreement with an electronics supplier. That left Miss Koslow scrambling to fill the old electronics area with stuffed animals from her stockrooms. It also made year-to-year sales comparisons more difficult, as last year's numbers included higher-priced electronic goods.    Miss Koslow, who views cheerleading as a big part of her job, was crestfallen. She had planned to lead a Christmas pep rally that weekend, but she postponed it. &quot;I didn't want to send the wrong message,&quot; she says. &quot;I didn't want the managers focusing on a party when we were getting them to have fewer {sales} people on the floor.&quot;    She finally held the party on the Saturday before Thanksgiving. The store's managers performed a goofy skit about a new Field's store opening in Andy Griffith's fictional hometown of Mayberry. Then, clutching white Mistletoe teddy bears that Field's sells for Christmas, they led more than 200 of the store's employees in a musical wish list. To the tune of &quot;White Christmas,&quot; they sang about their hopes for a holiday &quot;just like the one we had last year.&quot;    &quot;It's going to be a great season,&quot; Miss Koslow shouted at the end of the program. &quot;Let's do it.&quot; Later, she privately was less effusive: &quot;Nobody knows if people are going to start shopping again and when,&quot; she conceded.    To her relief, sales perked up at Miss Koslow's store on the Friday after Thanksgiving. A special two-hour sale -- featuring discounts as deep as 50% on down comforters, sweaters, dresses, toys, gold chains and pearl strands, table linens and boxed Christmas cards -- drew early-morning crowds that make Miss Koslow squeal with delight.    Soon after the sale ended, she checked out the competition around the mall. Compared with Saks Fifth Avenue, which had marked down much of its merchandise by 25%, she decided that her store had more traffic. At Neiman-Marcus, she eyed the only two customers in the jewelry department and figured things didn't look good. At I. Magnin, she whispered, &quot;It's kind of quiet here.&quot; Lord andamp; Taylor looked busier, but she pronounced an empty apparel department &quot;spooky.&quot;    In the first skirmish for customers of the Christmas season, Miss Koslow declared her store the winner. Shoppers would probably fan out over the mall as the day progressed, but she was still pleased. &quot;Everybody's got stuff on sale,&quot; she said. &quot;The trick is to get shoppers in your building and keep them there.&quot;    By late afternoon, when her secretary started tallying each department's 3 p.m. sales total, Miss Koslow gushed: &quot;I haven't had a good day like this to brag about in a long time.&quot;    So that is exactly what she did. She called the manager at the chain's flagship store in Chicago. She called her boss. She even called the manager at Saks, which is also owned by B.A.T.    The next morning, the printer in the store's basement computer office spit out a detailed report of Friday's sales volume. The total was 26% higher than last year's.    Later, over coffee, she perused the printouts, looking for hot spots. One was contemporary men's clothing -- an area that had gotten a lot of her attention lately. In anticipation of the opening of a new Bigsby andamp; Kruthers men's store in the mall in early November, she had worked with her staff to beef up her selection and presentation of European-cut clothing. When the new store opened, she liked its looks and predicted that it might make business tougher for Field's. Looking over her post-Thanksgiving numbers, she concluded happily that the new shop hadn't hurt her store.    But Friday's bonanza was short-lived. On Saturday, the crowds were thin, despite discounts of 20% to 50% on certain items. Miss Koslow fretted about the steady rain, which she said might be keeping shoppers away.    The 3 p.m. readings confirmed her fears. She glanced at the figures, then started flipping through a Field's Christmas catalog. Pressed for an assessment, she finally said: &quot;It doesn't look like we'll make our plan.&quot;    She didn't. Sales on Saturday fell 6.5% from last year's level. On Sunday, the store rang up a 4.4% gain. The result was a respectable 9.5% increase for the three-day weekend, and Miss Koslow seemed pleased.    During the next two weeks, the pattern was steadier, but the sales gains were more modest. Nevertheless, the totals exceeded Miss Koslow's conservative expectations. &quot;She's upbeat because we're still holding our own,&quot; explained Candy Greener, an assistant general manager. &quot;We're doing better than a lot of other stores.&quot;    Still, this Christmas so far has been one of the most unsettling of Miss Koslow's 17 seasons in retailing. She started out as a jewelry sales clerk at a Famous-Barr department store in St. Louis. She didn't intend to spend her life in stores. But after she got a taste of management in the candy department, she was hooked.    Later, she moved to Chicago as a bra and girdle buyer for Field's. But she soon switched to store management and worked her way up three years ago to her current post. &quot;She brings an enthusiasm and a very positive attitude to the job,&quot; says Mary Krejci, a housewares manager who has worked at the store since it opened 25 years ago.    General managers of Field's stores earn as much as $100,000 a year. They also get free use of green vans that double as store delivery trucks. Miss Koslow says hers sticks out a like sore thumb among the BMWs in the parking lot of the loft building where she lives in Chicago.    The key to Miss Koslow's strategy this Christmas has been flexibility. She trained more seasonal employees than usual as &quot;flyers&quot; who can move around the store and work in any department. &quot;I'm funding anybody that's cooking,&quot; she has told her managers repeatedly.    To compensate for slow-moving categories like women's apparel, she has focused on getting more hot goods into her store. When coated-fabric handbags made by Liz Claiborne started selling briskly, for instance, one of her assistants persuaded a buyer to ship $18,000 of the merchandise to Oak Brook from two other Field's stores.    Miss Koslow has also tried to pump up sales by making some last-minute floor moves. In the men's sweater department, she had two islands of display cases ripped out to make room for display cubes that hold more merchandise. She also created a department for a new women's sportswear label called Multiples, replacing Coca-Cola clothing, which had fizzled.    As general manager, Miss Koslow doesn't have complete control over her store's profits because she doesn't control prices. Those are dictated by the company's buyers, who also adjust their plans as the season progresses. The day after Thanksgiving, for instance, the buyers ordered an emergency markdown of 40% on a line of women's sportswear. The following week, they slashed 33% from the price of slow-moving Mistletoe Bears.    Miss Koslow, meanwhile, has concentrated on the details of running a big store. She has cruised the store's four floors several times a day to check staffing levels and displays, stopping along the way to pick up candy wrappers and empty hangers and to give shoppers directions.    On busy days, she has spent a few hours in the store's administrative office, collecting surplus cash, making change for her department managers and getting a feel for the day's results. On a Saturday in early December, for instance, she learned that Louis Vuitton handbags, priced between $175 and $285, were selling briskly. &quot;There's no recession, not at Oak Brook anyway,&quot; she concluded.    But despite such momentary triumphs, the Christmas season is a grind. At one point, Miss Koslow complained about not having been to the grocery store in so long that &quot;my cat and I are sharing Meow Mix.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>