<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880811-0022 </DOCNO><HL> States: Making Government Work -- Made in Michigan: State Goes All-Out To Nuture Start-Ups By New Manufacturers --- Public Oil and Gas Revenues Are 'Seed Money' Source, And Funds Offer Capital --- But What if Economy Falls? </HL><AUTHOR> Rose Gutfeld and Eugene Carlson (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT </CO><IN> IND </IN><TEXT>      {Last in a Series}   BEAR LAKE, Mich. -- John Mrozinski, a former boat builder, knew fiberglass. If the stuff makes solid boats, he figured, why not glass coffins? &quot;They're lighter than metal caskets, so it's less of a burden on pall bearers,&quot; he says. &quot;And it saves on air freight.&quot;    Mr. Mrozinski now devotes full time to his casket business. The state of Michigan has a big stake in keeping it alive. The state provided half the $4 million in capital of Diamond Venture Associates, which helped put Mr. Mrozinksi into caskets with an $80,000 equity investment in his business.    Seed money like this is just one element in Michigan's effort to develop new industry. Michigan is hardly the only place where state government has taken an activist approach to economic development. Among others, Pennsylvania's Ben Franklin Partnership and Ohio's Thomas Edison programs augment private funds with grants for applied research projects at universities and for education and training efforts by private firms. But Michigan has embraced economic development with a passion rivaled by few others.    Five years ago, amid predictions that America was entering a post-industrial age, Michigan decided that its economic salvation lay in manufacturing, not in turning its factory workers into computer programmers and medical technicians. Today, from the capital complex not far from a General Motors Corp. assembly plant, a cadre of government whiz kids oversees an economic development program that lavishes advice and money on manufacturers of everything from blood-testing machines to chrome car bumpers.    Aided by a healthy boost from the business cycle, the effort is paying off in new investment and new jobs. It is also weakening Michigan's reputation as the bluest of blue-collar states, an anti-business bastion of high costs and high frustration. &quot;We think they're doing a super job,&quot; says Miles Friedman, executive director of the National Association of State Development Agencies in Washington. &quot;We've held Michigan up as an example to other states.&quot; Heady praise for a state that managed itself to the brink of insolvency in the early 1980s.    Credit for Michigan's economic development plan goes to the handful of youthful strategists, recruited by Democratic Gov. James Blanchard, a former congressman from suburban Detroit. In 1983, at the age of 40, Mr. Blanchard succeeded three-term Republican Gov. William Milliken.    Among the grim realities then facing Michigan were the highest unemployment rate of any state for four years running; 283,000 lost jobs in manufacturing alone, and an empty treasury that required borrowing from the Japanese to keep the public schools open.    Despair ran deep in a state that had redefined the industrial revolution. &quot;There was a sense we were rusting, that we were becoming the Liverpool of the late 20th century,&quot; says Commerce Department Director Doug Ross.    Stopgap measures, including a controversial income-tax increase to stanch the $1.7 billion budget deficit, bought the Blanchard administration time. The governor began a series of reforms that took the business establishment by surprise. The reforms included an overhaul of complex regulations governing franchise businesses and a shakeup of the state's securities and workers' compensation laws. He also moved to encourage small business.    &quot;He spent hours and hours listening to our list of items,&quot; says John Paul Galles, then executive director of Michigan's Small Business Association. &quot;He ended up taking 18 or 19 of the items and putting them into his economic development agenda. It was incredible.&quot;    Gov. Blanchard's advisers drafted a plan for restoring Michigan's economic health. They leaned heavily on strategies that seemed to be working in manufacturing states such as Pennsylvania. In a key decision, the Blanchard brain trust resisted the temptation to push the state out of basic manufacturing and into a wide assortment of glitzy high-tech ventures, a path well trod by Massachusetts. &quot;We're good at making things,&quot; says Mr. Ross, ticking off automobiles, steel, chemicals and pharmaceuticals. &quot;We decided we weren't in the wrong businesses -- we were just doing them in the wrong way.&quot;    The much-touted rise in service industries was centered elsewhere, the strategists decided. Michigan's future lay in its industrial roots. Could old-line machine tool companies learn advanced manufacturing techniques using lasers and robots? More important, could the state attract the manufacturers of lasers and robots themselves? Silicon Valley was fine for California. Michigan wanted to create Automation Alley.    At the heart of the state's strategy is a potpourri of financing options, including seed capital, venture capital and investment capital. If banks won't lend money to a promising company, the state is ready to fill the gap. Financial aid is fleshed out with training and teaching organizations.    Gov. Blanchard has his detractors. John Engler, Republican majority leader of the state senate, says that the cost of doing business in Michigan remains high compared to neighboring states. He concedes that specific companies have benefited from certain programs, but he contends that many of the governor's initiatives consist of gussied-up versions of existing programs.    &quot;I give him an 11 on a scale of 10 for skillful marketing, and that is helpful,&quot; Mr. Engler says. &quot;But there is a strong case to be made that all of our state industrial policy efforts have done little toward the diversification of industry. If the economy turns down again, Michigan could really be headed down.&quot;    Gene Heck, an economist and author of a study commissioned by the state senate, contends that Michigan's declining unemployment rate is due to worker migration out of the state, rather than any impressive creation of new jobs. He criticizes the state, too, for neglecting service-sector development.    Blanchard aides deny that their program neglects service companies. But, they point out, the Michigan economy rests heavily on manufacturing, and the state's development program caters to that strength.    Some elements of the program:   Venture Capital   After the 1983 collapse of a company they worked for, an executive and 13 engineers believed they could successfully make tape drives for microcomputers, but they lacked the money to start. Enter Michigan's venture-capital fund. It put up $1.3 million, half the initial financing for Irwin Magnetic Systems Inc. in Ann Arbor.    Michigan's deep pockets of venture capital &quot;made start-up possible,&quot; says Francis Glorie, Irwin's chief financial officer. The company now has 450 employees, and sales last year to customers such as Compaq Computer Corp. totaled $51.6 million. About one-third of Irwin's sales are overseas.    Backed by a 1983 law allowing it to invest up to 5% of the state's $15 billion public-employee pension fund in new businesses, Michigan has become the world's largest venture-capital player. The state's commitment has had an encouraging multiplier effect; by weighing in with big bucks, the state is attracting dollars and management expertise from private venture capitalists.    Today, Michigan's $320 million in venture-capital investments is spread among 23 private venture-capital funds, two groups specializing in leveraged buy-outs, and 37 fledgling companies. &quot;We are management intensive,&quot; says State Treasurer Robert Bowman. &quot;We say 'no' 99 times, and the last time we say 'yes.'&quot;    Modernization Service   When Lewis Metal Stamping Inc., a Highland Park auto-parts supplier, needed to improve its manufacturing processes and product quality, it turned to the Michigan Modernization Service for help.    James Lewis, president, says he was pleasantly surprised by the reasonable cost of the training the service recommended for the company's 25-employee work force. &quot;One of the major side benefits was the attitude change,&quot; he says. &quot;People began to feel a part of things. For some of the guys working for me, this was probably the first positive educational experience they had had in a long time.&quot;    The three-year-old modernization service has offered free advice to 245 companies. Its goal is 1,000 consultations by 1990. Typically, the service offers two lengthy telephone interviews and an all-day visit by two technology specialists. The service doesn't provide money to needy companies, but it does help firms apply for job training funds or other assistance.    Small manufacturers, with their potential for creating new jobs, are potentially a better investment for long-term prosperity than giant corporations, says John Cleveland, director of the modernization service. &quot;This isn't the old politics of the left where the government's trying to control the market,&quot; he says. It's just that smaller firms &quot;need the assistance more than the other folks do.&quot;    Seed Capital   Seed capital, which helped Mr. Mrozinski get into the fiberglass-coffin business, is the low-end sector of an umbrella organization called the Strategic Fund, a state development bank financed by oil and gas revenues from Michigan public lands. The Strategic Fund steps in where banks fear to tread. It contributes to a loan-loss reserve fund that encourages banks to make riskier loans. It backs new products directly in return for royalties.    &quot;Venture-capital companies can't afford to mess around with $50,000 investments,&quot; says Howard Diamond, a managing partner in Diamond Venture Associates, which helped the coffin business get off the ground. &quot;These people are orphans.&quot;    Diamond Venture is one of three privately run seed-capital companies backed in part by Michigan. The Ann Arbor seed fund has invested also in a one-stop wedding shop that offers gowns, tuxedos, flowers and photo services.    The state Strategic Fund is also creating a statewide network of public-private finance companies called Bidcos, short for Business and Industrial Development Corporations. California has a similar experiment under way. Bidcos will join with banks to make loans to start up companies. If a company jells, its lenders become stockholders. </TEXT></DOC>