<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880603-0117 </DOCNO><HL> Bloodless Coup: Russians Are Coming To Bonn, and Germans Are Positively Aglow --- All-Out Cultural Offensive Just as U.S. Is Scrimping Even Wows Conservatives --- Waltzing Franz-Josef Strauss </HL><AUTHOR> Thomas F. O'Boyle (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP FREST </CO><G> EXE </G><DATELINE> HERRENBERG, West Germany  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Andreas Kirmse, 17, is your average earnest German teen-ager. He likes soccer, rock music and Boris Becker. He also likes Mikhail Gorbachev. In fact, he hopes to give him some advice this summer.    Mr. Kirmse is a winner of an essay contest for German high-school students on the topic &quot;Hope Through Gorbachev.&quot; It was sponsored by the local German-Soviet friendship society. It's just one example of the subtle, sophisticated and largely successful way the Kremlin is wooing West Germany, the very cornerstone of the Western alliance.    German towns are competing to set up sister-city ties to Russian towns. Right-wing German politicians are proclaiming an end to the Soviet threat. Germans are speaking of Moscow and Washington as moral equals. And now a survey has found that, for the first time, Germans as a whole have a more favorable opinion of the Soviet Union than of America.    This year has seen a virtual explosion in Soviet-German links. On the agenda are 83 separate sporting events, a blizzard of cultural, political and business delegations, student exchanges, and speaker exchanges. Germans this summer can see exhibits celebrating 1,000 years of Russian art, hear lectures on 1,000 years of Russian Christianity and read a new book on 1,000 years of Russian-German friendship. Soviet Ambassador Yuli Kvitsinsky, the point man for this friendship assault, speaks fluent German, unlike his American counterpart, Richard Burt.    Even the boss is doing his part. Seemingly every German politician of any import -- or political shading -- has made a pilgrimage to Moscow this year for a chat with Mr. Gorbachev. &quot;He has spent more time with German politicians in the last year, I would guess, than with all other Western Europeans put together,&quot; says James Dobbins, charge d'affaires at the U.S. Embassy in Bonn.    All this comes at a time when a budget-conscious America is cutting back its presence in West Germany. It has closed two of its six consulates and is ending all financing for German-American cultural institutes in seven German cities. Moscow soon will open a consulate, its second, to go along with its embassy and a trade office. The U.S. presence still is larger, no doubt of that; but the trends, in energy and empathy, are ominous.    Behind them stand individuals like Mr. Kirmse. He is too young to remember America as a generous, democratic nation that rebuilt Germany after World War II and then airlifted food to West Berliners when a totalitarian Soviet Union sought to engulf them. Mr. Kirmse sees the two superpowers as &quot;morally equivalent.&quot; His friends consider America the greater evil, he says.    His nine-page essay on &quot;Hope Through Gorbachev&quot; is turgid prose, but he impressed the three German academics who judged the contest by his knowledge of how Gorbachev programs could affect Germany. Mr. Kirmse expresses the dream that glasnost will bring more freedom behind the Iron Curtain and pave the way for reunification of the two Germanys. &quot;I hope that Gorbachev wins and I also believe he will,&quot; Mr. Kirmse says earnestly. &quot;If I see him I will wish him a lot of good luck for his policies and ask him to do everything to achieve success.&quot;    Mr. Kirmse is a teen-ager, of course, a group among whom idealism and rejection of one's elders' preferences are not unknown. But a poll by the U.S. Information Agency in March makes clear that it is by no means only youths who are captivated by the Gorbachev mystique. The poll found that 70% of Germans had a favorable opinion of the Soviet Union, a huge jump from 47% just six months earlier. More alarming, just 60% of Germans expressed a favorable opinion of the U.S.    That the Soviets are trying to influence German public opinion, of course, isn't new. What is new is the scope, the style and the success of their efforts. The Soviets cozied up to the German left in the early 1980s during heated debate over deployment of U.S. intermediate-range nuclear missiles, the ones being removed by the new INF treaty. They threatened a break in arms-control talks if deployment proceeded, and when it did, the top negotiator -- by chance, it was Mr. Kvitsinsky -- walked out. But that tactic backfired; Helmut Kohl held firm and deployed the missiles. And the Soviets, not the chancellor, lost out in German public opinion.    So Moscow switched tactics. It is trying to win the German right, not left, and the method is sweet talk, not threat. &quot;We are all living in one European house,&quot; Mr. Gorbachev is fond of saying, a subtle way of playing on the longing of West Germans to someday be reunited with their East German brethren, divided from them by Soviet design. For the Soviets' part, they want German financial credits and technology to build their backward nation. And they hope West Germany will pressure its Western alliance to spend less on defense.    One graphic sign of success came six months ago when Franz-Josef Strauss, the arch-conservative governor of Bavaria, finally traveled to the Soviet Union and, after meeting Mr. Gorbachev, astounded countrymen by announcing he believes fears of Soviet aggression no longer are justified. Notices like this from conservative politicians and businessmen have paved the way for a $2 billion Soviet line of credit, extended last month by a group of West German banks.    Consider the case of Biberach, a town that until recently had the biggest majority of Christian Democratic voters in all West Germany. This month it will form a sister-city link with Telawi in Soviet Georgia. Mayor Claus-Wilhelm Hoffmann, just back from a visit to Telawi, is practically giddy about it. &quot;The people there are so friendly and hospitable,&quot; he gushes.    There are 26 such city partnerships now. That's still well below the 92 German-American sister-city compacts, but way up from 10 two years ago.    Moscow's friendship offensive is directed by Mr. Kvitsinsky, a tall, Western-looking diplomat who works with about 200 colleagues behind the heavily guarded walls of the Soviet Embassy in a wooded Bonn suburb. He shuns the media spotlight, in sharp contrast to U.S. Ambassador Burt. While Mr. Burt, too, spends long hours in staid diplomatic pursuits, the American has also done a stint as disk jockey on a radio rock-music show, sung Beatles songs in a disco and hawked potato pancakes in a square with Foreign Minister Hans Dietrich Genscher.    Mr. Kvitsinsky, a non-voting member of the Soviet Central Committee and reported Gorbachev confidant, spends his time largely in private meetings with German politicians and businessmen and on tours of German factories. He tours, especially, in the southwest state of Baden-Wuerttemberg, home to Daimler-Benz AG and to 70% of Germany's machine-tool output. No fewer than 20 Soviet delegations have visited Baden-Wuerttemberg this year, several led by Mr. Kvitsinsky.    &quot;He speaks German so fluently you can barely tell he isn't German,&quot; says a Daimler-Benz employee who went along on a tour of the auto maker's plant in Sindelfingen. The ambassador was there to talk to chairman Edzard Reuter about ideas a Daimler executive had raised on a Moscow visit, including possible cooperation in aerospace.    But Mr. Kvitsinsky is active on cultural cooperation too, and here the scope and the number of activities are mind-boggling: theater festivals, art exhibits, puppet shows, language contests, GermanRussian youth fellowship weeks, and on and on.    Organizing many of them are 17 regional Societies for the Promotion of German-Soviet Relations. These are run by Germans and claim to be independent of the Soviet Embassy. But Mr. Kvitsinsky -- who has increased his embassy's press and cultural staff to 59 from 41 a year ago, by intelligence estimates -- is never far away.    He was the host, for instance, of an embassy reception for winners of the &quot;Hope Through Gorbachev&quot; essay contest. &quot;We are prepared to discuss everything,&quot; he told his guests during the two-hour discussion that followed the reception. The ambassador, who declined to be interviewed for this story, was asked about German-Soviet student exchanges. As in other areas, the Soviet Union &quot;will do more in this field,&quot; he promised.    Not America. Closing its consulate in Bremen, to cite just one instance, means an end to the big July 4 celebration that drew German businessmen, politicians and local citizens to cut a birthday cake for Uncle Sam and sing &quot;God Bless America.&quot;    Even at German-organized pro-America events, the Americans aren't very active, Germans complain. &quot;They haven't even answered our invitations to attend important American cultural events here,&quot; says Josef Krings, the mayor of Duisburg, a working-class town in the industrial Ruhr Valley. He counts eight cultural events in the past year by Soviets in Duisburg, including three art exhibitions and a visit by the director of the Bolshoi Theatre. The story is the same in cities and towns all over Germany.    America still is much in evidence. The Bonn embassy is the largest U.S. embassy in the world. It and the consulates have more than 1,000 staffers, both American and German. Add to that the business and military presence and the total number of Americans in Germany is roughly 570,000.    In part, that is America's problem. While familiarity hasn't bred contempt, it has bred boredom, plus irritation over the U.S. military presence, particularly among the young. After 40-odd years of knuckling under to the U.S., the Germans want to assert their autonomy. And because the Soviets are largely unknown, they are exotic. When the first German-language edition of Moscow News went on sale in April, customers grabbed 120,000 copies; the publisher had to rush out extra printings.    &quot;There's this bad German habit,&quot; says J. Kurt Klein, who watches Soviet propaganda activities as director of a German defense ministry academy. &quot;We have the Americans here all the time. But many Germans have not seen a Russian, and now they are happy if they can have one around in their clubs to talk with him.&quot;    No one seems immune. Conservative forums like the Konrad Adenauer Foundation eagerly invite Soviet speakers. Even propagandists: Radomir Bogdanov, the deputy director for ideology at the Soviet Academy of Sciences in Moscow, was a guest this March.    So after years of being outgunned by U.S. resources, the Soviets suddenly have the money and the mandate to win hearts and minds in Germany. They can barely hide their glee. Philip Griffin, the head of the U.S. consulate in Stuttgart, tells of recounting a string of cutbacks to Anatoly Dobrynin, the former Soviet ambassador in Washington who is now a top Gorbachev adviser. Mr. Dobrynin, Mr. Griffin says, threw back his head and laughed. &quot;You Americans never have enough money,&quot; he said. </TEXT></DOC>