<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871013-0022 </DOCNO><HL> How Now to Counter Moscow?---By Ted Galen Carpenter</HL><DD> 10/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST FORGNMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   The U.S.-Soviet competition for dominance in the Third World has exhibited a consistent pattern throughout the Cold War era. Moscow has relied heavily on political subversion to install and maintain Leninist clients in countries deemed strategically important. The U.S. has countered those efforts by assisting incumbent anti-communist governments in a variety of ways. Lately Washington has gone on the offensive, with the Reagan Doctrine, and it now seeks to help insurgents dislodge pro-Soviet regimes.    The results of that intense jockeying for power have been less than satisfying for both superpowers. It might appear that the Soviet Union has scored a number of geopolitical triumphs, the communist victories in Cuba, Vietnam, Ethiopia and Angola being the most obvious examples. But Moscow has discovered that such &quot;victories&quot; entail enormous and seemingly endless financial drains.    Fidel Castro's Cuba, one of the world's foremost economic basket cases, survives only by the grace of an annual Soviet subsidy of nearly $4 billion. Vietnam may provide the Soviet Union with a strategically important naval base at Cam Ranh Bay, but it too is a billion-dollar welfare recipient. Moscow continues to pour military and economic aid into Angola to help the government of Jose dos Santos stave off the determined insurgency of Jonas Savimbi's Unita rebels. An even worse situation exists in Afghanistan, where the U.S.S.R. had to commit its own military forces in order to prevent the collapse of a client.    The American record also has been disappointing. Washington's longstanding policy of sponsoring authoritarian regimes has earned the U.S. enmity throughout the Third World. It has also created complex entanglements, as demonstrated by Washington's current effort to dissuade Pakistan from acquiring a nuclear weapons capability while using that country to channel military aid to the Afghan rebels. The policy has been expensive; the U.S. has provided nearly $160 billion in economic assistance and tens of billions in military aid to Third World nations during the past four decades. Moreover, the Vietnam debacle demonstrated how costly an attempt to preserve a vulnerable client could be in terms of American lives.    Both Moscow and Washington of late have signaled alteration of their Third World policies in an attempt to overcome such drawbacks. Especially since Mikhail Gorbachev's ascension to power, the Soviet Union has adopted more subtle techniques. Its new strategy is apparently to de-emphasize attempts to install Leninist regimes while accelerating efforts to garner political and economic influence with noncommunist governments. Moscow has flirted with that approach before, most notably during the Khrushchev years, when the U.S.S.R. provided developmental aid programs to India and Egypt. Those measures, though, were a mere appendage to the Soviets' principal Third World strategy: political and military subversion.    This time economic overtures appear to constitute a far more important component of Soviet strategy, perhaps even the dominant one. That is not to suggest that Moscow will abandon its existing client states. There may be some retrenchment, but the major change is that Moscow is now reluctant to take on new dependents, preferring to adopt more indirect methods of enhancing Soviet geopolitical clout.    During the past two years Moscow has engaged in several significant initiatives. It has negotiated commercial treaties with Kiribati and Vanuatu, far-flung island nations whose strategic location and mineral wealth have not been lost on the Kremlin. Those treaties gave the Soviet Union important access to the Central Pacific. Soviet officials have also courted various Persian Gulf states, and Moscow capped its diplomatic offensive by concluding a major economic development agreement with Iran. It has made serious efforts to improve relations with nations as diverse as China, Indonesia and Argentina.    Conversely, Moscow is showing signs of losing its enthusiasm for incompetent Leninist clients. Mr. Gorbachev is exerting increasing pressure on the East European satellites to emulate the Soviet Union's economic reforms in order to revitalize their moribund economies. The desire to escape at least some of the burdens of empire is also becoming apparent with respect to Third World clients.    The Kremlin's relations with Marxist Mozambique have cooled dramatically in recent years, and its growing frustration and impatience with its Afghan dependent have become obvious. Another indication of Moscow's desire to stanch its financial hemorrhage came this summer when Nicaragua, an incipient client, requested increased shipments of low-priced petroleum. Not only did the Kremlin refuse to oblige, it informed the Sandinistas that the existing level of shipments might not be maintained.    The recent shift in America's Third World policy has been somewhat less dramatic. It has chiefly taken the form of a more selective endorsement of authoritarian clients. The 11th-hour abandonment of Ferdinand Marcos in favor of Corazon Aquino, the encouragement of democratic reforms in South Korea, and the covert support for opponents of Gen. Manuel Noriega in Panama all represent examples of that trend.    Washington's receptive posture toward democratic alternatives is refreshing, but it seems to stem largely from a belated realization that indiscriminate support for autocrats has been counterproductive. It is apparently not a response to the Soviets' new strategy in the Third World, because other aspects of America's Third World policy demonstrate little awareness of the change in Moscow's approach and even less of the ramifications. Indeed, elements of that policy give the Soviets unnecessary opportunities to expand their influence.    The Reagan Doctrine can rekindle Third World fears of U.S. &quot;imperialism&quot; at a time when Moscow is adopting a lower political profile. Washington's blundering military intervention in the Persian Gulf region has enabled the Soviet Union to reap diplomatic benefits, at least in Iran, just by remaining on the sidelines. (The enthusiasm of some Arab states in the region may prove transitory.) Soviet political and commercial penetration of the Central Pacific was facilitated by U.S. insensitivity toward fishing rights, French nuclear testing, and other issues important to those island nations.    Worst of all, the U.S. has pursued a variety of protectionist trade practices that are injurious to Third World producers. U.S. restrictions on the importation of textiles, sugar, bauxite and other products have been devastating the economies of those nations, and they have reacted with bitterness and anger. Demonstrations of anti-American sentiment explicitly or implicitly linked to trade issues have occurred in Thailand, South Korea, Fiji, Australia and Costa Rica. U.S. officials are being dangerously naive if they assume that the Soviets are not sufficiently adroit to fish in such troubled waters. Particularly in the Pacific Basin and Latin America, they are already doing so.    If the U.S. does not alter its Third World strategy, it will play directly into the hands of the Soviet Union. Clumsy military interventions and such imitative subversion measures as the Reagan Doctrine are not even well suited to countering the kind of heavy-handed foreign policy pursued by Mr. Gorbachev's predecessors. Against a more sophisticated Soviet approach, they will fail utterly.    A three-pronged strategy would allow the U.S. to avoid such egregious errors and counteract Soviet Third World initiatives without incurring undesirable political or military entanglements. First, the U.S. must practice as well as preach the virtues of free trade. Second, the Reagan administration should intensify its ideological offensive to promote capitalist values. In addition to furthering its geopolitical objectives, Moscow hopes to demonstrate the vitality of socialism and bolster its waning appeal in the Third World. It is imperative to prevent that discredited economic doctrine from enjoying a resurgence.    Finally, Washington must abandon debilitating or counterproductive measures. It should especially avoid funding bilateral and multilateral aid programs that merely encourage Third World nations to embrace the failed principles of centralized planning. Nor need the U.S. become the arbiter of Third World debt problems and fashion a comprehensive &quot;solution.&quot; Debtor nations and private Western creditors can more effectively resolve short-term difficulties on a case-by-case basis. Long-term solutions await the adoption of market reforms in the debtor countries, reforms that current U.S. trade and foreign-aid policies tragically delay.    This tactical triad offers the U.S. the best hope of coping with a subtle and varied Soviet policy in the Third World. Washington should welcome the opportunity to compete with Moscow in the ideological and economic realms, where the Soviets will operate at a tremendous disadvantage, given their rigid domestic system. It is an ideal chance to demonstrate the superiority of democratic and capitalist principles throughout the Third World.    ---   Mr. Carpenter is the director of foreign-policy studies at the Cato Institute. </TEXT></DOC>