<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870824-0077 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:Puffing the Prima Donna of Suez---By George Szamuely</HL><DD> 08/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   How ironic that Anthony Eden, who has been out of public life for more than 30 years and dead for 10, should still arouse intense passions. He was, to outward appearance, only too generously endowed with the justly celebrated British talent for negotiation and compromise, for the eschewal of confrontation. In November 1956, though, he presided over the greatest humiliation his country has suffered in modern times. The Suez crisis provoked a debate, still far from ended, over whether the British possessed an attitude of mind that was perfectly attuned to the realities of the 19th century, but hopelessly inadequate for the ones of the 20th.    Robert Rhodes James's &quot;Anthony Eden: A Biography&quot; (McGraw Hill, 665 pages, $22.95) is the official biography. It is generous toward its subject to a degree so unusual that it makes one suspect that the author is, on every page, taking issue with David Carlton, who in his &quot;Anthony Eden: A Political Biography&quot; of 1981, produced a massive work remarkable for its unremitting hostility to its subject.    Eden, born in 1897 to a country squire and a beautiful though profligate mother, rose quickly in the British political hierarchy. Almost from the beginning he devoted himself exclusively to foreign affairs. Indeed, he must be the only prime minister in modern times who upon achieving the summit of his political ambition in 1955 had never served in any domestic ministry. This together with his temperament (&quot;Don't forget that I am just a bloody prima donna,&quot; he once apologized after a hysterical outburst to his parliamentary private secretary) would in normal circumstances have spelled disaster for any political career. Yet until his downfall in January 1957 in the aftermath of the Suez crisis he was, next to Churchill, the most popular politician of his day.    He enjoyed senior ministerial appointments at an early age (he was foreign secretary when he was 38) and was identified as a man of principle. Handsome, debonair, a war hero who had lost two brothers in action, a man who avoided ideological tussles and political partisanship, he seemed to express all that was fine and noble in the British character.    He had opposed the appeasement policies of Neville Chamberlain and had resigned rather than carry them out. Upon his return to the back benches it was to him rather than to Churchill that disaffected Tories looked for leadership in a revolt against Chamberlain. He opposed their cause, believing, correctly, that it was necessary to maintain national unity in such a time of crisis. Returning as foreign secretary in 1941, he was under few illusions about Stalin and even frequently expressed his disgust at Churchill's apparent personal fondness for the tyrant. Eden's assessment of his nemesis, Gamal Abdel Nasser, was similarly astute. In Mr. Rhodes James's words, Eden saw Nasser as &quot;another Mussolini -- vain, megalomaniac, with vaulting ambitions . . . in whose dreams of fame and glory his unfortunate people were cast . . . as docile participants and, if need be, victims.&quot;    So what went wrong? Mr. Rhodes James contents himself with ascribing it to sheer bad luck. If only Churchill had retired in 1945, if only Eden had not been so seriously ill in 1953, &quot;he would have reached the political summit at the height of his powers. Instead he did so under lowering circumstances that were, unhappily, stronger than he could survive.&quot; Unfortunately, that is not good enough. Eden's entire career could be characterized by his persistent misunderstanding of the causes of international conflicts. He adhered to the conventional liberal view of his time that World War I had been caused by balance-of-power politics of the European states along with an uncontrollable arms race. Consequently, he treated the farcical Disarmament Conference, established in 1932 just as democratic government in Germany was on the brink of collapse, with deadly earnestness even after Germany, predictably, withdrew.    After 1945, Eden vented his spleen against minor and ideologically ambiguous tyrants such as Mossadegh and Nasser but took a relatively complaisant view of Ho Chi Minh. Moreover, it was Eden himself who had sealed his own fate when in 1954 he had negotiated with Nasser the British military evacuation of the Suez Canal Zone. This having been accomplished it made little sense subsequently to alienate Nasser by pressing ahead with the Baghdad Pact, which was to exclude Egypt, and then by cutting off economic aid. And even after Nasser nationalized the canal it was the height of folly to risk a rupture of relations with the U.S., by then Britain's senior partner, as well as to let Khrushchev off the hook in Hungary -- two of the results of Britain's intervention.    &quot;The lessons of the '30s and their application to the '50s . . . are the themes of my memoirs,&quot; Eden wrote in his autobiography, &quot;Full Circle.&quot; Unfortunately, it is his misunderstanding of the &quot;lessons&quot; of the '30s and his misapplication of them to the '50s that ought to be the theme of Eden's biography. Mr. Rhodes James has provided us only with an apologia.    ---   Mr. Szamuely, formerly an editor of the (London) Times Literary Supplement, is now a writer in New York. </TEXT></DOC>