<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871203-0031 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   U.S. OFFICIALS SAID Moscow has provided essential arms-control data.    The information on missile locations was turned over following an exchange of accusations by Washington and Moscow, each saying the other was withholding data needed to verify a pact banning intermediate-range nuclear weapons. Reagan also accused the Soviets of a new violation of the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile treaty. A Kremlin spokesman denied any violation occurred.    Carlucci said NATO is likely to put forth early next year a new proposal for establishing parity between Western and Soviet-bloc conventional forces in Europe. The defense secretary provided no details, but NATO sources said he presented a recommended negotiating position at a meeting of defense ministers in Brussels this week.    Gorbachev invited leaders of Congress to meet with him at the Soviet Embassy during next week's summit, House Minority Leader Michel said.    ---   Nicaraguan peace talks are to begin today in the Dominican Republic. Sandinista and Contra delegations will not meet face-to-face, but Cardinal Obando is to act as go-between. Separately, House Republicans, citing the talks, said they will temporarily shelve an effort to include further aid to the Nicaraguan rebels in a spending bill.    Zamora left El Salvador after a 12-day return from exile set up under a Central American peace accord. The rebel leader said conditions are not yet ripe for him to establish a political base in the country.    ---   Federal negotiators said they were working to resolve legal issues with Cuban detainees holding 89 hostages in Atlanta, but discouraged hopes for a quick pact. Detainees also heard a tape from a Cuban-born bishop who helped end a Louisiana standoff. A church spokesman said earlier negotiators were blocking the bishop's mediation.    ---   Eugene Sawyer was named mayor of Chicago, succeeding Harold Washington, who died of a heart attack last week. Sawyer is a black Democratic alderman popular with enemies of Washington, Chicago's first black mayor. He was named to the post, which he will hold until 1989, at a stormy city council meeting.    ---   South Korea's Chun said North Korea, seeking to disrupt next year's Seoul Olympic Games, may have caused the crash in Burma of a jetliner carrying 115. In Bahrain, officials sought the identities of a couple carrying forged Japanese passports who swallowed cyanide pills prior to questioning about a possible bombing of the airliner.    Fishermen from Mauritius said they saw a South African jetliner explode before crashing into the Indian Ocean Saturday. Twelve bodies have been recovered so far from the airliner, which was carrying 159.    ---   Haitian opposition leaders demanded the military government resign or face a general strike and rally today. Haiti's ruling junta said it would organize a new electoral council to replace the group it dissolved Sunday. Council members, in hiding since election-day violence that killed 34 and halted voting, said they would not resign.    ---   An Iranian official began talks with U.N. Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar aimed at implementing a Security Council cease-fire resolution in the Persian Gulf war. Deputy Foreign Minister Larijani said he brought &quot;a lot of hopes&quot; to the talks. Perez de Cuellar is to hold parallel talks with Iraqi Foreign Minister Aziz early next week.    ---   Cambodia's prime minister met in France with resistance leader Prince Sihanouk in talks aimed at reconciliation. Sihanouk was deposed in 1970 and later became leader of a coalition of resistance groups seeking to oust Phnom Penh's government, installed by Vietnam in 1978. Progress was reported and more talks are set.    ---   The U.N. is considering seeking a loan of $50 million because its funds are nearly exhausted. A spokesman said it would be the first time the world body has been forced to turn to commercial lenders. Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar has said members' cumulative unpaid dues total $456.4 million, of which $342.8 million is owed by the U.S.    ---   Israel's military chief announced a shake-up following security lapses by troops at a northern base where a guerrilla aboard a hang-glider killed six Israeli soldiers. Two soldiers face courts-martial and the base commander was removed from his post.    ---   Romania fired managers at a truck plant in Brasov two weeks after its workers marched to protest austerity measures. Romania's official news agency also said some workers would be moved and prosecuted.    ---   A general strike in Bhopal was called for today by Indian opposition parties and relief groups. The strike and a rally are to mark the third anniversary of a poisonous gas leak from a Union Carbide pesticide plant that killed more than 2,800 people.    ---   South Africa placed more than 500,000 blacks under the jurisdiction of two tribal homelands, QwaQwa and KwaNdeble. The homelands, created under the apartheid system but recognized by no other nation, are used to remove blacks from white areas. </TEXT></DOC>