<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861209-0090 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Borderline Warfare</HL><DD> 12/09/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM FRESTCONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   The Nicaraguan army that invaded Honduras over the weekend is not exactly Hitler's Wehrmacht but it's a far better-trained and better-equipped army than Nicaragua's Sandinista Directorate had at its disposal six years ago when it began converting Nicaragua into a communist state.    Reports say that the Sandinistas now have three battalions specially trained in counterinsurgency warfare. According to the latest Pentagon numbers, they have 35 Soviet Mi-17 armed, troop-carrying helicopters, 12 advanced Mi-24 helicopter gunships, a quantity of modern Soviet SAM-14 antiaircraft missiles, and some 150 tanks of various descriptions. By one estimate, the Sandinista army now has 35,000 to 40,000 regulars, and total military forces number some 120,000.    This year's shipments of Soviet ordnance and supplies had exceeded 20,000 tons at last count, which means record shipments are likely for all of 1986. Fraternal countries of the Soviet bloc -- Cuba, Bulgaria and East Germany -- are supplementing the Soviet arms with training, military construction and field advice. In a few more years, with two large, new military airfields to receive equipment and supplies directly from Cuba and other Soviet satellite states, the Sandinista army will be better yet.    It is in the face of this buildup that Washington's political establishment has once more embarked upon an aid-to-the-contras debate. The proposition is that the administration's embarrassment over unofficial contra aid supplied through the Iranian arms sales has so outraged Congress that it will withdraw the $100 million in contra aid it voted last spring. The record of Congress on the Nicaraguan question is perhaps the most convincing chronology available to demonstrate why Congress is not equipped to manage U.S. foreign policy:    In its first policy, in 1980, Congress sent U.S. aid to the Sandinistas, having been assured that they were in fact democrats. Someone must have had some doubts, however, because the aid was conditioned on presidential certification that the Sandinistas were not aiding attempts to overthrow other governments, El Salvador being the case in point.    As it became obvious that the Sandinistas and the Cubans were directly stage managing the Salvadoran insurgency, President Reagan started to complain, like President Monroe, about &quot;inviting alien influences and philosophies into the hemisphere.&quot; It became apparent the administration was aiding the rebels. In its second policy, Congress did not stop this aid. In the 1982 Boland amendment, Congress decided the aid was OK so long as it was not intended to overthrow the Sandinistas.    About two years later word leaked out of a secret congressional briefing that the CIA was trying to discourage shipments of Soviet arms into Nicaragua's Corinto harbor with low-grade nuisance mines. So Congress moved to its third policy, the famous 1984 Boland amendment that barred U.S. aid for any military or paramilitary aid in Nicaragua. It was this amendment that the National Security Council was trying to circumvent when it arranged for profits from the arms sales to go into a contra account.    During all this time there were periodic embarrassments of individual congressmen over inept attempts to preempt the president's foreign-policy role and make peace with the boys in Managua, the famous &quot;Dear Comandante&quot; letter being among the most inane. In its fourth policy in 1985, Congress decided that it was OK to send &quot;humanitarian&quot; aid to the contras, who of course were in direct battle with Sandinista troops.    Finally, last spring, House Democrats realized that the administration had been right all along on the fundamental nature of the Sandinistas. So in its fifth policy, Congress voted a resumption of direct military aid to the contras. Now Congress is preparing a sixth policy, bashing the whole enterprise and giving the Sandinistas a free ride.    Naturally the Sandinistas, not missing a trick, sent troops into Honduras to see how the Americans would react. The U.S. Army reacted by ferrying Honduran troops to the general area of the incursion, but trying at the same time to abide by another congressional restriction that bans U.S. operations closer than 20 miles from the border. This little test of U.S. resolve is the way the U.S.-Soviet game is played today.    If Congress wants to resign from this game, it could always say so and take responsibility for what happens. Or it could come up with a coherent policy itself. Rather than accepting responsibility or forming policy, its approach to Nicaragua has been to enact pettifogging restrictions, and then complain that an administration trying to conduct a policy is &quot;violating the law.&quot; This, as we are again seeing, is a recipe for disaster abroad, and at home. </TEXT></DOC>