<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880329-0128 </DOCNO><HL> Business World: Infrastructure Repair Needs More Than Money </HL><AUTHOR> George Melloan </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> TRA </IN><TEXT>   Peter C. Goldmark Jr. was a natural choice for the National Council on Public Works, a five-member body that just has issued a report on the condition of America's highways, bridges, waterworks, airports and other basic facilities that constitute the national &quot;infrastructure.&quot; Mr. Goldmark from 1977 to 1985 was executive director of the Port Authority of New York and New Jersey, a huge enterprise that runs, among other things, JFK Airport, the Holland Tunnel, New York's World Trade Center and the PATH commuter railway. In short, he managed a key part of the infrastructure in one of the world's most congested metropolitan areas.    From that experience, and his participation in the three-year council study, Mr. Goldmark has concluded that the considerable problems of the national infrastructure are a result of a number of things that go well beyond the question of how to raise the money. As with so much else where government has the primary responsibility, infrastructure maintenance, repair and improvement seem to get increasingly tangled in the red tape generated by conflicts and confusions among the separate layers of the government and the multiplicity of agencies at all levels that have a voice in project design and approval. Maneuvering even a relatively simple project through all the necessary approvals is time-consuming and adds significantly to financing and other costs.    &quot;The Erie Canal was built in seven years,&quot; says Mr. Goldmark. &quot;In seven years at the Port Authority, I could not get a permit -- that's a piece of paper -- to deepen the main channel of the harbor of New York. We needed an Army Corps of Engineers permit plus about 20 others. The people who built the Erie Canal would be astonished to find that the first product of our big infrastructure is paper, rather than digging a hole or something.&quot;    The council's report concluded that &quot;the quality of America's infrastructure is barely adequate to fulfill current requirements, and insufficient to meet the demands of future economic growth and development.&quot; It graded the U.S. infrastructure as follows: highways, C+; mass transit, C-; aviation, B-; water resources, B; water supply, B-; waste water, C; solid waste, C-, and hazardous waste, D.    Infrastructure usually is taken pretty much for granted until a breakdown occurs. New York state seems to have had a recent affliction of such breakdowns. National problems with solid-waste disposal were illuminated when the Long Island town of Islip last summer attempted to ship its garbage by barge to a distant landfill only to get caught in a regulatory bind that brought the stuff right back to where it started after a 6,000-mile ocean voyage. More akin to a natural disaster was a bridge collapse on the New York Thruway west of Albany last April that killed 10 people.    But mostly the costs of inadequate infrastructure are measured less dramatically, by such things as pothole damage to tires (New York City gets especially bad readings on automobile club bump meters), airline delays or freeway traffic tieups. Los Angeles County Transportation Director Rich Richmond estimated at a public hearing last July that traffic congestion in the county costs $507 million a year in wasted time, not to mention the wastage of 72 million gallons of gasoline.    Such estimates never can be precise but they make the point that inadequate infrastructure exacts an economic cost. The great difficulties of economic advancement in nations lacking the most basic forms of infrastructure, such as farm-to-market roads, best illustrate the point.    The U.S., of course, has a vast and, in many places, efficient infrastructure. The council study put a value of $1 trillion on the parts it measured. But government-owned fixed capital suffers along with privately owned plant and equipment when economic policies discourage long-term investment. The greatest scourge of investment is, of course, inflation, which explains why the national infrastructure suffered particularly during the 1970s. User fees simply could not keep up with the soaring costs of loans and construction. Highway construction had the added problem of reduced yields from gasoline taxes brought about by energy shortages and shortage-enforced conservation.    At the same time, new costs have been piled on infrastructure projects by federal and state requirements for elaborate environmental-impact statements and by private litigation to block projects not wanted by local residents. Perhaps this was the only way people in the U.S. could arrest public-sector overdevelopment in areas where that was occurring. But it has been, and remains, a very expensive way to make public-policy decisions.    Indeed, federal involvement in infrastructure decision-making seems to have contributed to waste. The pork-barrel syndrome in Congress means that once a national initiative is under way -- as in the case of secondary sewage treatment, for example -- the money is not divided up on the basis of local need but on the basis of ensuring every district of a fair share whatever the level of need. The council, in its arguments for better ways to establish responsibility and accountability for infrastructure projects, subtly but clearly tilted toward more local control.    Council members also had some things to say about the usual methods of letting contracts in the U.S. Public bodies tend to establish the specifications for projects and then let contracts based on those detailed specs. The problem is that this process leaves little room for technical innovation by private contractors. Contractors who reap larger profits through good performance are too frequently accused of gouging the public when in fact a system that rewarded contractors well for efficiency often would save money for the public.    The council also touched on the point that simple maintenance has less political appeal than new projects or major overhauls. Yet, by one estimate, the cost of repairing a street or highway that has been allowed to fail is triple or quadruple the cost of maintaining it properly.    &quot;Places that have done well in building infrastructure seem to have had a very active involvement of the business community,&quot; says Nancy S. Rutledge, executive director of the council. &quot;It's not just the builders and engineers, but business groups that see a direct impact of public works on the productivity of private investment. They have a long-term involvement in the planning process.&quot;    There may in fact be some trend toward more local accountability and control as Congress tries to shed federal budget costs. Some states also have discovered that federal participation in projects costs more than it's worth when the expense of complying with federal environmental and wage standards is counted. Certainly, the paper work is less.    The element of the council's study that seems to have made the biggest impression in Washington, however, is its recommendation that the nation double by the year 2000 the $45 billion annually it spends on infrastructure. That, of course, gives reason to fear that Congress merely will see the report as justification for pork, ignoring the other problems it raises. If that proves to be the case, the pointed analysis by Mr. Goldmark and his colleagues will have gone for naught. </TEXT></DOC>