<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880322-0166 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor: Reviewing Dartmouth's Standards </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Re your editorial &quot;Dartmouth Teaches . . . Censorship&quot; (March 8) and the letter to the editor (March 10) by Catherine Wolff, the college's news director: My brother is one of the three students suspended as a result of their activities with the Dartmouth Review. A fourth student has been placed on probation for one year. Despite the penalties, at no time has the college notified my parents of the charges against their son although they pay $18,000 a year to the school. Numerous phone calls by my parents to the college have not been returned.    When my parents and I arrived for the &quot;open&quot; hearings we were told that only two members of the immediate family could attend and the two admittance tickets were not transferable during the course of the hearings. An assistant dean also informed us that the college was most generous since Committee on Standards hearings are closed to all but the &quot;Dartmouth community&quot; (students, faculty and administration, but not tuition-paying parents). It took us more than an hour to persuade the committee to admit us.    Ms. Wolff further distorts the facts by stating &quot;the disciplinary hearing, which is not a court proceeding, was closed only to lawyers representing either the college or the charged students.&quot; The accused students were denied the opportunity to have counsel present. Dartmouth College did have Kate Burke present throughout the entire proceedings. Not only did she serve as the secretary for the committee, but she is an attorney.    As for &quot;due process,&quot; rather than allow the accused students to directly question witnesses, they had to address their questions to the committee chairman. In turn, the chairman decided whether the questions were meritorious. If not, the questions were not asked. When the questions were asked, they often were rephrased by the chairman to suit the committee's ends. Additionally, the committee members' coaching of answers was appalling.    To further illustrate Dartmouth's brand of fair play, witnesses were allowed to openly converse with each other before and after their testimony. Most disturbing, after Prof. Cole (subject of the accused students' reporting) provided his statements to the committee, he returned to the room where witnesses were gathered and proceeded to blast those who were prepared to provide testimony unsympathetic to him. He left the room only after prodding from an assistant dean.    As to Dartmouth President Freedman's comment saying he &quot;felt dreadful about the attack on Professor Cole,&quot; I suggest thoughtful people ask the Dartmouth Review for copies of their &quot;attack.&quot; Readers will be most surprised that Dartmouth's president and many administrators, faculty and students are rallying around a tenured professor who not only fails to teach his subject but also describes members of the Review as racists.    The parties on trial are not the young men facing expulsion for pursuing a legitimate story. Rather, it is a college administration that refuses to pursue the resolute course. That course is a demand for academic excellence, not irrelevant profanities from a tenured professor and appeasement of shallow thinkers.    Charles S. Quilhot   Indianapolis   ---   Your editorial ignores the root of the Review staffers' misconduct, which was their harassment of a professor in a college classroom and, before that, over the phone. Their alleged racism and the Review's right to publish under the Dartmouth name are different, though important, matters.    Prof. Cole is a tenured and respected faculty member, who has been harassed by the Review for six years, and he does not have a responsibility to respond to the Review's articles. The Review staffers' conduct in attempting to elicit Mr. Cole's response is the misconduct in question and one which is clearly covered in college regulations.    Bill Cole's response to the Review staffers' demands might have been beyond what you consider the bounds of good taste. However, though a respected scholar and professor, Prof. Cole is only human and even the best person can get a little angry after being pursued with insensitivity for six years.    Daniel E. Garrick   Student, Dartmouth College   Hanover, N.H. </TEXT></DOC>