<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870814-0005 </DOCNO><HL> TECHNOLOGY:Medicine's 'Magic Bullets' AddA New Dimension to Imaging---By Wendy L. WallStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CNTO IMMUPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   FOR YEARS, MEDICAL RESEARCHERS have envisioned loading certain proteins with radioactive isotopes that are visible to a gamma-ray camera, then injecting them into a patient to produce a scanning image of the body. Depending on the protein used, the scans would pinpoint blood clots, viruses or cancerous growths only a few cells large, greatly expanding physicians' diagnostic powers.    The proteins, monoclonal antibodies, are known as the &quot;magic bullets&quot; of medicine because they seek out specific targets in the body. Using them in scanning sounds simple, but researchers long have had trouble producing clear images: Some antibodies linger in the bloodstream, while others are absorbed into the liver and other organs. All this produces &quot;background noise&quot; that makes the scans difficult to interpret.    Now, a handful of companies are finding ways around these problems, and the first wave of monoclonal imaging products soon may reach the U.S. market. One company is already selling such a product in Europe, and at least two are in the final phase of U.S. clinical trials. A drug reviewer at the Food and Drug Administration says chances are good that at least one monoclonal antibody imaging product will be available in the U.S. within two years.    ONE LIKELY CANDIDATE is Myoscint, a monoclonal antibody developed by Centocor of Malvern, Pa., to gauge the severity of a heart attack. Myoscint zeroes in on cardiac myosin, a substance in heart muscle that is released when cells rupture during a heart attack. The isotope-tagged antibody gives doctors a detailed map of dead heart tissue less than 24 hours after it is injected into a patient's bloodstream.    The product helps doctors determine when a patient's heart damage is so limited that he can safely be sent home early, says Dr. Harvey Berger, who heads Centocor's research effort. A Myoscint scan can also tip doctors off to extensive damage that might necessitate a coronary bypass or other procedures. Centocor is already selling Myoscint in four European countries and plans to seek U.S. regulatory approval early next year.    Some cardiac cells are unique. Developing imaging products for cancer cells, which generally vary only slightly from other human tissues, is more difficult, but some companies are making progress there, too. NeoRx Corp. of Seattle is in the final stages of clinical testing on an antibody that detects melanoma, a virulent skin cancer that spreads rapidly throughout the body. NeoRx says its antibody binds to more than 90% of all melanomas, while creating little background noise: the kidneys, where melanoma seldom spreads, are the only other tissues that absorb the antibody.    BUT THREE YEARS AGO, in company tests, the antibody also showed up in the liver, spleen, bone marrow, and lungs. Paul Abrams, NeoRx's medical director, describes one method the company has used to solve that problem: NeoRx first administers a harmless decoy antibody that is absorbed, for example, by the spleen. That organ becomes largely saturated, so when the tagged monoclonal is injected, the spleen absorbs little.    Other companies are experimenting with different techniques. Immunomedics Inc. of Newark, N.J., is using a so-called anti-antibody to sharpen its images of colorectal cancer. It first administers a radioactively tagged monoclonal antibody that seeks out the cancer. A day later, it injects a second antibody that is directed against the first. That antibody helps clear the radioactive isotope out of non-targeted areas while leaving it in targeted areas, where it was present in higher concentrations.    Medical researchers say the monoclonal antibody scans won't replace current imaging methods like X-rays and CAT scans. But because they cover the whole body at once, the scans can uncover unexpected problems. In a NeoRx study, one patient who previously had melanoma complained of a pain in her leg. An antibody scan showed she still had the disease, not only in her leg but in her arm and lungs as well. A CAT scan confirmed the diagnosis.    Fibriscint, a monoclonal antibody developed by Centocor to detect blood clots, is in the early stages of clinical testing. But it already has helped doctors spot blood clots they probably would have missed otherwise, says Dr. Abass Alavi, a University of Pennsylvania radiologist. What's more, the easy Fibriscint scan replaces contrast venography, a painful method of locating blood clots that can aggravate kidney problems in some patients.    AND THERE ARE INDICATIONS that the antibody scans detect tumors that don't appear on CAT scans and X-rays. Immunomedics recently tested its monoclonal antibody forcolorectal cancer on 59 patients, says Dr. David Goldenberg, president. In about one-fifth of the cases, the antibody scan found pockets of cancer that were missed by other methods, he says.    Meanwhile, a new monoclonal antibody probe developed by Neoprobe Corp. of Columbus, Ohio, is helping surgeons detect cancer tumors. Before surgery, the patient is injected with radioactively tagged monoclonals that attach to the cancer cells. After the surgeon removes all visible tumors, he checks the area with an internal probe. The monoclonals set off a siren in the probe as it draws near, alerting the surgeon to the presence of additional cancer cells.    The method, now in clinical testing, was developed by Dr. Edward T. Martin, an Ohio State University oncologist. In one-third of the patients tested, the method has tipped surgeons off to cancer they otherwise would have missed, Dr. Martin says. </TEXT></DOC>