<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881011-0071 </DOCNO><HL> International: Quemoy Caught in Cold-Ward Time War --- Island Is Denied Freedoms Granted in Taiwan, China </HL><AUTHOR> James McGregor (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> QUEMOY, Taiwan  </DATELINE><TEXT>   This last outpost of the Chinese civil war, is surely the world's most bucolic battle zone.    As a Cold War hot spot Quemoy was a main topic in the Kennedy-Nixon 1960 campaign debates. Now, little remembered abroad except by trivia buffs, it is odds-on to go unmentioned in the final Dukakis-Bush debate this week.    In three decades of undeclared peace, the estimated 50,000 troops on Quemoy have become a garrison of gardeners. They have blanketed shell-pocked hillsides with groves of bamboo. They have built roadways shaded by lush canopies of Polynesian ironwood trees. Empowered by strict martial law, the soldiers have kept the inhabitants as orderly as the habitat.    When they aren't working, adult civilians don powder-blue militia uniforms and practice repelling communists or march around singing patriotic songs. A curfew ensures that everyone is home by 10 p.m. Children never drop out of school. Litter and clutter are nowhere to be seen. As for loud music, forget it: Radios are banned.    But, there's a problem: It's dull, dull, dull. &quot;This place is really boring,&quot; says a young man sitting on a stool outside a coffee shop where several dozen soldiers are idling away an afternoon.    In enemy territory, just 2,500 yards across the water, these are exciting times. After decades of ideological torment, China is trying to create an economy, well, much like Quemoy's, where private enterprise and state industries coexist under an authoritarian government.    In the home territory of Taiwan, a distant 220 miles to the east, life is positively exhilarating. Martial law has long gone and democracy is all the rage. People's lives revolve around demonstrations, discos or department stores.    Sitting between the two, Quemoy is caught in a Cold War time warp. Taiwan and China are still technically at war. This is the front line. So while their friends and families travel to China for business or pleasure, soldiers based in Quemoy scan China's shores from a distance, searching for communist invaders.    &quot;This relaxation phenomenon between the two sides is just superficial,&quot; says Quemoy-based Gen. Cheng Yu-ching. &quot;The Chinese communists have never given up their intention of taking Taiwan by force, so we must keep alert.&quot;    To cope with this confusing situation, the island's military commanders are focusing firmly on the past. In 1984, a museum was opened to highlight the October 1949 battle that left Quemoy in Generalissimo Chiang Kai-shek's hands. Huge paintings depict tattered communist troops lying in pools of blood or cowering before heroic-looking Kuomintang soldiers wearing miraculously unwrinkled uniforms.    In August, a second museum opened down the road. This one commemorates a period of 44 days in 1958 when China pummeled Quemoy with half a million artillery shells. The KMT troops dug in and refused to budge.    The battle is recounted in a series of table-top mechanical displays that would delight any child. In one, planes attached to metal rods engage in a dogfight. In another, a mountaintop lifts to reveal six-inch soldiers digging tunnels. The artillery duel comes with puffs of smoke, flashing lights and little plastic boulders that bounce about after being hit by simulated shells.    A guidebook says the 1958 battle ensured Quemoy's role as Taiwan's &quot;Great Wall on the Sea&quot; and the foremost &quot;anticommunist outpost of the free world.&quot; In the 30 years since, Quemoy has settled down to a more peaceful state of war.    Yet Quemoy still cranks up its 24,000-watt loudspeaker system and broadcasts daily &quot;news from the free world&quot; across the water. When the wind is right, soldiers send over balloons carrying soap, underwear and other necessities designed to win hearts and minds on the mainland.    In the old days, there was a certain excitement in being eyeball-to-eyeball with the hated communists. Soldiers would prove their bravery by swimming over to China at night and returning with such things as movie ticket stubs to document their journey. Nowadays, Quemoy is a tedious tour of duty.    The soldiers have built such a network of subterranean roadways that the island's only streetlight is underground. A 300-bed hospital is chiseled into a granite mountain. The barracks are built in caves.    Above ground, the military created a successful economy, based on pottery, sorghum liquor and beef sold to the rest of Taiwan. The idea was to build a model society that could be replicated in territories recaptured on the mainland.    But the model society isn't seen as such by the rest of Taiwan. Annual per-capita income is $3,000, half Taiwan's average. Quemoy's 50,000 civilians don't share the freedoms blooming elsewhere in Taiwan.    The islanders can't have radios for fear spies could use them to receive signals from China. TV is limited to one military-owned channel. Telephone calls can't reach beyond the island's shores. A Quemoy resident complained to a Taipei daily that the army even has strict controls on pingpong balls because spies might reach China on floats made of them. Quemoy's high command even manages the island's brothel, with separate sections for officers and enlisted men.    Spiritual desires can be fulfilled at a military-built temple where a colonel has been transformed into a god. The deity is Col. Lee Kuang-chien, the most senior KMT officer to die in the 1949 battle. The colonel's remains are in a small glass-enclosed box on the altar of the ornate temple that bears his name.    A gold-robed statue of the colonel, topped off by an army officer's dress hat, overlooks a long table where farmers place food offerings and incense.    &quot;The people believe his spirit is protecting them, not so much from the communists but from all kinds of evil spirits,&quot; says a military guide taking journalists on a rare tour of the island.    The spirit troubling Col. Lee's successors is democracy. Quemoy natives returning after living in Taiwan are bringing home new ideas.    The winner of a local election to represent Quemoy at the KMT's party congress last July is a high-school teacher. He beat 25 other candidates by advocating the lifting of martial law and electing a county council to govern the island.    Quemoy shop owners want to open the island to tourists. Land prices near Quemoy's expansive and pristine white beaches -- currently off-limits to civilians and covered with metal spikes -- are said to be rising quickly.    &quot;People think it would be a nice place to build hotels and casinos,&quot; says a military official. </TEXT></DOC>