<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870914-0074 </DOCNO><HL> Bush, Blue-Blood, Texas Oil Man, Washingtonian,Still Must Confront the Question: Who Are You?---By Gerald F. SeibStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>      {First of a series}   WASHINGTON -- In 1948, 24-year-old George Bush -- war hero, baseball star and Phi Beta Kappa college graduate -- packed his belongings into a red Studebaker coupe.    He drove away from the campus of Yale University, symbol of the Eastern establishment to which his family belonged, and headed off for a career in the West Texas oil fields. To young George Bush, it was a seminal moment: He was breaking the Yankee blue-blood mold and becoming a self-made man.    Yet today, Vice President George Bush concedes, lots of people don't believe he ever broke away from his Eastern establishment world.    &quot;I consider myself a Texan,&quot; he says over the drone of jet engines as Air Force Two carries him home from a speech. &quot;I've voted in every election there since '48. And yet some insist on a different kind of mold. They look at the background, which is right. Yet they don't look at the different, you know. . . .&quot; His voice trails off, and he seems uneasy arguing yet again that he is his own man.    It is odd that a presidential candidate as well known as George Bush has to contend with a question as simple as where he really comes from. Is he still the scion of an Eastern establishment family, as he was for his first 24 years? Or is he the Texas oil wildcatter of his next 18 years? Or is he the Washington establishment figure that he's been for the past 21 years?    The geographic schism is a metaphor for the man. He has been a prominent figure in American politics and foreign policy for two decades, yet it remains unclear just what motivates him or precisely what he stands for.    Friends point to his dazzling resume and say that he has grown as he has moved through a series of demanding jobs. But critics say he has no real identity or record on basic domestic issues and would be an uninspiring leader.    In large measure, Mr. Bush is in politics because his patrician parents instilled a belief that public service was a way to repay a society in which they had prospered. &quot;He has a patriotic, quasi-religious thing about serving his country,&quot; says his sister, Nancy Ellis.    Thus, he isn't driven to be president by some burning belief in a core set of ideas or clear-cut objectives he wants to achieve as much as by a simple notion that he is qualified to do a good job managing the country. His basic political positions -- suspicion of big government, a fundamental belief in business, a firm but not confrontational foreign policy -- track closely with those of the traditional wing of the Republican Party that helped send his father to the U.S. Senate.    In his Texas years, he developed a willingness to take the occasional big political risk and a conservative tinge in his rhetoric. But his experience in Washington suggests that once in office, he looks to the mainstream establishment for guidance and is willing to adjust to conventional wisdom.    He campaigns as a tough conservative, yet often he is perceived as a &quot;wimp&quot; because of his patrician manner and willingness to submerge his own views as vice president. Some acquaintances say neither of those labels is accurate, and they suggest another. &quot;I think he's a lot more of a pragmatist than he's given credit for or than he gives himself credit for,&quot; says Thomas Ludlow Ashley, a former Democratic congressman who went to Yale with Mr. Bush and who has remained a friend despite their political differences.    Regardless of what political label they think is appropriate, almost everyone regards George Bush as a decent, honest and likable person. And most would agree that his personal history has a storybook quality about it. &quot;Somebody once said George Bush has led the life that Ronald Reagan portrays,&quot; says Pete Teeley, a longtime aide.    Mr. Bush was born 63 years ago to Prescott Bush, a successful businessman and New York banker, and Dorothy Walker Bush, daughter of a wealthy investor. Their five children grew up in a brown-shingle house in the comfortable New York suburb of Greenwich, Conn. Dorothy Bush stressed the virtue of the Episcopal faith and the vice of braggadocio. Prescott Bush was a towering figure who regularly dashed off to local-government meetings or civic functions.    In a family of athletic over-achievers, George was the star. &quot;George was good at everything, always,&quot; says his younger brother Jonathan. He was a standout student and athlete at the Phillips Academy prep school in Andover, Mass. But by the time he graduated, World War II was blazing. Most of his classmates went on to college, but Mr. Bush became the Navy's youngest aviator and went to war as a bomber pilot aboard the aircraft carrier San Jacinto.    &quot;To me, he was a damn good pilot,&quot; recalls Leo Nadeau, a working-class Massachusetts native who was his gunner. But Mr. Nadeau adds, &quot;He was a cautious man. No unnecessary chances.&quot; Nevertheless, on Sept. 2, 1944, Mr. Bush's luck ran short. He was shot down by Japanese gunners over the Pacific island of Chichi Jima. His two crew members died as the plane plunged into the sea. Mr. Bush parachuted from the craft, struggled to a life raft and finally was rescued by a submarine.    After the war, Mr. Bush returned to his Eastern roots. He married his sweetheart, daughter of a New York publisher, and got an economics degree at Yale, where he was the slick-fielding, light-hitting captain of the baseball team.    By his own account in a just-published autobiography, Mr. Bush didn't do much serious thinking about politics in these years or for some time afterward. Mr. Ashley, a fellow student-athlete at Yale, remembers visiting the Bush family home those days and engaging in lively political discussions -- but only with George Bush's father.    And though he was a consistently good student, Mr. Bush doesn't seem to have developed into an intellectual. Years later, he told a reporter he had never read much history, and today he lists the most important book he has read as &quot;War and Peace&quot; -- but because of the &quot;discipline&quot; it took to read it as a youth rather than because of its contents.    While his war experience didn't fuel political passions, it did ignite the wanderlust that drove Mr. Bush to Texas. He was a drilling-equipment salesman and then co-founded an oil-exploration company. It grew and merged into Zapata Petroleum, which hit paydirt in offshore oil drilling. Mr. Bush had become wealthy in his own right.    By 1964, Mr. Bush was dabbling in Republican politics in his new hometown of Houston, and party leaders persuaded him to run for the U.S. Senate. He lost, but soon he sold his business interests and got elected to the House in 1966. After two terms, party leaders again persuaded him to run for the Senate -- and he lost again. The Nixon and Ford administrations were grateful for his effort, though, and rewarded him with appointments as United Nations ambassador, Republican national chairman, American representative in China and director of the Central Intelligence Agency. This impressive resume helped him seriously challenge for the presidential nomination in 1980.    Mr. Bush's career suggests that he has more political courage than critics acknowledge. In 1968, for example, he cast a vote for an open-housing bill crucial to civil-rights groups but vehemently opposed by conservatives in Houston. Afterward, he went home and faced down his critics in a tense open meeting.    But his record also shows that he doesn't always display strong convictions. While Republican national chairman during the Watergate scandal, he remained a Nixon apologist until a few days before the president's resignation. And after criticizing supply-side economics in 1980 as &quot;voodoo economics,&quot; he swallowed his misgivings to serve as vice president in the Reagan administration, and there isn't any record that he privately protested as the administration enacted its supply-side program.    Yet many of his closest confidants still tend to be mainstream Republicans rather than conservative Reaganites. They include new Federal Reserve Chairman Alan Greenspan, former White House foreign-policy adviser William Hyland and Treasury Secretary James Baker, a particularly close friend.    Generally, Mr. Bush is regarded as a good manager willing to delegate responsibility. But on tough decisions, he can be slow and frequently searches for the safest path. When he had to pick a new deputy at the CIA, he dawdled and finally chose E.H. Knoche, an agency insider who was considered politically safe because he had no experience in the agency's covert operations. There also is evidence that he can vacillate and agonize over decisions. As a businessman, he suffered a bleeding ulcer. And acquaintances say that when planning a Middle East trip last year he waffled for days over whether he should make a high-risk stop in Syria. (He decided not to.)    Still, Mr. Bush doesn't seem to be a brooder. He has endured traumatic experiences, especially the loss of a young daughter to leukemia in 1953, and he has emerged an optimist. His oldest son, George Jr., says his father has always kept a picture of the deceased daughter in his house, and he thinks the experience made his father more religious. But he adds, &quot;I don't remember any woe-is-me, life-is-miserable reaction to that death.&quot;    And today, Vice President Bush vows to avoid fretting too much over whether he is portrayed as an Eastern preppie or Texas wildcatter. &quot;You know something, I don't spend a lot of time worrying about that,&quot; he insists. He pauses, and reiterates: &quot;But I do think there's an attempt to fit you in a mold.&quot;    ---   IN BRIEF   George Bush   -- 63 YEARS OLD   --MARRIED 42 YEARS, 5 CHILDREN    -- YALE UNIVERSITY   -- REPUBLICAN OF TEXAS   U.S. Congressman 1966 to 1970; U.S. ambassador to the United Nations 1971 to 1973; chairman of Republican National Committee 1973 to 1974; chief of U.S. liaison office in People's Republic of China 1974 to 1975; director of Central Intelligence 1976; elected vice president of U.S. 1980.    Proudest accomplishment in politcs: As vice president, &quot;the role I've played in spearheading the administration's deregulation efforts, the south Florida Task Force and our efforts to interdict the flow of illegal drugs into our country.&quot;    American liberal he most admires: Norman Cousins, &quot;for his courage and decency.&quot;    Worst mistake in politics: &quot;My relations with the press suffered during the race in 1984 against Congresswoman Ferraro. I was too testy.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>