<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871028-0043 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 10/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   SHEVARDNADZE WILL VISIT the U.S. to reopen talks on scheduling a summit.    U.S. officials said the Soviet foreign minister will arrive this week for discussions on completing a treaty to eliminate the superpowers' medium-range nuclear missiles and scheduling a summit to sign it. Soviet leader Gorbachev said last week that there would be no summit unless Reagan agreed to new Strategic Defense Initiative concessions. Administration officials say the speed with which the Shevardnadze visit was arranged suggests Gorbachev realizes he may have miscalculated.    Shultz said an agreement on mediumrange arms &quot;is very close to being completed.&quot; He said the White House would make a formal announcement today.    ---   SOUTH KOREANS APPROVED a new constitution by an overwhelming margin.    With 90% of the ballots counted Wednesday in the national referendum, the approval rate was 93% and election officials declared the constitution approved. Nearly 80% of the country's 25.6 million eligible voters cast ballots. The constitution provides for the first direct presidential election in 16 years, a reduction in the powers of the presidency and increases in the authority of the legislature and judiciary.    Kim Dae Jung formally announced he is running for president, and said he is forming his own party to support his bid. The move splits the opposition.    ---   The Senate passed a catastrophic-illness bill that would greatly expand the Medicare program. Differences between the Senate bill, which would cover hospital and doctor bills after a patient pays the first $1,850, and a previously passed House measure now must be worked out.    ---   China's Communist Party announced that there will be a choice of candidates in elections to the ruling Central Committee for the first time in the party's 66-year history. The vote will take place during the current party congress, the first in five years, and will include at least 5% more candidates than there are seats in the 200-member body.    ---   Iran received a shipload of Chinese-made artillery shells within the past week, administration officials said. China insists it doesn't sell arms to either side in the Persian Gulf war, but the U.S. is pressuring Beijing into halting such arms deliveries. In the gulf, Iraq said its warplanes attacked an oil tanker and an Iranian oil facility.    ---   Malaysian police detained opposition leader Lim Kit Siang and about 13 other political and social critics under a law that permits indefinite detention without trial. The arrests come at a time of rising political and racial tensions between indigenous Malays and ethnic Chinese in the Southeast Asian nation.    ---   The U.S. and Mexico reached agreement on a trade accord that will set up a framework for consultations between the two countries on thorny trade issues, a U.S. trade official said. The accord, scheduled to be signed Nov. 6, requires the two sides to meet and discuss any trade issue within 30 days of a request from either side.    ---   The Air Force resumed cruise missile tests over western Canada. The tests have provoked widespread protests and heated political debate within Canada over the nation's role in U.S. nuclear arms development. The test involved a check of the missile's guidance system and it never left the wing of the B-52 that was carrying it.    ---   Tamil rebels appear to be shifting their campaign to eastern Sri Lanka following the capture of their northern stronghold of Jaffna by Indian troops. Police said four members of a Sri Lankan patrol were ambushed and killed by Tamil separatists in the eastern district of Trincomalee.    ---   The Justice Department said the gunman who killed a Merrill Lynch broker before committing suicide had been relocated to Miami under the federal witness protection program. The department said the man actually was Arthur Katz, a former attorney in Kansas City, Mo., who was indicted for insurance fraud.    ---   Soviet-Afghan forces ambushed and killed two Americans as they returned with their rebel escorts from filming a documentary on Afghanistan's civil war earlier this month, U.S. diplomats in Pakistan said. The two were identified as Lee Shapiro and Jim Lindeloff. Their project was partly funded by the Unification Church.    ---   Sikh gunmen killed 10 people in six separate attacks in the northern Indian state of Punjab. Sikhs also claim that a former Punjab senior minister, detained for the past year under the National Security Act, had been freed in a move that could herald government talks with Sikh leaders. The government wouldn't confirm the release.    ---   Ecuador imposed a state of emergency and placed newspapers and radio stations under censorship. The moves came on the eve of a banned nationwide strike.    ---   About 150 tourists are trapped in heavy snows in buses en route from Tibet to Nepal, according to a Canadian member of the group who hiked out to reach Katmandu. The tourist group, which includes at least three Americans, has been stranded since Oct. 19 and urgently needs help, he said. </TEXT></DOC>