<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871015-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 10/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   ARGENTINA ANNOUNCED a series of tough economic measures.    The package -- designed to slow inflation, narrow the budget deficit, bolster the sagging trade surplus and encourage foreign investment -- includes a wage and price freeze, a devaluation of the local currency's fixed rate, and higher import duties. In a televised address, President Alfonsin said the measures were urgently needed and characterized them as a step toward a contract among the nation's political, business, labor and social groups.    The Buenos Aires government's economic steps drew mostly favorable comments from foreign creditors and only muted domestic criticism.    ---   Indian troops penetrated Tamil rebel lines and entered a guerrilla stronghold in the Sri Lankan city of Jaffna, a military official in Colombo reported. Hundreds of people have been killed in the offensive, launched over the weekend by Indian forces sent to Sri Lanka to enforce a July 29 ceasefire aimed at ending ethnic violence.    ---   Duarte told Reagan that his government must have full control of El Salvador's territory before he negotiates peace with leftist rebels, a White House official said. The insurgents hold several provinces. Duarte met in Washington with Reagan, who said the successful outcome of a Central American peace plan is &quot;far from certain.&quot;    ---   Reagan decried the battle over Bork's Supreme Court nomination as an &quot;ugly spectacle&quot; in which the &quot;normal rules of decency&quot; had been cast aside. The president again pledged to fight for the judge's confirmation despite likely defeat. In the Senate, Democratic and GOP leaders continued arguing over the timing of the vote.    ---   The Nobel Physics Prize was awarded to two Swiss-based IBM Corp. scientists, J. Georg Bednorz and K. Alex Mueller, for a discovery last year that triggered the current world-wide rush to develop superconductors. Separately, two Americans shared the Nobel Prize in chemistry with a French researcher.    ---   The National Institutes of Health said an experimental anti-cancer drug has shown promise in treating a type of pneumonia that is the leading cause of death among AIDS patients. The drug, trimetrexate, was found to be about as effective, but less toxic, than drugs now used against pneumocystis carnii pneumonia.    The Senate approved legislation calling for nearly $1 billion for AIDS research and education. The measure was amended to include a provision to prevent federally financed materials about AIDS from promoting homosexuality or illegal drug use.    ---   Taiwan's ruling party unveiled a restrictive policy on travel to China in an apparent effort to curb rising expectations for broader contacts with the mainland. In announcing an end to the nearly 40-year-old travel ban, the Kuomintang said only those Taiwanese with close mainland relatives will qualify for visits.    ---   An Iranian gunboat raked a Kuwaiti-bound tanker with machine-gun fire, the second Iranian attack on commercial vessels in three days. Iraq, meanwhile, again pledged to retaliate for Tuesday's Iranian missile strike in Baghdad as thousands of Iraqis marched in a funeral procession for 32 people killed in the assault.    A House panel voted to charge Kuwait at least $250,000 each time the Navy escorts one of its oil tankers through the Persian Gulf. The fees, approved by 32-7 by the Merchant Marine Committee, would help cover the Navy's $20 million in monthly operating costs in the gulf.    ---   A New York State jury acquitted real estate broker John Zaccaro of extortion charges. The husband of 1984 Democratic vice presidential candidate Geraldine Ferraro was charged with conspiring to solicit a bribe, never paid, from a local cable-television firm that was seeking a franchise.    ---   A bomb exploded outside a Manila hotel, injuring at least 10 people. Philippine authorities ordered extra security at hotels and restaurants in the capital. In northern Luzon, communist rebels set fire to a fuel dump at a mining company and hinted at more attacks against economic targets.    ---   Israeli security forces arrested at least 50 suspected Arab guerrillas believed to be part of the Islamic Jihad movement in the Gaza Strip. In Jerusalem, Arab merchants reopened shops after a three-day strike, but Palestinian students threatened to disrupt a visit by Shultz, which begins tomorrow.    ---   A labor union in Haiti recommended that preparations for Nov. 29 national elections be halted because of Tuesday's assassination of a presidential candidate. Witnesses said the candidate, Yves Volel, was shot by police. He was the second presidential candidate killed in the past three months.    ---   The St. Louis Cardinals beat the San Francisco Giants to win baseball's National League title, four games to three. The Cardinals will face the American League's Minnesota Twins in the World Series. </TEXT></DOC>