<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880411-0030 </DOCNO><HL> ATandamp;T, Sun Looking to Open Windows of Opportunity --- Demonstration of System to Make Unix More User-Friendly Is Planned </HL><AUTHOR> Brenton R. Schlender (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LOTS TATE XRX SUNW T </CO><IN> EDP </IN><TEXT>   The growing battle over desktop computer standards has turned into a video game.    Today, American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. and Sun Microsystems Inc. will demonstrate Open Look, a product aimed at eventually transforming a forbidding operating system for technical computers into a splashy one that's user-friendly to ordinary office workers.    The so-called graphical-user-interface, designed by Sun with the help of Xerox Corp., someday will give computers running ATandamp;T's Unix operating system much of the snazzy on-screen images and ease of use of Apple Computer Inc.'s popular Macintosh computer and International Business Machines' new PS/2 personal computers. It is ATandamp;T's bid to make Unix -- heretofore an arcane operating system -- and the computers that rely on it, a powerful team to rival personal computers in the office.    Open Look is being launched into turbulent waters, however. Last month, Apple sued Microsoft Corp. and Hewlett-Packard Co., charging infringement of Apple copyrights covering certain visual features that are similar to ones Sun, Xerox and ATandamp;T will incorporate in Open Look.    Moreover, Open Look is the first product of ATandamp;T's controversial alliance with Sun to streamline and standardize Unix, a joint-effort that has set off howls of protest among many of ATandamp;T's biggest Unix customers. Finally, ATandamp;T's choice of letting Sun and Xerox design Open Look amounted to giving the cold shoulder to Microsoft, which is helping IBM design a similar graphical user interface for all of its computers, and badly wanted to provide one for Unix as well.    &quot;These are very interesting times,&quot; said Richard Shaffer, an industry consultant and analyst who publishes Technologic Computer Letter. &quot;A year ago it seemed that IBM and Microsoft alone would dictate the standards for desktop computers in the office. Now, after Apple's lawsuit challenging Microsoft and Sun coming up with Open Look for Unix, we have the possibility of seeing three very competitive standards.&quot;    ATandamp;T and Sun are trying to make the most of the announcement -- and the confusion and interest spawned by the Apple lawsuit -- by inviting dozens of software companies, chip makers and other computer makers to publicly endorse Open Look and the new, refined Unix. Lotus Development Corp., maker of the popular personal computer financial spreadsheet program 1-2-3, and Ashton-Tate Corp., maker of the Dbase family of database manager programs for personal computers, both are expected to announce their commitment to developing programs to run under Unix and Open Look.    Intel Corp. and Motorola Corp., two chip makers who supply crucial microprocessor chips for Unix computers, have been asked to attend, although it isn't clear whether they will show up.    Open Look functions as an on-screen operating environment, much like Microsoft's Windows for IBM PCs and Apple's Finder for the Macintosh, providing a visual &quot;desktop&quot; on which a computer user can view various icons representing documents, files of documents, applications programs, and places to store information. To look at a document or to use, say, a spreadsheet program, a user points to its icon with a cursor, using a hand-held pointing device called a mouse.    It is the culmination of work started at Sun two years ago. At the time, Mountain View, Calif.-based Sun was looking for a way to make its technical workstations easier to use in hopes of broadening its markets beyond engineers' workbenches. Last fall, as part of a larger, technology sharing agreement under which ATandamp;T also would license some of Sun's computer designs, Sun agreed to help ATandamp;T work on the new, standard version of Unix, complete with a new graphical-user-interface. (ATandamp;T cemented that relationship in January when it agreed to buy a 20% stake in Sun.)    Initially, Sun and ATandamp;T debated whether to use Sun's previous work for the new interface, or to ask Microsoft, which was in the midst of helping IBM, to design a similar interface for Unix.    But last fall, Sun signed a similar technology sharing agreement with Xerox, which at its Palo Alto, Calif., research center in the 1970s invented many of the visual features that Apple, Microsoft and others have incorporated into user interfaces. With access to such expertise, Sun and ATandamp;T decided to design Open Look themselves.    &quot;Microsoft is not a happy camper over this,&quot; asserts Mr. Shaffer, the industry analyst, who says that's why Microsoft officials will be conspicuously absent at today's public announcement of Open Look. (Mr. Gates and other Microsoft officials weren't available to comment.) &quot;It's especially upsetting now that Apple has sued Microsoft,&quot; in an action that, regardless of its merits, makes Windows &quot;look a little bit like tainted goods.&quot;    Sources close to Sun say that Microsoft was turned down because of its close ties to IBM. &quot;Polygamy is hard to pull off, and IBM and Microsoft have to have a relatively monogamous relationship,&quot; said a source.    While Open Look will give makers of Unix-based computers a better shot at selling to the fast-growing business market, many analysts believe its success in displacing either IBM-compatible or Apple computers in the office is a long shot. For one thing, Open Look is only a prototype now, and won't reach computer users for at least a year. And even then, computer users will have to wait for companies like Lotus and Ashton-Tate to write useful programs tuned to run on Unix and Open Look, something neither has done before.    In the meantime, IBM and Microsoft are working furiously to finish up OS/2, a new operating system for more powerful personal computers that will offer much of the flexibility and functionality that Unix promises. And even though OS/2 faces many of the same uncertainties as Unix, Microsoft and IBM have been holding the hands of independent software developers for several years to help them prepare for it, which should make the transition smoother. Plus, there are millions of personal computers already on desktops that, with a few modifications, will be able to run OS/2 programs, compared with fewer than a million Unix machines, thus creating a real incentive for software developers to get moving on OS/2 programs.    And then there is Apple, which started the whole user-interface footrace among its competitors with its playful Macintosh &quot;look and feel.&quot; Not standing still, Apple has vowed to improve its Macintosh operating system next year to make it as powerful as OS/2 and Unix promise to be.    One thing Sun and ATandamp;T don't think they'll have to worry about is a lawsuit from Apple to confuse the issues. The companies took pains to license similar technology from Xerox that Apple licensed and refined in its distinctive interface for the Macintosh. Microsoft, on the other hand, never licensed any of the graphical-user-interface images or ideas developed at Xerox, but instead relied on two rather vague license accords with Apple.    &quot;This whole turn of events just shows that OS/2 isn't the end of things&quot; in the personal computer business, says Esther Dyson, a computer industry analyst who likens the personal computer business to a card game. &quot;Just when you think someone's won the game, another hand shows up and everything gets rearranged.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>