<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870709-0047 </DOCNO><HL> Casey Is CalledDriving ForceIn Iran Network---North Says Ex-CIA DirectorEmbraced Plan to DivertArms Profits to Contras---By David Rogers and John WalcottStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MDEST GOVMTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North testified that former Central Intelligence Agency Director William Casey was a driving force behind the Iran-Contra operation, and was fully informed of the diversion of arms-sales profits to aid Nicaraguan insurgents.    Col. North said Mr. Casey embraced the diversion plan when it was first proposed in January 1986, and saw it as part of a &quot;full-service&quot; covert operation that he hoped to expand beyond Central America.    A secret White House fund used by Col. North was set up at Mr. Casey's urging, according to the Marine officer, who said that when the operation began unraveling last year, the CIA director instructed him to destroy a ledger recording disbursements to the Contras.    Col. North's account contradicts repeated statements by Mr. Casey that he only learned of the diversion last fall; Mr. Casey died last May. While Col. North continued to deny any direct knowledge of the president's role, the young officer has drawn an ever wider circle of high officials who had access to Mr. Reagan and were familiar with the details of the operation.    Casting himself as more an operator, Col. North portrayed Mr. Casey as a central strategist who proposed setting up private companies to funnel aid to the Contras and recommended that retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord be recruited to run the operation. The working relationship between the former White House aide and the former CIA director dates back to at least 1983, said Col. North. Mr. Casey frequently reminded Col. North that he was a lawyer, and said their activities were legal, the Marine testified.    In his second day of testimony before the House and Senate committees investigating the controversy, Col. North, accompanied by his attorney, Brendan Sullivan, remained flamboyant and combative. The Marine officer used the televised hearings to defend his record, and challenge the committees at home and even a Palestinian terrorist abroad.    In a moment of apology, the former National Security Council aide admitted that he had personally benefited from a home-security system paid from accounts used in the Iran-Contra operation. But he sought to shift part of the blame to a government that he said failed to provide protection last year.    &quot;This lieutenant colonel was not offered at any time any protection by the government of the United States,&quot; Col. North said, after describing a threat against his life by Palestinian guerrilla Abu Nidal. &quot;I'll be glad to meet Abu Nidal on equal terms anywhere in the world,&quot; the Marine testified. &quot;But I am not willing to have my wife and my four children meet Abu Nidal or his organization on his terms.&quot;    Prior testimony has established that Gen. Secord paid $16,000 to a consultant who arranged for the installation of the security system at Col. North's Virginia home, and at least $9,000 of the funds have been traced to a Panamanian shell company used in the Iran-Contra operation.    Col. North admitted preparing false letters to cover up the fact that he hadn't paid for the work, describing his action as &quot;probably the grossest misjudgment that I have made in my life.&quot;    Commenting on Col. North's testimony, the chief spokesman for the Federal Bureau of Investigation said the agency considered the threat by Abu Nidal's organization &quot;very serious.&quot; But he said the FBI told Col. North that it hadn't any legal basis to provide him protection. After the hearing, however, Warren Rudman (R., N.H.), vice chairman of the Senate panel, said that &quot;a government official who receives a threat that is deemed serious&quot; can get protection from other government agencies.    A former NSC official, Rodney McDaniel, with whom Col. North said he spoke about his security concerns, couldn't be reached for comment.    Col. North said the secret fund established within the White House consisted of cash and traveler's checks that drew on the resources of the Contras' main military organization and the private network of companies overseen by Gen. Secord.    An estimated $150,000 to $175,000 was disbursed from the fund during the life of the operation, Col. North testified, and in some cases he advanced funds of his own to cover costs. Though records show that some traveler's checks were cashed in the Marine's name, he said all of these expenses were related to the operation or were compensation for money he had advanced.    Col. North denied knowing beforehand of arrangements to establish a fund for his family from the proceeds of the Iran-Contra operation. He confirmed, however, that his wife Betsy met last year with an attorney representing Gen. Secord's business partner and money manager, Albert Hakim.    The Marine didn't dispute Mr. Hakim's stated desire to provide some assistance to the North family if the colonel were killed during a trip to Iran in May 1986. But Col. North said that once he had returned safely from Iran, he instructed his wife to end such talks.    The former aide, who has said he provided detailed reports on his activities to his superiors, couldn't provide even a rough estimate of how much money he assumed was left in the Iran-Contra operation when it ended last fall.    &quot;I was surprised,&quot; Col. North said of prior testimony showing an estimated $8 million remains in accounts in Europe. &quot;I still don't understand that.&quot;    As the leading counterterrorism expert on the NSC staff, Col. North admitted to misgivings about selling arms to Iran, and said the idea became &quot;more palatable&quot; to him when the diversion scheme surfaced in January 1986.    Col. North said the idea grew out of discussions with a high-ranking Israeli official who wanted part of the proceeds to be used for joint covert activities, said Col. North. He added that the proposal was linked directly to Nicaragua by Iranian middleman Manucher Ghorbanifar, whom he described as an Israeli agent.    &quot;He made (the link) point blank,&quot; said Col. North, describing a January 1986 conversation that he had with Mr. Ghorbanifar in a bathroom in Europe. &quot;And he made it, by my understanding, with the full knowledge and acquiescence and support, if not the original idea, of the Israeli intelligence services, if not the Israeli government.&quot;    Col. North's description of the evolution of the diversion plan puts Israel in a far more prominent role than Jerusalem has said it played in the arms sales.    Apart from aid to the Contras, the arms-sale profits helped finance a variety of smaller covert operations, Col. North said, involving such things as radio equipment provided to the Jamaican government and a Danish freighter used in a failed attempt to ransom U.S. hostages in Lebanon.    While repeatedly dressing his actions in patriotic colors and insisting he wasn't trying to snare his colleagues &quot;in Ollie North's dragnet,&quot; Col. North's testimony that he didn't act alone could pose serious problems to several senior administration officials. Senate committee Chairman Daniel Inouye (D., Hawaii) said the panels may recall some earlier witnesses and take depositions in an effort to resolve contradictions between Col. North and others who denied knowing the former NSC aide was helping arm the Contras.    &quot;He did have authority for what he did, and he was not a lone ranger,&quot; Sen. Rudman said after yesterday's testimony. &quot;I think he's given a number of people reason for some sleepless nights.&quot;    In addition to Mr. Casey, Col. North testified that Secretary of State George Shultz, Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams, and Alan Fiers, the head of the CIA's Central American task force, all knew he was helping deliver aid to the Contras after Congress voted to suspend assistance to them. Col. North didn't specify how much these officials knew, but his notes of meetings with colleagues indicate that he discussed arms shipments and payments to the Contras with Mr. Abrams, Mr. Fiers and others.    Col. North testified that Mr. Shultz took him aside once last year, put his arm around the Marine's shoulder, and thanked him for his assistance to the Contras. &quot;I knew what he meant,&quot; Col. North said.    In a statement, the State Department said Mr. Shultz only &quot;expressed his appreciation&quot; to Col. North last September for having kept up the morale of the Contra leaders. Mr. Shultz &quot;was not indicating either his knowledge or approval of the activities to which North has recently testified,&quot; the statement said.    Col. North also said he doesn't know how much Vice President George Bush or his staff knew about his secret Contra operation, and said he never told Mr. Bush about his activities. But he said administration officials and members of the congressional intelligence committees who read the CIA's daily summary of intelligence reports could have pieced the story together. He said a congressman, whom he didn't identify, once asked him to organize an airdrop of weapons to a Nicaraguan Indian group.    Col. North also admitted that he helped prepare responses to congressional inquiries that were &quot;erroneous, misleading, evasive and wrong.&quot; But he said &quot;lying doesn't come easy to me,&quot; and insisted his actions were necessary to defend the Contra aid operation and the lives of some of its participants.    Asked about a 1986 meeting with the House Intelligence Committee, Col. North said: &quot;I misled the Congress at that meeting, face-to-face. I did so with a purpose.&quot;    Col. North testified that his superiors knew about and approved his efforts to deceive Congress. He said former National Security Adviser John Poindexter didn't order him to mislead the House panel, but did congratulate him after he reported doing so.    Directly contradicting sworn testimony by his friend, former National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane, Col. North said Mr. McFarlane directed him in 1985 to &quot;fix&quot; six memos about his secret Contra-aid operation in order to conceal Mr. McFarlane's knowledge of his activities and to minimize potential political damage to President Reagan. Mr. McFarlane has testified that Col. North suggested altering the memos.    At the end of yesterday's hearing, Col. North explained the paradox of the good soldier prepared to sacrifice himself and the witness who has testified he didn't act alone or without approval.    &quot;I was that deniable link (between the U.S. government and the Contra-aid operation), and I was supposed to be dropped like a hot rock when it all came down,&quot; Col. North said. &quot;And I was willing to serve in that capacity. I was not willing to become the victim of a criminal prosecution.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>