<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870722-0124 </DOCNO><HL> Making Sure Our Technology Stays Ours---By Richard Perle</HL><DD> 07/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST EUROP JAPANAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   Through unusually sensitive intelligence, the Reagan administration learned in 1981 that the Soviet Union was massively (and effectively) organized to acquire, and use for military purposes, the West's most sensitive technologies.    Preferring butter to guns, we had long since come to accept that the Soviet Union (which prefers guns to butter) would build more tanks, airplanes, ships and missiles than the Western democracies. But we believed that qualitative superiority would compensate for our quantitative inferiority. And then we learned that each year more than 5,000 Soviet military programs utilized Western technology drawn from the U.S., Japan and our allies in Western Europe.    Much of the technology, equipment and know-how that poured into the Soviet military-industrial complex was obtained illegally in violation of an embargo agreed to by the U.S., its NATO allies and Japan, and administered by COCOM, an obscure, informal, voluntary organization housed in an annex of the American Embassy in Paris.    Shaken by evidence that the Soviets were devastatingly effective in getting what they wanted from and through COCOM countries, President Reagan set out to strengthen COCOM. It was hopelessly understaffed. For each of COCOM's two dozen or so employees (all of them clerical), the Soviets had more than a thousand professionals, in Moscow and abroad, engaged full-time in defeating the Western embargo. COCOM's budget was about $500,000 a year. It had no computer, no simultaneous-translation facilities, no professional staff, no research or intelligence capability, no military advisers. It duplicated its reports on what must have been one of the last hand-cranked mimeograph machines in Western Europe.    Delegates to COCOM were generally diplomats of modest rank specializing in commercial affairs, men and women whose careers centered on expanding, not interdicting, exports. They typically would serve in Paris between trade-promoting tours in Warsaw Pact countries. When, in 1982, the U.S. requested a high-level meeting of COCOM it was the first in 25 years. Abysmal neglect had permitted COCOM to atrophy even as Soviet operations aimed at defeating it were increasing.    For nearly seven years we have been trying to get our COCOM allies to strengthen COCOM and, more important, to improve their own licensing and enforcement institutions. We have pleaded with them to treat the licensing of exports to the Eastern Bloc with the seriousness it deserves. We have implored them to staff their export-control authorities with sufficient trained personnel to do the job. We have urged them to augment their customs personnel, as we have done, and train them so that they can distinguish between exports that are permitted under the COCOM regulations and those that are not. We have urged the creation of a group of experts in military technology, drawn from ministries of defense.    We have done all this with only meager and unsatisfactory results. Almost without exception our allies have resisted our efforts, sidetracking our initiatives or watering them down, delaying, diminishing and deflecting us with every dilatory tactic and bureaucratic maneuver they could devise.    I vividly recall a conversation with a high-level Japanese official, sent by his government to Paris for a meeting at which strengthening COCOM was on the agenda. We were hoping to increase the COCOM budget, and the Japanese share of the increase would have been $45,000. With breathtaking disingenuousness, this official told me that Japan couldn't afford it. Thus lacking consensus, yet another American initiative was delayed.    Like the Japanese, the Germans have fought us every inch of the way. Always eager to expand the list of technologies, they let their assiduousness vanish when help is needed to enforce agreed controls or bring diverters to justice.    Other COCOM members -- the Dutch, Canadians, Belgians, Italians, Norwegians, British and Danes -- have, to varying degrees, resisted our efforts to obtain a level playing field in which all COCOM member countries exercise comparable diligence in implementing the embargo. Virtually all of them have sought to decontrol as much technology as possible, particularly when one of their industries is directly affected. It is not uncommon at COCOM meetings to find officials of European companies whose product line is being discussed or negotiated seated behind their national delegations. The last thing in their minds is the security of the Western alliance. They are there to open market opportunities for their companies. And if the U.S. has to increase its defense budget to counter Western technologies in Soviet military systems -- well, that's not their concern.    Our COCOM partners lack the legal, institutional and bureaucratic means to enforce the embargo. Japan, for example, has 30 people overseeing 200,000 licenses annually, and 20 of them have been added since the Toshiba case became public. Norway has only six officials to discharge its international obligation to implement the rules. The situation in other countries is similar.    If anyone doubts my skepticism about how our allies administer and enforce the rules, consider this: The U.S. has 15 times as many licenses as Japan awaiting COCOM review for sales to China. Either we are doing 15 times as much business as the Japanese in high-technology exports to China or the Japanese aren't bothering even to request licenses.    This is the essential background against which to reflect on the disastrous transfer to the Soviet Union, by companies in Norway and Japan, of the equipment and know-how needed to reduce radically the detectability of Soviet submarines. In the atmosphere of governmental indifference that has existed among our COCOM partners, disasters like the Kongsberg-Toshiba case are bound to happen.    Despite this sad history, administration officials routinely appear before congressional committees and talk about how much progress we have made at COCOM. They are wrong. They have become so accustomed to the absence of any progress that they are ready to regard the most trivial (and generally ephemeral) hints of tractability as a significant step forward. It reminds me of a hospital room full of anxious relatives surrounding Uncle Charlie, who is recovering from a stroke. When, after weeks in a coma, Uncle Charlie wiggles his little finger ever so slightly a great cheer goes up.    It is undoubtedly frustration with our allies' approach to export controls that has led some Americans to argue that we should weaken or abandon our own controls, sinking to the level of our least vigilant allies rather than working to raise them to ours. According to this view, we should join the Toshibas and the Kongsbergs; we should switch rather than fight. I believe that this is profoundly mistaken.    Some days ago the House passed amendments to the trade bill that will open the way to many more Toshibas. It took this action before the Kongsberg-Toshiba case was understood, before people recognized how much damage could be done in a single transaction.    The House amendments would effectively decontrol all U.S. exports to COCOM member countries, despite the fact that, as we have seen in the case of Norway and Japan, most of those countries are hopelessly ill-equipped to protect their own, much less our, technology. Ship American technology with reckless abandon to any COCOM country, as the House bill would authorize, and there will be countless cases like Kongsberg-Toshiba. And we won't even know -- because there will be no record of the transactions -- what sensitive American technologies are being exported or where our exports ultimately wind up. That is one reason why I have elsewhere referred to Rep. Don Bonker's (D., Wash.) amendments as the &quot;Soviet Technology Relief Act of 1987.&quot;    The House amendments also would decontrol 40% of the exports we now embargo regardless of the impact of such action on our national security. This arbitrary decontrol will help the Soviets upgrade their weapons and weapons making with Western technology, giving them legally what they have been stealing.    Finally, the House bill would repeal an amendment to the Export Administration Act and exclude the Defense Department from any role in export licensing to COCOM countries. It's idle nonsense to believe that one can make decisions on the control of exports for national security purposes without the benefit of the advice, perspective and expertise of the Defense Department.    The Senate amendments to the trade bill, pushed through the mists of inattention, indifference and industrial greed by Sen. John Heinz (R., Pa.), are almost as bad. Like the House measures, the Senate measures would end the practice of licensing sensitive exports to even the most errant of our allies. Senators who have voted to shut Toshiba out of the American market have now voted for legislation that will permit our most sensitive technology to be sold, without license or scrutiny, to Toshiba or anyone else with a letter of credit and a post office box in a COCOM member country. Thus would Messrs. Bonker and Heinz reward the Japanese, the Norwegians and the rest by entrusting to them our most sensitive advanced technologies.    The bitter lesson of the Kongsberg-Toshiba case has not been lost on COCOM, which seems, at long last, ready to accept the sort of strengthening we have been urging. But the moment is fleeting. If the U.S. fails now to press urgent reforms we will search in vain for the will to do so later. Getting started will require getting rid of the Heinz-Bonker measures. If they become law, any hope of strengthening COCOM will be lost.    The administration would do well to remember the policies it adopted in 1981 and why it adopted them. If it does, the president will veto the trade bill -- not only because it is dangerously protectionist, but because it would do irreparable harm to our national security.    ---   Mr. Perle, resident scholar at the American Enterprise Institute, was formerly assistant secretary of defense for international security policy. </TEXT></DOC>