<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870109-0135 </DOCNO><HL> Early Retirement:More People Quit JobsBefore 65, but WaysOf Using Time Vary---Some Start Second Careers,Others Take Up Fishing;Effect of New Tax Law---Living Out Life at the Beach---By Selwyn FeinsteinStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMT LABOR TAXESFINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><TEXT>   Before he took early retirement seven years ago, Howard Shank made a list of the things he wanted to do when he was no longer the president and chief creative officer at Leo Burnett Co., a Chicago advertising agency. High on his agenda were painting, writing, golf and traveling.    But Mr. Shank, who was then 57 years old, wasn't ready for his own advice. Instead, he let others tell him how a man of his talent, experience and vigor should spend his retirement years. So he taught, consulted and was miserable for 18 months.    He didn't snap out of his melancholy until he realized that his professional achievements no longer mattered. &quot;Retirement forced me to reinvent myself,&quot; he says. And what the new Howard Shank really wanted to do was write, which had been on his list from the start. &quot;I've written one book (about retirement) and I'm struggling cheerfully to write another,&quot; he says from his home-office in Lake Forest, Ill.    Retirement, the experts counsel, forces people to come to grips with what is important in their lives. Early retirement, whether by choice or not, is forcing thousands of managers in their mid-50s to early 60s to face the issue more abruptly, while they are still young and healthy enough to resent a career interruption -- or to realize a dream.    For some people, leaving a company after 20 or 30 years is as jolting as a forced separation from their family would be. Others welcome the chance to shuck the pressures of a job and commuting. Some retirees subsequently seek new careers because they need the challenge or the cash; others shun anything commercial, preferring volunteer work or fishing and golf. Often, retirement means a new relationship with a spouse.    The number of retirees has been growing. According to the General Accounting Office, an agency of Congress, 17% of men and 7% of women between the ages of 55 and 61 -- some 1.9 million people in all -- received pension benefits in 1983, the latest year for which government data are available. The count doubled over 10 years. Most cited voluntary retirement, rather than health or disability, as their reason for not working.    Sluggish economic conditions accelerated the rush to retire before the customary age of 65. Hewitt Associates, an employee-benefits consultant, says that 32% of the companies it surveyed offered &quot;some type of voluntary separation plan&quot; in recent years, usually cash or richer pension benefits, to entice unneeded workers to leave.    Most often, such plans took the form of &quot;early retirement windows,&quot; incentives for senior staffers who retired within, say, three months. Most of the companies found such an approach preferable to mandatory layoffs, which would have hit pensionless younger workers the hardest.    Ground rules, though, are changing. To keep Baby Boomers in the work force longer, thus easing their future drain on the Social Security system, the federal government has been whittling away at the economic incentives for early retirement. Under 1983 legislation, the normal age for Social Security benefits will gradually rise from 65 to 67 for those born after 1960. This means that workers who want to start collecting benefits at the minimum age of 62 will ultimately get far less from Social Security.    The new tax law, moreover, curtails early-retirement benefits in private pension plans. Under the old tax code, according to the Employee Benefit Research Institute, a worker retiring at age 55 could have received a maximum annual pension of $75,000 from a corporate defined-benefit pension plan. The Tax Reform Act of 1986 slashes that maximum for 55-year-old retirees to $40,600, and, when the Social Security retirement age climbs to 67, will cut it further, to $35,500. Because existing pension rights are protected, though, early retirees may not feel the full sting of the revision for several years.    When he faced the prospect of early retirement six years ago, Charles Gedge had plenty of misgivings. He was 59 when Sears, Roebuck andamp; Co. offered retirement incentives to 2,500 managers, aiming to reduce employment and make room for younger workers eager to move up. The offer was attractive: half pay for three years plus all his accrued pension benefits in a lump sum. Still, after 30 years with Sears, the last eight as director of purchasing in Chicago, Mr. Gedge wasn't ready to end his career.    &quot;I had seen so many people who retired at Sears who were dead in a couple of years,&quot; he says. &quot;The longevity wasn't very good.&quot;    But when a friend offered him a senior vice presidency at a laboratory-equipment concern, he accepted Sears's offer. While his new salary was only 60% of his Sears pay, with the income from his Sears pension and his severance pay he figured he was well ahead.    His new job lasted only three years before the company was bought out and he was offered six months' severance pay to again part ways. Now he is selling real estate, &quot;doing just moderately&quot; but enjoying it, he says. His initial qualms about retiring early have eased; his health is fine. &quot;I think I did the right thing,&quot; he says.    Robert Cullen had little choice about retiring when he returned to the U.S. last spring after serving in South Korea for two years as a vice president of a General Foods Corp. affiliate. He had spent 28 years with General Foods, much of it overseas. But the company, acquired in 1985 by Philip Morris Inc., told him it didn't think it could reassign him. Instead, it offered him retirement with two years' pay over seven years, plus accrued benefits, that worked out to about 45% of his pay.    He retired last July at 58, &quot;disappointed&quot; that General Foods no longer needed him and &quot;psychologically unprepared&quot; for a life of ease. &quot;There was never any question I would stay home,&quot; he says. &quot;I need to be in the business world.&quot; And he has quickly jumped back in, consulting for a company near his Valhalla, N.Y., home and serving as U.S. representative for a Korean manufacturer.    Though his wife is bitter about his forced retirement, he says, &quot;I have a little more pragmatic view. I'm taking home as much or more than when I was working. I am very sound and very content.&quot;    There was nothing sudden about Frederic Libby's retirement; he plotted it for more than a decade and hasn't had any second thoughts. Five years ago, at age 60, he left his job as supervisor of vocational training at Eastman Kodak Co. in Rochester, N.Y., after 32 years with the company. Eight years before, he had bought a lot on North Carolina's Outer Banks. And six years before, he had bought a boat suited to the Carolina waters. With a 50% Kodak pension and Navy benefits, he figures he can afford to live out his days happily on the beach.    Roger Birk also laid out a retirement schedule when, in 1980, he was asked to become the chairman and chief executive of Merrill Lynch andamp; Co.: He said he would probably retire in five years, when he was only 55. His predecessor, Donald Regan, now the White House chief of staff, &quot;offered to bet I would change my mind,&quot; Mr. Birk says. But he was true to his word, ending 30 years with the brokerage house in July 1985.    &quot;I don't think we're put on this earth to make all the money we can,&quot; he says. &quot;There are other ways you can live happily.&quot; He didn't have any specific plans; with the self-assurance of an executive who had earned as much as $1.5 million a year, &quot;I had confidence I could make happen what I wanted to happen,&quot; he says.    Now -- besides being a low-handicap golfer -- he is a director of four companies, a trustee of Notre Dame and a consultant at Merrill Lynch. &quot;I'm booked,&quot; he says of his retirement schedule. &quot;I feel good. I am happy.&quot;    Robert Swinarton, who retired six years ago at 54 as vice chairman of Dean Witter Reynolds, another major brokerage house, also planned to retire early. But serving as a director or trustee wasn't part of his plan. &quot;I cold-turkeyed,&quot; he says from his mountain home in Dorset, Vt. &quot;I made my deal on Thursday, packed my office and left on Friday, and I've been back only once, a year ago.&quot; In the past six years, he adds, &quot;I haven't done a lick of work for pay.&quot;    His wife, Roddy, was apprehensive at first, fearful that a husband at home full time might impinge on her daily routine. &quot;But we go our own ways during the day,&quot; she says. And she soon discovered a plus. &quot;When he was working, he was never at home. All the responsibilities were on my shoulders. Now he shares some of this. He frees me for other things.&quot;    Many executives, with savings from years of high earnings, houses already paid for, and pensions and Social Security benefits, can well afford to do what they please. Retirement living, moreover, is often cheaper than anticipated, with savings on commuting, lunch and clothing bills.    But Arthur Freitas in Danbury, Conn., knew he needed supplemental income when he accepted early retirement almost three years ago, at age 57, from Union Carbide Corp. His 33 years with Carbide, most recently as an assistant controller, entitled him to one year's pay and a 60% pension. But two of his four children were still at home. So he worked first with a nonprofit agency and now is a business broker.    Conrad Pologe was lucky in his financial planning. Three years ago, after 28 years with American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co., the last as division manager for media relations in New York, he decided to retire at age 61. He told the company he would staff a month-long conference in Geneva, Switzerland, as planned. But he said he wasn't coming back. He would stay on and live in Europe.    Only while he was in Geneva did Mr. Pologe learn that ATandamp;T was offering cash incentives to persuade older managers to retire. &quot;I got one year's pay out of the blue,&quot; he says. This cushion has made retired life all the easier for him and his wife, first in Italy and now outside London.    Betty Frederick probably didn't have to work after her husband, Raymond, retired as manager of training and development three years ago, at age 59, from what was then Michigan-Wisconsin Pipeline Co. His early-retirement benefits, plus other income, brought him about 65% of his regular pay.    But his wife of 42 years isn't about to give up her job as a claims examiner for a Ford Motor Co. insurance subsidiary. She didn't start working until 20 years into their marriage and, at 60, says, &quot;I get fulfillment out of my work. It keeps me thinking young.&quot; Her paycheck, Mrs. Frederick adds, is &quot;the difference between being frugal and being at ease.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>