<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880315-0095 </DOCNO><HL> Cocaine Trade Snares Haitian Strongman --- Col. Paul Accused of Profiting From Drug Shipments </HL><AUTHOR> Charles McCoy (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><IN> MON </IN><TEXT>   Col. Jean Claude Paul may be Haiti's most powerful man. He believes in black magic and deals in white powder, according to U.S. drug agents and others. And he is a thoroughgoing thug, they say.    One day last year, in the basement of Haiti's main military barracks, Col. Paul watched as his intelligence operatives worked over a woman who would not confess to theft. Then, say former Haitian officers who were there, he ambled over to the woman, smiled reassuringly and clubbed her unconscious with a night stick. &quot;The colonel is a dangerous man,&quot; says Fritz Pierre Louis, formerly one of the colonel's top intelligence officers.    The recent indictment on drug charges of Panamanian strongman Gen. Manuel Noriega and revelations from Honduras and elsewhere have exposed the degree to which Colombian drug cartels have penetrated Latin American and Caribbean armies and governments. Violent and corrupt officials there are undermining U.S. efforts to fight drugs and to move the region toward more democratic forms of government.    Col. Paul seems a striking version of the type. Haiti has a new president named Leslie Manigat, and former junta leader Lt. Gen. Henri Namphy is still on the scene. But many people say Col. Paul calls the shots. As Haiti seems to be slipping back to rule by the gun, the colonel has the most guns. And to help raise money for more, U.S. officials believe, the colonel has conspired to ship tons of Colombian cocaine to the U.S.    Col. Paul declined requests for interviews. A Miami grand jury Thursday returned drug-trafficking indictments against him and a band of confederates that includes a brother and a former beauty queen who considers herself a witch. One alleged deal: a 100-kilo (220-pound) cocaine shipment from the colonel's ranch to Miami that ended up being stolen in the Bahamas, triggering a bloody search for the thief in which five men were killed, according to participants.    &quot;The colonel and his people don't play around,&quot; says a federal law enforcement official.    Col. Paul is commander of the 800 elite Haitian troops at the Dessalines barracks, a low, mustard-colored structure whose power-behind-the-throne location behind the national palace in Port-au-Prince fits with political reality. Former officers say Col. Paul also has a private army of thousands of toughs, remnants of the Ton-Ton Macoutes, the dreaded secret police of deposed dictator Jean Claude &quot;Baby Doc&quot; Duvalier and his late father, Francois &quot;Papa Doc&quot; Duvalier.    The tall, powerfully built colonel grew up poor in a Port-au-Prince slum but got into the military through his father, who had started as a janitor at the palace and rose to a top spot in the secret police. As a young officer, he made a name for himself during a 1963 uprising when his regiment cornered rebels in a graveyard and made sure they never left.    People who know the colonel say he mixes violence and sentimentality. A lover of Julio Iglesias's sappy ballads, he keeps a bazooka by his bed. He is unflinching before bullets, but is said to fear spirits, and his ranch is littered with coconut shells and half-empty glasses of water, voodoo totems that supposedly ward off evil. He personally beats prisoners, yet has paid hundreds of dollars in medical costs for one of his corporal's sick daughters.    The violent side often prevails. Col. Paul has denied it, but U.S. government officials say his men created much of the mayhem that left 34 people dead in the aborted November election that was to be Haiti's first experiment in democracy in three decades.    Mr. Pierre Louis, the former intelligence officer, says the colonel once handed him a scrap of paper listing three opposition politicians and said they should be &quot;taken care of.&quot; Mr. Pierre Louis says that meant they should be killed. But all three fled the country, he says.    Much of the colonel's power flows from the fierce loyalty of his enlisted men who, diplomats say, are beyond the control of anyone else in Haiti. Former officers say the colonel cultivates that loyalty by supplementing his troops' meager pay with bonuses from his own pocket. &quot;The colonel is like a generous father,&quot; says an officer who says he left Haiti under a death threat after questioning the colonel's order to shoot civilians. &quot;If you need cash, you just ask.&quot; The money, say U.S. law-enforcement officials, drug traffickers and others, comes from cocaine.    These sources say Col. Paul rents out a dirt airstrip at his ranch, 90 miles north of the capital, to Colombian cocaine traffickers. U.S. Drug Enforcement Administration informants who have been involved in at least one deal with the colonel say that for about $250,000 the colonel provides government troops for security and fuel for the planes.    His approach is hands-on. Osvaldo Quintana, a Cuban-American who brokered one cocaine deal for the colonel before becoming a DEA informant to escape a drug charge, once worried about getting a jar full of cocaine past soldiers inspecting bags at Haiti's international airport. The colonel, who had given Mr. Quintana the coke as a sample for his Miami partners, slipped the jar into his own leather handbag and strode into the airport, Mr. Quintana says. The soldiers saluted and within minutes, the cocaine and Mr. Quintana were on a flight to Miami.    Federal investigators say the colonel tries to keep the business in the family. One alleged partner, his brother Antonio, is embroiled in a scandal in Haiti in which he allegedly took payoffs to let a U.S. company dump 13,200 tons of potentially hazardous wastes on Haiti's west coast. Another alleged cohort is Mireille Delinois, the colonel's ex-wife and a Miss Haiti in the 1960s. Ms. Delinois professes to be a witch who can spin death spells, say Mr. Quintana and others who know her. Ms. Delinois, who skipped bail in March 1987 after being charged in Miami with conspiring to smuggle cocaine and machine guns, couldn't be reached to comment.    Participants say the main Col. Paul drug deal under investigation began well enough: After weeks of negotiating, 100 kilos of cocaine brokered by Mr. Quintana were flown from the colonel's ranch to the Bahamas. But the cocaine was ripped off there, dismaying the colonel, who expected to make $800,000 from the deal. Since then, participants say, five Miami Cubans have been murdered in the hunt for the culprit. And Mr. Quintana, whose role as a DEA informant has been known to the colonel for months, has survived three close scrapes that federal agents believe were meant to be contract hits.    In one, three pistol-packing Haitians in a green Thunderbird followed Mr. Quintana to a windowless building in southwest Miami that they didn't realize was a DEA office; a dozen federal agents arrested them. Mr. Quintana now travels with a stubby MAC-10 machine-gun pistol in his briefcase and is about to disappear into the federal witness-protection program.    But the colonel has faced more potent adversaries than the U.S. law. Once, he infuriated Colombia's murderous Medellin druglords by seizing 800 kilos of their cocaine and demanding ransom. The colonel sent an emissary to Medellin to collect. But the Colombians seized the emissary and threatened to kill him if the colonel didn't turn over the drugs.    Col. Paul kept the cocaine. The emissary hasn't been seen since. </TEXT></DOC>