<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870922-0023 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 09/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   A U.S. HELICOPTER ATTACKED and set afire an Iranian Persian Gulf ship.    The Pentagon said the helicopter, operating from the frigate USS Jarrett, fired on an Iranian gunboat thought to be laying mines northeast of Bahrain. No information was available on possible Iranian casualties, but the Pentagon said the ship was &quot;dead in the water&quot; but no longer ablaze hours after the attack. It was the first time the U.S. has struck Iranian forces since it began convoy operations in July. The action was distinctly tougher than previous U.S. responses to Iranian mine laying.    A British Persian Gulf vessel was set afire by an Iranian gunboat's missile, shipping sources said. Iraq said it bombed a Tehran oil facility.    ---   REAGAN CALLED for U.N. sanctions against Iran unless it accepts a cease-fire.    In an address to the General Assembly, the president said sanctions should be imposed &quot;rapidly&quot; unless Iranian President Khamenei agrees to the U.N. cease-fire in a speech he is scheduled to deliver to the world body today. Reagan also expressed hopes for further arms accords with the Soviet Union, saying he would seek a 50% cut in superpower intercontinental nuclear missiles. He warned Nicaragua that he won't be satisfied with &quot;phony&quot; moves toward democracy there.    Reagan urged Japanese Prime Minister Nakasone to open his country's markets to U.S. goods in the face of trade legislation pending in Congress.    ---   The American Bar Association explained why a large minority of its judicial nominees panel found Bork unqualified for the Supreme Court, saying he lacks &quot;compassion&quot; for minority rights. Meanwhile, Sen. Packwood (R., Ore.) said he will vote against Bork and would be willing to attempt to block confirmation.    ---   The Senate is expected to begin deliberations on the Strategic Defense Initiative today, with two senators planning an amendment to slash Reagan's funding request. Several other votes are expected soon that may determine whether the program proceeds or hangs in limbo until the next president takes office.    ---   A suspect wanted in several scandals in Italy surrendered in Geneva, saying he needed heart surgery. Licio Gelli, former grandmaster of the outlawed Propaganda Due Masonic Lodge, has been indicted in the 1982 collapse of Banco Ambrosiano, a 1980 bombing in which more than 80 died and other charges.    ---   Bowen told a House subcommittee that the federal government shouldn't bar discrimination against AIDS patients or impose confidentiality requirements in legislation to fund testing and counseling for the disease. The secretary of Health and Human Services said individual states should resolve those issues.    Illinois's governor approved legislation calling for the tracing of AIDS victims' sex partners, mandatory premarital testing and limited power to quarantine victims of the disease. The package includes confidentiality requirements for testing.    ---   Botha said South Africa could soon sign a U.N. treaty designed to stop the spread of nuclear weapons. The South African president said Pretoria was prepared to begin talks with the nuclear powers on joining the 1970 Non-Proliferation Treaty, after refusing for years to join the accord.    ---   Aquino dismissed three generals and 13 officers linked to the Aug. 28 attempt against her government and ordered a sweeping reorganization of the military. The Philippine president also formally fired fugitive coup leader Col. Honasan. Meanwhile, 5,000 supporters of a leftist leader assassinated Saturday marched in Manila.    ---   McArtor ordered a special review of the aircraft industry to ensure that technological changes haven't hurt quality. The FAA chief said in-depth safety inspections will be conducted at about 40 of 1,300 companies. He said a growing threat to aircraft safety is the increasing use of inexpensive, uncertified parts.    ---   A baseball arbitrator ruled that owners of Major League teams conspired to shut down the free-agent market after the 1985 season. The players union said the ruling is a &quot;major victory,&quot; but its effects won't be known until the arbitrator decides on an effective remedy. Such a decision may not come for some time.    ---   South Korea's National Assembly opened its regular 50-day session, during which it is to vote on a new constitution and revision of laws for a transition to full democracy. Meanwhile, two opposition leaders, Kim Dae Jung and Kim Young Sam, said they would decide by the end of the month which of them will run for president.    ---   The U.S. is likely to demolish and rebuild at least five of the eight floors of a new Moscow embassy that it says is riddled with Soviet listening devices, a White House spokesman said. No final decision has been made, he added, but other U.S. officials said one could come as early as next week.    ---   The Titanic may have been sunk by an internal explosion rather than an iceberg, a spokesman for a French salvage expedition said. He said the theory arose after divers to the site of the luxury liner, which sank in the North Atlantic on its maiden voyage in 1912, discovered a hole in the front of the ship with the metal pushed outward.    ---   Arias cautioned the U.S. against new aid for the Contras until a diplomatic solution to fighting in Central America is achieved. The Costa Rican president and chief architect of a five-nation peace plan said in a Kansas speech that his plan is but a first step toward a solution to the region's problems. He is to meet with Reagan today.    ---   Jury selection began in federal court in Boston in the conspiracy and fraud trial of political extremist Lyndon LaRouche, five of his organizations and seven supporters. Charges include conspiring to obstruct justice, refusing to comply with court orders and using fraud to raise more than $1 million in LaRouche's 1984 presidential bid. </TEXT></DOC>