<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870611-0064 </DOCNO><HL> Allegis Shakeup CameAs Shareholder Ire PutBoard Tenure in Doubt---Expense of Takeover DefenseHurt Ferris and His PlanFor Unified Travel Firm---Pilots Still Seek Ownership---This article was prepared byWall Street Journal staff reportersJudith Valente, Laurie P. Cohen and Scott Kilman</HL><DD> 06/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AEG MS LABORAIRLINES (AIR)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><TEXT>   Richard J. Ferris had a bold program to unite a group of companies into a travel empire called Allegis Corp. But just months after he emblazoned the former UAL Inc. with its lofty new name aimed at inspiring loyalty, Mr. Ferris lost the allegiance of his closest supporters.    The 50-year-old executive walked out of a board meeting at New York's Plaza Hotel Tuesday and resigned as chairman. A faction on the board had begun a revolt against his business strategy. The directors' change of heart, observers say, was caused by intense shareholder resistance to the company's plans and by Allegis's difficulties in financing a $3 billion recapitalization intended to ward off takeovers.    &quot;The board was worried about being voted out of office,&quot; said an investment banker with close ties to Allegis. &quot;That can be a powerful motivator.&quot;    The resignation of Mr. Ferris, one of the airline industry's most prominent and colorful figures, represents a stunning defeat for a chief executive of a major corporation.    He was succeeded as chairman by Frank Olson, who was the chairman of the company's Hertz Corp. unit. Mr. Ferris's departure climaxes a bitter battle over the direction of Allegis, which owns United Airlines and Westin and Hilton International hotels in addition to Hertz. While Mr. Ferris had fought to preserve his ambitious plan of transforming the company into a full-service travel empire, others -- including United's pilots and Coniston Partners, a New York investment firm -- were struggling to break up the company.    Although details of the board's plans are still unclear, the board said in a statement that the company now will probably give in to the outside pressures by selling its rental-car and hotel units and refocus the company around its dominant United Airlines unit. Even the Allegis name probably will be junked, the statement said.    The plan for a full-service travel company could have helped transform the structure of the travel industry if it had succeeded. Now, if United employees eventually emerge with some ownership of the airline, other labor groups may be encouraged to pursue efforts similar to the buyout proposal by United pilots that started all the turmoil at Allegis.    The events came as a surprise if only because the strong-willed Mr. Ferris had tried so hard to keep his bold scheme on track. In addition to usual takeover defenses of poison pills and golden parachutes, he engineered a novel financing agreement that gave Boeing Corp. unusual powers over the company's business decisions. When even those moves seemed inadequate, he proposed the plan to borrow $3 billion and to give the proceeds to shareholders in the form of a $60-a-share distribution.    The turning point apparently occurred because Allegis's stock kept rising even after the company had announced the proposed $60-a-share distribution. Last week, after the pilots unveiled a restructuring proposal that some traders valued at more than $95 a share, the company's stock reached a record $90. That put pressure on the company to sweeten its offer at a time when its investment advisers were struggling to arrange the financing for the original proposal.    On top of that, a poll of Allegis shareholders is said to have shown support for a Coniston proposal to oust the board. Kissel-Blake Inc., a New York proxy solicitor hired by Allegis, submitted oral reports to the company late last week indicating that the company might lose a shareholder vote.    Shareholder dissatisfaction had mounted in recent months. Holders apparently considered Mr. Ferris to have repeatedly broken promises that he would raise cash by selling individual hotel properties rather than by diluting their holdings further in the issuing of more stock. Many stockholders also believed most of Mr. Ferris's efforts were aimed at preserving his business strategy at the expense of plans that could provide much higher short-term gains for the stock.    &quot;What you had in a nutshell was a company without a constituency,&quot; says an analyst at a large insitutional investor that, until recently, was one of Allegis's largest shareholders.    Outside directors of Allegis are said to have held informal talks throughout the weekend about what to do, finally calling the special meeting in New York for Tuesday. Although the board as recently as last month had stated that it was &quot;foursquare&quot; behind Mr. Ferris, it rapidly became apparent at the meeting that support had disappeared.    The faction calling for a change was led by Charles F. Luce, the senior member of the board, sources say. Mr. Luce, who couldn't be reached for comment, reportedly told Mr. Ferris that the company could no longer afford to pursue the travel-empire strategy but that Mr. Ferris could remain as chairman of a slimmed-down corporation. Mr. Ferris responded that he would rather resign, sources said.    The turnabout on the board apparently took Mr. Ferris by surprise. He had been scheduled to go to New York Wednesday to lobby institutional shareholders for support and was due to visit Boston on a similar mission today.    He confided to an associate after the board meeting he had thought that Mr. Luce was in his corner but that instead he had stabbed him in the back.    In April, in fact, The Wall Street Journal published a letter from Mr. Luce saying he was &quot;appalled&quot; by a page-one story in this newspaper that said Mr. Ferris's job was on the line because of the turmoil at Allegis. In the letter, Mr. Luce said directors fully supported &quot;Mr. Ferris, his management team and his long-range strategy.&quot; Mr. Luce, 69, a former chairman of Consolidated Edison Co. of New York, currently is the chairman of a Texaco Inc. general creditors committee that devises strategies in that company's Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceeding.    The board's decision also was a blow to Morgan Stanley andamp; Co., the investment banker that Mr. Ferris had hired to help ward off both Coniston and the United pilots union, which wanted control of the company's airline business. Sources say that the board instead will now rely more heavily on the advice of First Boston Corp., outside directors had previously hired to review company proposals.    Several airline analysts reacted to the turn of events by saying they thought United eventually might emerge in a strengthened position, but it is still unclear who its owners will be. Although the Allegis board said it would consider giving United employees partial ownership of the airline, the pilots union yesterday said it would proceed with its effort to become the airline's sole owner.    Coniston Partners, meanwhile, announced that it would immediately discontinue its efforts to overthrow the Allegis board and instead would hold talks with the company.    The board may have had little choice in finding another way out of its dilemma, partly because of the continuing labor problems United faced. In addition to the pilots' bitterness toward the chairman, the union that represents United machinists had raised the possibility of a strike if the company went ahead with the recapitalization plan.    &quot;Employee bitterness toward Ferris was going to be a cloud that just wouldn't go away,&quot; one airline analyst says. When the resignation was announced at the company, some employees cheered.    Another apparent blunder was the anti-takeover pact with Boeing. Under that transaction, Boeing received a note in return for $700 million of aircraft financing. The note was convertible into a special series of preferred stock that gave Boeing certain powers in the event of an attempted takeover of Allegis.    But on the day that Coniston presented its solicitation plan, Allegis representatives called Boeing officials and asked them to exchange the note for preferred shares so that Boeing could vote against Coniston.    &quot;Boeing said they weren't ready&quot; to convert, an Allegis source says. &quot;They said they needed time to think about it. We were beside ourselves. We thought that the Boeing transaction had made it financially impossible for anyone to do a proxy fight.&quot; That would have been the case apparently only if Boeing had held shares that it could vote in Allegis's favor.    Not only did the Boeing defense fail, but also it cost Allegis a large dose of credibility. Allegis, in effect, had given away the store and didn't stand to get much in return. Moreover, the Boeing transaction irked shareholders, who were about to face a good deal of dilution of the value of their shares.    The recapitalization plan and the distribution of $60 a share were Allegis's next move. It didn't work, either. Allegis officials said the directors approved the plan on the assumption that Coniston, which held a 13% stake in the company, would take advantage of the distribution to sell its shares at a profit. &quot;Everyone thought Coniston would take the money and run,&quot; says one associate of Mr. Ferris.    Instead, Coniston said it thought Allegis was worth still more and would continue with a shareholder solicitation aimed at electing its own board of directors. Coniston's determination to proceed was unnerving. But just as upsetting to the Allegis board and to the company, however, was an announcement by the pilots last week proposing a sweetened recapitalization plan that promised shareholders $70 a share in cash. The pilots even had a letter from Salomon Brothers Inc. indicating that the investment firm was &quot;highly confident&quot; it could finance the proposed offer. &quot;That really enhanced their credibility among traders,&quot; a Wall Street source says.    The pilots' proposal sent Allegis stock soaring past $90 a share. If the company wanted to remain independent, it would have to create value for shareholders of at least that much.    But Allegis was having trouble raising the $3 billion it would need for its recapitalization plan. Apparently worried about the company's high labor costs, bankers were making the impossible demand that the company guarantee it would win wage reductions. In a downturn, the banks contended, the company's cash flow wouldn't justify the heavy debt load it was taking on unless wage concessions were assured.    Up until that point, sources said, directors had remained essentially loyal to all of Mr. Ferris's efforts. But they began to see that the plans weren't working. By the weekend, the board was &quot;finally at the point where they had no alternative,&quot; an Allegis investment banker says. &quot;Ferris had to go.&quot;    An individual who attended the seven-hour directors' meeting said that although Mr. Ferris did resign, he also didn't have much choice. &quot;He didn't resign of his own volition,&quot; the source says.    Officials also say that directors already had Mr. Ferris's replacement in mind before the meeting began: Mr. Olson, Hertz's combative chief executive, who has proved himself in a number of battles in the intensely competitive rental-car business. Even so, sources say, Mr. Olson continued to support Mr. Ferris until his resignation.    The company has already begun seeking buyers for its hotel system. One analyst says that several foreign investors are interested in the Hilton International hotels. The company may attempt to contact the Barclay family of London, which has already said it is willing to pay $1 billion for the international hotels. European analysts speculated that Trusthouse Forte PLC, a large London-based hotel and catering concern, and Bass PLC, a British brewing, hotel and leisure company, may also be interested. Evry, the French hotel and leisure group, was also mentioned.    Finding a buyer for Hertz may prove more difficult. Analysts speculated that employees there may attempt a leveraged buyout.    Allegis's financial advisers declined to set prices on the company's various units. But Wertheim andamp; Co. released estimates yesterday that value the Hiltons at $1 billion; the Westins at $1.2 billion; Hertz at between $700 million and $1 billion; and the airline at between $3.3 and $3.9 billion.    In the end, while few of Mr. Ferris's anti-takeover moves helped his cause, at least one will end up benefiting him personally. Allegis officials confirmed that with his resignation he is entitled to receive a golden parachute, which provides annual compensation of $579,000 until 1992, for a total of $2.9 million.    ---   FERRIS'S BUMPY RIDE AT ALLEGIS   1962: Bachelor's degree from Cornell University in hotel management. Later that year joins Western International Hotels, Westin's predecessor, as staff planner.    1971: Joins UAL as president of its food services division.    1979: Named chief executive officer of UAL and quickly faces industrywide crisis of confidence in the DC-10 following a disastrous American Airlines crash in Chicago; Mr. Ferris grounds United's entire fleet of DC-10s.    1982: Becomes UAL's chairman and president. Air traffic controllers' strike, fare wars and recession thrust UAL's results deep into the red.    May 1985: Mr. Ferris's demand that United pilots accept a two-tier wage system triggers a 29-day walkout by 5,000 United pilots. UAL blames the strike for a $91 million second-quarter loss.    June 1985: In the biggest step so far toward implementing Mr. Ferris's broad travel-services strategy, UAL agrees to acquire RCA Corp.'s Hertz unit, prompting speculation that other airlines will follow its expansion into travel services.    October 1985: UAL acquires Pan American World Airway's Pacific operations for $750 million.    August 1986: Labor strife wrecks United's plan to acquire Frontier Airlines.    December 1986: UAL agrees to buy Transworld Corp.'s Hilton International Co. unit in a transaction valued at $980 million.    April 1987: The union representing United pilots launches a $4.5 billion takeover bid for the airline; Allegis management rejects the offer as &quot;grossly inadequate&quot; and grants golden parachutes to Mr. Ferris and seven other top officials.    May 12, 1987: Boeing Co. enters an unusual anti-takeover aircraft-financing arrangement with Allegis.    May 26, 1987: Coniston Partners, a New York investment firm that holds a 13% Allegis stake, announces it will seek to gain control of the Allegis board.    May 28, 1987: Allegis directors propose a plan to distribute $60 a share to stockholders and keep the company intact in a last-ditch effort to forestall a takeover.    June 4, 1987: United pilots propose a restructuring plan that would break up the company and pay holders $70 a share. Allegis stock soars as a result, heightening pressure on management to sweeten its offer.    June 9, 1987: Mr. Ferris, under pressure from directors, employees and shareholders, resigns his post. </TEXT></DOC>