<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870128-0125 </DOCNO><HL> Trade War or Monetary Reform---By Lewis E. Lehrman</HL><DD> 01/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX) </IN><TEXT>   The &quot;twin deficits&quot; and the protectionist effects of floating exchange rates are now out of the financial section and on the front pages of the national print media. The present budget and trade crises cannot be exaggerated, even if their elusive monetary causes may now lead to mistaken tariff and quota policies. Indeed, after 25 years of fruitless debate over international monetary reform, recent signs of a steep inflation in the value of financial assets suggest the world may be in for yet another round of shocks, even while the conventional price indexes appear stable.    Now as before, the dollar reserve-currency system -- which leads the world's trading nations to use their dollar holdings as a monetary base -- lies at the root of the problem. This judgment is confirmed not only by the direct evidence of foreign-exchange markets during the past few months, but also by those who participated both in the collapse of Bretton Woods (1968-1973) and in the growing problems of floating exchange rates (1973-1986).    For only one example, Helmut Schlesinger, vice chairman of the Bundesbank, has written and spoken of his experience during 1972-1973, the final days of Bretton Woods, when the Bundesbank, and the Swiss and Japanese central banks had to buy billions of unwanted depreciating dollars in exchange for newly issued deutsche marks, Swiss francs and yen -- thereby creating excess liquidity in all major currency markets, leading directly to the oil-price mutation of the early 1970s and also to &quot;imported&quot; inflation in Europe, Japan and the Far East. He and his central-bank colleagues also have described how the very same thing occurred amid the collapse of the dollar and the disarray of the managed float in 1978-1979, leading to a second oil-price explosion, the organization of the European Monetary System, and to the appointment of Paul Volcker as chairman of the Federal Reserve.    This time, the world's central bankers and finance ministers are staring into a new kind of black hole into which undesired dollars the world over seem to be disappearing. The flight from the dollar takes the form of a flight to financial assets, as stock prices explode around the globe, while the world's premier currency grows shakier in the hands of those who would use it as a weapon in an incipient trade war. We should not be surprised that the U.S. has joined in the cutthroat currency competition, for under floating exchange rates since 1973, mercantilist nations, young and old, have used undervalued currencies as battering rams to aggrandize world trade. It is this neo-mercantilism of manipulated exchange rates that has set ominous protectionist forces in motion.    In these circumstances, the U.S. has no choice but to take the leadership of its own currency. Once issued and accepted as foreign monetary reserves, these dollars only appear to be held by foreign official institutions abroad. They actually wind up invested in the global dollar market that has its center in New York. Moreover, much of the active, foreign official dollar reserves are invested directly in U.S. Treasury securities. For example, foreign official institutions own $40 billion more of U.S. Treasury securities in January 1987 than a year earlier -- a 30% increase of these reserves in one year. And these are only their officially reported holdings.    Because of the unique monopoly status of the dollar in the international system, the U.S. alone can finance its deficits by issuing its own money -- a reserve-currency role the dollar has maintained despite the end of its official position under Bretton Woods. As a result, everything goes on in the U.S. as if there were no budget deficit. Indeed, for a time earlier in the '80s when monetary conditions were tight, the dollar reserve-currency system engendered a sort of hidden world-wide demand for U.S. budget deficits. Now, after two years of Fed looseness, deficit-bred reserves have reached a crisis point.    We are seeing in the financial markets the results of this condition. The Germans and the Japanese, for example, buy the Fed's newly created dollars in order to protect their export industries and to ensure the value of their own dollar holdings at the core of their monetary base. But the marks and yen, newly issued in order to hold up the dollar, are not completely &quot;sterilized&quot; (mitigated by domestic monetary tightness in those countries); they thus provide new liquidity in the yen and mark area, and tend to lift financial markets abroad. Moreover, the dollars bought up by central banks are then invested in short-term financial instruments in New York. This in turn tends to hold down U.S. short-term interest rates below where they otherwise would be. Together with a declining currency, the low yields discourage the holding of long-term fixed-rate U.S. instruments and help to make equities here relatively more attractive. In foreign countries, the increase in liquidity -- at a time of stable tradable-goods prices after six years of commodity surplus -- has similar effects in financial markets. Excess liquidity now goes to equities, not to commodities.    To end this financial disorder and the world-wide trend to protectionism, we face the following choice: either fixed exchange rates based on key currencies convertible directly to gold, a true international gold standard (we could keep saying &quot;or some other commodity,&quot; but monetary authorities have accumulated over a billion ounces of gold, not platinum or pork bellies or baskets of goods); or, as some propose, we could entrust our fate to a World Central Bank -- a monetary United Nations -- whose credit would serve as reserves for all national central banks, including the Federal Reserve.    If, however, we stipulate that a new world monetary system be neither inflationary nor deflationary over the long run, history shows that, in the real world, there is no effective alternative to unrestricted domestic and international convertibility at fixed rates into gold.    Thus, the specific minimum elements of a lasting monetary reform are these:    --First, as a follow-up to the G-5 agreement of September 1985, President Reagan should direct the Treasury to cooperate formally with the Group of Five to stabilize the value of the dollar and G-5 currencies at a level consistent with mutually balanced, longer-term purchasing-power parities. (This measurement is the quantity of various currencies required to buy, say, a constant basket of standardized manufactured goods and services in each country. Indexes to measure this value can be agreed upon in conference.)    --Second, the president should promptly send legislation to Congress to restore gold as the monetary standard of the U.S., to take effect at a fixed date after currency stabilization, say one year from now. At that date, the gold value of the dollar would be fixed. This convertibility price should provide for a steady output of gold, the new international monetary standard, consistent with long-term world economic growth. In the interest of equity, the gold price should be at a level to avoid any decline in the average level of nominal wages. The optimum gold parity thus would reflect a gold price proportional to its marginal cost of production in America under full employment conditions.    (This pricing technique would avoid the mistake made in Britain during the 1920s. Winston Churchill, chancellor of the exchequer, undervalued gold and overvalued the pound at the pre-war parity, thus raising labor-intensive export prices and simultaneously lowering import prices. Underemployment in Britain was the result, and statist remedies were adopted.)    I estimate that the gold parity should be about $500 an ounce under existing world-market conditions. However, if we wait, a deflationary world economy over the next five years could bring the price down as low as $200, while an inflationary five years could bring about a price even higher than $1,000.    The same congressional statute fixing the dollar's gold value also should contain a provision restricting the monetization of U.S. government debt, thus restoring the internal budget discipline of the original Federal Reserve Act of 1913.    --Third, the existing official dollar reserves owned by foreign governments could and should be consolidated and refunded -- not unlike the great Hamiltonian refunding at the birth of the American republic. These dollar debts would be reimbursed by the U.S., in part through immediate gold redemption, and gradually by means of amortization of long-term treasury debt -- all brought about via the rise in the value of U.S. gold reserves to $500 from their last official valuation of $42.22.    --Fourth, the president should convene an international monetary conference of the principal industrialized democracies, in order to stabilize the reciprocal values of all major currencies, and proceed to general convertibility of these currencies directly to gold -- and thus to international fixed exchange rates. The new system would automatically, therefore, rule out any official national reserve currency.    --Fifth, following the international monetary agreement by the major nations of the free world, the conference agenda should be expanded to include trade discussions to dismantle quotas and tariffs and other barriers to trade.    Some argue that there are always weaknesses in any exchange-rate system. And they are, of course, correct. But currency convertibility is the least imperfect stable exchange-rate system known to human history. Recent experience has shown again that international free trade without stable exchange rates is a fantasy.    As in the past, the results of currency convertibility would be dramatic. With the future price level pinned down, which only convertibility can guarantee on a long-term basis, funds would be channeled gradually from speculation and hedging into long-term investment markets. This monetary reform is the true and enduring road to financial stability, low long-term interest rates and full employment.    ---   Mr. Lehrman has written on monetary concerns for more than a decade. He heads the Lehrman Institute in New York. </TEXT></DOC>