<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870904-0139 </DOCNO><HL> Better Competition Means Cheaper Arms---By Robert H. Charles</HL><DD> 09/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AEROSPACE (ARO)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><TEXT>   Several months ago, the Air Force determined that an advanced tactical fighter, or ATF, should be developed for introduction into the fleet in the 1990s. To that end, contracts were awarded to two teams to develop and build prototypes for a fly-off to determine which aircraft should be selected for production. In making its selection, the Air Force will be guided not only by technical performance, but also by the costs proposed for production.    By maintaining competition throughout development until a winner is chosen, and by requiring contractors to take on substantial development risks, this program will, according to the Pentagon, revolutionize the military's much-criticized procurement methods, making them more efficient and less costly. It will also respond to the call from Sam Nunn, chairman of the Senate Armed Services Committee, for a &quot;strong dose of free-enterprise competition and accountability&quot; and to many of the recommendations in last year's Packard Commission report on defense acquisition.    On its face, the ATF program seems to do all these things and to put a crimp in noncompetitive military contracting, which is reported to have amounted to $82 billion in 1984. If this procurement method succeeds, it could be a model for such other systems as the Navy's Advanced Technology Aircraft projects and the Army's LHX helicopter. These three programs are expected to cost a total of more than $100 billion.    But will this happen? The answer lies not in what is done in development, which averages less than 15% of total costs in most such systems, but in what is done in production, which makes up 85% of costs and is controlled largely by a few prime contractors. Obtaining competition among them has not been addressed but is essential for major cost reductions.    The Pentagon's long-standing procedure in acquiring a new system is to invite qualified companies to participate, mostly with government funds, in its development until the government considers it ready for production. The competing companies are then asked to submit price and performance proposals. Although these proposals include estimates of the costs of the entire quantity that the government intends to buy over a system's life span of 20 years or more, only the initial congressionally funded increment of a few years is negotiated, usually at a cost lower than the actual cost turns out to be.    The problem arises when subsequent orders are placed -- noncompetitively -- with the same company. Costs are almost always much higher than in the proposal on which the winner originally was selected. A monopoly has been created.    Nevertheless, a &quot;monopoly&quot; (limiting production to one company) on programs such as ATF is critically important from a cost standpoint. If split between two companies, some facilities, tooling, and administrative costs would be duplicated. More important, because of the small quantities in most major weapons systems, the efficiency of large-scale production cannot be realized. Costs would be even higher if production were split.    In any new production activity, there is a learning process. A worker's proficiency improves with repetition; he performs the work in fewer man-hours and hence at less cost. But the rate of improvement declines as the work progresses; cost savings are greatest at the beginning of the program and least at the end.    A learning formula of 85%, which is not atypical for aircraft, indicates that the cost of a unit will be only 85% of the cost of an earlier similar unit every time the number of units is doubled -- i.e., from two to four or from 50 to 100. Thus, on a program of 500 aircraft, of which the first unit costs $100 million, the second will cost $85 million, the fourth $72 million, and right down the line until the 500th unit will be only $23 million. On this learning curve, the cumulative cost of the first 250 aircraft will be $9 billion, but the second 250 will be $6.5 billion, or a total of $15.5 billion if all 500 are built by one company.    If production is split between two companies, however, with each building only 250 aircraft, the cost will be $9 billion per company, or a total of $18 billion for 500 aircraft. The extra cost will be $2.5 billion. Neither company will reach the less costly lower half of the program.    Due to this economy of scale, it is rarely advisable to split production of major military systems. Is it surprising that the F-16, of which several thousand had already been built, was selected for more production instead of the F-20, a reasonably competitive fighter of which there had been only three? There may be valid reasons for seeking competitive dual production, but reducing costs is not one of them.    But the cost advantages of limiting production to one company need not eliminate competition for that production. At some point in its development, a system's technological building blocks will be sufficiently in hand to give the government assurance that it can be built and will perform its intended functions. If not, the system is not ready for production, and competitive development should be continued until it is. If so, the government should then request the competing developers to submit price and performance proposals for the entire production program -- with binding contracts for funded work and binding options for unfunded out-year work. By so doing, the government could realize the economy of scale while keeping the entire program under the umbrella of competition.    Complex military programs thus can be subjected to competition under contracts tailored to those complexities. Since there is an infinite variety of such arrangements, there can be a sharing of the risks sufficient to reward cost efficiency and to penalize the lack of it. Manufacturers of commercial aircraft, which are as complex as many defense systems, make commitments to airlines before the aircraft is fully developed, let alone flown. If this risk can be taken in nongovernment business, why not also in military work, particularly when the risk is shared?    Nor would our defense-industrial base be damaged if defense contractors are exposed to the risks of the market. These companies usually are involved in several projects, and a loss on one program should be cushioned by gains on others. In the unlikely event of bankruptcy, a project could be continued directly by the government or in Chapter 11 receivership. How many defense programs have been curtailed by the bankruptcy filing of LTV, a major defense contractor? Not one.    Another problem with sole-source contracts is that their terms are not determined by an objective standard, such as competition. Neither self-policing negotiation on what the cost should be nor government auditing can fill that role. But a contractor that must meet an objective standard will take efficient action in its own interest. It is able to charge only what it bid in competition. It will have no reason, as recently alleged, to inflate its labor or its suppliers' costs during contract negotiation with the government, expecting that it can later obtain lower labor and supplier costs. We will see less suspected crime in the defense industry, such as payroll padding. Without competition, this will continue.    Returning to the ATF program, the portion of its development costs that the contractors are being asked to absorb is too great. At this stage of the program, which essentially is defining and developing what military capabilities might be produced, industry should share only enough of these costs to prevent incurring them inefficiently. Cost pressures on the competing companies should be relatively minimal in the period when technological advances in performance are critical. It is then that constraints on cost may unduly inhibit promising but expensive breakthroughs, and when the total development cost amounts to a small part of the entire program. In terms of operational performance, such pressures are likely to be counterproductive. On the other hand, cost constraints should be maximal during production, when manufacturing efficiency and economy are critical, and where the bulk of the program's total costs are spent. Cost pressure should be where the costs are.    In view of these development risks and given past history, the crucial question is: Will ATF production, like its development, be subjected to meaningful competition? This is not likely; nor would it be fair. Instead, the companies will seek (and probably should get, given the conditions) an essentially cost-plus production program in which there is insufficient incentive to reduce costs, or they will limit their bids to the first increment of production units, expecting to recover their investments on noncompetitive negotiated contracts for later increments.    At this stage, it may be too late to restructure the ATF program to reduce the contractors' development risks and also to obtain meaningful competition on its production. In any case, some such framework should be imposed on similar future programs.    ---   Mr. Charles, a retired executive of McDonnell Aircraft, was assistant secretary of the Air Force from 1963 to 1969. </TEXT></DOC>