<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870220-0052 </DOCNO><HL> DeNunzio, Kidder Peabody Chairman,Again Finds Himself at Center of Crisis---By Steve SwartzStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GESTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The whirlwind of arrests, court hearings and subpoenas that last week brought the insider trading case to the vaunted halls of Kidder Peabody andamp; Co. has placed the firm's chairman, Ralph D. DeNunzio, at the center of yet another crisis.    In the early 1970s, Mr. DeNunzio, as the youngest chairman in the history of the New York Stock Exchange, helped bail Wall Street out of a financial crisis. He worked with a handful of other Big Board leaders to rid the Street of scores of inefficient firms through liquidations or mergers with stronger houses. He also was a prime mover in persuading the government to back insurance for customers of failed brokerage houses.    In late 1985, Kidder Peabody itself was caught in a capital squeeze. Despite saying publicly last March that &quot;we're not thinking of a sale,&quot; Mr. DeNunzio reluctantly began the negotiations that in June placed 80% of the privately held firm's stock in the hands of General Electric Co.    Now the 55-year-old Mr. DeNunzio faces another dilemma. The government has alleged that Kidder Peabody made millions of dollars in profits from 1984 to 1986 as a result of trading in takeover stocks using illegally obtained inside information.    Two top Kidder traders of that period -- Richard Wigton and Timothy Tabor -- have been charged with securities fraud, and Martin A. Siegel, the firm's former top mergers and acqusitions specialist, admitted guilt in a conspiracy to traffic in inside information. The allegation of illegal profits by Kidder Peabody was made in connection with the government's case against the three men, and a top official of Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co. Neither firm has been charged with wrongdoing, although it is known that both have received subpoenas in connection with the federal probe.    For Kidder Peabody, whose patrician investment bankers began practicing their trade in Boston in 1865, the government's charges against the three former employees raise the specter of potential legal and financial responsibility for the alleged insider trading. The case also could cause GE to take a greater role in Kidder Peabody's management, GE officials say. Since the acquisition, Mr. DeNunzio has run the firm with a relatively free hand, according to a Kidder Peabody spokesman. Mr. DeNunzio declined to be interviewed for this article, but Kidder Peabody made a spokesman available.    Citing persons familiar with the government investigation, this newspaper reported Tuesday that Mr. DeNunzio instructed Mr. Siegel in March 1984 to help start a takeover arbitrage department, and that the firm allotted $30 million to the effort. The sources said Mr. DeNunzio indicated that Mr. Siegel's role shouldn't be disclosed publicly. This evidently was because there were inherent conflicts in having the head of mergers and acquisitions directly involved in trading on takeover rumors, persons familiar with the investigation said.    The Kidder Peabody spokesman said yesterday that this report was &quot;a misstatement.&quot; He denied that Mr. DeNunzio had ordered formation of an arbitrage unit in such a manner. The spokesman said Mr. Siegel didn't have a direct role in the unit's operations. The spokesman said the unit grew gradually since the 1970s. &quot;It wasn't that formal,&quot; he said.    The spokesman said Mr. Wigton, a senior trader, had begun making occasional arbitrage investments in the 1970s. The spokesman said that Mr. Wigton developed a relationship with Mr. Siegel, because each sought advice from the other -- an arrangement the spokesman said was legal. He said Mr. Wigton would ask Mr. Siegel for advice about mergers in which Kidder Peabody had no role. Likewise, Mr. Siegel would ask Mr. Wigton questions about the stock market. This relationship was known throughout the firm, the spokesman said.    In 1984, the spokesman said, Mr. Tabor, a planning assistant to Mr. DeNunzio, expressed interest in trading. He was assigned to work with Mr. Wigton, and the two formed the takeover arbitrage department.    The spokesman said takeover arbitrage made up &quot;a very small&quot; portion of Kidder's business. The spokesman said he didn't know whether Mr. DeNunzio reviewed risk arbitrage trading records daily, but he did say that Mr. DeNunzio reviewed them &quot;periodically.&quot;    Kidder Peabody profit figures obtained by this newspaper show that takeover arbitrage profit in 1985 accounted for 15% of the firm's profit and was Kidder Peabody's third-largest profit center. In 1984 the unit contributed 20% to the firm's net income, according to the figures.    That Mr. DeNunzio's firm is touched by scandal strikes many in the industry as ironic, because Mr. DeNunzio is known as a highly conservative executive. In the early 1970s, Mr.DeNunzio wouldn't handle a public offering by college chum Ben F. Edwards III's A.G. Edwards andamp; Sons Inc., because he thought brokerage houses shouldn't be publicly owned.    A few years ago, Mr. DeNunzio told the New York Times that he disapproved of the growing trend toward merchant banking because, he said, it would &quot;taint us&quot; if Kidder Peabody invested in investment banking clients.    And last year, Mr. DeNunzio made Kidder Peabody one of the first companies to institute comprehensive drug testing for employees.    Under Mr. DeNunzio, Kidder Peabody has become a highly politicized but, for some, a surprisingly low-pressure place to work, current and former employees say. Mr. DeNunzio is praised for developing young talent, his quick decision-making and giving key employees leeway to make decisions.    He also is described as a low-key executive devoted to his family. He rarely works late nor pushes employees beyond their limits. One former top Kidder Peabody official recalls a conversation with Mr. DeNunzio shortly after the official was promoted. &quot;Relax, you've made it,&quot; Mr. DeNunzio told him. When the official said his department wasn't anywhere near the top in its field, Mr. DeNunzio said, &quot;We don't have to be the best.&quot;    Such an attitude contributed to a paternalistic and homey feeling, but it also is blamed by some for Kidder Peabody's backslide in the 1980s. While other investment banks like Goldman Sachs and First Boston Corp. increased capital rapidly, Kidder Peabody lagged behind. When some big firms leaped into areas such as mortgage-backed securities, junk bonds and merchant banking, Kidder Peabody held back.    Mr. DeNunzio remained concerned with office politics and his own power within the firm, former associates say. A former Kidder Peabody director says: &quot;He viewed himself as the patriarch, the father that gave to everybody.&quot;    The former director says that Mr. DeNunzio identified young stars and encouraged them to go over their bosses' heads and report to him, telling them, &quot;We should work more one on one.&quot; However, once a young star became a top manager, says the former director, Mr. DeNunzio's &quot;attitude changed; he no longer seemed in your corner.&quot;    A preoccupation with status seems to stem from Mr. DeNunzio's background and Kidder Peabody's history, according to people familiar with both.    Hailing from a middle class background, Mr. DeNunzio graduated from Princeton University in 1953. He majored in classical studies and was a sportscaster for the university radio station.    Joining Kidder Peabody right out of Princeton, Mr. DeNunzio rose through the ranks as an institutional salesman and syndicate manager. In 1968, he was tapped by the firm's chairman, Albert H. Gordon, to reorganize the sleepy firm. Mr. DeNunzio, a heavy-set man who looks more like a football coach than an investment banker, threw himself into the job, and his work helped Kidder survive the Wall Street crises of the early 1970s.    While Mr. DeNunzio had day-to-day control from 1968 on, sources at the firm said he often squabbled with Mr. Gordon, a trim athletic investment banker who is listed in the Social Register.    Kidder Peabody sources say Mr. DeNunzio had to skillfully cultivate his own power base to maintain control. He did that well, and one admirer at Kidder Peabody says Mr. DeNunzio has &quot;total control of the organization.&quot; Mr. DeNunzio became chairman last year, succeeding the 84-year-old Mr. Gordon.    In the past few years, Mr. DeNunzio vastly has expanded fixed-income trading. Shrugging off a long-held disdain of publicity, Mr. DeNunzio hired a public relations firm. And he tapped as his probable successor the much more intense and aggressive Max C. Chapman Jr., a former marine and college football player who has headed fixed-income trading.    Kidder Peabody also has entered the high-yield bond, mortgage-backed security and merchant banking fields -- the latter despite Mr. DeNunzio's earlier objections. The spokesman said the firm's goal is to become a top-tier global investment firm, aided by GE's capital infusions.    Earlier this year, Mr. DeNunzio also reduced the number of people reporting to him to five from 17 and greatly expanded the role of Mr. Chapman. </TEXT></DOC>