<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880819-0095 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS: Theater: Festival Latino </HL><AUTHOR> Sylviane Gold </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   New York If George Shultz has trouble swallowing the political murals of Ecuador, what, I wonder, would he make of the plays in this year's Festival Latino at the Public Theater? (What I made of them was aided by simultaneous translations heard through earphones.)    In &quot;Made in Lanus,&quot; an Argentine woman announces she would rather suffer the indignities of poverty in her homeland than enjoy the good life among the hated Yanquis. In &quot;El Martirio del Pastor,&quot; the American government is seen as meddling and inept by all factions in chaotic, pre-Duarte El Salvador. And in &quot;De la Calle,&quot; sordid, brutal scenes of life among Mexico's have-nots are paraded across the stage as a rebuke to the haves. And who has more than us Norteamericanos?    The most striking thing about these three plays actually is not their anti-Americanism. Indeed, they are on the whole not even overtly political. Their anti-Americanism emerges casually, in asides, as a natural part of conversation in Latin America. So if these plays are representative of how deeply rooted such attitudes are south of the border, Mr. Shultz's stern lectures will not go very far toward changing our image in that part of the world.    In the Argentine play, a couple arrives in Lanus, a poor Buenos Aires suburb, after 10 years in the States. Mabel and Osvaldo may have left as political refugees, but they've returned as members in good standing of Philadelphia's middle class. With their spiffy clothes and shopping bags crammed with gifts, they are a walking advertisement for the American rags-to-riches ideal. And during their visit with Yoli and Cacho, the relatives they left behind, they paint a bright picture of the U.S. as a place of boundless economic opportunity and no identity cards. So the vehement denunciation that wells up from the depths of Yoli's being when she's offered the opportunity to go north comes as something of a surprise -- to her as well as to us.    Nelly Fernandez Tiscornia has given her four characters -- beautifully portrayed by Betiana Blum, Adrian Ghio, Marta Bianchi and Luis Brandoni -- lively personalities but fairly standard emotions: Yoli is inextricably bound to Lanus, while Cacho is drawn to the American dream; Mabel cut her ties to Argentina when she was forced to leave, but Osvaldo has been secretly nursing an aching homesickness.    The play is conventionally structured -- a straightforward family drama with touches of sitcom humor. And its premise -- that sometimes it takes as much courage to stay put in a country as to leave it -- sounds original only because we've been conditioned since childhood to admire our immigrant forebears.    But &quot;Made in Lanus&quot; opened here with a powerful secret ingredient that could not have been present in its Buenos Aires incarnation: An audience of expatriate Argentines. The night I went, there was a muffled sigh as Osvaldo took his first sip of mate, the South American herb drink. When he said he had left behind &quot;things you can't put in a suitcase,&quot; the audience members wept unabashedly. They cheered Yoli's line about the Yanquis and roared at the jokes about &quot;weepy Argentines&quot;; they turned this astute but modest play into an occasion for a communal catharsis -- which is exactly what Aristotle said theater was invented to be.    If the audience at &quot;Lanus&quot; was by far the most vociferous of this festival, there was no lack of audience response at the Costa Rican entry, &quot;El Martirio del Pastor.&quot; And little wonder. The theater has been designed to look -- and even smell -- like a church; the play recalls medieval dramas of the lives of Christian saints and martyrs; and its climax is a sermon delivered by the doomed archbishop of El Salvador, Oscar Romero. So it seemed perfectly normal to see heads bobbing up and down in agreement or bowed in silent sorrow.    Playwright Samuel Rovinski calls this play a &quot;historical drama,&quot; but its effect, it seems to me, is more akin to that of history than drama. Perhaps that's as it should be; perhaps there's something meretricious about adding dramatic hokum to the story of an archbishop shot down in cold blood as he prepared to say Mass. Still, Mr. Rovinski draws back so far from his material that Bishop Romero never becomes anything more than a stick figure in dramatic terms. Clerics and politicians talk about him. They talk to him. And the upheavals of Salvadoran history between 1977 and 1980 swirl all around him. Yet he always seems to be acted upon rather than acting, a holy witness rather than a committed participant in the fray. And Luis Fernando Gomez's dignified but becalmed performance does nothing to diminish this problem in the writing. So &quot;El Martirio&quot; seems more like a religious pageant than true theater.    The same can be said of the Mexican play, &quot;De la Calle,&quot; despite its being very different in tone and subject. There's no mistaking the brick wall and sewer grates that provide the backdrops here for church architecture, or the pimps, whores, drugrunners, drug users, murderers, thieves and drunks for saints. But the purpose here simply is to display these horrible specimens of humanity, not to have them interact.    Jesus Gonzalez Davila does provide his play with two martyrs -- a young boy, played by Roberto Sosa Martinez, searching for the father who abandoned him at birth; and his only friend in the world, a sweet young girl played by Martha Papadimitriou. As they wander through the Mexican underworld, its grotesque denizens alternately beat, rape and humiliate the pair -- when they're not too busy playing soccer with dead babies (honest!) or giving one another electric shocks for kicks.    This play is meant to shock you into empathy with the vile creatures of this lost world. All it does is turn your stomach. I thought, after I saw it, that nothing else the festival could pull out of its hat would be harder to sit through. But then I saw &quot;Mariameneo, Mariameneo,&quot; from Spain. It's a surrealistic piece about women driven crazy by housework, a theme with which I can of course sympathize. Unfortunately, the play, too, can drive you crazy, with its solemn, repetitive, just plain irritating style. Its only virtue, I fear, was that it taught me I'd rather be grossed out in the theater than be yowled at, especially in two languages at once.    Festival Latino continues through Sunday with &quot;Martirio&quot; and &quot;Mariameneo,&quot; with simultaneous English translation available for the latter. </TEXT></DOC>