<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880728-0128 </DOCNO><HL> Safety Net: In Depressed Mexico, Families Pull Together To Make Ends Meet --- Members Pool Their Earnings, Start Businesses at Home; A Pig, 8 Sewing Machines --- A Stabilizing Effect on Nation </HL><AUTHOR> Matt Moffett (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><DATELINE> NEZAHUALCOYOTL, Mexico  </DATELINE><TEXT>   &quot;For a household of 17 people to survive in such hard times, everyone must contribute,&quot; says Enrique Lara. One of his daughters, giggling, corrects him: There are 18 people living in the Lara house.    Government rolls show that Mr. Lara is an inspector for the water department in this sprawling shantytown outside Mexico City. But a visit to his home provides a clearer picture of how he supports his family -- and how it supports him -- in the depths of Mexico's devastating six-year-old economic crisis.    In the living room two of his grown sons share a single bed. They also work for the water department and contribute their earnings to the family pool. On a wall above the bed hangs a photograph of Mr. Lara's oldest son, who found work in the United States and sends home coveted dollars to support the four children he left in his parents' care.    Above the living room, a makeshift second floor that was cobbled onto the roof accommodates a married daughter's family, no longer able to afford a home of its own. The son-in-law kicks in his earnings from a factory job -- and raises a pig on the rooftop. Two bustling rooms in back provide the family's biggest meal ticket. Here Mrs. Lara and four tenders tend to a rattling battery of sewing machines that stitch 1,000 blouses a week for a clothing factory.    This is getting by, Mexican style. The burden of a $104 billion foreign debt has jolted the country's development course into reverse, forcing more and more Mexicans like the Laras to rely on the world's most basic economic unit: the family.    With real wages set back to their levels of the early 1960s, families make do by combining their diminished resources, &quot;putting more water in the soup,&quot; as the Mexican adage goes. With no economic growth the past six years and a sharp recession unfolding, the family has acted as a cradle for small, subsistence enterprises that take the place of vanishing farms and factories.    In this month's presidential election, Mexicans showed the extent of their economic distress by delivering a historic repudiation of Mexico's ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party, or PRI. The PRI, which had never received less than 70% of the vote in a presidential election, won only a fraction more than 50%. Even that result looked suspicious when the government delayed a week before releasing the vote tabulations.    Still, despite scattered protests against what is widely seen as a tainted election, the atmosphere in even the poorest barrios is calm. Many attribute the stability to the family safety net. &quot;Our great advantage in times of crisis,&quot; says an old Mexican politician, &quot;is that most people will go home to help their families, and not out onto the streets to attack the government.&quot;    A recent study of 95 urban working-class families showed how families were banding together to cushion the blow of the crisis. The average size of households in the study grew by more than 10% as they incorporated more wage-earning cousins, uncles and in-laws. At the same time, the number of adult females and young males pushed into the work force rose 25%.    &quot;The crisis has forced the family to take almost all of the responsibility for social security and entrepreneurial development,&quot; says Mercedes Gonzalez de la Rocha, the anthropologist who made the study.    The family has spearheaded an explosive growth in small, off-the-books enterprises as diverse as repair shops, taco stands and sidewalk flea markets. The output of this underground economy nearly doubled to an astonishing 38% of the gross domestic product in the first three years of the crisis, according to the Center of Economic Studies of the Private Sector.    &quot;If there is one encouraging thing we've learned from the crisis, it is the great capacity of the family to start these small underground businesses,&quot; says Charles Oppenheim, editor of Expansion, Mexico's major business magazine.    Here is how three working-class families -- one from the urban outskirts, one from the countryside, and one from the inner city -- have confronted hard times.    The Laras   Tears roll down Juana Lara's cheeks when she recalls the family's desperation a few years ago. Even though she borrowed from relatives to supplement her husband's meager government salary, she could afford meat for her nine children only every other day. Her two teen-age daughters' knees frequently buckled under them when they walked, apparently because of their poor diet.    Only her relatives' support kept things from being even worse. When Mr. Lara left to look for better-paying work in the U.S. and was detained by immigration authorities, her &quot;compadre,&quot; or son's godfather, moved into the home and supported the family for months. As the crisis cut even deeper, three young sons were sent out to find jobs, and a working son-in-law was brought into the home.    But two years ago, the collapse of oil prices pushed Mexico's economy -- and the Lara's -- to the brink. Mrs. Lara finally decided she would have to find work herself. &quot;My husband didn't want me to do anything but housework,&quot; she recalls. &quot;But how else were we to feed the family?&quot;    Mrs. Lara's &quot;comadre,&quot; or daughter's godparent, found her a sewing job at a small blouse factory. Soon Mrs. Lara began working at home on an ancient pedal sewing machine. A teen-age daughter helped. After saving for weeks, Mrs. Lara was able to buy an electric sewing machine and put another daughter to work.    Today Mrs. Lara supervises a production line of eight electric machines that often clatter away 16 hours a day. She herself sews the backseams between the two halves of the blouses. A teen-age daughter sews on the collars. Another attaches the sleeves. The two youngest daughters fasten the buttons. The growth of the business has forced Mrs. Lara to hire some help from outside the family, but she prefers using her daughters: They work for one-third the wage of outsiders.    The sewing shop now provides the Laras more income than all of the men's jobs combined, but the family still struggles to get by. When their oldest son visits home from his job in the U.S., he suffers culture shock. &quot;He complains that the house is dirty, that there are too many people living here and that we should not keep a pig on the roof,&quot; says Leticia, one of the Lara daughters. &quot;He says that things are never this bad in the United States. He even asks for bread instead of tortillas.&quot;    The Laras' son-in-law and youngest son are also preparing to emigrate to the U.S., but they are still counting on the protection of the family safety net. &quot;It is a strange, unfriendly country, but our son will take care of them,&quot; says Mrs. Lara. &quot;Wherever there is family, they will be able to survive.&quot;    The Avinas   It's as though the economic crisis has set time back many years in the tiny central Mexican farm community of Barrio de Guadalupe de Mezquitillo.    Traditional rope sandals are making a comeback, replacing more costly factory-made shoes. Donkey carts appear more frequently on the one paved highway. Animals are all bones.    &quot;The crisis is forcing us to return to the old way of life, when we depended on the land and the family,&quot; says Manuel Avina, the 76-year-old patriarch of a huge clan living here.    Mr. Avina never earned much farming this dusty plain. Now he and his family barely subsist. With little money to invest in his crop, he can't raise much more corn than what he, his wife and three grandchildren consume. The grandchildren were left to him by a son who emigrated to the U.S. Mr. Avina loads his harvest's small surplus onto a cart and tries to sell it for cash in a nearby town, but he increasingly must resort to bartering it for other staples.    Mr. Avina is thankful he lives near a vast and supportive family -- 10 children, 70 grandchildren and a host of other relations. When he needs groceries, he goes to the general store owned by a son, who often won't accept his payment. When his animals get sick, he takes them for treatment to a grandson, who hasn't charged him since the crisis began. Now that he can't afford to buy new clothes, a cousin makes them for him.    Even the one son who left Mexico for the U.S. contributes to his father's welfare. When Mr. Avina didn't have money to repair his tumbledown wooden shack, the emigrant son returned to the village and used the money and skills he had obtained working in the U.S. construction industry to build his father a new brick home.    Mr. Avina's children also look out for each other. Last year, when Antonio Avina's corn crop failed and he could find no work in the city, his brothers supported his family for several months. &quot;When it doesn't rain on my land, it will rain on my brother's,&quot; says Antonio Avina. &quot;If there is something for one, there is something for all.&quot;    But none of the Avinas can afford to be idle, not even the elder Mr. Avina's 101-year-old mother-in-law. She is blind and deaf, but her hands are still nimble. She weaves sombreros, which Mr. Avina sells on his cart.    The Ravelos   Armando Ravelo's family has had to battle a natural disaster as well as an economic one. A severe recession caused Mr. Ravelo to lose his job as a cook in a Mexico City restaurant in 1985. Shortly after, one of the most devastating earthquakes in recent history destroyed the family's rattletrap apartment building.    Mr. Ravelo, his wife and three children were crammed into a one-room emergency shelter with their son-in-law and seven grandchildren, who had also lost their home. Struggling to support the enlarged household, Mr. Ravelo and his wife got jobs as servants. An uncle arranged a job for one son in a brewery, and another son pitched in what he earned at a factory. The grandchildren salvaged and sold whatever they could from the wrecked buildings around them.    When the Ravelos were finally relocated in a new apartment complex a year later, the grandchildren and son-in-law stayed with the family. The addition of one new worker barely compensated for all of the new mouths to feed. Mr. Ravelo worried that he would soon be cast out on the street again.    So last year, Mr. Ravelo and his wife quit their servant jobs and gambled that their extensive family contacts could earn them a living as vendors in Mexico's thriving black market. &quot;All of the money now is underground -- if you know the right people,&quot; he says.    Mr. Ravelo's best contacts are members of his family. A nephew who lives along the U.S. border ships him smuggled electronic products. A brother-in-law from southern Mexico sends clothing from other Latin American countries. A network of cousins, uncles and nephews in the capital supplies him with everything from American-made boxing gloves to Japanese-made electric knives.    Aggressively hustling their wares, the Ravelos have been able to support their enlarged household. Mrs. Ravelo sells door-to-door during the week and operates a booth at an open-air market on weekends. After finishing their factory shifts, his two sons go to work selling smuggled radios in the plant parking lots.    The sons also act as bodyguards for their father in an enormous black market bazaar called Tepito, notorious for violent crime as well as contraband. &quot;People usually don't bother my father because they see his sons are with him,&quot; says Mr. Ravelo's son Fernando, who lingers a few steps behind his father and his brother as they make their way through the market's sinuous alleys.    Reckless driving is also a hazard. A truck suddenly turns the corner of the alley and barrels down on the Ravelos from behind. Moving quickly, Fernando pushes his father and brother to one side of the alley, out of the way. As the truck passes, the three Ravelos regroup in single file, one son in front of his father and the other guarding the rear. </TEXT></DOC>