<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870721-0056 </DOCNO><HL> WHAT'S NEW:New 'Sniffer'Finds Explosives---By Jerry E. Bishop</HL><DD> 07/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CTUS GRAPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)CHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM) </IN><TEXT>   Explosives hidden in luggage can be detected by a new &quot;sniffer.&quot;    Explosives like TNT, nitroglycerine and plastique constantly emit vaporous traces of nitrogen-oxygen compounds that leak through any container into the surrounding air. Molecules of these compounds can be detected by a mass spectrometer, a laboratory instrument that identifies molecules on the basis of their weight or mass.    Analytical chemists at the federal Oak Ridge National Laboratories in Tennessee are developing a computerized, compact mass spectrometer that can be used at such places as security checkpoints at airports, military installations and power plants. A fan blows surrounding air through the instrument. The computer, which will pick up traces of the vapors at concentrations of only a few parts per billion parts of air, determines if the air contains molecules of the vapors from explosives. Unlike trained dogs, which are equally good at sniffing out explosives, the instrument can operate around the clock.    A laboratory bench version of the sniffer was about a cubic yard in size and cost about $80,000, says Gary L. Glish, one of the developers. A more compact version is now being built for field testing. Costs should come down if the instrument is produced commercially, Mr. Glish says.    Tests show the sniffer is highly specific for explosives -- that is, it won't sound false alarms. Variations could be made to detect flammable liquids or illegal drugs, Mr. Glish says.    Inhalable Insulin   Inhalable insulin for diabetics passes a crucial test.    Taking insulin by nasal spray would be far more convenient than injections. But the insulin currently used for injections can't be absorbed through the nose's mucous membranes. So researchers have long sought a detergent that will break the insulin down to absorbable size.    One such inhalable insulin was tested at Boston University Medical Center on six patients with Type I diabetes, the kind that requires insulin injections from childhood. The patients took their usual morning injection of slow-acting insulin to maintain a minimum level throughout the day. But at mealtimes, when they normally would have taken an extra injection to deal with the meal, they inhaled an insulin dose. It was as effective as the injection in holding down blood sugar but acted faster and disappeared more quickly from the blood stream, more closely mimicking the body's natural production of insulin following meals, according to Renate Kimmerle and James Melby of the endocrinology department.    In the first tests, the insulin aerosol irritated the nasal membranes. So, the Boston researchers are now testing a new version. In addition, intranasal insulin wouldn't replace a morning injection of long-acting insulin, and several times as much insulin has to be used intranasally as injected for the same effect. But the convenience of using the spray at mealtimes may be worth the extra cost for many diabetics.    Other inhalable insulins are under test at Boston's Beth Israel Hospital, the University of California in San Francisco, and in Australia. Once researchers settle on the most effective versions, large-scale clinical trials, taking two to three years, must be done before inhalable insulins are available, Dr. Kimmerle cautions.    Killing Termites   A new termite killer grows out of a serendipitous discovery.    Six years ago, researchers at the Madison, Wis., labs of Agricetus Inc. were studying how certain bacteria take nitrogen from the air and &quot;fix&quot; it into compounds that can be used by plants for food. The company, jointly owned by Cetus Corp, a biotechnology firm, and W.R. Grace andamp; Co., a farm chemicals maker, specializes in genetic engineering for agriculture. Among the nitrogen-fixing microbes they looked at: a strain that has a unique symbiotic relationship with termites, living in the termites' intestines and providing them with nitrogen nutrients.    The termite-dwelling bacteria happen to use molybdenum and tungsten as part of their nitrogen-fixing chemistry. So the researchers fed the termites various molybdenum and tungsten compounds to determine the role of these metals. The bacteria continued to fix nitrogen but -- for a still-unknown reason -- the termites died. The compounds were patented in 1983 but insecticide makers had little interest.    Now commercial interest rises as new government restrictions are placed on insecticides used against termites. Argricetus recently licensed a Japanese company to formulate and test the molybdenum termiticides and is ready to license companies in the U.S. and other countries. </TEXT></DOC>