<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880408-0006 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   GORBACHEV OFFERED to begin a Soviet pullout from Afghanistan next month.    In a joint statement issued after a meeting in the Soviet Uzbekistan city of Tashkent, Gorbachev and Afghan leader Najibullah said they had solved all problems blocking a settlement in the nine-year-old war. The statement also said the withdrawal of about 115,000 Soviet troops would begin May 15 if peace negotiations in Geneva are successful &quot;in the shortest period.&quot; Both sides at the U.N.-mediated talks in Switzerland indicated that an agreement was near.    Reagan administration officials said the Tashkent accord appeared to meet conditions for continuing U.S. and Soviet aid to the warring Afghan parties.    ---   Jewish settlers vowed revenge at the funeral of a teen-age girl killed Wednesday in a clash with Arabs in the West Bank. Autopsy results released by the army showed the girl was shot in the head and struck by a stone. Israel radio said the gunshot may have been from an Israeli weapon.    Shultz said Jordan's King Hussein is a possible partner for Arab-Israeli peace talks. The secretary of state made his remarks after arriving in Amman from Saudi Arabia, where he was promoting a U.S. peace initiative for the Mideast.    ---   Simon suspended his Democratic presidential campaign but said he wouldn't decide about formally withdrawing until after the final primaries June 7. On the GOP side, Robertson also ended active campaigning. He has lost his right to matching funds, relinquished his Secret Service protection and reduced his schedule of appearances.    ---   Arab hijackers planned to leave the northeastern Iranian city of Mashhad today, and ordered airport authorities to prepare for their departure. The Kuwaiti jet, with about 50 hostages aboard, was refueled and food was sent aboard. The gunmen, who commandeered the flight Tuesday, have demanded that Kuwait free 17 prisoners.    ---   Three Iran-Contra defendants moved to have the charges dismissed on the ground that the prosecution's evidence is illegally based on their testimony to Congress. Lawyers for Poindexter, North and Hakim said some of the evidence used to obtain the 23-count indictment came from testimony given under a grant of limited immunity.    ---   Thirteen white supremacists were found innocent of charges of murder, robbery and conspiring to violently overthrow the U.S. government and establish a new nation in the Pacific Northwest. The all-white federal jury in Arkansas returned the verdict on its fourth day of deliberations.    ---   Presser's attorney filed in federal court an FBI memo to former agency chief Webster showing that as early as 1983 the Teamsters president was authorized to participate in &quot;illegal activities.&quot; The document appears to undercut prosecution allegations that high-level FBI aides weren't aware of such activities.    ---   Government researchers reported that a recent increase in salmonella cases in the Northeast stems from raw or undercooked eggs of a quality and type thought to be infection-free. The Centers for Disease Control reviewed 65 salmonella outbreaks and found a high proportion resulted from grade A shelled eggs.    ---   The U.S. said Panama's plan to arrest deposed President Delvalle was illegal and branded Noriega's rule &quot;illegitimate.&quot; A special Panamanian government prosecutor said that an arrest warrant had been issued for Delvalle and that Panama City would ask Interpol to assist in the arrest of two Noriega opponents living in the U.S.    Two Panamanian parties withdrew from an opposition alliance to form their own anti-government movement. Their leaders argued that U.S. economic sanctions are hurting Panama's people more than they are damaging Noriega and his regime.    ---   Iran said its jets bombarded an Iraqi military base and oil refinery in Baghdad, and Iraq said its forces attacked 10 Iranian towns. Amid the escalation of strikes against civilian targets, Iranians are to vote today in parliamentary elections that are considered crucial in determining who will hold power after Khomeini, 87, dies.    ---   Ethiopia's government is preparing to airlift troops from Somalia's border to the north of the country where fighting against rebels has escalated. In Geneva, the Red Cross called on Addis Ababa to reverse an order withdrawing relief workers from the region, citing more than three million drought victims in Eritrea and Tigray.    ---   Rival Shiite Moslem militias battled for control of southern Lebanon for the third consecutive day. Lebanese police said at least 39 people were killed and 96 wounded in the fighting between the Syrian-backed Amal and the pro-Iranian Hezbollah near the port city of Sidon.    ---   U.S. negotiators boycotted a round of talks in the Philippines about the future of U.S. military bases in that country after local newspapers reported a dispute over American rights to launch combat missions without Manila's approval. The accord over the maintenance of the six U.S. installations in the Philippines is to expire in 1991.    ---   Rep. Edward Boland said he would retire after 36 years in Congress. The 76-year-old Massachusetts Democrat probably is best known as the author of amendments that barred U.S. aid to the Nicaraguan rebels.    ---   The State Department rejected an informal request from Vietnam to send food aid to regions where villagers are searching for the remains of American servicemen missing since the Vietnam War. The U.S. expressed outrage at &quot;any suggestion linking food assistance to the return of remains.&quot;    ---   Died: Denis Hamilton, 69, ex-chairman of the Reuters news agency, in London. </TEXT></DOC>