<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870608-0089 </DOCNO><HL> India Chooses Its Friends Unwisely---By Jim Courter</HL><DD> 06/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><TEXT>   Which government leader represents the Soviets as &quot;keen to pull out of Afghanistan&quot; but unable to do so because &quot;Pakistan appears to have a vested interest in keeping the Afghan problem alive&quot;? Mikhail Gorbachev? No, Rajiv Gandhi, prime minister of India. What Southwest Asian country poses the gravest danger to the peace of that region? Is it the U.S.S.R., with 115,000 troops in Afghanistan and the Pakistani borderlands? Not according to India. Or China? Wrong again. India has gone out of its way to play down reports of a recent clash in disputed area along its border with China, and Mr. Gandhi has said China is unlikely to attack India. The real enemy of peace, according to Indian spokesmen, is Pakistan.    India's obsession with Pakistan, Prime Minister Gandhi's recent comments about American efforts to &quot;destabilize&quot; India, and India's steady refusal to condemn the depradations of the Soviet bloc make that nation a difficult friend for the U.S.    Narayan Dutt Tiwari, India's External Affairs Minister, describes his government as sharing the Kremlin's &quot;common aspirations for peace and nation building,&quot; and &quot;feelings of mutual trust and understanding at the highest level.&quot; Mr. Tiwari canceled a Washington visit last month because the Reagan administration is considering sending AWACs to Pakistan, which has requested aid in defending itself against the Soviet and Afghan planes that attacked Pakistan 256 times last year. An attack in February killed 100 Pakistanis in a crowded bazaar in the border town of Miran Shah.    Mr. Tiwari, who had no hesitation about visiting Afghanistan last month, said in Kabul that the AWACs for Pakistan would be &quot;for use against India,&quot; not to counter &quot;any hypothetical threat from Afghanistan.&quot; Mr. Gandhi has said the same.    That is a fantastic diversion from India's real -- and serious -- security problems. While India has gone to war with Pakistan three times since 1948, there is probably no non-Indian analyst who seriously believes that Pakistan, bent backward by the pressures of the Afghan war and the presence of three million Afghan refugees, is preparing to attack India. India's air force is three times larger than Pakistan's. It has a two-to-one advantage in ground forces, and clear superiority in naval forces. In the past three years the Soviets have supplied India with twice as many weapons as Pakistan has received from the U.S. What is more, a Pakistani assault on India would be the perfect pretext for a Soviet move into Pakistan.    New Delhi's misapprehensions about Pakistan are only one aspect of a foreign policy that in general demonstrates too much sympathy for dictators and too little interest in friendly non-Communist countries. India's leaders direct the world's largest democracy yet seem to lack all desire to make it a leader of other democracies. For a democracy, India has strange friends.    In March, Cuba won a reprieve from a resolution of condemnation pending before the U.N. Human Rights Commission in Geneva. The escape came when India introduced a procedural motion to prevent action on the resolution. Previously, New Delhi had explicitly promised that it would not block the resolution.    Marxist Nicaragua receives favors too. Last September, on the very day that the U.S. State Department had the Sandinista ambassador called on the carpet for planning a series of attacks on American missions in South America, Daniel Ortega and other Nicaraguan ministers were in New Delhi accepting a $10.4 million aid package. Mr. Gandhi received the Order of Augusto Cesar Sandino, Nicaragua's highest civilian award, bestowed only on Fidel Castro and four others.    Angola, which is dominated by Cuban and Soviet troops and advisers, has benefited from Indian efforts to increase commercial, technical and economic cooperation between the two nations. India has no diplomatic mission in Israel, but the Palestine Liberation Organization terrorists keep at least one official mission in India, and Mr. Gandhi just tipped the national hat to Yasser Arafat on his reappointment as chairman of the PLO.    Even the international pariahs North Korea and Libya have received kind words from India. In April, Indian Defense Minister K.C. Pant joined North Korean President Kim Il Sung for the latter's 75th birthday celebration in Pyongyang, where he lent dignity to a regime that spends 24% of its gross national product on its army by describing the Indian and North Korean governments as having much to gain by &quot;working for disarmament, development and just world order.&quot; External Affairs Minister Tiwari uttered similar sentiments in Libya last July when he offered cooperation in new areas of industry and trade and said Libya and India shared a commitment to &quot;creating a more equitable world order.&quot;    India appears to be spoiling for a fight with the neighboring democracy of Sri Lanka. It has long aided the Tamil extremists there, most recently last week when it dropped food and medicine by parachute into areas held by the Tamil insurgents. It has permitted training camps for Sri Lankan Tamil guerrillas on Indian soil.    Certainly the U.S. gets very little political support. The $500 million in American aid sent New Delhi's way in the past three years can never be said to have bought votes. At the U.N. in 1985 India was with the U.S. on 8.9% of the votes, less often than even the Kremlin.    Soviet-Indian bilateral trade increased by 2 1/2 times in the past five years, and a further increase is expected. Last month India announced the visit of what a spokesman called &quot;the most powerful team of Soviet scientists that the U.S.S.R. has ever sent to any country.&quot; There is talk of a Soviet-built nuclear power plant. All of this indicates that Mr. Gandhi was serious when he stated last month that India and the Soviet Union are embarking on a &quot;totally new phase of collaboration.&quot;    But it is India's military relations with Moscow that are the most troublesome. New Delhi is working to increase its own weapons production base, and has also made significant new agreements with the U.S. on some military technologies. But the Pentagon quite rightly is inclined to go slowly with releases of high technologies because of New Delhi's close ties to the Kremlin.    India and the Soviet Union co-produce T-72 tanks and MiG-21 and MiG-27 fighters. India was one of the first countries to take delivery of the MiG-29, and will be the first to get the new Mi-26 Halo helicopter. Earlier this year India granted the Soviets overflight rights for passage to Vietnam, from whose bases Soviet warplanes transgress upon Indonesian airspace. The naval base at India's Nicobar Islands in the Indian Ocean, partially built with Soviet help, is being used by Soviet Navy submarines, which prowl Indonesia's territorial waters.    These unpleasant facts bear recording, partly because they have received little attention, partly in hope for the future, and partly in response to a letter that India's ambassador to the U.S., P.K. Kaul, sent to U.S. representatives recently. In his letter, Mr. Kaul spoke of what the two countries had in common, &quot;beginning with democratic systems and a commitment to individual rights and liberties.&quot;    Indeed we do. But have we gone further than this beginning in common domestic political structures? Can we do nothing together to extend such prized liberties to others? India sometimes appears deaf to the security and political interests of countries hard pressed by the Soviet bloc, justifying its indifference with a wave of the flag of the nonaligned movement.    Here is what matters most about Southwest Asian geopolitics today: The Hindu Kush, arguably the world's greatest land barrier, has been breached by the Red Army. The plains of India and Pakistan alike are bared to what is probably the most powerful armed force in the world. Only in the very short term is India any safer than Pakistan or Iran. So either India's leaders are ignoring this fact, or they have faced it and decided upon appeasement. Whatever the case, they are not meeting their responsibilities. Not to their citizens, and not to their democratic friends.    ---   Mr. Courter is a Republican representative from New Jersey. </TEXT></DOC>