<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880615-0150 </DOCNO><HL> GOP Must Share Blame for Byrd Amendment </HL><AUTHOR> David B. Rivkin Jr. </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> NUK ARO </IN><G> CNG EXE </G><TEXT>   President Reagan issued a statement Friday asserting that the Byrd amendment to the INF Treaty had no impact on his &quot;constitutional powers and responsibilities.&quot; This rather bland pronouncement failed to generate front-page news. Yet, it involved both constitutional principles of the highest order and a rather uninspiring effort by the Reagan administration to defend them.    What was at stake is the president's power to interpret treaties -- a major component of his foreign-affairs responsibilities. This matter has been a subject of a furious debate, dating back to 1985 and the &quot;reinterpretation&quot; of the ABM Treaty.    During the Senate's consideration of the ABM Treaty in 1972, Nixon administration officials gave testimony suggesting that the treaty banned development and testing of all futuristic ABM systems, except for fixed-site land-based ones. This testimony stood unchallenged until 1985, when review of the negotiating record showed that the Soviets never agreed to that ban.    Presented with the problem, State Department legal adviser Abraham Sofaer concluded that since Moscow never agreed to this provision, it was not bound by mistaken explications provided to the Senate, and that the U.S. and the Soviet Union were bound by the bargain struck during treaty negotiations -- even if it differed from what the president told the Senate.    These assertions drew fire from congressional Democrats, especially Sen. Sam Nunn of Georgia, who claimed that the position developed by Mr. Sofaer negated the Senate's constitutional right to participate in treaty-making and provided an inducement for a president to mislead the Senate in the future. Sen. Nunn led the fight to introduce language in defense authorization bills that would have mandated compliance with the &quot;narrow&quot; interpretation of the ABM Treaty. Ultimately, the administration caved in to congressional pressure and agreed to a de facto compliance with Sen. Nunn's position.    This, however, was not enough for Sen. Nunn and other Senate Democrats, who decided to use the INF Treaty as a vehicle to settle the score with the administration. They introduced the Byrd amendment, which provides that the INF Treaty should be interpreted in accordance with the testimony provided by the executive branch to the Senate, and specifies that in the future the president cannot reinterpret the treaty without the Senate's consent. The possible result of the Byrd amendment is what Sen. Arlen Specter (R., Pa.) calls a &quot;two-treaty&quot; situation -- whereby the U.S. is bound by a stricter version of the INF Treaty than is Moscow.    To be fair, the blame for the passage of the Byrd amendment does not rest entirely with the Democrats. Both the administration and some Senate Republicans bear at least some of the responsibility. To begin with, the administration's efforts to assuage Sen. Nunn's concerns about Mr. Sofaer's legal theories not only failed to bear fruit; they actually backfired. Initially, Assistant Attorney General Charles Cooper issued an opinion asserting that, as a matter of domestic law, the administration that presented mistaken testimony to the Senate was bound by it, even if, as a matter of international law, the treaty had a different meaning.    This point was reaffirmed in a March letter issued by A.B. Culvahouse, the White House general counsel. The letter posited that &quot;the president is bound by shared interpretations which were both authoritatively communicated to the Senate . . . and clearly intended, generally understood, and relied upon by the Senate in its advice and consent to ratification.&quot;    The administration's implicit intent at the time Mr. Cooper's and Mr. Culvahouse's opinions were released was to introduce enough qualifications and hedges to ensure that testimony by executive branch officials would be considered binding only in exceptional circumstances. This, however, was unacceptable to the Senate Democrats. In the process, however, the administration sacrificed important constitutional principles, by embracing the legitimacy of the &quot;two-treaty&quot; approach.    The administration's efforts to prevent the passage of the Byrd amendment were at best halfhearted, and, in the end, the White House simply dropped the ball. With the Moscow summit rapidly approaching, the administration abandoned any efforts to rally the Senate Republicans against the amendment. Instead, White House Chief of Staff Howard Baker made a trip to Capitol Hill to meet with Republican leaders, and, to their considerable surprise, appealed to them to vote for the Byrd amendment. No price seemed too high to enable President Reagan to sign the treaty at the Moscow summit.    The problem with the amendment is that it addresses a nonexistent issue. The claim that, in the absence of the amendment, a president would feel emboldened to habitually misinform the Senate about the treaties for which he was seeking its consent is absurd. For a president knowingly to furnish false testimony to the Senate would constitute an impeachable offense. Not surprisingly, this has never occurred.    The real problem arises, as was the case with the ABM Treaty, when the executive branch makes a mistake or unwittingly provides confusing testimony. In such a situation, the solution favored by Sens. Nunn and Byrd seems to involve punishing the U.S., by making it abide by a treaty provision that the other treaty partner does not have to follow.    Moreover, the Byrd amendment is unconstitutional. Under the Constitution, the president alone has the right to determine U.S. international treaty obligations. The president also has the right to interpret, for purposess of domestic law, what any treaty or statute means. While the courts have the ultimate power to adjudicate the validity of the president's interpretation, they habitually defer to his interpretation, and would not disturb any reasonable determination unless there is clear and unmistakable evidence that Congress intended something else.    There is an additional basis for maintaining that the Byrd amendment does not have the force of law. Under the Constitution, a treaty cannot create binding domestic obligations that exceed the international obligations agreed to by the treaty parties. Thus, an extra provision, allegedly created by the executive-branch testimony, is not a &quot;supreme&quot; law of the land. At the same time, such a provision does not have the force of a regular law, since it has not been properly enacted by both houses of Congress. As such it is at most a political decoration that any president is free to disregard.    It is regrettable that the Senate saw fit to mar the INF Treaty with a legally defective and unconstitutional amendment. It is even more regrettable that the president failed to correct this mistake prior to the treaty's ratification, by declaring that the Byrd amendment is null and void and that he has no intention of complying with it.    ---   Mr. Rivkin, a Washington lawyer, is a visiting fellow at the Heritage Foundation. A related editorial appears nearby. {See: &quot;REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Sofaer's Revenge&quot; -- WSJ June 15, 1988}</TEXT></DOC>