<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871030-0120 </DOCNO><HL> Competition Inspires Detente in Detroit---By Jacob M. Schlesinger</HL><DD> 10/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR F C GMAUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT) </IN><DATELINE> DETROIT  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Last March, hundreds of auto workers gathered at a rally on Detroit's west side to hear the Rev. Jesse Jackson berate the Big Three. The protest ended with a rousing chorus of &quot;Strike! Strike! Strike! Strike!&quot; In late July, workers ringed General Motors Corp. headquarters to mark the opening of national contract talks, and in an indelicate reference to its embattled chairman, chanted, &quot;One, Two, Three, Four, Shove Roger Smith Off the 14th Floor!&quot;    But by mid-October, the UAW signed contracts with both GM and Ford Motor Co. without any strike at all -- only the second time in non-crisis negotiating in more than three decades.    At Ford, the union for the first time ever extended the contract indefinitely past its expiration, then got 73% worker approval. At GM, the union never set a strike deadline, and got a whopping 81% worker support. The contract got support even from Pete Kelly, the firebrand president of Local 160 and the union's most visible dissident, who has opposed every pact since 1964.    Worker hostility didn't collapse because the union won a tremendous victory. Mr. Kelly, for one, turned around because the contract includes a specific clause promising to try to save jobs at the Warren, Mich., Technical Center he represents. In general, it happened because both sides have grown more realistic, and because they have truly changed their views of their relationship.    The 1987 negotiations, once feared as a return to traditional knockdown-dragout days, will now apparently go down in history as cementing union-management detente in deference to the larger battle against world competition. &quot;I think we got out of this a totally new relationship with the UAW,&quot; says Alfred S. Warren, GM's negotiator.    The half-century since the UAW's founding can be divided into three eras of labor-management relations. At first, the companies fought strenuously to keep the union out, triggering bloody brawls, bitter sit-down strikes, and even assassination attempts against union leaders. Eventually, the companies accepted the union as a fact of life, but still wanted to simplify the relationship and contain it. In the late 1940s, the auto makers guaranteed their workers regular, fixed wage increases and cost-of-living adjustments. In return for the money, the companies expected workers to mind their own business and stay out of management decisions.    Hostility remained. The big question at each bargaining round wasn't whether there would be a strike, but which company would be the target and how long the strike would last. Every session between 1958 and 1976 involved walkouts, peaking with consecutive nine-week strikes at Ford and GM in 1967 and 1970.    Finally, in 1979, the UAW was able to reach agreements without any strikes. But that proved to be a false peace. The pacts were too rich for the auto makers, who had to beg for unprecedented relief before the contracts even expired. At the time, the crisis bargaining of 1982 seemed like a severe, yet temporary, response to a cyclical downturn. Instead, those talks have turned out to be the dawn of a new age -- if not of harmony, then at least of cooperation and non-ideological pragmatism.    The perception right now on Wall Street is that GM this year caved in to the union, and that was the price of peace. That is only half-true. GM came into the negotiations beating the drums for a contract different from Ford's, tailored to its specific needs. On that score GM lost.    But looking at the historical context, GM did OK. Several practices established in the 1982 contracts have continued through the most recent bargaining, even though the industry is coming off three of its most lucrative years ever. The UAW has yet to win back the principles of annual pay raises and &quot;paid personal holidays&quot; -- a concept designed to shorten the work week. Pay is tied more closely to corporate performance through profit-sharing plans.    But the union repeatedly said its new top priority is job security, and now claims &quot;historic&quot; progress in that area. Indeed, the most recent contracts will affect certain business decisions that will likely result in more union jobs. But the UAW now seems resigned to only a loose form of job protection, which still allows the companies to lay off workers during sales downturns.    The heart of these contracts, more explicitly stated than ever before, is assurances from both sides to work more closely together to improve quality and efficiency. The UAW leadership, in each of the three negotiating rounds during this new era, has encouraged changing factory-floor organization. But this year's accords are the most blunt. They include an actual checklist of potential modifications, such as the politically touchy team concept, in which a group of workers share responsibilities. The GM pact even hints at the possibility of reduced wages and benefits. And, while the contracts don't require changes, they do require that committees be set up and that they file reports in six months.    Management, for its part, is giving up prerogatives once jealously guarded, and more frequently asks workers for help. The manager of one of GM's plants near Lansing, Mich., even spends one day a month working on the factory floor. And the companies now have a financial incentive to work with the union. The job-security provisions will cost money only if people are actually laid off, and the auto makers also likely will get more productivity gains only if they are more friendly toward the union.    The placid autumn in the auto industry matches a recent national trend of fewer strikes. But the truce doesn't pervade all industries. Just last year, USX, the nation's largest steelmaker, suffered a six-month strike. The UAW itself has just come off equally lengthy walkouts at Deere andamp; Co. and Caterpillar Inc.    Perhaps that's because, even in its darkest days, the auto makers suffered less than other U.S. manufacturers, and auto workers gave up less than other U.S. unions. Even though this year's auto pacts would be considered paltry by traditional industry standards, they preserve and build on privileges that make the auto workers among the best paid and protected in America.    UAW members, looking toward the future, also likely realize those facts in themselves are an accomplishment. More and more countries are shipping cars to the U.S., and more and more Japanese companies are building nonunion auto plants in the U.S. &quot;The worker attitude has improved somewhat after they realized General Motors was not in a position to give some of the things we wanted in 1984, and we want it now,&quot; says Eldon Renaud, president of the UAW local at GM's Chevrolet Corvette factory in Bowling Green, Ky.    In 1984, the last round of bargaining, Mr. Renaud opposed the contract, and his members voted 77% against it. This year, he backed it and it got more than 80% support. &quot;The simplistic analogy is when a child is thinking about Christmas,&quot; Mr. Renaud explains. &quot;Before negotiations you set your goals high, your wish list is long. Then you see that's not affordable, that your parents tell you it's no longer a possibility. We cannot strike GM and hope to gain market share. We have a better understanding.&quot;    Finally, the auto makers may have decided that labor is no longer the relevant fight. Union contracts and worker efforts can make a big difference on cost and quality. Those elements are crucial, but soon they won't be enough, as most auto makers will have reached an acceptable level of performance. Competition then will focus on technological innovation and the speed with which the companies can bring it to market.    &quot;In the next 10 years, quality won't be a deciding factor,&quot; GM's Mr. Smith said in a speech earlier this month to the Economic Club of Chicago. &quot;It will be, what does the product do for you and what does it have technologically?&quot;    And labor, for all its importance, can't do much about that.    ---   Mr. Schlesinger covers the auto industry in the Journal's Detroit bureau. </TEXT></DOC>