<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870910-0137 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint:Let the Democrats Be Democrats---By Michael Kinsley</HL><DD> 09/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   The party line on the Democratic Party is roughly as follows: Sen. Sam Nunn's decision not to run for the 1988 presidential nomination forecloses the party's last chance to avoid self-immolation again next year. Sen. Nunn, a responsible and widely popular centrist, realized he could not get the nomination and therefore left it to a field of unimpressive ultra-liberals with no special appeal to anyone.    This development symbolizes the party's central problem, which is that its nomination can be won only by running a formidable gantlet of liberal activists and interest groups, and anyone who succeeds at this process will be too far left to win the election. This is why the party lost four of the past five presidential elections, and six out of the past nine. If Democrats don't wake up, their party is doomed, at least on the presidential level.    Whose party line is this? Not Democrats themselves, or at least not the party as a whole. This analysis comes from three sources. First, Southern whites, who thought they had arranged the Super Tuesday regional primary to guarantee one of their own on the Democratic ticket. Second, faux-Democrats such as Washington fixer Bob Strauss who get a reputation for statesmanship by hanging out with Republicans, standing for nothing and perpetually counseling moderation. Third, and most important, the Washington punditocracy, including leading conservative sages whose concern for the Democratic Party's health is, let's say, problematic.    Starting in 1968, the Democrats have lost four of five presidential elections, but starting in 1960 the score is four out of seven -- almost a tie. Going back to 1952, you get Republicans 6, Democrats 3, which looks pretty grim. But going back to 1932 it's Democrats 8, Republicans 6. Going even further back, the Republicans come out on top again. But unless you're terribly selective in your starting point, there's nothing in the historical pattern that points toward impending cataclysm for the Democrats. In a recent CBS/New York Times poll, asking voters which party's presidential candidate they would be more likely to vote for without knowing the actual candidate, the Democrats won, 37% to 27%. That doesn't sound so disastrous.    Obviously the specific candidate makes a big difference. But the idea that Sam Nunn was a giant among the dwarfs is laughable, a bit of Beltway fever. Mr. Nunn is an excellent senator: smart, honest, serious, hard-working. His strong pro-defense stand gives him -- and his party -- valuable credibility when he attacks wasteful military spending and Reagan administration flim-flam on arms control. But he has about as much charisma as a fish. If his political views are genuinely moderate, his political style is almost a parody of moderation. Thus Sen. Nunn as a politician well illustrates the fallacy that centrism and moderation alone can be made into effective political rallying cries.    Furthermore, there is no evidence that Sen. Nunn's views, however you label them -- views closer to those of the Republican presidential candidates than to those of the other Democrats' -- are necessarily more saleable. The idea that the Democrats must nominate someone like Sen. Nunn or face oblivion is a con.    Sen. Nunn, like all the Republican candidates, favors continued aid to the Nicaraguan Contras. The public, after a brief period of Ollie North hysteria in which the pros and the antis were tied, is back where it was before: 36% for, 59% against (according to an ABC/Washington Post poll). Contra backers have long insisted that Americans would rally 'round as soon as they learned where Nicaragua is and which side we're on. It hasn't happened.    The pundits would have it that all the Democrats, apart from Sen. Nunn, risk being perceived as &quot;soft on defense.&quot; In fact, rightly or wrongly, fairly or unfairly, public support for Mr. Reagan's defense buildup has evaporated. According to a recent Gallup poll, 14% agree with Mr. Reagan that we're still spending too little, 36% think we're spending about the right amount, and 44% think we're spending too much. Nor do the polls indicate that most people are any less eager than all the Democratic candidates -- or, for that matter, than Mr. Reagan himself these days -- for an arms-control treaty. Sen. Nunn's qualms are worthy and even important, but politically they're not widely shared.    Sen. Nunn voted for a constitutional amendment to overturn Roe v. Wade, the abortion decision. Abortion is one of the issues on which Republicans, not Democrats, have a special-interest-group problem. Right-to lifers are influential party activists. That's why the 1984 Republican platform went beyond repeal of Roe to call, in effect, for a constitutional ban on abortions. (Sen. Nunn doesn't go this far.)    Polls consistently show that 70% to 80% of Americans oppose a constitutional abortion ban, and majorities favor legal access to abortion.    As for Snow White and the Seven Dwarfs, so-called, the eight announced or semi-announced Democratic candidates, only three -- Pat Schroeder, Jesse Jackson, and Paul Simon -- are close to classifiable as flaming liberals (preposterous image anyway). The others all babble neoliberally about economic growth and fiscal discipline. Their relatively puny followings among Democratic voters (ranging from 26% for Mr. Jackson to 3% for Sen. Joe Biden, in a recent Time magazine poll) could indicate an embarrassment of riches as logically as anything else. Anyway, except for Vice President George Bush, things are the same over on the Republican side (ranging from Sen. Robert Dole at 21% to former governor Pete du Pont at 2%). And who would wish to argue that Mr. Bush's lead reflects his ability to galvanize the electorate with his vision and charisma?    In his interesting forthcoming book, &quot;The New Season: A Spectator's Guide to the 1988 Election&quot; (Simon andamp; Schuster), George Will argues that the Supreme Court is one of three issues on which &quot;the Democratic Party's credibility . . . will be tested.&quot; (The other two are foreign policy and race.) Mr. Will and others are trying to make Sen. Biden's flip-flop on the nomination of Robert Bork (first Sen. Biden said yes, then he said no) a paradigm of Democratic cravenness before liberal interest groups. The purpose is to pressure other Democrats, if not Sen. Biden himself, to support Mr. Bork.    Sen. Biden does look a bit craven and foolish because of his inconsistency. But there's nothing foolish or politically dangerous about opposing Mr. Bork's nomination. Voters are not going to skewer any candidate for dissenting from the notion that the Constitution offers no protection against racial covenants in deeds or state laws against birth control by married couples. &quot;The voters believe in checks and balances,&quot; says Democratic pollster Geoffrey Garin.    Let Democrats be Democrats. There are plenty of things wrong with the Democratic Party, but the failure to be identical to the Republican Party is not among them.    ---   Mr. Kinsley edits The New Republic. </TEXT></DOC>