<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870826-0139 </DOCNO><HL> Activists Attempt to Use Strike at DaewooAs a Challenge to the Korean Government---By Damon DarlinStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST LABORTRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)AIRLINES (AIR) </IN><DATELINE> OKPO, South Korea  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Political activists are flocking here in efforts to turn the acrimonious strike at Daewoo Shipbuilding andamp; Heavy Machinery Co. into a challenge to the Seoul government.    Police have set up checkpoints on major highways leading to this isolated southern island to discourage more activists from arriving and joining those who already are advising union leaders how best to use the weekend death of a shipyard worker, Lee Suk Kyu, as a symbol of government repression.    Dissidents are planning to hold rallies and funerals throughout the nation. Yesterday, the National Coalition for a Democratic Constitution, the nation's most powerful dissident coalition, called for a nationwide general strike on the day Mr. Lee is buried.    The government has warned that the social unrest caused by the coalition of labor and students will be dealt with harshly. The government is also worried because universities reopen next week, raising the possibility of a new round of student demonstrations focused on the death of Mr. Lee.    In Seoul yesterday, hundreds of students battled police at Yonsei University following a campus memorial service for Mr. Lee.    Despite government concern, however, Roh Tae Woo, leader of the ruling party, has promised that the army won't be called in to quell disturbances.    The clearest evidence of the change in the Daewoo union philosophy came in the latest demands made by the union in this Daewoo company town. The seven demands were made to the government, not the company, and many of them went beyond local labor concerns to broader social issues.    The union leadership also announced that until its demands were met, it would refuse to hold the funeral for Mr. Lee, who died during a clash with riot police Saturday. He was hit in the chest by shrapnel from an exploding tear-gas cannister.    Negotiations for a strike settlement can't be continued until after the funeral. They broke down Friday after workers rejected a compromise wage increase worked out between Daewoo and union officials. The union and the company haven't met since then.    Daewoo officials said yesterday that the union has continued to rebuff company attempts to renew talks. &quot;We've made approaches 10 times and have been rejected,&quot; said a spokesman.    He added: &quot;Politicizing the strike has made it all the more difficult to settle. We have nothing we can do right now. The demands are being made to the government, not us.&quot;    The government announced the arrests of five students who allegedly falsified their resumes in order to get jobs in factories. Korean law discourages college graduates from working in factories in an attempt to minimize labor agitation.    The chairman of the Daewoo group, Kim Woo Joong, held a news conference at 2 a.m. this morning, local time, in Okpo, but didn't offer new concessions to the unions. &quot;After the funeral, I will try to negotiate with the union. It is difficult for me to make new suggestions I can make to the union now,&quot; he said.    For their part, the union leadership spent most of yesterday discussing when to hold the funeral for the 22-year-old worker and where to bury his body. He is the first person to be killed in the wave of strikes that has swept over Korean industry since July 1.    Hundreds of strikes are continuing around the nation. Other workers, ranging from Seoul taxi drivers to employees of the national airline are threatening to walk off their jobs soon if their wage demands aren't met.    Workers who have surrounded the Okpo Daewoo Hospital, where the body of the Mr. Lee is being kept, spent yesterday singing songs and building posters and banners for the funeral. Women in a parking lot sewed funeral costumes on foot-treadle sewing machines they brought from their homes.    Okpu is extremely tense, but when workers held a brief rally in the early afternoon, riot police stayed away.    The union is demanding that the Korean government prosecute riot police involved in the death of Mr. Lee, that top government ministers responsible for the police resign and that the government apologize for the incident. The union also wants the government to stop using tear gas to quell demonstrations. It wants government compensation for the dead man and for other workers injured in demonstrations.    It also asks the government to force Daewoo to resume operations of the Daewoo plant here, accept union wage demands and stop anti-union pressure.    But Daewoo's Mr. Kim said at the news conference that &quot;workers' demands are too excessive. They must sacrifice. The next generation will enjoy the fruits of our development.&quot; He said the shipbuilding unit is in poor financial shape and can't afford higher labor costs.    In an effort to smooth over tensions in Okpo, Mr. Kim said Daewoo would pay compensation to the family of the dead worker. He said he would personally contribute to the fund. His four attempts to offer personal condolences were rejected by the union, he added. </TEXT></DOC>