<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870427-0129 </DOCNO><HL> Not This Arms Control---By William E. Jackson Jr.</HL><DD> 04/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   President Reagan and his divided administration have been so uninterested or ineffective in seeking arms-control agreements for the past six years that there is a great temptation to embrace whatever they are doing once they are in hot pursuit -- as in the case of the prospective &quot;zero-zero&quot; deal on intermediate-range nuclear-tipped missiles in Europe.    Indeed, it is a fear of bureaucratic relapse into no action on arms control, as much as it is a desire to see a specific agreement, that explains the rush of diverse experts across the political spectrum to cheer on the White House in sealing a reductions agreement within months. There is also concern that we stay in the public-relations game in Europe by not letting General Secretary Gorbachev win a decoupling propaganda offensive hands down and emerge as the &quot;law-and-order&quot; candidate in the superpower competition.    However, these considerations do not relieve the U.S. of the responsibility to weigh the long-term political and security consequences of the process of &quot;denuclearizing&quot; Europe. We are not negotiating in a vacuum or a value-free environment. There is great Soviet conventional strength in Europe. We had better think very carefully, now, when we are dealing in nuclear weapons we control, before the talks get to nuclear and non-nuclear weapons over which we have less or no control.    The INF (intermediate nuclear forces) accord, coupled to an agreement on shortrange nuclear missiles (and perhaps even battlefield tactical nukes), could be the opening wedge for not only the total removal of American nuclear weapons from Europe but also the weaning away of Western Europe from the U.S. in an elaborate anti-American detente strategy.    The U.S. would find the world to be a lonely place without Europe. Arms-control agreements could set in motion European unilateralism and, in turn, promote American isolationism. There is already considerable pressure in this country, given the major burden of NATO defense upon the U.S. military budget, to reduce U.S. ground troops in Europe by 100,000 to 150,000. And Americans are increasingly sore at Europeans over their aggressive trade competition. If we cut the umbilical cord that both guarantees and symbolizes deterrence extended to Europe, i.e. nuclear weapons on the ground in the theater, the psychological chasm will grow. I realize that this sounds like an American clinging to his nuclear &quot;teddy bear.&quot;    But theater-range missiles plant the flag of extended deterrence in ways that other weapons do not. Extended deterrence does not have the same credibility at intercontinental distances. This is what Gen. Brent Scowcroft means when he warns that Mr. Gorbachev is well on his way to reversing NATO strategy: &quot;He will leave us the choice of a conventional defeat or using strategic weapons to defend Europe.&quot; Flexible response is out the window. It is not a viable argument for Richard Perle (assistant secretary of defense for international security) to point to the thousands of other nuclear weapons in NATO's European arsenal. Those are less convincing as the linchpin of deterrence. Just watch the pressures grow in West Germany, once theater-range missiles are eliminated, to get rid of those tactical nukes most certainly to be used on the local battlefield in case of war!    The political perception of what constitutes acceptable risk does matter. If the U.S. had to make a &quot;strategic&quot; decision, it would aim and fire Pershing ballistic missiles and ground-launched cruise missiles (GLCM's) at Soviet territory from Europe. Western European leaders therefore should understand this: Without these weapons, they probably will end up thinking there is a greater likelihood of Soviet willingness to threaten a strike West without fear of U.S. intercontinental retaliation.    Under the circumstances, the deterrent qualities of U.S.-controlled theater missiles, are simply greater than tactical warheads or nuclear-capable aircraft -- which take hours instead of minutes to reach their targets. In the absence of INF forces, will the U.S. not be asked to multiply already existing strategic, intercontinental retaliation assurances that have long since lost their punch? If America is increasingly removed from Europe, would we risk New York for Bonn, let alone Berlin?    Imagine this scenario. After agreements to remove theater missiles, there will shortly follow proposals to remove &quot;forward-based&quot; forces in Europe, such as aircraft that can deliver nuclear weapons. The British and French will be told that they can keep some of their nuclear forces, and invited to sign separate security accords with the Soviets. As confidence-building measures, the Soviets will suggest mutual troop withdrawals from central Europe -- meaning &quot;Yanks go home&quot; and Warsaw Pact (Soviet-led) forces pull back to the East. A demilitarized zone for Central Europe will be advocated, while East-West trade is hailed as the cure-all for political divisions.    None of these steps are necessarily bad in themselves, but their cumulative effect would be to squeeze the U.S. out of Western Europe -- that is, remove us from a dominant role and thereby cause a loss of interest by Americans in Europe. We may turn to the Pacific Basin; we may turn inward. To do either would be to divorce us from the greatest concentration of gross national product and values that reenforce the security of the U.S.    It is difficult to see the overriding reason for leading with a European nuclear-forces agreement, especially at zero-zero. Why not link nuclear reductions to some cuts in Soviet tank armies? Why not insist on some strategic arms-control progress at the same time we move to reduce on the European front? Does an overzealous commitment to Strategic Defense Initiative put the White House in a straitjacket, leaving the easy way out of following the Soviets in a Gorbachev-managed disarmament campaign in Europe? Whose national interests are being served?    Doing anything is not better than doing nothing. It all depends. Of course, the U.S. must be sensitive to the public desire to lift the specter of nuclear war off the brow of Europeans. There are various ways to do this, short of &quot;zero-zeroing&quot; all the way off the continent. What are we afraid of?to borrow a phrase from Mr. Gorbachev. Only undue haste to cut a deal with insufficient attention to consequences. Even deep cuts must be arrived at gradually, and in military balance with other forces, and in light of political circumstances. We can take &quot;yes&quot; for an answer, but it does not have to be on their terms.    The Soviets are quite clearly willing to trade weapons (270 SS-20s tipped with three warheads each, for example) for political and military gains. What are the benefits for the U.S.? They lie in the realm of the political, much more than the military, when it comes to theater weapons in Europe. After all, Pershing IIs and ground-launched cruise missiles don't defend the U.S.; nor do Soviet intermediate-range weapons threaten us.    Unfortunately, it seems that the larger prize is the recouping of the president's political fortunes in this country. Seen in that light, the INF agreement is time-urgent bait to get Mr. Gorbachev to the summit. It will play well in the U.S. and make it appear as if the Reagan game plan of big defense outlays driving the Soviets to the table has worked. But who will have driven whom? The Soviets will not arrive in America prepared to both scuttle the ABM Treaty (i.e. give the green light to &quot;Star Wars&quot;) and deeply cut their land-based ICBMs.    There has to be some reasonably coherent vision of the overall American national interest in this whole process. I don't trust the current crowd in power to have it.    ---   Mr. Jackson is senior fellow of the Fulbright Institute of International Relations at the University of Arkansas and executive director of the U.S. General Advisory Committee on Arms Control, 1978-80. </TEXT></DOC>