<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870327-0034 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 03/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. AND SOVIETS RECESSED special arms-control talks in Geneva.    While officials on both sides described the negotiations as useful and said some progress had been made, Moscow and Washington remained at odds over whether shorter-range missiles should be included in an accord to eliminate midrange arms from Europe. The U.S. wants the linkage, citing Soviet superiority in short-range nuclear forces. The Geneva talks are scheduled to resume April 23, following Shultz's planned meeting in Moscow with Shevardnadze.    A State Department aide said Reagan has &quot;substantial discretion&quot; to interpret the 1972 ABM treaty to allow testing of a space-based antimissile system.    ---   THE SOVIET UNION DECLARED a state-run company bankrupt.    The official Tass news agency said a Leningrad construction trust had been closed, and 2,000 employees temporarily displaced, because it had fallen behind delivery schedules, overrun cost limits and produced substandard work. Tass blamed the firm's managers for relying too heavily on instructions from central authorities, rather than responding to Gorbachev's call for independent decision-making.    Western experts said this first announced Soviet bankruptcy was a symbolic gesture to dramatize Gorbachev's intention to revitalize the economy.    ---   Reagan said that trading arms to Iran to win the release of hostages was &quot;a little like paying ransom to a kidnapper.&quot; The president, on his first speech-making trip outside Washington in four months, made the remark in response to a question from a sixth-grade student in Columbia, Mo.    U.S. intelligence agencies recorded negotiations between U.S. representatives and Iranian middlemen about U.S. arms sales to Tehran. Sources said the agencies recorded meetings in Europe, Tehran, and Washington as well as those cited by the Tower panel.    ---   Tunisia severed diplomatic relations with Iran, accusing Tehran of supporting a Tunisian Moslem fundamentalist group that is suspected of complicity in bombing campaigns in France. Iranian envoys were given until the weekend to leave Tunisia, the first Moslem nation to break ties with Iran for allegedly sponsoring subversive activities.    ---   An Atlas-Centaur rocket was exploded by remote control as it veered off course shortly after liftoff, NASA said. The unmanned rocket, possibly hit by lightning after its launch from Cape Canaveral, carried an $83 million military communications satellite, which also was destroyed.    ---   Deaver pleaded innocent to five counts of lying to a congressional panel and to a grand jury investigating his lobbying activities for possible ethical violations. The former White House aide entered the plea before a federal judge in Washington. The judge set a trial date of June 8, and granted Deaver's request for a jury trial.    ---   China unveiled economic plans for 1987 that call for promoting growth through the largest state budget deficit in years, boosting foreign borrowing and tightening state control of investment decisions. The plans, announced at the National People's Congress, also advocate maintaining restrictions on imports.    ---   Afghan warplanes attacked a border town and Moslem guerrilla bases inside Pakistan, killing at least five people. The assault was the latest in a series of Afghan raids in which at least 94 people have been killed and 110 others wounded since Monday, the Islamabad government said.    ---   Moslem kidnappers issued a videotape of American hostage Jesse Turner saying fellow captive Alann Steen &quot;is dying.&quot; The kidnappers in Lebanon have offered to trade Steen for 100 Arabs imprisoned in Israel. In Beirut, fighting flared around a Palestinian refugee camp and six women were killed.    ---   The Marine Corps has brought additional charges against Sgt. Clayton Lonetree, one of two Marine guards arrested on suspicion of spying at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, Pentagon sources said. The new charges include another count of espionage.    ---   Prime Minister Shamir said Israel should pursue ties with the Soviet Union despite Moscow's policy on Jewish immigration. Meanwhile, former President Carter arrived in Jerusalem and told Foreign Minister Peres that Syria probably would agree to direct Arab-Israeli peace talks in the framework of an international conference.    ---   The Vatican projected a record budget deficit of about $63 million for 1987, compared with an estimated 1986 deficit of $56 million. The Vatican, citing &quot;drastically&quot; insufficient revenue and the falling dollar, appealed to Roman Catholics to help alleviate the church's financial plight.    ---   Polish leader Jaruzelski called for a shakeup of Warsaw's economic apparatus, cuts in privileges for state officials and an intensified crackdown on waste and mismanagement. Elsewhere in Warsaw, government and trade-union officials met to discuss planned price increases.    ---   A mine cave-in killed at least 30 miners in Ecuador, authorities said. The incident occurred at an isolated gold mine about 420 miles south of Quito. The mine had been condemned and closed by officials, but miners continued working there.    ---   Federal health officials said a study of prostitutes in seven U.S. cities indicates that they aren't any more likely to have AIDS than other women in the same areas. The study by the Centers for Disease Control also showed that measures recommended to prevent the spread of the disease, such as the use of condoms, have been successful.    ---   The Philippines placed army and police units on alert to guard against attacks by the communist New People's Army, which marks its 18th anniversary Sunday. Politicians, meanwhile, remained divided on whether to call a truce during campaigning for the May 11 general elections.    ---   Authorities in France said eight people were charged with possessing weapons and explosives. The officials said the arrests Sunday foiled a foreign guerrilla network that was preparing bomb attacks in Paris. </TEXT></DOC>