<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880330-0124 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Bad Banking Deserves Penalties </HL><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT </CO><IN> BNK </IN><TEXT>   Perhaps our ears are deceiving us, but we seem to be hearing speculation that ultimately the nation's taxpayers will have to bail out sick banks and &quot;thrift&quot; institutions. That might be one idea of a solution. It isn't ours. We'd like to see Bill Seidman and Danny Wall seize more institutions and fire their officers.    Texas, of course, is where the most trouble is to be found. Lenders there like to blame the so-called &quot;oil patch recession.&quot; But the problem, in fact, is bad banking, in a few cases even corrupt banking. Some parts of Texas, the Dallas-Ft. Worth area, for example, haven't had anything that legitimately could be called a recession. The main reason so many lenders are in trouble is an old-fashioned failing among bankers -- a weakness for real-estate speculation.    Given the attractions of such speculations for bankers, builders and anyone else who can lay hands on someone else's money, there is a need for discouragement. But we are beginning to worry that Mr. Seidman of the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. (FDIC) and Mr. Wall of the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp. (FSLIC) are not exacting sufficient penalties when institutions are failing or on the verge of failure. It could be that the emphasis both agencies have placed on arranging takeovers has been misplaced. Additional resources both agencies now have available for that purpose may be delaying, rather than hastening, the solutions. Indeed, good banks and good Sandamp;Ls increasingly are being punished through higher deposit-insurance premiums for the follies of bad ones.    It stretches credibility to hear that prudent bankers could not have foreseen the Texas slump. The Texas boom was fairly standard, but with some added elements. Savings institutions, previously confined to home lending, were able to get in on the boom because of changes in federal regulatory policy in 1982 that allowed 20% of their assets to be in commercial real-estate loans. The idea was to bail out Sandamp;Ls by giving them additional ways to make money. But the effect in Texas was to bring a bunch of newcomers into commercial real-estate lending. That spawned alliances between lenders and developers, fueled the boom and created new competition for banks. Texas Sandamp;Ls more than doubled their assets (loans) between 1982 and 1985. The quality of loan paper deteriorated and when the real-estate bust came, it deteriorated even faster.    When Texas economic growth slowed, there were a lot of gleaming new office buildings in Texas cities, but they were short on tenants. Office vacancies in Dallas exceed 20% and rents are half what they were two years ago. Austin's vacancy rate, in excess of 30%, was the highest in the nation by one recent count.    The latest big casualty, of course, is First RepublicBank Corp. of Dallas, which this month sought the mothering care of the FDIC after having suffered a $657 million loss last year. The FDIC extended a $1 billion loan in an effort to restore depositor confidence and stem withdrawals. But the agency could have taken stronger steps. It could have removed the bank's officers and replaced them with a workout team as it did when Continental of Chicago collapsed in 1984. It chose instead a gentle approach. A somewhat tougher approach is being taken with Houston's First City Bancorp. of Texas, where shareholders and creditors in effect are being asked to either accept a complex bailout plan or risk the possibility that the FDIC will let the company fail.    Texas savings institutions account for about half of the nation's total herd of insolvent or otherwise ailing Sandamp;Ls. FSLIC's resources for dealing with such problems were expanded last year when Congress granted it $11 billion in borrowing authority to supplement premium revenues. But the money is dwindling fast, thanks in part to the large task of restructuring the Texas industry. The point is to make sick Sandamp;Ls attractive to would-be partners or acquirers, mainly through added equity investments. But even that is being resisted by Sandamp;L officers who don't want to be merged out of a job.    The FDIC, FSLIC and associated regulators simply could shut down sick institutions, pay depositors only the insurance money they are due and walk away with whatever assets are available. Both agencies claim that it is cheaper for the government -- and involves fewer problems over what to do with seized assets -- if they find stronger partners.    But under this gentle handling, the problem seems to be getting worse, not better. Quite possibly what is missing is a sufficient demonstration that bankers are to be held accountable for their mistakes. </TEXT></DOC>