<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871230-0114 </DOCNO><HL> Board of Contributors:World Economy Doesn't Hang in the Imbalance---By Herbert Stein</HL><DD> 12/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGNMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   We are again being warned about the calamities that will befall the world economy if certain &quot;imbalances&quot; are not promptly corrected. A group of 33 distinguished economists gathered from around the world by the Institute for International Economics recently added their alarms to those coming from less-qualified sources. The group warned of a possible world recession resulting from further sharp drops in the dollar.    Now, life is full of surprises. Also, I do not want to be cast out of the club of writers of op-ed pieces for saying that nothing terrible is about to happen. (I suppose that economists have a vocational need to foresee disaster. How could they explain the absence of imminent disaster if their advice has been so consistently neglected?) But I must say that the scenario that is supposed to lead to the world economic calamity is not convincing to me.    Many reasons for concern are commonly listed. Much of the world is poor and getting richer only slowly. (Somehow, observers of the global scene do not get much kick out of the rapid growth in China and India, with 40% of the non-Soviet world's population.) Continental Western Europe is stagnating. But much of the world has always been poor. And if Continental Western Europe prefers to subsidize idleness, &quot;chacun a son gout.&quot;    Anyway, these are not the problems that really excite people. What excites them, and leads to dire predictions, is the two &quot;imbalances&quot; -- the world trade imbalances, with deficits in the U.S. and surpluses elsewhere, and the U.S. budget deficit. But people should be careful about the word &quot;imbalance,&quot; and that goes especially for economists. The word &quot;imbalance&quot; means something other than inequality, and equality may be imbalance. A pie with equal amounts of apple and cinnamon would not be a balanced pie. The word &quot;imbalance,&quot; as used in the current discussion of the world economy, means a condition that is either now causing undesirable results or that cannot continue and will cause undesirable results when it ends. So to say that we have these great imbalances in the world implies something other than that U.S. imports exceed U.S. exports, or U.S. government expenditures exceed U.S. government revenues.    Let us look at the trade &quot;imbalance&quot; first. Suppose that the U.S. is a country in which private citizens have a low propensity to save, because they are already relatively rich or for cultural reasons. And suppose also that the U.S. is an attractive place to invest, because we have lots of land, a skilled labor force, a favorable political environment or for other reasons. And suppose further that in the rest of the world private citizens have high propensities to save and the opportunities for investment are less attractive. In these conditions there will be a flow of capital from the rest of the world, and a corresponding net inflow of goods, to the U.S. The U.S. would have a trade deficit.    This would not be a situation of imbalance. It would be an efficient adaptation to different savings propensities and investment opportunities in the U.S. and in the rest of the world. Moreover, it could go on forever. It might not go on forever. The accumulation of capital in the U.S. might reduce the return to investment here so much, and the accumulation of wealth in the rest of the world might reduce propensities to save so much, that capital would no longer flow here. But that wouldn't have to happen. And when it did, the trade gap would disappear. In fact, it would become a surplus, because the rest of the world would be receiving investment income from the U.S. The U.S. will not be made poorer by paying this investment income because the income will be earned by capital that would not have been here without the prior inflow of funds from abroad.    &quot;Aha,&quot; I can hear you say. &quot;There is an old-fashioned economist, describing the Garden of Eden without the serpent. The serpent in this case is government. It is not American private citizens who have such a low propensity to save. It is the U.S. government that has a high propensity to run deficits -- that is, to engage in negative saving. And it is no longer foreign private citizens who want to invest in the U.S. but foreign governments that are doing the investing here by supporting the dollar. So the situation is not a natural balance, after all, but an artificial imbalance.&quot;    But, I say in reply, these decisions of the U.S. and foreign governments are expressions of national preferences to which trade flows properly adjust in a balanced way. The governments of Europe and Japan prefer to subsidize their exporters by supporting the dollar, at the expense of their taxpayers and consumers. You and I may think that is a foolish policy, but it is their business, and the response of international trade, capital flows and exchange rates is a balanced adjustment to that policy. Moreover, the policy can go on for as long as it represents the preferences of those governments and their people.    The U.S. government prefers to put some of the burden of current American private consumption and public expenditures, including defense, on the future, by running a large budget deficit. You and I may think that is an unwise policy, but it seems to reflect the revealed preference of the American people -- revealed by their votes in the 1980 and 1984 elections. The international economy is in a condition of balanced adaptation to fact.    Some of the concern about the present &quot;imbalances&quot; results from the fear that the foreign governments will decide to stop supporting the dollar, with a resultant &quot;free fall&quot; of the dollar and consequent havoc. I suppose that foreign governments have reasons for supporting the dollar, and that these reasons make them unlikely to accept a &quot;free fall.&quot; But I may be wrong about that. Perhaps the dollar will be let loose all at once. In that case it may fall sharply. During the process of fall, interest rates may rise sharply also. But the dollar will reach a level at which the most probable estimate of its future price is its thenpresent price. Interest rates may then be higher than now but lower than during the &quot;free fall.&quot;    So we will have two forces at work. The decline of the dollar will increase U.S. exports and decrease U.S. imports, in real terms, giving a &quot;stimulus&quot; to demand in the U.S. economy. The decline of the dollar will raise import prices relative to U.S. incomes, tending to restrain U.S. consumption, and the rise of interest rates will restrict investment here, exerting in combination a depressing effect on U.S. demand. Whether the net of this is to reduce U.S. demand by more than the reduction in our net imports, and so reduce U.S. output is, I believe, impossible to predict.    In any case, and this is important, the stability of the economy does not depend upon the fortuitous equality of assorted positive and negative forces. It depends upon the existence of some equilibrating factor. That factor is monetary policy, which serves as a moderator to fluctuations in nominal gross national product and together with a rather sluggish adjustment of prices moderates fluctuations in output and employment. The system has withstood considerable shocks. After the Korean War, real federal spending declined by 4.9% of GNP in six quarters and we had only a moderate recession. From the peak of the Vietnam War, real federal spending declined by 2.7% of GNP in two years, and we had a mild recession in 1971. From 1982 to 1986, U.S. real net exports declined by 5.4% of 1982 GNP, and the economy grew strongly. Our current net imports are about 3.5% of GNP.    Warnings that the spontaneous adjustment of markets to current imbalances will cause great difficulties -- in some predictions the worst since the 1930s -- must be made of sterner stuff than I've yet seen.    The standard prescription for correcting the present &quot;imbalances&quot; is a sharp, big cut in the U.S. budget deficit. This may be a good prescription for the long-run growth of the American economy and for equity between the present generation and succeeding ones. But it is not required to prevent any imminent crisis in the U.S. or world economy, unless we make it necessary by talking ourselves into believing that we will perish without it.    ---   Mr. Stein, chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers under Presidents Nixon and Ford, is a senior fellow at the American Enterprise Institute. </TEXT></DOC>