<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861216-0129 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP FRESTNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO) </IN><TEXT>   The Reagan administration apparently is concerned that the Reykjavik summit and the Iran affair have badly shaken the Western Alliance. First, Secretary of Defense Caspar W. Weinberger was dispatched to Europe to reassure the allies that President Reagan's Reykjavik proposals to eliminate intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Europe did not imply U.S. abandonment of the allies. Secretary of State George Shultz then followed his colleague to Brussels, pledging to restore confidence in the aftermath of the Iranian-contra crisis.    Of the two emissaries, Secretary Weinberger had more than placebos to offer the Europeans to calm their anxieties. At a NATO defense ministers' conference in Brussels, Mr. Weinberger announced that the Pentagon was awarding $14 million in research contracts to European firms to explore ways of shooting down Soviet short-range ballistic missiles over Europe. The secretary's message was clear enough: that the president's Strategic Defense Initiative (SDI) did not imply abandonment of the allies.    But was the SDI payoff really necessary? The benefits of a defensive shield for Europe are best realized and acted upon by the Europeans themselves, for reasons I argued on this page last May.    Furthermore, not only are concessions to reassure our allies of continuing U.S. interest in them unnecessary, they actually are counterproductive to Western security interests. That the Reykjavik summit and the Iran affair have caused disquiet in Europe about U.S. leadership of the Alliance is undeniable. But what Reagan administration officials have missed is that this disquiet has been beneficial for the West.    Anxiety about continued U.S. interest in Europe, for example, has brought the European powers into closer cooperation with one another. According to a story in The Wall Street Journal, &quot;common security fears following the Reagan-Gorbachev meeting in Iceland have prompted West Germany, Britain and France into an unprecedented agreement to coordinate their nuclear-arms-control policies. . . . Under the coordination efforts, Bonn, London and Paris aim to speak with one voice in arms-control discussions with the superpowers.&quot;    The New York Times reports that Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher has moved closer to her European partners as a result of Reykjavik and Iran: &quot;President Reagan's ability to manage foreign affairs and the durability of American commitments -- especially conspicuous in the aftermath of the Iceland summit meeting -- appears to have much to do with the urge to find an enhanced role for Britain in Europe. . . . A common fear that Washington might be tempted to negotiate away their deterrents leaves Britain and France, Western Europe's two nuclear-armed nations, with a sense of common interests on national security.&quot;    A second beneficial effect of the president's proposal to eliminate intermediate-range missiles from Europe is that it has focused attention both on the conventional arms imbalance in Europe and the need to redress it. Because of Soviet conventional arms superiority in Europe, if Moscow were to attack Western Europe by conventional means, according to the present NATO commanding general, Bernard Rogers, NATO could fight for &quot;days, not weeks&quot; before facing the doomsday decision of surrender or launching a nuclear first strike.    The Europeans want to link nuclear arms control to agreements on conventional forces. But the only way the Soviets are likely to reduce their conventional-force strength in Europe is for the Europeans to give them the proper incentive by demonstrating their willingness to increase their conventional strength.    Third, and most important, new European anxieties about the constancy of U.S. interest in Europe has moved the NATO allies into a more militaristic posture. It must be remembered that it was only a short time ago that there was a great deal of fashionable talk in Europe -- and not only from the extreme left -- about the desirability of a world free of nuclear weapons. Reykjavik, by putting an end to such talk, has delivered a weighty blow to Europe's &quot;peace movement.&quot; According to a senior European official, &quot;The question of a nuclear-free world raises a lot of problems -- not for the Americans and not for the Soviets, but first for the Europeans.&quot;    Today all Europeans, except for the extreme left, want the U.S. missiles to remain in Europe. Europe also has shown itself to be against President Reagan's goal of eliminating all American and Soviet ballistic missiles within the framework of an arms-control accord. This was made clear at last week's NATO foreign ministers conference in Brussels when the NATO ministers distanced themselves from the president's de-nuclearization objective. Even Britain's Labor Party, which wants the U.S. missiles out of the U.K., has altered its defense platform in the aftermath of Reykjavik to include increases in conventional defense spending.    The lessons of Reykjavik and the Iranian-contra affair for U.S.-European relations are clear. So long as the Europeans feel secure about U.S. defense support, they are apt to fight among themselves, be drawn to anti-nuclear fantasies and ignore their conventional defense. On the other hand, the less sure the Europeans are of the U.S., the more they cooperate with one another and the more militant they become in their own defense.    ---   Mr. Krauss's new book is &quot;How NATO Weakens the West&quot; (Simon andamp; Schuster). </TEXT></DOC>