<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870710-0115 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas:Panama's Business Community Won't Take It Anymore---By Eduardo Vallarino</HL><DD> 07/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM </IN><DATELINE> PANAMA CITY, Panama  </DATELINE><TEXT>   There was an urgent call from Panama last month asking me to return from Miami on the first available flight. At the Tocumen Airport, I was told that the National Caucus of Private Enterprise (CoNEP) already had convened, and that I should go directly to the meeting to participate in a most important decision. When I walked into the meeting, the usually very cautious and cool presidents of the 28 largest business associations in the country, which together constitute CoNEP, had drafted and were about to approve the most incredible and momentous resolution in CoNEP's history: We demanded that Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega, the feared head of the Panamanian Defense Forces, had to be &quot;separated&quot; from his office and investigated for a number of crimes, including electoral fraud, murder and drug trafficking. The accusations had been made public by the former second-in-command of the defense forces, Col. Roberto Diaz-Herrera.    All were keenly aware that voting for that resolution certainly would hurt their businesses, very likely could result in imprisonment, and in a nonassessable way would put their lives and those of their families at risk. Yet, the vote was the easiest I can remember and, to my surprise, was unanimous. That resolution just reflected the mood of the whole country, which, in a spontaneous and totally unexpected way, joined the next day with businessmen in what became the most complete and successful protest strike in the history of our country.    In a matter of hours, 63 organizations, ranging from Rotary Clubs, to the National Medical Association, and to the radical student ACTION group of the national university, organized into a National Civic Crusade, whose aim has been to try to restore effective and real democracy to our country. Even authorized members of the hierarchy of the usually cautious Roman Catholic Church signed the hastily drafted act of incorporation.    What followed was a stoic and unarmed resistance by the entire population against the military regime. Practically the whole country joined in peaceful demonstrations against the dictatorship. The retribution from the military was swift and harsh: More than 1,000 people were jailed, several hundred beaten, others blinded by buckshot and, according to the reports submitted by the Human Rights Commission, an undetermined number of people were shot to death. The Constitutional Rights were then &quot;suspended&quot; and the country went back to an apparent normalcy. During this period, the U.S. Congress passed a resolution supporting the objectives of the National Civic Crusade and of the National Council of Catholic Bishops.    The government then reacted violently to the U.S. protest; a campaign was begun somewhere among Panama's rulers against &quot;intervention of Yankee imperialism,&quot; asking for international support against a possible invasion, and even inviting Nicaraguan communist leader Daniel Ortega for support. The Constitutional Rights were reinstated in order to allow a government-sponsored mob to attack the U.S. Embassy, Consulate and Library and make it appear as a spontaneous action by the people of Panama. It did not escape anybody's attention that the mob came from a rally attended by eight cabinet members, just a few blocks away.    But reestablishing the Constitutional Rights was an expensive mistake. As soon as the Rights were restored, peaceful demonstrations were resumed, and the regime could not very well suspend the Constitutional Rights again under the watchful eyes of the international press and foreign governments. Thus, the regime resorted to the use of intimidation. Government-affiliated paramilitary bands began roaming the streets, burning businesses and cars, beating and even shooting people (photographs and videotapes bear witness). My neighbor, Cesar Tribaldos, who coordinates the National Civic Crusade, had to watch as government thugs burned down his department store and machine-gunned his office while more than 100 riot policemen stood by, protecting the attackers. We sensed that the government wanted us to respond with violence in order to have an excuse to reimpose a state of siege. The National Civic Crusade instructed people to remain calm, and not to respond violently even if attacked, and to this day the protesters have responded to government violence with nonviolent protest.    On Tuesday, the local district attorney told me I could get one to two years in prison for &quot;attempts against the security of the State,&quot; and all the presidents of the 63 original associations that started the National Civic Crusade face similar charges.    What has caused normally urbane and sedate businessmen, physicians and other professionals to join, and in many ways to lead the people in this struggle, and vow to continue it to the end? Because a system of governance based on the arbitrary whims of the corrupt individuals who hold the reins of power has reached the point where it is choking every aspect of our lives. Doing business in this environment is not covered in any of the courses taught in well-known Ivy League business schools.    Prior to last month's protest movement, a facade of normalcy was maintained and the &quot;rules of the game&quot; were that you could be in business provided your activity did not compete with any of the regime's favorites. You also had to pay your &quot;dues&quot; to the proper officials, and you didn't oppose the system politically in an open fashion. One who is favored by the regime is granted immunity to deal in contraband or default on government contracts. One who doesn't play ball, however, will find court rulings twisted against him, normal government permits delayed forever, and, in some extreme cases, businesses expropriated or bankrupted. When a businessman is confronted with these choices, year in and year out, in a never-ending nightmare, such words as values, integrity and democracy acquire their true meaning.    As we continue our peaceful resistance and protest, the regime continues to lose support. Some astounding developments are occurring: Last week, the usually radical and &quot;anti-imperialistic&quot; student factions voluntarily decided to go and help repair the damage done by the government-sponsored mobs to the U.S. Information Center Library. On Monday, the government employees union publicly declared that it would not attend a government-sponsored rally called for yesterday, and the government had to cancel it. And just two days ago, the vice president of the republic went on television and expressed his firm personal and party support for the principles of the National Civic Crusade. On occasions, we receive unverifiable messages supposedly from members of the military establishment, asking us to keep the pressure up until they can &quot;do their thing.&quot;    Toppling a dictatorship is no easy task, and we realize that we still have a distance to go. As we continue to press on, we look for every sign of support, internal or external, while trying to maintain the spirit of the people. Perhaps the hardest part is trying to assess how far we should go every day without unduly endangering people's lives, but still maintaining the necessary pressure.    ---   Mr. Vallarino is chairman of CoNEP and president of the Business Executive Association of Panama. </TEXT></DOC>