<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870422-0076 </DOCNO><HL> Justices Back State Curbs on Takeovers;Move May Deal a Blow to Hostile Bidders---This article was written byStephen Wermeil and Bruce Ingersoll in WashingtonAnd James B. Stewart in New York</HL><DD> 04/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> DYA CTSTENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)SUPREME COURT (SUP)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   The Supreme Court for the first time upheld state regulation of corporate takeovers.    By a 6-3 vote, the high court upheld an Indiana law that gives shareholders in companies organized in Indiana the right to decide whether an investor who buys a substantial or majority interest may vote those shares.    The high court ruled that the Indiana law is a legitimate attempt to set conditions for companies incorporated in the state and to protect the interests of shareholders in those companies. The court said the law neither conflicts with federal securities law or the Securities and Exchange Commission's rules governing tender offers, nor unduly interferes with interstate corporate transactions.    Takeover experts said the court's ruling could deal a serious blow to hostile takeovers and called it the most important takeover decision in years.    The decision has &quot;enormous implications,&quot; said Arthur Fleischer, a partner at Fried, Frank, Harris, Shriver andamp; Jacobson in New York. He noted that by approving the 50-day delay in the Indiana law, the court has thrown a wrench into takeover planning. &quot;Time is a bidder's most strategic consideration,&quot; he said, since it allows the target to muster its defenses, mount a defensive recapitalization or seek a rescuer.    Martin Lipton, a leading takeover defense lawyer and partner in Wachtell, Lipton, Rosen andamp; Katz, described the court's ruling as a &quot;keystone case that comes along once every few years.&quot; He said the case makes &quot;crystal clear&quot; that the states &quot;have the right to deal with coercive tactics by raiders.&quot;    Mr. Lipton said he anticipates a rush by other states to enact similar legislation. He said he wouldn't be surprised to see 30 to 40 states with similar statutes within 18 months.    The Supreme Court made no mention of the Ivan F. Boesky insider-trading scandal, but takeover lawyers said that the widespread public perception of abuses associated with hostile takeovers undoubtedly contributed to a climate in which judges are likely to look with favor on legislative efforts to regulate takeovers.    The ruling is an important victory for the states, which have been wrestling for years with different ways to regulate tender offers and protect shareholders in the current corporate takeover climate.    &quot;This is really exciting for states to have this kind of vindication after all these years of being cuffed around by the courts, SEC and Wall Street attorneys representing the raiders,&quot; said Randall Schumann, general counsel for the Wisconsin securities commissioner's office and chairman of the North American Securities Administrators Association's tender-offer committee.    The ruling, which rejected the SEC's position that the Indiana law was invalid, is certain to spur other states to pass similar takeover laws. &quot;Of course, you'll see a flurry of states copying the Indiana statute,&quot; said James Treadway, a Washington lawyer and former SEC commissioner.    Whether and to what extent states may regulate takeovers has been a hotly contested legal issue ever since Virginia passed the first state tender offer law in 1968. By 1982, 37 states had adopted tender offer laws. But that year, the Supreme Court struck down Illinois's law as unconstitutional in a ruling that cast doubt on the validity of the laws of all 37 states.    Since 1982, more than a dozen states have adopted what are known as second-generation takeover laws, attempting to regulate tender offers within the limits of the high court ruling. Among these are Ohio, New York, Minnesota and Wisconsin. Some of the new laws are similar to Indiana's. Many other states, according to Mr. Schumann, have put the issue on hold to await the Supreme Court ruling in the Indiana case.    The real question, said Mr. Treadway, is whether Delaware follows Indiana's lead, since many major companies are incorporated in Delaware.    Delaware's Legislature isn't currently considering adopting such a change in its takeover laws, according to Lewis S. Black, a Wilmington attorney and a member of the state bar's corporate law section. &quot;We try to keep Delaware's corporation laws state of the art, so if this is a good change, we'll take a look at it,&quot; he said.    Lawyers said they expect Delaware to act quickly to amend its takeover legislation. The existing Delaware statute has been routinely struck down as unconstitutional in takeover-related litigation, and has had little practical impact on takeovers.    Ohio has a statute similar to Indiana's, and it is now expected to survive any legal challenges. Last year, after Sir James Goldsmith abandoned his hostile takeover bid for Goodyear Tire andamp; Rubber Co., he cited the Ohio anti-takeover legislation as one of the main reasons for dropping his quest for the company.    New York's takeover statute, also viewed as an important effort to deter hostile takeovers, is significantly different from the Indiana and Ohio models, lawyers said. But its chances of surviving any constitutional challenge seem to have been enhanced by the court's broad language approving state regulatory efforts.    The Indiana law reviewed by the high court was passed in March 1986. The provision at issue in the case regulates the purchase of &quot;control&quot; shares, defined as enough shares to give an investor at least a 20% stake in a company, or to increase the investor's share to 33%, or to 50%.    When an investor buys &quot;control&quot; shares, those shares can only be voted after approval by a majority of &quot;disinterested&quot; shareholders, those who aren't officers or inside directors of the company. The law says the buyer of the shares may insist that a shareholders' meeting be called within 50 days to decide whether the shares may be voted.    The Indiana takeover law was challenged by Dynamics Corp. of America, which in March 1986 announced a tender offer for one million shares outstanding of CTS Corp. Dynamics had a 9.6% share at the time, and the tender offer increased its stake to 27.5%.    Shortly after announcing the tender offer, Dynamics also challenged the constitutionality of the Indiana law in federal court, and a federal judge struck down the law in April 1986. A federal appeals court in Chicago also found the law unconstitutional in a May 1986 decision.    While the case was pending in the Supreme Court, CTS announced last month that it had reached an agreement that allowed Dynamics to acquire as much as 35% of CTS shares and to have three seats on its seven-member board. The Supreme Court said yesterday that the agreement didn't make the case moot.    The high court ruling, written by Justice Lewis Powell, said the Indiana law differed from the one Illinois invalidated in 1982. The Illinois law, the court said, favored management against corporate raiders by allowing indefinite delays of tender offers and by giving management an advantage in sending its views to shareholders. The Indiana law, the court said, &quot;protects the independent shareholder&quot; against both sides.    John Pritchard, a New York securities lawyer who represented Indiana in the Supreme Court, said a principal reason the Indiana law was upheld is that &quot;the state is using the system of corporate governance for affecting the tender offer process rather than regulating the process, itself.&quot;    The organization and governing of corporations are traditionally matters of state law in the U.S., but the regulation of interstate commerce is spelled out in the Constitution as a subject of federal law.    Justice Powell acknowledged that the Indiana law affects interstate commerce, but said the effect is &quot;limited.&quot; He said the law doesn't prevent or unduly delay any tender offers. &quot;It only provides regulatory procedures designed for the better protection of the corporations' shareholders,&quot; he said.    The SEC had argued in a friend-of-the-court brief that the Indiana law is unconstitutional. Because it restrains the voting rights of some shareholders, the SEC argued, it interferes with interstate business transactions.    While state regulators touted the ruling yesterday as a victory for states' rights, Louis Cohen, deputy U.S. solicitor general and an author of the SEC's brief, said it was just the latest step in the battle between offensive and defensive corporate strategies. &quot;This is an important victory for the defensive side,&quot; he said, &quot;but history suggests the offensive side will figure out a way to counter it and the pendulum will swing back.&quot;    Daniel Goelzer, SEC general counsel, said, &quot;At minimum, the effect will be to slow down acquisitions.&quot; He said that while the SEC voted to oppose the Indiana law, &quot;In a broad sense, we have felt state law may be able to address (takeover) problems and we have been slow to recommend that Congress get into the area.&quot;    &quot;I don't see this as calling for some SEC regulatory response. I think the question will be debated in Congress whether this increases or reduces the need for further federal regulation,&quot; he added.    The Securities Industry Association said in a statement, &quot;It appears to us that the states have now been given a green light to undermine&quot; a 1968 federal law that regulates tender offers. The association said, &quot;State anti-takeover bills essentially pre-empt shareholders from making their own decisions regarding the type of protection, if any, they believe is necessitated by today's takeover environment.&quot;    Justice Byron White dissented from yesterday's ruling, joined by Justices Harry Blackmun and John Stevens. The Indiana law, they said, &quot;will predictably foreclose completely some tender offers.&quot;    Grand Jury Materials   The justices also ruled, 5-3, that a federal prosecutor who handles a criminal case and grand jury inquiry may use the same secret grand jury records in conducting a government civil investigation of the same dispute.    The ruling is a significant victory for the Reagan administration, after a major setback on the use of grand jury materials in a 1983 Supreme Court ruling. In 1983, the high court ruled that lawyers handling civil cases in the Justice Department needed a court order to gain access to secret grand jury evidence. Justice Department officials complained that the 1983 ruling hampered their investigative efforts.    In yesterday's ruling, department antitrust lawyers sought access to grand jury records from a criminal investigation of alleged price-fixing in the sale of tallow to a foreign government by three as yet unidentified U.S. corporations. Tallow is an animal by-product used to make soap, animal feed and lubricants.    The criminal investigation lasted from 1982 to 1984 when the grand jury was discharged without any indictments. In June 1984, the lawyers who had handled the criminal case launched a civil antitrust investigation. A federal district court in New York permitted department lawyers access to the grand jury files, but a federal appeals court, also in New York, denied the request for the records.    In an opinion written by Justice Stevens, the Supreme Court ruled that the federal rules on the secrecy of grand jury materials simply prevent disclosure to &quot;others&quot; but don't prohibit use by the same lawyers for a civil lawsuit.    Justice William Brennan, joined by Justices Blackmun and Thurgood Marshall, dissented. Justice Byron White didn't participate in the case and offered no explanation for his absence. </TEXT></DOC>