<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880303-0019 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. ESCALATED efforts to gain the ouster of Panama's Noriega.    The State Department said it continues to recognize deposed President Delvalle as the constitutional leader of Panama, thus giving banks legal grounds to heed his request to hold Panamanian assets in the U.S. The department also indicated it would effectively withhold monthly payments for the Panama Canal. In Panama City, an opposition leader said Noriega was purging the army of suspected opponents, as doctors joined businesses in a strike aimed at ousting the military chief.    The CIA reportedly is conducting an internal investigation into allegations that the agency was the source of data on U.S. senators forwarded to Noriega.    ---   NATO APPROVED a policy to end an imbalance in East-West conventional arms.    The plan, announced by Western allies at the start of a two-day summit in Brussels, calls for the removal of &quot;tens of thousands&quot; of East bloc weapons, and is designed to show the alliance's determination to address the Soviet Union's superiority in tanks, artillery and other defensive weapons. The statement comes after NATO officials spent several months attempting to set an agenda for a new round of East-West talks expected to begin next fall.    The NATO leaders, meeting for the first time since 1982, also endorsed U.S. efforts to negotiate strategic arms reductions with the Soviet Union.    ---   SHAMIR SOFTENED his resistance to an international parley on Mideast peace.    The Israeli premier, in an interview with The Wall Street Journal, said Israel would attend such a conference, but only if it is ceremonial and sponsored by the superpowers. Shamir remains opposed to any substantive meeting backed by the U.N., which he fears would become a forum for bashing Israel. His remarks came as Reagan announced that Shultz would return to the region today in an effort to arrange Arab-Israeli talks.    Israeli troops fired tear gas into a hospital and raided a West Bank village, arresting Arabs suspected of violence in the Israeli-occupied territories.    ---   The House passed and sent to Reagan a measure restoring anti-bias protections overturned in 1984 by the Supreme Court. The bill would broaden civil-rights defenses by expanding the scope of laws that apply to entities receiving federal funds. Reagan, citing a &quot;threat to religious liberty,&quot; has said he would veto the bill.    ---   Soviet officials acknowledged that several people were killed and others injured in recent ethnic unrest in Sumgait, in the republic of Azerbaijan. Police have arrested an unspecified number of people involved in the riots sparked by a territorial dispute. An official said the city was quiet, but a curfew imposed Monday remained in effect.    ---   Afghan and Pakistani negotiators opened their latest and possibly last round of indirect peace talks. A U.N. mediator at the Geneva discussions said he was confident of forging a pact leading to a withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan. Pakistan appeared to soften its demand for an interim Afghan government to oversee the pullout.    ---   Tests in Massachusetts indicated the AIDS virus is more widespead among young women of child-bearing age than previous studies have suggested. Researchers said the blood tests on newborns showed that early last year one of every 476 women giving birth in the state carried the virus that causes the disease.    ---   A jury in Los Angeles acquitted a mentally ill prostitute who sold blood tainted with the AIDS virus of charges of attempted poisoning. The jurors said the 29-year-old homosexual, described as destitute, lacked the intent required for a conviction under California law. He was arrested in June.    ---   Iraq battered Tehran and Qom with surface-to-surface missiles. The rocket attacks on the Iranian holy city were the first in the eight-year-old Persian Gulf war. Iran retaliated with rocket strikes on Baghdad. Both sides reported civilian casualties in the third day of bombings in the capital cities.    ---   The U.N. called on the U.S. to rescind its plan to close the PLO's observer mission. The General Assembly, in a 143-1 vote at a special session, also requested that the World Court rule whether the U.S. must accept binding arbitration on the issue. Anti-terrorist legislation passed last year by Congress ordered the PLO mission closed.    ---   The Supreme Court agreed that a U.S. appeals court in St. Louis applied the wrong legal standard in holding the city liable for damages to a worker who was laid off in apparent retaliation for an earlier complaint to local officials. But the justices were divided over what the proper standard should be for municipal liability.    ---   Two British political parties approved a merger after months of sniping. But the new centrist party formed by the Social Democrats and Liberals faces an uphill fight for voters' support because of public squabbles surrounding the merger and the decision by former SDP leader David Owen to continue leading a separate faction.    ---   Bangladeshi youths hurled bombs, burned vehicles and shouted anti-government slogans during a general strike called to disrupt parliamentary elections, scheduled for today. Eight people were reported injured. An opposition coalition, which has called for President Ershad's resignation, plans to boycott the balloting. </TEXT></DOC>