<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870619-0172 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor:Sugar-Coated Scheme</HL><DD> 06/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROPCOMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   Re your May 27 editorial &quot;Sugar Daddy&quot;:    The same day you castigated the U.S. sugar program providing commodity loans averaging 18 cents a pound for raw sugar produced here, the European Community (EC) announced its weekly tender awarding more than 24 cents a pound in export subsidies for nearly 150,000 metric tons of sugar to be dumped in the already glutted world sugar pool. (The EC has, in fact, dumped more than 25 million metric tons of sugar in the past seven years.) Virtually every nation has a policy designed to insulate sugar consumers and producers from the volatile world sugar price and supply structure. If the EC and the rest (including the U.S.) agreed to cancel their various schemes at once, North Dakota sugar-beet growers and other U.S. producers, which remain among the world's most efficient sugar suppliers, would lead the cheering!    Unilateral cancellation of the program, however, would destroy the domestic industry, effectively export more than 100,000 American jobs, and forfeit the U.S. market to the predatory trade practices of others -- most especially the EC.    Caribbean Basin countries and other less-developed offshore suppliers now sell less sugar in the U.S. because it uses less sugar. But they get the U.S. price for what they sell here, not the world dumping price. As a result they have benefited by more than $60 million in added earnings each year since the program was enacted, according to economic studies (income that these Caribbean countries need).    The most devastating times for U.S. sugar consumers and producers were those intermittent years between 1974 and 1982, when the U.S. alone experimented in totally free sugar trade. You endorse a scheme by Rep. John Porter (R., Ill.) -- whose district happens to include influential candy manufacturers -- that would replace a fair-trade farm program mandated by Congress to be operated at no cost to the Treasury with a direct-payment plan to phase out the sugar industry at a cost of more than $1.1 billion.    To the thousands of farmers and other workers employed by the sugar industry, the cost would be even higher.    Gov. George A. Sinner   State of North Dakota   Bismarck, N.D.   ---   You show a lack of sensitivity in attacking one of the most successful farm programs at a time when U.S. farmers are just beginning to recover from the worst crisis in agriculture since the Great Depression. In the future you should give a more balanced representation of the sugar program, as opposed to presenting only the perspective of the large corporate users of sugar who would like to increase their profits at the expense of farmers.    Jerry Huckaby, (D., La.)   Chairman   U.S. House of Representatives   Subcommittee on Cotton, Rice and Sugar    Washington   ---   Your editorial was right on target. I would like to point out that among the sugar program's beneficiaries are multinational firms from Britain and South Africa (of all places). And because of loopholes in the program, substantial quantities of sucrose-dextrose blends are being imported from Canada and Europe at giveaway prices that make it impossible for U.S. firms to compete.    Due to the sugar program, eight cane refineries have shut down, with a loss of 4,000 or more jobs. Since sugar is a much cheaper source of carbohydrate than other food sources, I also might point out that the additional cost included by the sugar program is borne by the lower-income consumer, the one least able to afford it.    Alex N. Umrichin   Hoffman Estates, Ill.   ---   You criticize the U.S. sugar policy for generating higher domestic sugar and related sweetener prices compared with world prices. To reach that conclusion, you apparently have assumed that the world price represents the real economic value of sugar in the global marketplace.    In truth, however, sugar's world price has little to do with its real economic value but rather is the predictable result of universally practiced government intervention by virtually all of the world's sugar-producing nations -- a condition that makes comparisons with that price economically impractical.    R. Tom Crawford Jr.   Barrington, Ill.   ---   As part of the omnibus farm program of 1985, the sugar program is intended to ensure viability of an industry that provides a necessary food product to American consumers. I dare say both producers and consumers are quite satisfied with the program. Ask 10 housewives the current price of sugar and nine of them won't know. Why? Because sugar prices have not experienced any wild fluctuations, remaining at a level acceptable to consumers.    The most damaging aspect of Rep. Porter's proposed legislation lies in its transition payments to sugar growers, which are meant as an impetus for them to pursue other crop production. Rural America is currently facing an economic depression brought about by huge grain surpluses that it can't move on foreign markets.    Where are sugar growers to turn? In my district in Northwestern Minnesota, the only thing they likely could produce is wheat, corn or soybeans. Consumers stand to benefit much more from reducing U.S. grain surpluses than from dismantling an effective sugar program.    Arlan Stangeland, (R., Minn.)   U.S. House of Representatives   Agriculture Subcommittee on Cotton, Rice and Sugar    Washington   ---   The sugar program stands against free trade, encourages inefficient producers to remain viable and puts U.S. laborers out of work. The ability of a few large corn-processing firms to lobby successfully for the retention of this program, in the face of a farm bill set to lower prices to world market clearing levels (while maintaining competitive farm income), is politics at its worst. The media need to inform the public more on how it continues to pay three times the price for sugar than those outside the U.S. pay. The question is, why does it continue?    Patrick D. Mitchell   Manager, Commodity Analysis   Keebler Co.   Elmhurst, Ill.   ---   (Revised WSJ June 22, 1987.) </TEXT></DOC>