<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880129-0116 </DOCNO><HL> Financial Corp. Is Anxious Over Bank Board Vow </HL><AUTHOR> David B. Hilder (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FIN GOVMT </CO><IN> BNK </IN><TEXT>   Within a few weeks, the nation's top thrift regulators must decide whether to renew a promise of support for Financial Corp. of America that has let the deeply troubled company tap Wall Street for nearly $14 billion in borrowings.    The Federal Home Loan Bank Board hasn't said how or when it will decide what to do. But as more time passes without a decision, Financial Corp. and its lenders are growing increasingly restless.    At issue is the so-called &quot;lifeline letter&quot; written in January 1987 to Financial Corp., parent of the nation's largest thrift, by Edwin J. Gray, the then-chairman of the Bank Board. In the letter, Mr. Gray pledged that the Bank Board wouldn't take any action against Financial Corp. based on its failure to meet capital requirements. Mr. Gray further promised to support Financial Corp. &quot;to enable it to continue as a going concern.&quot;    The letter, which was essentially a renewal of a letter that Mr. Gray first issued in March 1986, expires March 31. And the question of whether the current Bank Board, chaired by M. Danny Wall, will renew the letter has become one of the major uncertainties surrounding Irvine, Calif.-based Financial Corp., which has been struggling since 1984 with a massive portfolio of delinquent loans and foreclosed real estate.    The importance of the letter increased this week with the company's unusual public plea for a federal bailout of more than $100 million a year, after posting a 1987 loss of $468 million that wiped out net worth.    If the Bank Board renews the letter or its major provisions -- as Financial Corp. wants -- it will, in effect, be endorsing Mr. Gray's strategy of letting the company try to grow out of its problems while gambling that interest rates won't rise much.    But if the Bank Board fails to renew the letter or provide substantial guarantees to the big Wall Street firms that have lent Financial Corp. nearly $14 billion, then the company will be forced to dump much of its $18 billion portfolio of mortgage-backed securities, possibly at a significant loss.    And even if the Wall Street firms keep lending to Financial Corp., believing that they hold adequate collateral in the form of mortgage-backed securities, they're likely to raise their interest rates or require even more collateral.    Such rising costs would come when Financial Corp. can ill afford them. The company's fourth-quarter loss of $225 million was caused largely by a $235 million provision for losses on loans and real estate, but Financial Corp. also incurred a $49 million operating loss stemming from rising interest rates.    The company's decline into a negative net worth position makes the issue of government backing through the &quot;lifeline letter&quot; even more important, analysts say.    &quot;I would think that this (the negative net worth) is an item that would be considered by people who do business with Financial Corp.,&quot; said Peter Treadway, an analyst at Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co. in New York.    &quot;As long as they have confidence that the regulators are standing behind the company, it doesn't matter what (the company) shows. But this increases the pressure on the regulators to do something. It would be a major disruption of the financial markets if it were mishandled in some way, and I think everyone is well aware of that,&quot; Mr. Treadway said.    The type of collateralized borrowing from securities dealers that Financial Corp. uses, known as &quot;reverse repurchase agreements,&quot; or reverse repos, is a significant source of funding for many other thrifts. In November, the latest month for which Bank Board statistics are available, the thrift industry had borrowed $85 billion using reverse repos.    The Bank Board says it is considering whether to renew the letter, but hasn't tipped its hand. &quot;The question of future 'comfort' letters is under review by the board and no time frame has been set for a decision on this matter,&quot; the Bank Board said this week.    However, officials of Wall Street firms familiar with Financial Corp.'s borrowings say the maturities generally range from two weeks to 30 days, indicating that the Bank Board must make a decision by the end of February or risk a sudden drying up of funds for Financial Corp.    Interviews with Wall Street executives, securities analysts and credit analysts, all of whom declined to be identified, suggest the Street might not act in its usual herdlike fashion if the letter isn't renewed.    Said an official of one major firm: &quot;We won't go past March 31 if we don't have some replacement of that letter.&quot; Without the letter, the official said, &quot;We would essentially wind it (lending to Financial Corp.) down. We think it would be too big an exposure without an explicit blessing of the Bank Board.&quot;    However, an analyst at another firm said Wall Street will continue to lend on a secured basis to Financial Corp.'s American Savings andamp; Loan Association unit, &quot;but they will just use it (the absence of the letter) to gouge another eighth or a quarter of a point from them.&quot;    William J. Popejoy, Financial Corp.'s chairman, also said Wall Street firms have taken different stances. &quot;Some Wall Street firms have said, 'We're collateralized and we're not concerned.' But others have said, 'We're collateralized, but it's our money and we're concerned.'&quot;    Spokesmen for two of Financial Corp.'s biggest lenders, First Boston Corp., and Goldman Sachs andamp; Co., declined to comment. Officials of Salomon Brothers Inc. didn't return phone calls. Each of the firms had more than $1 billion in reverse repos outstanding to American Savings as of Sept. 30.    Although reverse-repo lending is considered relatively safe for the lender, it isn't risk-free. Borrowers, such as Financial Corp., generally can borrow no more than 95% of the market value of the securities they turn over as collateral. The market value of the securities, which are all issued by government or quasi-government agencies, is calculated every day. If the market value falls because interest rates are rising, the borrower must put up more collateral, or the lender will sell some of the securities and keep the proceeds to reduce the amount of the loan.    One risk, then, is that the market value may fall more than 5% in one day, which is unlikely even in the most volatile markets. Another risk, however, is that if a borrowing company fails, a creditor or bankruptcy court might block the lender from liquidating its collateral. If interest rates are rising, the value of the securities might fall more than 5% while the litigation is fought out.    But if American Savings failed, it would be taken over by the Bank Board, and wouldn't enter bankruptcy-court proceedings. And the Bank Board is viewed as unlikely to block lenders from liquidating their collateral, because to do so would send a chill through the markets and dry up a significant source of liquidity for the thrift industry.    Still, few firms would be willing to lend more than $1 billion to Financial Corp. without explicit Bank Board backing, according to Wall Street executives and analysts. &quot;The letter is important to all of Wall Street,&quot; said one official.    The letter and the reverse-repo borrowings let the company buy billions of dollars of mortgage-backed securities that generated a modest stream of income that was enough, at times, to offset other operating losses.    But the letter, which was made public and printed in Financial Corp.'s annual report, has drawn fire from other thrifts' executives, who view it as a special indulgence. &quot;I think there is a question about whether the Bank Board and the regulators should be issuing letters to individual institutions separate and apart from a (confidential) supervisory agreement,&quot; said Theo H. Pitt Jr., chairman of the U.S. League of Savings Institutions, the industry's major trade group.    Others, both thrift-industry executives and Bank Board staff members, believe the letter severely limited the Bank Board's options in trying to arrange for another company, such as Ford Motor Co., to take over Financial Corp. with government assistance. Talks with Ford broke off about three weeks ago.    The Bank Board historically hasn't been willing to provide assistance to an acquirer unless the troubled thrift's shareholders are wiped out. But the letter appears to make it more difficult to accomplish that, and perhaps could provide grounds for a shareholder suit against the Bank Board if Financial Corp. shareholders indeed were wiped out. </TEXT></DOC>