<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870827-0041 </DOCNO><HL> Sliding to Wider War in the Gulf---By Paul Jabber</HL><DD> 08/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST FORGN FRESTPETROLEUM (PET)TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><TEXT>   The military buildup currently under way in the Persian Gulf heralds a new and highly dangerous phase. Despite the United Nations Security Council's unanimous call for a cease-fire, attacks on shipping by both Iraq and Iran are likely to resume. In the wake of last month's bloody episode in Mecca, onshore facilities in Saudi Arabia and other Arab oil-producing countries may also become Iranian targets. As the U.S. air and naval presence in the area grows, Tehran will repeatedly test Washington's resolve and its security commitments in the area.    Only a comprehensive cease-fire in the Iran-Iraq war is likely to keep the U.S. from becoming deeply entangled in the regional fighting. An all-out effort to produce such a cease-fire is needed.    In recent weeks an expectation has developed that Iraqi restraint in response to the U.N. action may stop the tanker war, brake the slide toward expanded hostilities, and perhaps even render superfluous the U.S. naval escorts. This is wishful thinking.    Baghdad may indeed refrain from military action in the gulf for a while; as long as Iran and the U.S. are in direct confrontation, Iraqi interests are served. But in the long run, Iraq has everything to lose and nothing to gain from an extended halt to the tanker war without a companion cease-fire on the ground. Baghdad's most vital objective is a complete end to the fighting. Its long-term strategy is to end the draining military stalemate of the past four years, either by crippling Iran economically, or by expanding the conflict so as to engulf vital interests of other regional states and of major world powers. A spreading conflict in such a vital area would in turn compel the international community to intervene.    The Iranians have been on the offensive since late 1982, when they succeeded in pushing Iraq back behind its own borders. They have since captured significant chunks of Iraqi territory. Rejecting numerous Iraqi cease-fire offers and international mediation efforts, they seized the large Majnoon Island oil fields in 1984 and the port town of Faw in February 1986. Over the past year they have come close to capturing Basra, Iraq's second-largest city. Fired by religious zeal, regional ambitions, and Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini's driving obsession, they have set conditions for ending the war that are tantamount to a demand for Iraq's unconditional surrender: the overthrow of President Saddam Hussein and of the ruling Baath Party, to be followed by establishment of an &quot;acceptable&quot; Islamic regime.    Iran's military campaigns have been checked thus far by Iraq's overwhelming superiority in firepower and its control of the air. The resulting stalemate has caused untold human casualties and nearly bankrupted both countries. Iraq in turn has targeted its enemy's oil-export infrastructure, waging a campaign of economic attrition to force an end to the fighting. This has included the partial crippling of Iran's main oil terminal on Kharg Island, and attacks on 96 ships -- mainly tankers carrying Iranian oil -- since 1984. For Iraq, the use of its superior air power against Iran's export trade is virtually its only remaining instrument of direct, effective pressure.    Thus, even if the American escorting of reflagged Kuwaiti tankers and U.S. merchant ships succeeds in becoming a routine operation safe from effective Iranian challenge, hostilities in the gulf will continue. Without a complete end to the war, the chances of U.S. involvement in the fighting remain high.    Pressure on Iraq to maintain self-restraint indefinitely is not the solution. Not only would it be fiercely -- and in all likelihood successfully -- resisted, more to the point, it would run directly counter to the West's broader strategic interests, interests that brought U.S. forces to the gulf. It would suit Iran's designs perfectly: Baghdad's isolation and defeat; intimidation of the other, much weaker gulf states into submission to Tehran's will; and hence control of the world's largest and cheapest oil reserves.    Iran's aggressive posture is forcing Saudi Arabia and the smaller oil sheikdoms, however reluctantly, into open confrontation with it. The incident in Mecca, clearly provoked by the Khomeini regime, has greatly accelerated this dynamic. This will mean not only more aid for Iraq but also much heavier Saudi pressure on Syria and non-Arab Islamic states to curb their cooperation with Iran.    As Iraqi strikes against shipping or loading facilities resume, Iran can be expected, in rough escalatory order:    --To retaliate further against ships owned by gulf states.    --To skirmish with Saudi or Kuwaiti air or naval units.    --To mount terrorist attacks on oil installations, airports, government offices, embassies and the like in the gulf, using subversive agents in the local Shiite communities.    --To launch air strikes or naval bombardments of oil fields, power stations, waterworks or loading docks in Kuwait or Saudi Arabia.    Clearly, this is a very dangerous course for Iran. It has already brought U.S. and other forces into the gulf, and brought about a strong tilt by the West toward Iraq. A military clash with U.S. forces could prove fatal to Tehran's already severe diplomatic isolation. Iran's very heavy dependence on trade with or through a handful of countries that are allies or clients of the U.S. (notably West Germany, Britain, Japan, Turkey and Pakistan) make it especially vulnerable to a determined effort by Washington to marshal leverage against it.    Why, since last fall, has Iran taken a course of action that will unleash a set of international dynamics that could force it into a cease-fire and thwart its objective of defeating Iraq and imposing an Islamic government there? There are several reasons:    --The Iraqi air campaign was hurting the Iranians. Iran's liquid foreign-exchange reserves are $3 billion to $4 billion, but its import bill last year was an estimated $10 billion. Depressed oil prices and export disruptions last year cut Iranian revenues by more than half, to $8 billion, from a year earlier. As new Iraqi pipelines through Turkey and Saudi Arabia have come on line, the balance-of-payments picture for Iraq is improving while Iran's is deteriorating.    Iran will do anything to keep its oil exports flowing freely. Unlike Iraq, it does not have enough aircraft to provide protective cover to shipping in or out of its ports, nor can it rely on external sources of financial aid to ease revenue shortfalls. Unable to deliver a knock-out punch on the ground, and unwilling to negotiate a ceasefire, it began late last year to increase its pressure on Baghdad's backers in the gulf. Hence the rapid escalation of attacks on Kuwait.    --The Iranian leadership has little but contempt for the gumption of the conservative monarchies in the gulf. It is gambling that they will go to any lengths to avoid confrontation and to preserve a modus vivendi with revolutionary Islam. This is a major miscalculation. Kuwait's behavior indicates that four years of futile efforts to obtain a peaceful settlement have convinced the ruling families in the gulf that appeasement of the mullahs is an exercise in self-delusion.    --Iran's rulers believe that even if worst comes to worst and Western military forces become involved, the final outcome may still be favorable to them. U.S. intervention may light the fires of fundamentalist Islamic revolution in the gulf sheikdoms and further radicalize anti-Western Islamic movements throughout Asia and the Middle East.    --Western intervention in the form of U.S. base rights and land deployments in the gulf may prompt the Soviet Union to counter by switching support from Iraq to Iran. At the very least, Moscow might sell Iran larger quantities of the heavy weaponry it needs, and at lower prices than it now gets on the black market or in furtive deals with other pariah states. Soviet discussions with Tehran have been reported recently on reviving cooperation in the oil and gas industries and on aid in building a rail link to the gulf. The Soviets are sure to exploit Iran's growing rift with the West, if allowed to do so without harming their own relations with the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, where arms-control negotiations are at a critical point.    The risks of a widening war are serious and carry unpredictable consequences. A marshaling of international leverage to compel the Khomeini regime to accept the U.N. mandated cease-fire is urgently needed. To this end, the Reagan administration should harness all its diplomatic resources.    While European cooperation is of course essential, a successful effort depends on Soviet support. Mikhail Gorbachev has offered to discuss joint measures in a bilateral forum. Washington should take up this offer. The best way to checkmate any Iranian-Soviet rapprochement is to coopt Moscow into taking further multilateral steps to isolate Tehran. Ultimately, both an arms embargo and a boycott of Iranian oil may be required. While neither sanction would be airtight, the combined effect of even a partial quarantine would cripple both Iran's chances of breaking through Iraqi defenses, and its tottering economic base.    ---   Mr. Jabber, who heads the Middle East program at the Council on Foreign Relations, is writing a book on gulf security. </TEXT></DOC>