<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870120-0022 </DOCNO><HL> About Possible Impact---Secretary Baker Seems LikelyTo Let Currency Slide;Volcker Appears Worried---Devaluation's Slight Benefits---By Art PineStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP JAPAN FORGNMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   How far will the dollar fall? When will its devaluation in the currency markets begin to lift U.S. inflation and interest rates? How big a decline is necessary to help the U.S. reduce its $170 billion annual trade deficit?    These questions are troubling U.S. policy makers as they watch the dollar's sharp -- and so far relentless -- plunge against the West German mark and the Japanese yen. There are no sure answers, and there are differing views in Washington over what the answers should be.    So far, the Reagan administration has done nothing to brake the fall that began a month ago. Treasury Secretary James Baker appears resigned to letting market forces drive down the dollar until the U.S. trade deficit begins to shrink. However, Federal Reserve Board Chairman Paul Volcker has raised concerns about the risks of relying too heavily on a weakening currency to make the U.S. more competitive in world markets.    If the dollar's drop does lead to higher interest rates, the already-sluggish American economy could be weakened further, and the current stock-market surge, which has been sparked largely by lower rates, could be abruptly halted.    The dollar plunged again yesterday. It dropped 1.8% to 1.8080 marks and 1.6% to 150.80 yen in late trading in London from the levels of late Friday in New York. Explaining the decline, traders cited a Newsweek magazine report that the Treasury believes that 1.70 marks and 140 yen are &quot;appropriate&quot; levels for the dollar. Asked to comment, a Treasury official called the Newsweek report &quot;wrong&quot; and added that &quot;we haven't discussed any specific targets&quot; for the dollar.    Contrary to market perceptions, the Treasury isn't actively trying to force the dollar down. But the administration is clearly prepared to let the dollar fall further on its own, partly to intensify the pressure on West Germany and Japan and to help ward off protectionist pressures in Congress. Treasury Secretary Baker believes that it would be a mistake, for domestic political reasons, to try to ease the dollar's fall right now.    Although the dollar has dropped 39%, according to the Fed's trade-weighted average, since its peak in early 1985, American manufacturers are still having difficulty competing in world markets. The administration believes that a lower dollar, which reduces prices of American exports on world markets and increases prices of imports, is the best way to defuse powerful protectionist pressures in Congress.    Thus, the U.S. hasn't intervened to support the dollar, although both Japan and Germany have bought dollars over the past month to slow their slide. Japan has intervened more aggressively than Germany, and yesterday Satoshi Sumita, the governor of the Bank of Japan, said Japan will continue to support the dollar.    The Reagan administration's apparent lack of concern about the declining dollar is worsening relations with Bonn and Tokyo; both thought that Mr. Baker had promised them a respite from U.S. pressure to stimulate their economies. The unconvincing U.S. denials that the administration wants the dollar to decline have humiliated Japanese Finance Minister Kiichi Miyazawa, who had staked his reputation on the notion -- an erroneous one, U.S. officials say -- that Washington had agreed to some specific target for the yen.    Yesterday, Tokyo announced that Mr. Miyazawa is coming to the U.S. and will meet with Secretary Baker tomorrow. A Treasury spokesman said that Mr. Baker &quot;readily&quot; agreed to the meeting. Japanese sources said that no new agreements are expected from it.    The recent market turmoil has jolted West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl's administration just before Sunday's elections.    Yesterday, West German Finance Minister Gerhardt Stoltenberg said he will attend a meeting Thursday of the Bundesbank's policy-making council, setting off speculation that Germany may be considering cutting its interest rates. This is one of the ways the U.S. wants Germany to spur its economy, but most analysts don't expect action until after the elections.    There also was speculation yesterday that finance ministers of the five largest industrial nations -- known as the G-5 -- may meet soon to discuss the turmoil in the currency markets, but officials here and in Germany denied that any such meeting has been scheduled. Japanese Finance Minister Miyazawa said German officials approached Japan to explore the possibility of holding discussions, but he added that nothing in detail had been decided.    The dollar decline is of huge concern to export-driven economies such as Germany and Japan. Prices tumbled on the Frankfurt stock exchange yesterday, partly because of fears that the strengthening mark will curb exports by German automobile, chemical and electrical-machinery manufacturers. Tokyo worries that the strong yen will raise prices of Japanese goods in the U.S. and shrink markets for Japanese products around the world. South Korea, Taiwan and other industrializing countries whose currencies are tied closely to the dollar are finding it easier to undercut Japanese competitors in world markets.    Some U.S. economists and policy makers -- notably Fed Chairman Volcker -- also are uneasy about further devaluation. Mr. Volcker is afraid that too much downward pressure will risk pushing the dollar into a precipitous decline like that of 1976-80 -- rekindling domestic inflation, making it difficult for the U.S. to attract needed funds from foreigners and eventually plunging the country into a recession.    Fed strategists also worry that too large a dollar decline could limit their options on monetary policy. Fed Gov. Wayne Angell warned last week that if the Fed had to defend the dollar, it might not be able to relax monetary policy enough to offset any further weakening of the economy. The dollar &quot;would become a monetary-policy consideration,&quot; he says.    Mr. Volcker also has expressed doubts that continued devaluation alone would do much to restore U.S. competitiveness over the long term. Instead, he argues, the U.S. should be attacking the more fundamental cause of the trade problem -- that the U.S. is living beyond its earnings. Mr. Volcker wants the administration to adopt policies designed to damp consumption and spur savings and investment -- by reducing the budget deficit and increasing incentives for manufacturers, in particular, to invest in new equipment and technology.    The Fed chief says the U.S., to export enough to wipe out its trade deficit, will have to increase manufacturing output by 30% over the next five years. &quot;We are not investing in industry at a rate to support that growth,&quot; he warns. Indeed, if the falling dollar discourages foreigners from buying U.S. Treasury securities, interest rates would rise and depress business investment.    In short, Mr. Volcker worries that the administration is failing to act to correct domestic economic imbalances while waiting for the falling dollar to make American business more competitive and to reduce the trade imbalance. Both Mr. Volcker and Mr. Baker would prefer to see Japan and Germany stimulate their economies, but Mr. Volcker believes that the U.S. also must change its policies to achieve a better trade balance.    The administration's benign neglect of the dollar has convinced traders that the U.S. wants the greenback to fall further. &quot;The markets already are bearish on the dollar,&quot; says David Hale, Kemper Financial Services' chief economist. He and most other analysts expect the downward momentum to continue.    One reason is that traders have lost confidence that the U.S., Germany and Japan can work out a way to reduce their huge trade imbalances. Looming along with the $170 billion U.S. trade deficit are a German surplus of $56 billion and a Japanese surplus of $86 billion. Together, they have replaced the global debt problem as the main threat to the world economy.    &quot;These imbalances simply are unsustainable,&quot; says Robert Hormats, a former State Department official now with Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co. &quot;Unless they're reduced -- and quickly -- a recession seems inevitable.&quot;    There also are related worries: Congress isn't acting as firmly as the markets would like to reduce the federal budget deficit. Protectionist pressures are intensifying on Capitol Hill. There is concern over reports that the administration is considering replacing Mr. Volcker as the Fed chairman. Interest-rate differentials between the U.S. and its trading partners are narrowing. And, in the background, there is uneasiness about the potential weakening of the administration by the Iran-Contra scandal.    Because the dollar's sharp decline over the past two years has done little to narrow the trade deficit, many analysts, both in and outside the Reagan administration, think that the dollar must go lower. Rimmer de Vries, the chief international economist at Morgan Guaranty Trust Co., says, &quot;The dollar has to decline further, and the earlier the better. It's the only way we can hope for a quick turnaround.&quot;    Robert Lawrence, a Brookings Institution economist, agrees. A further decline in the dollar of about 10% to 15% will &quot;put the United States on a new path, where we'll be able to see some improvement in the overall trade situation,&quot; he says. &quot;That's far different from the point at which we've been before.&quot;    But Mr. Lawrence acknowledges the risks in a lower dollar. He notes that the last major decline -- an 18% trade-weighted drop in the dollar between 1976 and 1980 -- added several percentage points to the nation's inflation rate.    A decade ago, the fast-skidding dollar added visibly to foreign perceptions that the U.S. was on the decline. In the end, Washington was forced to intervene heavily in the foreign-exchange markets to halt the dollar's slide. Even that didn't work. It was only the tight-money policy that the Fed launched in 1979 -- and President Reagan's early-1980s moves to restore confidence in the U.S. -- that reversed the dollar's decline. The cost: record-high interest rates and a sharp recession.    Britain's long series of devaluations in the 1970s and early 1980s proved no more effective. Although the currency changes helped in the short run, they lulled the country into believing that British competitiveness was being restored without any need for belt-tightening at home. Thus, labor costs continued to soar, inflation raged unchecked, and the cheapened currency left British industry unable to afford to expand into foreign markets. In short, the country remains as uncompetitive as it was before. Meanwhile, Britons have become poorer and can't buy as much of what the rest of the world produces.    The Reagan team hasn't always viewed a declining dollar as a good thing. During its first 4 1/2 years, the administration was delighted that the dollar was rising sharply; President Reagan even boasted that it reflected world-wide confidence in the U.S. But 16 months ago, Treasury Secretary Baker, worried by growing protectionist pressures, engineered a five-country attack to speed the U.S. currency's decline. Ever since then, the U.S. has wanted the dollar to waft gradually down. At the same time, the U.S. has been leaning on Germany and Japan to stimulate their economies so they will import more.    The U.S. has hinted several times that it might be willing to trade concessions on the exchange-rate side -- perhaps leading to some sort of joint Big Three statement on what exchange-rate levels are appropriate -- if Germany and Japan would agree to stimulate demand at home. But so far, Bonn has refused.    Partly to prod the Germans into such a deal, the administration experimented last October with a bilateral &quot;accord&quot; with Japan, agreeing to give its blessing to prevailing exchange-rate levels if Japan cut its discount rate and launched a tax-revision program. Although Japan technically kept the bargain, its new budget package all but vitiated any new stimulus from tax revision. Yesterday, the yen broke through the top of the range, and the U.S. didn't move to intervene.    Mr. Baker still hopes to get a U.S.-German-Japanese accord sometime this year. Meanwhile, the administration has been willing to let the dollar fall. </TEXT></DOC>