<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861218-0016 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Grains, SoybeansFollow Cash PricesTo Lower Levels---By Wendy L. WallStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/18/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PETROLEUM (PET) </IN><TEXT>   Grain and soybean futures prices sagged, following cash market prices lower.    &quot;The market is just slipping and sliding&quot; as exports languish and traders anticipate a pickup in grain available on cash markets in the next few months, said Ted Mao, an analyst with Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. in New York.    Yesterday, corn futures for March delivery fell 1.5 cents to close at $1.645 a bushel. Wheat futures for March delivery closed at $2.7225 a bushel, down 3.5 cents.    Many traders had expected sharply lower crop prices to boost U.S. grain exports this year. Instead, the Soviet Union, one of the world's largest grain importers, has shunned U.S. grain markets entirely, while sales to other importers have remained sluggish. As of early December, U.S. corn export sales were trailing year-earlier levels 28%.    Although wheat exports are running modestly above 1985 levels, they also have tapered off recently. Earlier this month, the Agriculture Department slashed its estimate of both U.S. wheat and corn exports for the 1986-87 marketing year.    In addition, many traders are anticipating a pickup in cash market sales in the next few months as farmers use so-called generic certificates to redeem grain now owned by the federal government. The certificates are part of the payment farmers will receive for agreeing to idle some of their land next year.    And many farmers have been holding off on grain sales this fall to avoid tax payments in 1986, but cash-flow problems may force many to take their grain to market early next year.    In other commodity markets yesterday:    ENERGY: Oil prices fell on spot and futures markets for the second consecutive day, as the oil cartel's talks in Switzerland remained stalled. The 13 members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries haven't had a full ministerial meeting since Monday, and yesterday declined to set a date for the next such session. Traders and analysts noted that Iraq's insistence on production parity with its enemy Iran remains the major stumbling block, and could threaten OPEC's chances of pushing prices to $18 a barrel. The snag &quot;is more serious than I thought,&quot; said David Mizrahi, editor of the MidEast Report, a New York-based newsletter. Many traders, who had expected a quick pact after the meeting started a week ago, are growing disillusioned, analysts said. Market participants &quot;are now wondering if OPEC will be able to come to an agreement,&quot; said Edward Dellamonte, oil analyst for Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., New York. Crude oil contracts for January delivery on the New York Mercantile Exchange fell 24 cents, to $15.86 a barrel; heating oil and gasoline contracts on the Merc skidded, too. And spot, or noncontract, prices, also fell in Europe and the U.S. Meanwhile, the Iraqis apparently have stepped up attacks in their seven-year war against Iran, claiming to have bombed two offshore Iranian oil platforms in the Persian Gulf. Some analysts said this could only exacerbate the tensions at the conference. Moreover, some oil analysts speculated that OPEC will soon abandon efforts at a new pact, and simply extend its present agreement through Jan. 31. The present pact expires Dec. 31. If that happens, said Nauman Barakat, oil analyst for Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co., New York, oil prices will fall &quot;like a lead balloon,&quot; perhaps to $13 a barrel.    ORANGE JUICE: Futures prices extended Tuesday's advance, but analysts were divided about the reasons. Some thought the rise was mostly technical in nature, while others cited a market rumor that Brazil may raise the price of the juice it exports to the U.S. John Beigen, analyst for Thomson McKinnon Securities Inc., New York, said that expectations that Florida processors may also raise prices was an additional firming influence. Judy Weissman, analyst for Shearson Lehman, said traders were concerned that smaller domestic supplies might make the market vulnerable to sharp price rises if Florida were to have a freeze, even though the weather has remained mild. Total frozen concentrate orange juice supplies on hand in Florida in the week ended Dec. 6, the first week of the season that began Dec. 1, amounted to 36.5 million gallons, compared with 50 million gallons a year earlier. Also, she noted, &quot;Brazil isn't expected to ship as much concentrate as last year, partly because of the countervailing duty that has been placed on Brazilian juice after Brazil was found to be dumping it in the U.S. market.&quot; A Brazilian price increase would be more likely to stick if exports were reduced. An increase in domestic Brazilian consumption also has reduced export availability, Miss Weissman said.    COTTON: Futures prices rose partly in response to demand stimulated by strong spot prices and partly because of a technical rebound from declines during the previous two sessions. &quot;The decline in futures widened the gap with spot prices and created an attraction for traders,&quot; said Ernest Simon, cotton specialist for Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., New York. The technical rise touched off further buying that accelerated the advance, analysts said. John McNutt, managing analyst for Merrill Lynch Capital Markets, New York, observed that some of the firmness could be attributed to reported comments from China that it isn't holding huge supplies, as is commonly believed. Also, Mr. McNutt noted that recently the Chinese have been &quot;reluctant to offer cotton for sale, and when they have, their selling prices have been relatively high.&quot; According to a report just released by Prudential-Bache, the world cotton supply is shrinking. In the U.S., many farmers have withheld their cotton from the market in return for government loans, creating an even tighter supply situation, the report said. Crops in such other nations as China, Pakistan, Australia, India, the Soviet Union, Brazil and Argentina were said to be &quot;faced with some attrition,&quot; too, the report said. </TEXT></DOC>