<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870403-0119 </DOCNO><HL> Sperm Banks Thrive Amid DebateOver Medical and Ethical Issues---By Marilyn ChaseStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   By any definition, sperm cryobanking is a growth industry.    The total number of births world-wide from such services, which offer insemination with sperm that has been stored frozen, is now about 30,000, up some 25% since 1984, says Jerome K. Sherman, head of the reproductive council of the American Association of Tissue Banks. More than half of these children were born in the U.S., according to the association, whose membership includes some 70 commercial, nonprofit and university-based sperm banks.    While these infants represent only one-fifth of all artificial-insemination births to date (the rest were achieved with fresh donor sperm), sperm-bank advocates expect that share to increase. They argue that banks offer greater selection and accessibility, as well as higher safety because frozen sperm can be easily quarantined while donors are retested for disease.    Indeed, the rise in sperm-bank use has stirred up several medical and ethical debates, and brought renewed attention to some that have long surrounded artificial insemination. Such questions, as well as those addressing the legal and moral implications of sperm banking, are likely to intensify in the wake of both the Baby M surrogate-mother case and the recent Vatican letter denouncing high-technology methods of conception.    At present, most of the demand at sperm banks still comes from couples whose male partners have fertility problems. A large number of such clients turn to sperm banks out of frustration with the process of adoption, which in many cases has become lengthy and expensive.    But another group is accounting for an increasing portion of sperm banks' business: childless career women. For the first time, a generation of women has had both the means and the motivation -- in the pill and the women's movement -- to postpone procreation, says George M. Flesh, a Los Angeles obstetrician-gynecologist. Now, married or single, they find themselves ready for children -- and physicians across the country are hearing their laments.    &quot;I've never seen a woman in agony because she didn't make partner in a law firm,&quot; says Dr. Flesh. &quot;But I've seen women truly miserable because they didn't have a family.&quot;    Typical of such women is Odette Buschmann, a 31-year-old law student at Brooklyn College in New York and a single mother of three. &quot;I always wanted a family, a loving husband, a beautiful home,&quot; says Miss Buschmann, a straight-A product of convent schools. &quot;I never viewed myself living the alternative life style.&quot;    Though stung by an undergraduate love affair that produced a son Michael, now age 10, she began longing for another child just as she was preparing for a career in law. She considered adoption but couldn't afford the wait or the legal fees. &quot;I couldn't find a man to be part of our family,&quot; she says, &quot;so I went to the doctor.&quot;    She used a sperm bank in Manhattan operated by Daxor Corp.'s Idant Laboratories division. Conception, which was timed so the child would be born before the start of school, occurred after a single insemination; the procedure cost about $400, a fraction of what she anticipated the legal fees for an adoption would have been. A year and a half ago, when this second son, Paul, was one year old and Miss Buschmann was in her second year of law school, she was inseminated again.    As sperm-bank use has risen, so too has argument over whether frozen donor sperm is safer than fresh. Some doctors and others contend that, despite current precautions, fresh donor sperm presents a greater danger of transmitting illness.    The tissue-banks association's Dr. Sherman, who is also a professor of anatomy at the University of Arkansas, agrees. He argues, for example, that because infection from the virus for acquired immune deficiency syndrome, or AIDS, sometimes takes months to show up in blood antibodies, a three-month quarantine of the sperm is essential so that the donor can be retested for disease before it is used.    In a May 1986 report from the Centers for Disease Control, Mary Guinan and Laurene Mascola concluded that frozen semen is preferable for this reason. &quot;In the absence of a fast test, it's hard to guarantee that fresh semen is clean,&quot; says Dr. Mascola, now an epidemiologist with the Los Angeles County Health Department.    However, many doctors still favor fresh because it can achieve pregnancy months faster. Robert Nachtigall, a professor of obstetrics-gynecology at the University of California at San Francisco, says he uses fresh donor sperm in his infertility practice because it &quot;has higher motility, and we think motility has to do with its ability to penetrate an egg.&quot; Dr. Nachtigall adds that his scrupulous adherence to the American Fertility Society's guidelines for pretesting donors for such diseases as herpes, hepatitis and AIDS makes the risk of infection &quot;extremely low.&quot;    On a sociological level, screening of both donors and recipients has led to charges that some banks practice eugenics -- efforts to improve the gene pool. The main target of such criticism has been the Repository for Germinal Choice in Escondido, Calif. Founded in 1980 by the eyeglass magnate Robert Graham, the bank has solicited semen donations from Nobel laureates and other intellectuals.    But only a few laureates donated, most notably William Shockley, a Stanford University engineer and eugenics enthusiast. And equally few women asked for laureate semen. Only 2 or 3 of the Repository's 37 births are progeny of prizewinners, says Mr. Graham, who shudders at the &quot;eugenics&quot; charge. &quot;Our first objective,&quot; he explains, &quot;is producing a few more bright, healthy people.&quot;    Many sperm-bank clients take an even more pragmatic view of the selectivity the services offer. Leslie and Paul Curtis, for example, tried for a year to conceive a child before Mr. Curtis learned that his sperm count was low. They consulted the Sperm Bank of Northern California, where they perused a list of anonymous donors until they found a good physical match.    &quot;We tried to go with (a donor who had) my husband's appearance -- blondish-red hair and 5 feet, 10 inches,&quot; says Mrs. Curtis, a 30-year-old secretary in northern California. &quot;It amazes me; everyone says Gabriel looks just like his dad.&quot; The Curtises are now expecting their second child in October by the same donor.    Because sperm-banking technology enables clients to escape biological destiny, it unsettles many people. Says Joyce Bermel, a medical ethicist at the Hastings Center a Hastings-on-Hudson, N.Y.-based institute that examines medical issues: &quot;It raises issues of what constitutes the family: Is it biology or living group? What does it mean to be a parent? Is someone who donates sperm a father?    Today, Ms. Bermel notes, most sperm banks offer donors anonymity, unless they agree that the child may contact them upon reaching majority.&quot;The issue of confidentiality is a hot one,&quot; she says.    Deciding who should be a recipient also remains controversial. While some banks furnish sperm only to married women, others are much less restrictive. The Sperm Bank of Northern California, for example, pointedly caters to &quot;women who have been underserved in the past,&quot; including single women and lesbians. There is, however, no industrywide regulation.    While Ms. Bermel recognizes the need for rejecting obviously unsuitable candidates, she also warns that broaderolicies must be used judiciously. &quot;Screening,&quot; she notes, &quot;is a very imperfect procedure.&quot;    ---   Cryobanking Chronology   1776: First scientific observation of sperm at low temperatures.    1866: Banking of frozen sperm suggested by Italian monk.    1950: First sperm bank started at the University of Iowa.    1953: First birth from stored sperm.    1969: Sperm proves fertile after three years of storage.    1972-73: Sperm stored more than 10 years produces normal offspring.    1987: Frozen-sperm births total about 30,000 world-wide. </TEXT></DOC>