<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880408-0157 </DOCNO><HL> Panama Plotter: American Buddhist Aids Noriega's Foes --- A Former Ally of the General, Joel McCleary Now Maps Ways to Bring Him Down </HL><AUTHOR> Frederick Kempe (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><TEXT>   At a secret nighttime rendezvous a few weeks ago in Panama City, a Panamanian major representing Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega met to discuss a plan for the dictator to step down and leave the country.    Presenting the plan to him in the tall grass at the end of a Paitilla airstrip runway was a nervous American named Joel McCleary.    Mr. McCleary, a Harvard-educated Buddhist who worked in the Carter White House, may seem an improbable player in the efforts to oust Gen. Noriega. He doesn't speak Spanish or any other foreign language, and he doesn't represent the U.S. government. Born in North Carolina, he now is a private consultant based in New York.    Yet the portly international politician with a taste for dark pin-stripe suits has been deeply involved in Panama's political infighting for five years. Until the summer of 1986, he was a well-paid adviser to Gen. Noriega's puppet government. But when he advised Gen. Noriega to lower his profile, the Panamanian strong man froze him out. A year later, he made the risky switch to becoming a principal strategist for the general's opposition, led in Washington by Gabriel Lewis.    Mr. Lewis, the former Panamanian ambassador to the U.S. who helped negotiate the Panama Canal treaties, considers Mr. McCleary's advice and derring-do invaluable. &quot;He's one of the greatest conspirators the world has ever known,&quot; Mr. Lewis says with a smile. &quot;He plans all these things that belong in movies, and they turn out in real life.&quot; For one thing, Mr. McCleary met secretly with Panamanian President Eric Arturo Delvalle at a Miami dentist's home, delivering the message from the opposition that prompted the civilian leader to fire Gen. Noriega, setting off the current crisis.    The 39-year-old Mr. McCleary has shown a penchant for finding the action from the time he moved from the Youth for Muskie in North Carolina at age 24 to become the youngest Democratic Party national treasurer at age 28. As a protege of Hamilton Jordan, he was deputy assistant to the president for political affairs under Jimmy Carter.    Mr. Jordan says he picked Mr. McCleary to run President Carter's 1980 campaign in New York because &quot;he was the only guy around who could work with Hasidic Jews, blacks and yuppies.&quot; But Mr. McCleary's eagerness doesn't please everyone. In his book &quot;Mayor,&quot; New York Mayor Ed Koch complained about the Carter aide's strong-armed efforts to win his support for the president and chided Mr. McCleary: &quot;He was 33 years old, smiley and pudgy.&quot;    In 1981 Mr. McCleary, broke and disheartened by President Carter's defeat, joined Sawyer-Miller Group in New York, where he now heads a six-person international division that counsels foreign politicians and governments on how to run election campaigns and then hold on to power.    Political figures including the Dalai Lama, Philippine President Cory Aquino, South Korea's Kim Dae Jung and Nigeria's former President Shehu Shagari have sought his services. His clients typically pay $20,000 to $100,000 a month.    Mr. McCleary's detractors call him an opportunistic hustler. His friends regard him as a brilliant strategist with interests ranging from the workings of the brain to physics. They all say he plays by only his own rules, which he says are guided by a conversion to Buddhism 16 years ago. He worked at no cost for the cause of Tibetan refugees and took several months' leave to study under the Dalai Lama.    Some of his less altruistic endeavors stir concern. &quot;McCleary's job is interfering in the internal affairs of foreign countries, and that raises all sorts of ethical questions,&quot; says a Reagan administration official. &quot;This time he's working on our side, but what if he wasn't?&quot;    Mr. McCleary went to Panama in 1983 at the suggestion of Hamilton Jordan to run the presidential campaign of Nicholas Ardito Barletta, who won amid charges of fraud to become the nominal leader of Gen. Noriega's government. &quot;Joel is the gringo who knows how to get things done,&quot; says Mr. Jordan, who had become friendly with Panamanian officials during the Panama Canal treaty talks. &quot;He sees things in terms of plots and intrigue, and that's not a bad way to operate in Panama.&quot;    The plot thickened in 1985 when Gen. Noriega demanded Mr. Barletta's resignation amid growing economic problems and replaced him with then Vice President Delvalle. Mr. McCleary's falling-out came the next summer after he presented Gen. Noriega with advice that he would go the way of the Philippines' Ferdinand Marcos if he didn't lower his political profile and strengthen civilian leadership. Gen. Noriega rejected the counsel and accused Mr. McCleary of being part of a conspiracy against him that included his old friend and ally Jose Blandon.    Gen. Noriega got rid of Mr. Blandon by making him consul general in New York. There, he and Mr. McCleary worked together to write the &quot;Blandon Plan,&quot; which has become the recipe of the administration and the Panamanian opposition to oust Gen. Noriega and promote democracy.    It was Mr. Blandon who subsequently fingered Gen. Noriega as a drug dealer. His accounts encouraged federal grand juries in Florida to indict the Panamanian strong man early this year. Last fall, Mr. McCleary was hired by the opposition to help oust the general. &quot;He became not only my consultant but the consultant to the whole conspiracy we put together,&quot; says Mr. Lewis, the opposition leader.    Mr. McCleary is philosophical about his efforts -- and those of the U.S. government -- to bring down Gen. Noriega, who had received payments from the Central Intelligence Agency for over 20 years. He says that in view of his switching sides, &quot;if Noriega were to attack my character tomorrow, he would be justified.&quot;    Mr. McCleary describes his attraction to Panama as a mixture of a love for its people and a hedonistic attraction to its &quot;Casablanca&quot; mystique. &quot;Panama isn't Iran, it's divorce court. Everyone was sleeping with Noriega. But he grew more corrupt, he started selling drugs. He was a lovely hooker, but now you've got to get rid of him.&quot;    Gen. Noriega's opponents say Mr. McCleary's single most important contribution was a meeting last Oct. 3 at which he brokered the partnership between two enemies, Mr. Lewis and Gen. Noriega's former ally Mr. Blandon. &quot;I told Joel that I was only getting involved on one condition,&quot; says Mr. Lewis. &quot;I said he had to get into the act and attend every meeting that I have with that bastard.&quot;    Mr. Blandon provided inside information on the government party. Mr. Lewis also says that President Delvalle's decision to fire Gen. Noriega resulted from 10 hours of meetings in New York during the first week in January between the president and his old friend Mr. Blandon, interspersed with meetings with a State Department official, William Walker.    But first, Mr. McCleary had to go see the dentist in Miami.    Gen. Noriega's opponents dispatched the American to Miami to meet with President Delvalle in February when it seemed his plan was being delayed. After three days' wait in Miami, Mr. McCleary received a phone call from President Delvalle's Miami dentist. He told Mr. McCleary to come to his Biscayne Boulevard home for a clandestine meeting. &quot;The dentist was acting like he was in a Le Carre novel,&quot; Mr. McCleary says, &quot;but I knew we were stuck in a Beckett play.&quot;    Mr. McCleary says he told Mr. Delvalle that the Panamanian president had to act right away to fire Gen. Noriega. Private jets were waiting nearby to fly him to Washington to make his announcement at the Organization of American States. Mr. Delvalle decided instead to dismiss Gen. Noriega in Panama on national television, reasoning that it would then be harder for the general to oust him as president. He figured wrong; Gen. Noriega responded by forcing Mr. Delvalle's removal from office and naming Manuel Solis Palma as his new president.    The day after President Reagan announced his continued recognition of President Delvalle, who had gone into hiding, Mr. McCleary helped come up with the opposition's squeeze strategy.    Panama's assets now probably belonged to Gen. Noriega's opponents under the umbrella of the Delvalle government. At a meeting that Mr. McCleary arranged, the opposition put to work President Delvalle's new lawyer, William Rogers, a former State Department official now with the Washington law firm of Arnold andamp; Porter. The legal strategy of freezing Gen. Noriega's assets and cutting off his revenue has been surprisingly successful.    Mr. McCleary subsequently returned to Panama to try to open negotiations. He traveled with Enrique Carreras, a leading Costa Rican politician and friend of Gen. Noriega. The general would talk to them only by phone. And &quot;Joel turned out to be the last person Noriega wanted to meet,&quot; Mr. Carreras says, &quot;because it would indicate to his fellow officers that he was looking for a way out of the country.&quot;    One final attempt came that night at the airfield, where Mr. McCleary related a detailed plan to Gen. Noriega's representative, the Panamanian major, on how and when the dictator should leave the country. The major wouldn't accept the plan but did agree to meet with Reagan administration intermediaries to discuss it.    After all the excitement of the past weeks, Mr. McCleary laughs when asked whether he would go back to work in American politics. He recalls helping Nigeria's Shehu Shagari win election in 1983, only to have him removed by a military coup three months later. &quot;That is what is so intellectually fascinating about international work,&quot; he says. &quot;It is much more unpredictable. In American politics, you don't have to factor into your strategy who controls the tanks.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>