<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870616-0107 </DOCNO><HL> Board of Contributors:West European Scholars Absolve Yalta---By Arthur Schlesinger Jr.</HL><DD> 06/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP </IN><DATELINE> Yalta continues to haunt Europe  </DATELINE><TEXT>    as a perplexity, ahope, an accusation. So when Cagliari in Italy decided tohold a conference this spring on the Big Three meeting ofFebruary 1945, it had no difficulty in attracting scholarsfrom 10 European countries on both sides of the Iron Curtainas well as from the U.S. and Japan. For an Americanhistorian, the conference promised an unusual opportunity tofind out how objective European historians and politicalscientists assessed the summit meeting that has created somuch controversy in the 40 and more years since.   Cagliari is a charming city on the southern coast of the spectacular island of Sardinia. The title of the conference was &quot;Yalta: A Myth That Endures.&quot; Of the numerous myths generated by the meeting of the Big Three at Yalta, the one most on the minds of the European participants was the idea that Yalta was responsible for the partition of Europe.    This idea, French scholars pointed out, originated with Charles de Gaulle, who resented Yalta from the start for the sufficient reason that he had not been invited to attend. Actually France did well enough at Yalta without him, gaining an occupation zone in Germany, a seat on the Allied Control Commission and tacit recognition as a major power in postwar Europe. But de Gaulle remained unforgiving; and, as Prof. Maurice Vaisse of the University of Rheims observed, he condemned Yalta almost at once for settling the fate of Europe &quot;without Europe and without France, despite the protests of the Paris government.&quot; Since most Frenchmen are Gaullists at heart, this view soon crystallized into an article of faith. President Francois Mitterrand adopts it today, and in 1982 it was even endorsed by Helmut Schmidt of West Germany.    The West European scholars unitedly absolved Yalta from having caused the division of Europe. They agree that Winston Churchill and Franklin Roosevelt as realists were well aware that the Red Army would decide Eastern Europe's future. In October 1944 Churchill had conceded much of Eastern Europe to Stalin as a Soviet sphere of influence. In January 1945, shortly before departing for Yalta, Roosevelt had told a group of senators that &quot;the occupying forces had the power where their arms were present.&quot; Yet, despite their bargaining disadvantage, the Western leaders did their best to impede and dilute total Soviet domination and to preserve the hope of an undivided Europe.    They resisted Stalin on Poland, refusing to accept the puppet Lublin government and, in the Declaration of Poland, extracting Stalin's pledge to hold &quot;free and unfettered elections as soon as possible.&quot; The Declaration on Liberated Europe extended the free-election pledge to the rest of Eastern Europe. The Western objective, as Prof. Werner Link of the University of Trier in West Germany argued, was a &quot;moderate&quot; Soviet sphere of influence in Eastern Europe, comparable to the American sphere of influence in the Western Hemisphere and to the British in Southern Europe.    The two declarations in fact affirmed the unity of Europe. If words written on paper could not stop the Soviet Union from working its will in Eastern Europe, at least the declarations established standards by which the world subsequently judged Soviet behavior and found it grievously wanting. Far from partitioning Europe, these Yalta declarations supply the juridical basis for continuing Western complaint about Soviet policy in Eastern Europe.    Ironically the Communist historians -- eight of them, from the Soviet Union, Poland, Czechoslovakia and East Germany -- agree with de Gaulle that Yalta sanctioned the division of Europe. The argument, as developed by Marion Einhorn of the East German Academy of Sciences, is that allied unity was based on the understanding that primary responsibility in each liberated country rested with the occupying army. Hence, the Soviet Union was excluded from any serious role in the Allied Control Commission for Italy; in the same way, the U.S. and Britain were properly excluded in Eastern Europe.    For those who hoped that glasnost might liberate Communist historians from a uniform party line on historical questions, the Cagliari meeting was a disappointment. The Soviet delegation, headed by Prof. V.G. Trukhanovski of the Academy of Sciences, a bearded veteran of 40 years of stereotyped controversy, was especially lamentable. Historians obviously occupy a low priority in Mikhail Gorbachev's reform program.    One session dealt with the Big Three as diplomats. British and American historians in papers on &quot;Churchill's Diplomacy at Yalta&quot; and &quot;Roosevelt's Diplomacy at Yalta&quot; did their best to uncover and document the motives of the two Western leaders. Prof. Trukhanovski had been invited to do the same for Stalin. At first he had declined, saying that he preferred to talk about Churchill's motives and objectives. Finally he consented to present a paper on &quot;Soviet Diplomacy at Yalta&quot; -- a rambling polemic in which Stalin was hardly mentioned, and nothing of interest was cited from Soviet archives or said about Soviet purposes.    The succession of Soviet stump speeches finally provoked Prof. Melvin P. Leffler of the University of Virginia, a scholar who is himself critical of the assumptions of American Cold War diplomacy, to say to general applause: &quot;It is an incredible irony that the Soviet delegation should come here and hold forth about American and British policy and aims and motivations and should say hardly one word about Soviet policy, aims and motivations. I, for one, find the performance of the Soviet historians highly disillusioning.&quot;    The Cagliari discussions incidentally exposed another Yalta myth. The idea that Churchill at Yalta (and elsewhere) systematically pursued a harder line toward the Soviet Union than Roosevelt, observed Prof. Anthony Adamthwaite of Loughborough University in Britain, &quot;does not bear examination.&quot; The Declaration on Liberated Europe, the strongest anti-Soviet document produced at Yalta, was entirely an American initiative.    A session was devoted to the Far Eastern agreements. These have been much criticized in the U.S. on the grounds that it was unnecessary to pay Stalin so high a price to enter a war he could not have been kept out of and that it was immoral to give away Chinese interests without consulting China.    Such arguments did not impress the European scholars. Prof. Peter Lowe of the University of Manchester could not regard the concessions as &quot;excessive,&quot; at least not in light of the military situation as defined by the American Joint Chiefs of Staff. In any event, Prof. Lowe noted, the concessions had no great practical consequence, since they reverted to China within a decade after Yalta.    A professor from the University of Padua went further, noting that Roosevelt had obtained concessions too: especially Stalin's recognition of Chiang Kai-shek's Nationalist regime and of Chinese sovereignty in Manchuria, as well as Dairen as a free port instead of under Soviet control and the South Manchurian railroads under joint Soviet-Chinese management. The Far Eastern agreement, he concluded, was in the circumstances &quot;a great diplomatic achievement&quot; for Roosevelt.    The European scholars at Cagliari did not see Roosevelt as senile, appeasement-minded or ineffectual at Yalta. His energy level was low, but his defenses were not down, and he successfully attained the American diplomatic objectives: getting the United Nations under way before the end of the war; assuring Soviet entry into the war against Japan on terms that could strengthen the Nationalist regime in China; thwarting Stalin's campaign for immediate decisions in Germany and for the recognition of the Lublin government in Poland; laying down standards for the future of Eastern Europe.    The European scholars generally agreed that the West had done the best it could at Yalta. In the end, no form of words on paper could overcome the hard fact that the occupying forces had the power in the areas where their arms were present. The Big Three departed from Yalta in hope. Disillusion rapidly followed, whether because East and West interpreted the agreements differently or because Stalin never meant to keep them.    A document has recently come to light providing new evidence of FDR's post-Yalta mood. A fortnight after his return, he called in Leon Henderson, the New Deal economist who died the other day. Henderson had recently returned from a survey in Europe of allied planning for the occupation of Germany, and Roosevelt intended to appoint him American economic chief for Germany after surrender.    Roosevelt began, as Henderson recorded the meeting, by saying, &quot;We ought not do too much in advance.&quot; Henderson disagreed, arguing for getting some things settled in advance, like coal and transportation. FDR was skeptical. &quot;He said the British, French and ourselves would abide by agreement but the Russians would do to suit themselves! I remembered the protocols. He said 'yes' -- on protocols, on anything that would show, but anywhere else, they would go their own way.&quot;    After Yalta, they went their own way. Let us hope that, under more enlightened leadership today, the Russians may begin to find a way back to the Yalta agreements 40 years later.    ---   Mr. Schlesinger is Albert Schweitzer professor of the humanities at the City University of New York and a winner of Pulitzer Prizes in history and biography. </TEXT></DOC>