<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881018-0121 </DOCNO><HL> A Dangerous Concentration of Vital Minerals </HL><AUTHOR> Stansfield Turner </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> AFRIC DBRSY </CO><IN> PCS MIN TNM </IN><TEXT>   The U.S. has a stake in an international industrial power play being engineered by the secretive South African magnate Harry F. Oppenheimer. Mr. Oppenheimer shields his intricate industrial empire, Oppenheimer Group, as much as possible from outside scrutiny, but it is well known that it controls the West's largest producers of gold and platinum (certified by the State Department as a strategic mineral). It is now making a hostile bid for the second largest producer of gold and strategic minerals, Consolidated Gold Fields PLC of Britain. The resulting aggregation of control over mining and refining by one conglomerate would be ominous, especially when that conglomerate is in a nation with the potential for instability of South Africa.    More than half the assets of Consolidated Gold Fields are in the U.S. Several years ago, I served as an adviser to those investments. They included mining for gold; feedstock for titanium (which is used in jet aircraft, satellites and submarines); zircon (which is used in nuclear power plants); and several other exotic minerals. I question whether it could possibly benefit the U.S. to have these activities shift from British to South African hands.    An even more serious threat to the U.S. is the world-wide concentration of control over vital mineral resources that Oppenheimer Group would acquire. The acquisition of Consolidated Gold Fields would concentrate in South African hands nearly one-third of the Western world's supply of gold (including the largest gold producer in the U.S.), more than half of the principal titanium feedstocks, two-thirds of the zircon, and more than half of the platinum. Given the control exercised over South African corporations by the government of South Africa, this may well be an astute strategy to reduce the risk of firm U.S. intervention if the South African government continues to be adamant on apartheid.    With the concentration of control over vital minerals that this merger would create, there would always be the threat of deliberate shortages in supply at critical moments. (We should not forget that during World War II, the DeBeers diamond-mining company that is part of the Oppenheimer empire refused to sell the U.S. a large quantity of industrial diamonds for war production.) The more subtle approach the U.S. would have to worry about, though, is that of manipulating prices of scarce minerals. By driving up the price of gold, Mr. Oppenheimer at the behest of the South African government could create inflationary pressures in the West and interfere in world currencies, trading patterns and overall economic stability.    South Africa might not even have to move at all in the minerals markets. Just knowing that this leverage exists might constrain the U.S. in its dealings with South Africa. This could easily hamper U.S. efforts to end apartheid or to play a constructive role if and when apartheid drives South Africa into crisis. From the viewpoint of the white-dominated South African government, Oppenheimer control of Consolidated Gold Fields could be a very useful insurance policy against a very uncertain future.    It is fortunate that an amendment Congress passed recently to the Defense Production Act of 1950 offers the U.S. an opportunity to protect its interests at little cost. This amendment authorizes the president to investigate the effects on national security of any mergers, acquisitions or takeovers that could result in foreign control of people engaged in interstate commerce in the U.S. If the president finds that the Oppenheimer proposal imperils American security, he may suspend or prohibit the transfer of control of the U.S. assets involved in the transaction. The act also lets the president enjoin the transfer of American assets until he has completed his review.    President Reagan should exercise his authority in this case. That would give the U.S. some breathing space to review the situation dispassionately. When America's ability to pursue its own foreign policy is at stake, prudence seems in order.    ---   Mr. Turner, a retired admiral, was director of the CIA, 1977-81. </TEXT></DOC>