<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880105-0111 </DOCNO><HL> Business World: Technology Fosters More Corporate 'Togetherness' </HL><AUTHOR> George Melloan </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TXN </CO><TEXT>   For Jerry R. Junkins, chief executive officer of Texas Instruments Inc., having TI engineers working at other companies will be the &quot;ideal situation&quot; of the future.    The Dallas-based electronics company still will write the paychecks. But it wants more of its engineers engaged directly with customer scientists and engineers in the design and development of products that use semiconductors and other components made by TI.    Other major electronics companies around the world no doubt have similar goals. As a result, they likely will become more tightly interlaced at the technological level while at the same time competing in the marketplace. Critics of this trend toward corporate &quot;alliances&quot; might worry about the antitrust implications. But given the direction electronics technology is taking, alliances seem both inevitable and necessary if there is to be continued innovation and advancement.    &quot;More of our revenues will come from services, systems, software,&quot; says Mr. Junkins. &quot;Silicon is the vehicle, but as our products become more customized and more customer-specific, the very nature of that begins to drive you into a closer relationship with your primary customers. They will have fewer vendors because the cost of interfacing with vendors in the future will go up.    &quot;You've got to interface with design automation, you've got to interface with specific processing, you've got to interface with the enmeshment of software and with service and handbooks and so on.&quot;    This interlinked industry will become very large indeed. Mr. Junkins expects the world semiconductor market in the mid-1990s to be three times as large as the $26 billion of 1986. World-wide sales of all electronics equipment will total some $950 billion by then, he predicts, making electronics one of the world's four largest industries. By the 21st Century, it could become the largest industry in the world.    But as TI moves toward more direct involvement in the engineering of its customers' products it faces a major organizational problem. On a table near Mr. Junkins's desk are 10 thick volumes produced out of the company's forward planning process. They address how to organize a world-wide company with many different profit centers so that it brings all its resources to bear on the needs of each customer. That may sound easy, but it isn't at TI or any other larger organization.    &quot;Very candidly, we look more like multiple companies than a single company, and we're taking some steps to look at that and look at that critically so that we optimize ourselves for a single customer rather than trying to get him to optimize for us. We've got to maintain sharp project orientation so that people have a singular product family to manage but at the same time interface with a customer in a broad range across the company.    &quot;The world is changing. Defining the customer today is a good bit more difficult. Is it a company, or is it something within a company or is it something in a whole business area -- telecommunications, computers or whatever else?&quot;    TI may invent something equivalent to the account supervisors that ad agencies and other service companies use in their customer relations. These executives will then draw on TI's internal communications network to keep track of what customers need and what TI can offer. Communications software will have to be further developed to make the system work.    TI has a good start, however. It already is one of the world's most heavily &quot;networked&quot; companies, with 30,000 to 40,000 computer terminals in 40 countries, linked together through space satellite data transmission. That's roughly one terminal for every two employees. The system incorporates some 400 minicomputers and 41 mainframes, supporting everything from product design to marketing.    The forces that are pushing the company could yield greater operating efficiencies along with more rapid technological development. &quot;You've got a lot more knowledge of what's going on with your customer and it takes up a lot of slack that we've seen in the past. We liquidated inventory in our customers' houses for two years after the big boom in 1984. Much of it was shipped well in advance of any perceived demand. I don't think you're going to see that in the future. You'll have an electronic linkage with the customer so he can tap in and look at your own inventory situation and place orders directly. So you've got a very tight company.&quot;    But TI also observes greater sophistication in the way customers shop the world for electronic components. &quot;You must be moving in the direction of being able to take care of a customer wherever in the world he is going to exist. That's true of our U.S. customers, true of our European customers. It's true of our Japanese customers. Many of them are beginning to make investments outside Japan. We have an excellent relationship with them in Japan. They are looking for our management there through management here to begin to make commmitments that they will be serviced and supplied around the world.    &quot;We've seen people in the last several years take their purchasing organizations to the Far East in order to buy products or take some assembly operations out there in order to take advantage of the low-cost labor. Many of the barriers in terms of pricing are falling. There used to be many significant gradients between one part of the world and another in terms of pricing. Now you've got people who are sophisticated enough that they've got purchasing operations looking at something in Singapore or looking at something in Japan or in Europe or here.&quot;    TI maintains what it calls &quot;ASIC&quot; design centers around the world. ASIC stands for Application Specific Integrated Circuits. This simply means designing more and more of what the product is designed to accomplish into the semiconductor device itself. This trend toward custom-designed chips necessarily fosters a closer relationship between chip maker and customer.    TI also is moving deeper into computer software. It is marketing a new &quot;Information Engineering Facility,&quot; its version of what the computer industry refers to as CASE, or computer-assisted software engineering. IEF allows engineers to work out designs with some relatively simple diagrams and then automatically program them into computer language. That sharply reduces engineering development time and also cuts the time later consumed modifying and upgrading design software. It moves toward the development of &quot;expert&quot; systems, which ultimately will enable anyone with special expertise to easily translate that knowledge into computer software, thereby making it widely available and preserving it for all time. The work of experts in any field, whether it be quantum physics or bicycle racing, thus can become greatly leveraged, expanding the world's capacity to generate still more innovation.    This trend &quot;offers tremendous potential,&quot; says Mr. Junkins. &quot;If you use some Augustine's Law ideology, you can make a projection that says eventually everyone turns into a software guru.&quot;    In other words, the age-old process of discovery will expand. Clearly, part of that process will be new ways of organizing corporations and intercorporate relationships to facilitate the creation of new products and services. </TEXT></DOC>