<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880613-0029 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   FRANCE'S SOCIALISTS FAILED to win a majority in the National Assembly.    Following the final round of French parliamentary elections, computer projections showed that neither President Mitterrand's Socialist Party nor the union of center-right parties won a clear majority in the 577-seat assembly. Voter turnout was low. With results for nearly all seats declared, the projections gave both the Socialists and the center-right union about 275 seats. The Communist Party won about 27 seats, and the extreme right-wing National Front Party won just one. A party would need 289 seats for an absolute majority.    Despite the political uncertainty caused by the results, Mitterrand is expected to be able to implement his moderate economic and social program.    ---   South Korean students clashed with police in Seoul during a funeral march for a student who committed suicide last week. The students, shouting anti-government and anti-U.S. slogans, tried to storm the ruling party's headquarters. On Friday, the government blocked a march by protesters demanding reunification with North Korea.    ---   Dukakis called Reagan's anti-drug policy &quot;chaos,&quot; and pledged a tough program to the nation's mayors. Jackson, meanwhile, reiterated that he deserves serious consideration as the Democrats' vice presidential choice, but said he doesn't &quot;want to push&quot; Dukakis into making an offer. Republican Bush urged a strong civil-rights agenda.    Democratic strategists worked on a party platform designed to counter Republican charges that the party is soft on defense and eager to raise taxes. The 16-member drafting committee's effort is being conducted at a meeting, which began Friday, in Michigan.    ---   House Speaker Wright said he is &quot;extremely confident&quot; of being cleared by the House ethics panel, which voted Friday to study whether the Texas Democrat violated conflict-of-interest rules in his financial dealings. It appears that he will still be under investigation during next month's Democratic convention.    ---   The World Health Organization said about 150,000 people will develop AIDS this year, doubling the number of cases of the disease world-wide since the epidemic began in the 1970s. The remarks came at the opening of an international AIDS forum in Stockholm. The conference isn't expected to yield breakthroughs.    ---   Former White House aide North proposed that Church of England envoy Terry Waite be used to lure Libya's Gadhafi to his probable death in 1986 U.S. air strikes. The proposal, which would have violated U.S. law, was advanced to Reagan's crisis planning group, but never carried out, according to a new book.    ---   Israel has tentatively agreed to let Norway inspect heavy water that apparently has been used in a nuclear reactor at Dimona. Norway sold the 20 metric tons of heavy water, which can be used to make plutonium, in 1959 under an accord giving it the right to make sure Israel used it &quot;for peaceful purposes.&quot;    ---   Israeli firefighters battled dozens of blazes across the Israeli countryside, and officials in Tel Aviv blamed the fires on Arab arsonists. Near the West Bank town of Jericho, an Israeli bus driver shot and killed a Palestinian teen-ager. The youth reportedly was involved in stoning the bus.    ---   Moscow and East Berlin have requested diplomatic relations with the 12-nation European Community, and the Soviet Union and its East European allies hope the establishment of such ties will lead to stronger economic ties and easier access to Western technology.    ---   An Argentine airliner crashed in a heavy fog near the northeastern city of Posadas, and all 22 people aboard were killed, officials of the domestic carrier Austral said. The DC-9 jetliner was on a flight from Buenos Aires. Authorities said the cause of the crash wasn't immediately known.    ---   China's government called for tighter discipline and more ideological indoctrination among students after a week of political agitation at Beijing University, according to the People's Daily. The students had demanded democracy and an end to government bureaucracy and corruption.    ---   Philippine troops were placed on nationwide alert as President Aquino prepared to leave today for a six-day official visit to Europe. Over the weekend, former soldiers loyal to ousted leader Marcos raided a military armory in a failed effort to free colleagues jailed for past coup attempts.    ---   Died: Louis L'Amour, 80, Western novelist, Friday, in Los Angeles, of cancer. . . . Giuseppe Saragat, 89, ex-president of Italy, Saturday, in Rome, of a heart ailment. </TEXT></DOC>