<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870605-0176 </DOCNO><HL> Japan Sets DatesFor MeasuresFreeing Markets---Official Timetable CoversThe Role of ForeignersIn Stock, Bond Dealings---By Doug TsuruokaSpecial to The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN FORGNMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)STOCK INDEXES (NDX) </IN><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Japan's Finance Ministry released a timetable for liberalizing the country's financial and capital markets and opening them to foreign participation.    The timetable covers the admission of more foreign firms to full membership on the Tokyo Stock Exchange, new auction and underwriting procedures for foreign participation in government bond issues, and other areas. Many of the measures had been expected, but yesterday's announcement contained the first official description of when they are expected to take effect.    The timetable's release followed a decision by the Finance Ministry on Wednesday that essentially assured four U.S. bank-holding companies and six other foreign institutions that their bids to operate securities units in Tokyo will be approved. The U.S. has been pressing Japan to grant U.S. firms the same access to Tokyo markets that Japanese firms get in New York.    Toyoo Gyohten, the ministry's vice minister for international affairs, said an outline of the timetable recently was presented to U.S. officials.    Besides the stock exchange and the bond market, the timetable also covers the lowering of minimum deposits on money-market certificates; the establishment of a domestic commercial-paper market; the expansion of Japan's financial-futures markets; the further easing of restrictions on business operations by financial institutions; the improvement of capital-market practices; the improvement of capital requirements and oversight of banks; and the clarification of different financial institutions' roles.    The ministry said the Tokyo Stock Exchange is preparing &quot;to increase the number of its membership so that new members can be determined by the end of the year.&quot; According to an exchange official, however, the exact number of new members hasn't yet been determined by the exchange.    Mr. Gyohten previously told British officials that the exchange will make a decision on new foreign members in December, so that they could, theoretically, start trading by next May.    While emphasizing that the actual decision is the exchange's, Mr. Gyohten said: &quot;The Ministry of Finance hopes that the wishes of foreign securities firms will be satisfied to the largest extent possible.&quot;    Regarding foreign participation in government bond issues, the ministry said it will start auctioning its 20-year bonds this fall. Currently, the bonds are issued through a syndicate tightly controlled by Japanese banks and securities firms. At the same time, the ministry will implement a limited &quot;auction method of underwriting amount&quot; for the more important 10-year bonds.    That will allow foreign firms to underwrite about 20% of such issues. The Japanese bond syndicate, on the other hand, will be allowed to underwrite 80%.    Mr. Gyohten also promised further efforts to expand the auction system for foreign involvement in Japanese government bonds, based on demand.    --Concerning money-market certificates, the ministry said the minimum denomination on them will be lowered in October to 10 million yen ($69,871) from 20 million yen currently. And the minimum maturity on large-denomination time deposits will be shortened to one month.    --In the short-term financial markets, the ministry stated its support for the establishment of a domestic commercial paper market to increase the fund-raising options of corporations inside Japan. A specific date wasn't given.    The ministry said the Bank of Japan will also be asked to undertake a further &quot;improvement and expansion&quot; of the interbank money market to meet growing needs.    --Officials said they are trying to increase the participation of Japanese investors in overseas financial-futures markets and are seeking to expand the development of Japan's domestic financial-futures market. The ministry said the move to full-fledged stock-index futures and securities options trading could come next year.    --In Japan's capital markets, the ministry said it will spur development of the corporate-bond primary market next month by introducing a new rating system for domestically issued bonds.    --Increased use of electronic banking and the creation of new financial products and services will be emphasized under plans to ease curbs on business operations by financial institutions.    --On improving oversight and capital adequacy of Japanese banks, Mr. Gyohten said ministry representatives have been meeting with counterparts in Britain and the U.S. since last year to discuss those issues.    --With regard to technical distinctions between financial institutions, such as long-term and short-term credit banking institutions, as well as trust banks versus other banks, the ministry said its committee on financial system research is currently analyzing different issues and will attempt to identify problems by the end of the year. Mr. Gyohten, however, said the government isn't close to breaching remaining distinctions between Japanese banks and securities companies. </TEXT></DOC>