<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870617-0080 </DOCNO><HL> REAL ESTATE:Drugs, Inadequate Skills CitedAs Construction Deaths Rise---By William Celis IIIStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABORREAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)LABOR DEPARTMENT (LBR)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   IN APRIL, a building under construction in Bridgeport, Conn., collapsed, killing 28 workers in the country's worst construction accident in nine years. A few weeks later, a crane being dismantled at a Dallas building site tumbled, killing two workers and seriously injuring a third. And last month, a crane collapsed at a New Orleans drainage-ditch project. Two workers were killed.    The accidents, all still under investigation by federal authorities, underscore a disturbing trend: Construction-related fatalities, which were on the decline early in the decade, are on the rise. The Bureau of Labor Statistics says that in 1985, the latest year for which complete figures are available, the building industry recorded 30.8 deaths for every 100,000 workers, the highest of any industry that year, compared with the national rate of 6.2 deaths. A year earlier, the building industry reported 22.4 deaths for every 100,000 workers. Many contractors believe that when 1986 figures are out, they will show a fatality rate equal to or exceeding the previous year.    Explanations for the higher level of fatalities vary, depending on the source. Some say the growing use of drugs on the job is a major factor; the hiring of more inexperienced workers is frequently cited. And some union groups put the blame on weak enforcement of federal safety laws by the Occupational Safety and Health Administration.    NOT IN DISPUTE is the fact that the increase in fatalities has occurred despite efforts to improve existing safety programs and to confront the drug-use problem. Last year, the Associated General Contractors, a Washington, D.C., trade group with 32,500 contractors as members, initiated traveling safety programs that set up at construction sites during lunch breaks. The program now has a long waiting list. The trade group also is advocating surprise site safety inspections rather than scheduled ones.    Companies, too, have been making moves to head off potential problems. Eighteen months ago, for example, Butler Construction Co., Kansas City, Mo., began testing new workers for drugs. &quot;We certainly aren't immune from society's problems. Drug abuse is a problem for us,&quot; says Donald Pratt, Butler's president.    Ronald Boehning, a 27-year veteran of New York City construction work, however, isn't so sure that drugs are the major problem though he says, &quot;Every now and then you get a whiff of marijuana at a site.&quot; He thinks that inexperience among workers is a greater risk.    Indeed, a fundamental shift in the migration of construction workers has altered local job markets. As recently as five years ago, contractors and labor officials say, highly skilled workers followed construction work across the country, but constant relocations have become costly. Many contractors thus say they now have little choice but to draw from the local work force, which generally isn't as experienced.    Weak enforcement of safety regulations, however, is perhaps the most serious problem, some labor groups belive. &quot;OSHA has the tools to work with . . . but they choose not to go out and enforce,&quot; asserts Jim E. Lapping, director of safety and health programs for the building and construction trade department of the AFL-CIO.    For its part, OSHA says there are limits to what it can do. With its 1,200 inspectors, a spokesman says, the agency has the manpower to inspect only 2% of the country's six million work places annually. In addition, OSHA spokesmen and field representatives assert that penalties the agency recommends often are reduced through appeals by companies. Without a stronger threat, some contractors say, companies are sometimes willing to ignore a safety issue in order to complete a job.    ---   Protection for Mortgage Commitments    Federal legislation recently introduced would protect consumers from losing mortgage interest-rate commitments they receive from lenders. Some lenders, however, claim the legislation would unfairly penalize them and could increase the cost of a home loan.    Sponsored by Rep. Dean Gallo (R., N.J.) and Sen. William Proxmire (R., Wis.), the mortgage-commitment bill is designed to protect home buyers from being penalized for delays that prevent lenders from processing loans in the specified time, generally 30 to 45 days.    In recent months, consumers rushed to either buy or refinance as mortgage rates began climbing. That put pressure on lenders, many of whom weren't able to process loans during the specified time. As a result, many people were forced to resubmit applications, usually at higher rates.    Minnesota already has a law that protects consumers from such occurrences. Similar laws take effect July 1 in Maryland and Connecticut. Under the Gallo-Proxmire bill, lenders would be bound to honor the mortgage-rate commitments they quote despite what happens to interest rates, or face a $10,000 fine.    But the Mortgage Bankers Association asserts that the bill unfairly singles out lenders for a problem often created by the market. Burton Wood, legislative counsel for the 2,700-member MBA, says the bill in its present form could, for instance, force lenders to hedge against market volatility by quoting higher mortgage interest rates. Says Mr. Wood: &quot;The public perception is that lenders are in control, and that's just not the case.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>