<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870817-0066 </DOCNO><HL> Presidential Hopefuls Focus on Family---By Karlyn Keene</HL><DD> 08/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   In the 1980 campaign debates, President Carter spoke about his daughter, Amy, to highlight his concerns about nuclear war. Many observers thought that using his daughter to conjure up a potentially trigger-happy presidential opponent was a cynical ploy. It wasn't the first time a politician had used a child as a political prop, and it surely won't be the last.    But politicians most often talk about children to describe their aspirations for the country. Walter Mondale's charge that Reagan policies were &quot;mortgaging our children's future to the deficit&quot; was intended to score a political hit, but it was also a reminder of how central children are to hopes about the future.    The candidates in campaign '88 are using children differently. Republicans and Democrats are talking about children as a policy issue, not as their progeny; substantively, rather than symbolically or sentimentally. Some examples of this approach follow:    --Sen. Joseph Biden (D., Del.) has delivered a major policy statement, Save the Children. Among other proposals, Sen. Biden plans to put a day-care center in the White House complex. National service, a reborn political theme for the Democrats, plays a role here.    --While Democrat Bruce Babbitt was governor of Arizona, he gave an entire State of the State address about children's issues. The ideas in that 1985 address are reflected in his speeches.    --Sen. Robert Dole (R., Kan.) stresses his efforts to reverse administration cuts in children's health and nutrition programs.    --Rep. Richard Gephardt (D., Mo.) says, &quot;We have to have a national strategy on day care.&quot;    --Tipper Gore, wife of candidate Albert Gore, has written &quot;Raising PG Kids in an X-Rated Society,&quot; which stresses parental involvement. Her 17-city book tour may raise the campaign profile of her husband, a Democratic senator from Tennessee.    --Rep. Jack Kemp (R., N.Y.) has called for efforts to promote adoption, and for &quot;fair treatment for those who forgo added income to provide maternal child care.&quot;    --George Bush talks about helping a dyslexic child in a discussion of education's role in making America competitive.    --Rep. Patricia Schroeder (D., Colo.) has said -- according to columnist Ellen Goodman -- that while all of the men in the race are talking about the family issue, she has shown leadership on it.    There are several reasons for the emergence of family as a political issue. The demographic explanation has two components. The first is generational politics -- that is, the emergence of a significant generational voting bloc, the baby boomers. This year, a solid majority of the electorate will be under the age of 45. The baby-boom group is now in peak childbearing years. As Americans age, they develop more of a stake in society, particularly with the stabilizing influences of marriages, mortgages and kids. They are more likely to vote. The &quot;me&quot; generation is becoming the &quot;we&quot; generation.    For most of this group, both parents will be working, and concerns about their own children are central. Seventy-five percent of 22- to 40-year-olds told Gallup interviewers they would be less able than their parents to be home with young children.    Eight of this year's potential and announced candidates have children who are teen-agers. Five have younger children. At least three of the candidates have spouses who work at full-time jobs. These candidates' families represent the new norm, as the traditional family gives way to one where husband and wife work and someone else takes care of the children. Issues like parental leave can become the centerpiece of a campaign.    The other demographic component is heightened concern about the well-being of all children. Rep. Schroeder's words notwithstanding, the issue does not belong to any single politician. Concern and activism come from both left and right -- responses to concerns about the welfare of children in poor or near-poor families, drug abuse, and teen pregnancies. Less apparent, but no less real, is parental indifference.    Sen. Biden describes the expectations of a young person growing up in a ghetto in Chicago or New York: &quot;One out of 10 of your eighth-grade friends will be pregnant. Most of them will have abortions. . . . There will be more children selling and using drugs than there will be students at graduation. . . . It will be more likely that you will grow up to contract AIDS than grow up to attend a four-year college.&quot;    Sen. Joe Biden, meet the Rev. Jerry Falwell. The diagnosis is the same. Sen. Biden refers to &quot;child{ren} adrift in a so-called Opportunity Society.&quot; Mr. Falwell might describe them as adrift in the &quot;Great Society,&quot; where huge sums of money have been spent with mixed results. No matter what is to blame, there are discouraging demographic realities for some children. According to demographer Karl Zinsmeister, &quot;Before they reach their 18th birthday, about one-third of the children born today will spend time below the poverty level.&quot;    Another reason the issue has emerged is weaknesses both parties have. &quot;San Francisco Democrats&quot; was a term used by Jeane Kirkpatrick to remind voters of some Democrats' flirtation with alternative life styles and the anything-goes mood of the late-1960s. Especially after the Gary Hart scandal, Democrats need to remind Americans that they, too, care about traditional family values, and children are a way to do this.    Republicans have a weakness, too. When Jeane Kirkpatrick was a Democrat, she wrote an essay about why she hadn't become a Republican. She cited &quot;doubt that Republicans care enough about the whole, including those who are unable to look out for themselves.&quot; Reagan-era Republicans -- and by extension GOP candidates -- have been branded as too self-interested. Talking about children, particularly those who are poor, addresses a weakness they have, too.    A final reason for the emergence of family as a political issue is the need for candidates to define their vision. Children provide distinctive ways for both parties to do this. Families are our most precious communities -- refuges against the outside world and the government.    Democrats are using the family analogy to talk about national community as a way of defining their vision. Sen. Biden talks about &quot;A Call for a New Spirit of Community in America&quot;; New York Gov. Mario Cuomo, about the nation as a family. They are using community to invoke a national purpose, to get us all pulling together again, with the federal government as the engine of that progress. National service is a way of making national community happen. Gary Hart had a literacy corps. Sen. Biden has a National Community Service Corps.    The Republican vision -- articulated by some but not all the candidates today -- is different. Ronald Reagan gave expression to it in his 1980 convention speech, where he talked about family, neighborhood and community -- local community -- as the engines that drive the country. Local communities will decide what's needed, and local groups will work to solve problems they know best. Republicans are betting that Americans will prefer &quot;Mom and Pop&quot; to Big Brother.    It is somewhat ironic that concern about children should become an issue at a time when fertility rates are low and the average family size is smaller than at any time in recent history. Single and divorced parents and many parents in intact families are often working, of course, and this is a partial explanation. Once upon a time, quantity time with children was quality time, but many families don't have (or make) much time together anymore. The average woman will soon spend more time caring for an elderly parent (18 years) than she will raising children (17 years).    It is also surprising that family is emerging as an issue just as there seems to be general agreement on welfare concepts to help families when they need it, and then help them off the welfare rolls. Another explanation may be that the only way for Democrats to sell major new federal spending programs these days is to say they are for children.    Will children's issues help Democrats capitalize on generational themes? It's doubtful. Too much has been made of generational politics. The baby boom is extraordinarily diverse, and a single appeal to it certainly won't work. An appeal to an identifiable part of the group -- baby boomers with children -- might. Will children's issues help Republicans broaden their support, based in part on the GOP's identification with traditional values? Possibly, but not if Democrats have learned the lessons of the Hart scandal. It may not be Republicans or Democrats who benefit from this discussion. It may be the children themselves.    ---   Ms. Keene is managing editor of Public Opinion magazine and a resident fellow at the American Enterprise Institute. </TEXT></DOC>