<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861218-0135 </DOCNO><HL> America's Labor Federation Turns 100---Leaders Must Let Fresh Air In---By Herman Benson</HL><DD> 12/18/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR </IN><TEXT>   The labor movement's troubles are so acute that according to A.H. Raskin, the former labor union editor of the New York Times, the top echelons are imbued with &quot;a sense of urgency bordering on desperation.&quot; The way to bring unions back from the brink is for their leaders to become more accountable to the rank-and-file membership and to enforce the union codes of ethics against any corrupt officials or members in their midst.    The more familiar admonitions of many union militants -- organize the unorganized, get out and fight -- seem hardly adequate today. The trouble with too many organized-labor leaders is that they refuse to recognize any problems; or, if they do, they are not at all disturbed. Guaranteed reelection until retirement, supported by an internal patronage machine, and drawing upper-class salaries and expenses, they are quite comfortable, thank you.    But that kind of myopia is not characteristic of all, and certainly not Tom Donahue, the secretary-treasurer of the AFL-CIO. As chairman of its Committee on the Evolution of Work, he submitted a report last year entitled &quot;The Changing Situation of Workers and Their Unions,&quot; a statement designed to reorient organized labor at a time &quot;when unions find themselves behind the pace of change.&quot;    The report was dutifully adopted by the AFL-CIO executive council. Its specific recommendations are a compendium of old-fashioned remedies, snappy gimmicks and some genuinely new strategies.    The old remedies include training organizers, merging small unions, talking to the media and the greater use of modern bookkeeping. The gimmicks are such things as low-interest credit cards. The new ideas involve use of bargaining demands tailored to specific groups of workers such as white-collar professionals, new categories for those not in bargaining units and the provision of services (such as counseling) to nonmembers.    AFL-CIO President Lane Kirkland insists that the recommendations are being implemented promptly. Perhaps. But are they enough?    The real significance of the report is its recognition that organized labor must convince people of the justice of its cause. It hopes to change the way the public and nonunion workers &quot;perceive&quot; the labor movement; and it wants to encourage union members to rebuild their organizations. It is precisely this aspect of the report that eludes most AFL-CIO leaders. They can try to change their image through public relations and television ads or they can make real changes in how the labor movement conducts itself. The AFL-CIO clearly wants to alter the &quot;perceptions&quot; without changing the reality. That is the central weakness of the report.    The report notes that &quot;the labor movement must demonstrate . . . that unions are democratic institutions controlled by their members and . . . we have not been sufficiently successful on {this} score.&quot; The reason is that in whole sections of the labor movement, the democratic rights of members are repressed. In the construction trades, for example, the blacklisting of dissidents, usually by union officials in collusion with employers, is a fact of life. Court records show that the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, in at least 705 cases between 1970 and 1980, fined, suspended or expelled members in violation of federal law. Those who ran for office and criticized incumbents were routinely disciplined for &quot;slander.&quot;    It is futile to try to convince people that unions are controlled by their members unless measures are adopted to strengthen democracy inside the labor movement. So far, the AFL-CIO has not taken a single small step in this direction. The George Meany Center for Labor Studies will offer 37 courses during its first semester next year; not one deals with the rights of members inside their own unions. In addition, none of the courses uses the Ethical Practices Codes of the AFL-CIO.    Within the past two years, two members of the AFL-CIO Executive Council, Ed Hanley, president of the Hotel and Restaurant Employees Union, and Angelo Fosco, president of the Laborers' Union, took the Fifth Amendment before federal government commissions investigating their alleged connections with organized crime. Their actions clearly violated the Ethical Practices Codes: &quot;If a trade union official decides to invoke the Fifth Amendment for his personal protection and to avoid scrutiny by proper legislative committees . . . he has no right to continue to hold office in his union.&quot; The two presidents remain on the executive council. By not enforcing its own codes, the AFL-CIO is doing nothing to protect the democratic rights of its own members or to eradicate corruption from its ranks. This makes it extremely difficult for the AFL-CIO to convince union members and the public that it remains a potent force for democracy and decency.    So the immediate future for organized labor is gloomy. But in the wings is a new generation of younger, more educated union members, some still in the rank and file, but others already experienced leaders of union locals. They plan to shake up the status quo. In November, more than 800 came to Detroit, at their own expense, to discuss new policies and programs for the labor movement. In October, 400 union activists went to Atlanta for the annual convention of Teamsters for a Democratic Union, the reform group battling against corruption in the Teamsters union.    The labor movement has been weakened, but it still remains a mighty social force. Its problem now is a sluggish inability to adapt to change. But those who expect its demise, or even hope for it, are likely to be disappointed.    It is as unlikely that the labor movement, because of its current travails, will sink into oblivion as it is that American democracy, because of its current scandals, will be supplanted by a dictatorship. Democracy and free trade unionism are inseparable Siamese twins. Unionism cannot survive except in democracies; and, in a society of employees, democracy cannot survive without free labor unions. That truth transcends all the troubles that afflict organized labor on this anniversary.    ---   Mr. Benson is executive director of the Association for Union Democracy in New York. A former toolmaker and machinist, he was a shop steward in a Detroit local of the United Rubber Workers. </TEXT></DOC>