<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880427-0013 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88: Dukakis Wins Big in Pennsylvania, Continuing March to Nomination --- Jackson Trails Far Behind Among Most Segments Of Democratic Voters </HL><AUTHOR> David Shribman and Rich Jaroslovsky (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   Gov. Michael Dukakis, continuing his march to the Democratic presidential nomination, scored an overwhelming victory in the Pennsylvania primary.    With more than half the vote in, according to NBC News, Mr. Dukakis was winning close to 70%, and Jesse Jackson a little under 30%.    A Dukakis victory was a foregone conclusion, but its sweeping scope was impressive. An NBC election-day survey showed Mr. Dukakis with a commanding edge in almost every segment of the Democratic electorate -- rich and poor, blue-collar and white-collar, Protestant, Catholic and Jewish. Mr. Jackson won support only in black pockets of the state and was left far behind in the distribution of delegates.    Dukakis strategists hope their candidate's substantial victory in Pennsylvania, following a decisive win last week in New York, will hasten the process of swaying uncommitted delegates and party leaders and add to the governor's momentum, helping him to wrap up the nomination by the time the primaries end June 7. Mr. Dukakis, who has won every major contest in the past month, now has about 1,250 of the 2,081 delegates required for nomination.    The NBC survey found voters more accepting of and enthusiastic about Mr. Dukakis as the party's standard-bearer than they were in previous contests. Even among those who voted for Mr. Jackson, his last remaining rival, a plurality view Mr. Dukakis favorably and believe he will win the nomination.    &quot;Now we're in a process where voters throughout the party, black and white, are coming to believe that Dukakis is the nominee,&quot; said Paul Maslin, a Democratic political pollster who worked for the presidential campaign of Sen. Paul Simon of Illinois. &quot;We're in the political equivalent of a big Greek dance where everybody's getting in file.&quot;    Mr. Jackson led only among black voters, who, as in previous contests, gave him in excess of 90% of their votes. He carried Philadelphia, according to NBC.    Meanwhile, Vice President George Bush formally clinched the Republican presidential nomination by winning the Pennsylvania primary and exceeding the 1,139 minimum of delegates he needed. His remaining challenger, former Christian broadcaster Pat Robertson, said he wants to meet with Mr. Bush to &quot;discuss ways that I and my supporters might be helpful.&quot;    The Massachusetts governor's strong showing in Pennsylvania augurs well for his prospects in the fall. Pennsylvania -- industrial and traditionally Democratic -- is the sort of state Mr. Dukakis must capture if he is to prevail in the fall election.    Mr. Jackson's limited prospects in Pennsylvania were hurt further by a furor this week over his statement that he was willing to negotiate with terrorists &quot;if I could get (U.S.) hostages out.&quot; Later Mr. Jackson sought to clarify his position by saying that &quot;talk does not mean material concessions,&quot; but still said the U.S. &quot;must be willing to talk with anyone to free innocent American hostages.&quot;    The delegate surge that Mr. Dukakis rode last night was fueled in part by the peculiar rules governing Pennsylvania's primary and the 178 delegates at stake. These rules often mean that the winner in each of the 23 congressional districts takes all of the delegates -- numbering between three and nine -- available there. Shares of the 39 additional &quot;at-large&quot; delegates are given to candidates who cross the threshold of winning 15% of the delegates awarded in the districts.    The Democratic campaign now turns to Ohio and Indiana, where polls show Mr. Dukakis with 2-to-1 margins over Mr. Jackson leading up to Tuesday's primaries in the two states. Mr. Jackson is expected to win an easy victory in the District of Columbia, which also holds its primary Tuesday.    Mr. Dukakis is moving toward his party's nomination even faster than his most optimistic advisers had hoped, largely because no candidate other than Mr. Jackson was able to mount a formidable challenge. Rep. Richard Gephardt of Missouri showed signs of strength in the early months of the 1988 race, but his hopes perished after a poor Super Tuesday performance. Sen. Albert Gore of Tennessee, who suspended his campaign last week, had a strong showing in the South but couldn't sustain it, failing to win a major primary outside his native region.    Democratic leaders feared they couldn't avoid a protracted three-way contest, a primary season where no contender even approached the 2,081 delegates needed for nomination, and a brokered process to resolve the muddle. But that threat didn't materialize, and Mr. Dukakis is the beneficiary; the subsequent one-on-one contest with Mr. Jackson gives him the chance to nail down the nomination much earlier than once expected.    As the presumptive nominee who must worry about party unity in the fall campaign, Mr. Dukakis is likely to highlight his differences with Mr. Jackson even less in the remaining contests than in the past. Instead, the focus will be on Mr. Bush. &quot;The issues we used in Pennsylvania -- jobs, plant-closing legislation, the trade deficit -- are the things that will separate us from George Bush in the fall,&quot; said Susan Estrich, Dukakis campaign manager.    The NBC poll showed Mr. Dukakis with a strong lead among those Pennsylvania Democrats -- about half the total in the network's survey -- who believe the nation's economy will stay about the same in the next 12 months. But he also ran just about as well both among those who think the economy will get worse and among those who believe it will get better.    The poll found that three out of four Democratic voters in Pennsylvania have a favorable opinion of Gov. Dukakis. Even more telling, it found that Mr. Dukakis's supporters seem to be more enthusiastic about him than were supporters in some previous contests.    According to the survey, half of those who voted for the governor said they were generally pleased with the selection of candidates seeking their party's nomination. Just a week ago in New York, only a third of Mr. Dukakis's voters were pleased with the choice of candidates -- and the field at that time still included Sen. Gore.    The momentum Mr. Dukakis has gained since his New York triumph was also evident in the fact that eight in 10 Pennsylvania Democrats now believe he will be the party's nominee, compared with six in 10 who felt that way in New York.    But momentum wasn't the only explanation for Mr. Dukakis's victory in Pennsylvania. The Massachusetts governor was well-organized in the state, where Democrats must vote for delegates as well as indicate their presidential preference. Mr. Jackson, by contrast, filed full delegate slates in only a third of the state's districts. &quot;We have been clearly out-organized,&quot; said Willie Brown, speaker of the California Assembly and chairman of the Jackson campaign. &quot;We just don't have the resources.&quot;    Mr. Dukakis led by significant margins among all age categories. But, continuing a pattern that has been evident in several primaries, he ran especially well among older voters. While he won two-thirds of those 18 to 24 years old, he won eight in 10 of votes from people 50 to 64, and nine out of 10 votes cast by those 65 and over.    Mr. Dukakis also is being viewed more favorably by black voters, whose enthusiastic support he will need in November. In New York, where Mayor Ed Koch's strident attacks on Mr. Jackson helped create a campaign sharply polarized along racial lines, black voters viewed Mr. Dukakis unfavorably by a margin of 33% to 27%.    In Pennsylvania, however, the NBC survey showed that more than four in 10 blacks expressed a favorable view of the governor, while three in 10 viewed him unfavorably. Among whites, nearly eight in 10 viewed him positively, while fewer than one in 10 had a negative view.    One key to Mr. Jackson's difficulties in Pennsylvania was his inability to do better among white voters. In some earlier primaries, the civil rights leader was able to capture over 20% of white voters' ballots. In Pennsylvania, however, the NBC poll showed him winning only one in 10 white votes. That was far better than his showing in the 1984 primary in the state. That year, he captured just 4% of white votes. But his showing among whites this year wasn't nearly enough in a primary where only about one in seven voters is black.    According to the NBC News poll, about four in 10 white voters in Pennsylvania have an unfavorable opinion of Mr. Jackson. About one in three have a favorable opinion. And the survey found an even split among white voters on the question of whether Mr. Jackson's candidacy is helping or hurting the Democratic Party. </TEXT></DOC>