<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880628-0015 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   GORBACHEV PREPARED for today's opening of a Communist Party conference.    As delegates arrived in Moscow from each of the Soviet Union's 15 republics and from dozens of regions, the Kremlin leader is to deliver a lengthy report on the political and economic restructuring of the country. Delegates cautioned against expecting major policy changes during the general conference, the first of its kind in 47 years and only the 19th in Communist Party history. Officials said the conference will make Gorbachev's proposed changes irreversible.    The editor of the Communist Party newspaper Pravda said the Politburo engages in &quot;heated discussion&quot; that sometimes deadlock the 13-member group.    ---   The Supreme Court upheld the right of local governments to ban picketing in residential neighborhoods. The court said such bans don't necessarily violate free-speech rights. The ruling was a defeat for anti-abortion activists who were barred from picketing a doctor's home in a Milwaukee suburb.    ---   Michigan's governor signed into law a ban on for-profit surrogate mother contracts. The law bars payment to the natural mother beyond actual medical bills. Although four other states have enacted laws making surrogacy contracts unenforceable, the move makes Michigan the first state to establish pregnancy for pay as a crime.    ---   Two passenger trains crashed at a Paris station, killing at least 20 people and injuring dozens of others, police said. A number of passengers were trapped in the wreckage after a commuter train slammed head-on into a stationary one at an underground platform at the Gare de Lyon. Brake failure appeared to be the cause of the crash.    ---   France's transport minister discounted a systems failure as the cause of Sunday's crash of an Air France A-320 jetliner. His deputy said that the 150-seat, twin-engine plane was flying too low before the incident at an air show near the border with Switzerland. At least three people were killed.    ---   The president's AIDS panel presented its yearlong study to Reagan, who indicated that he is prepared to back efforts to bar bias against those with the disease, saying, &quot;We've got to get moving to give people hope.&quot; Reagan directed a top aide to review the 13-member commission's recommendations and develop a &quot;course of action.&quot;    ---   U.S. bishops acknowledged problems with a paper on AIDS that proposed to have the Roman Catholic Church teach about condoms as a way to stem transmission of AIDS. While the national conference of bishops decided to write a new statement in consultation with the Vatican, the prelates said the initial document would stand.    ---   Pope John Paul II concluded a five-day tour of Austria, meeting again with President Waldheim despite objections from Jewish leaders. According to ABC News, a plot by Turkish extremists to assassinate the pontiff was foiled by authorities in Vienna. The pope was wounded in a 1981 murder attempt by a Turkish terrorist in Rome.    ---   Reagan welcomed Turkish President Evren to the White House and praised the NATO ally for its commitment to democracy and its &quot;record of success&quot; in cooperating with the U.S. Evren, the first Turkish president to make a state visit to the U.S. in 21 years, was expected to seek greater Turkish access to U.S. markets.    ---   The Democratic Party named the state treasurer of Texas, Ann Richards, as keynote speaker for its national convention next month in Atlanta. Dukakis, meanwhile, scheduled a trip to Washington to talk with senators about a running mate. And Jackson, while praising the party's platform, vowed a floor fight over certain issues.    ---   Mexico released a Puerto Rican separatist who is wanted in the U.S. for terrorist activities. William Morales, who has been sentenced to more than 100 years in prison in the U.S. on weapons charges, was flown to Cuba upon his release from prison Friday, Mexican officials said. The U.S. Embassy said it was &quot;outraged&quot; by the move.    ---   Israeli Defense Minister Rabin met in Washington with Reagan administration officials and asked the U.S. for help in blocking Chinese missile sales to Arab nations. In Israel, soldiers closed more than 40 Arab schools in the occupied territories and blocked a main Jerusalem street in an attempt to thwart Palestinian protests.    ---   Syrian-backed Arab guerrillas defeated fighters loyal to PLO leader Arafat and took control of the Shatila refugee camp in Beirut. Arafat's guerrillas surrendered to a faction controlled by a dissident PLO official after three months of fighting.    ---   Reagan suggested that trials would be needed to exonerate North and Poindexter of charges related to the Iran-Contra affair. The president, reiterating that he believes his former aides are innocent of conspiring to defraud the U.S., said he hoped such legal proceedings would go forward quickly.    ---   Cambodian guerrilla factions agreed to a common position for unofficial peace talks with the Vietnam-backed Phnom Penh government next month in Jakarta. Under the accord, the guerrillas will call for a withdrawal of Vietnam's forces from Cambodia and the establishment of a four-party coalition headed by Prince Sihanouk.    ---   Died: Yves Pratte, 63, chairman of Domtar Inc., near Montreal. </TEXT></DOC>