<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870224-0041 </DOCNO><HL> Philippine Revolt, One Year Old, Wracked by Dissent---Even Some of Aquino's Former SupportersQuestion Her Performance---By Anthony SpaethStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> MANILA, the Philippines  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A year ago, Filipinos swarmed onto a Manila highway to shield a group of soldiers who dared defy a dictator. For three days, the people waited for an attack. The bravest knelt on the concrete to block tanks sent to quell the revolt.    Two days later, President Ferdinand Marcos and his family were en route to exile in the U.S. Corazon Aquino was the country's new leader.    The events still shine in people's memories, partly because of the dark days that preceded the revolution but also because of the disappointing months that followed.    Despite Mrs. Aquino's immense popularity, much of the solidarity that existed a year ago has dissolved. It lasted long enough to get rid of Mr. Marcos, but not to resolve the country's economic, social and military problems, or the alarming communist insurgency.    Challenges to Mrs. Aquino's presidency have arisen, and her performance has begun to disappoint. Power, once gained, has turned many of last year's revolutionaries into the kind of squabbling politicians and turf-conscious bureaucrats they rebelled against such a short time ago.    This is the story of two politicians and a prominent businessman who stood united a year ago behind Mrs. Aquino and against Mr. Marcos. Today, one of them says Mrs. Aquino is &quot;destroying the nation.&quot; The second, Mrs. Aquino's vice president, is wavering in his loyalty to her. The third, her minister of finance, is discouraged and has considered quitting.    Homobono Adaza   &quot;I was the loudest critic of Marcos,&quot; says politician Homobono Adaza, a diminutive man with hedgehog hair and a 1,000-watt smile. &quot;And now, I'm the loudest critic of President Aquino.&quot;    In 1985, the legislator led a no-confidence vote against Mr. Marcos's prime minister, which failed. During the Marcos-rigged 1986 election, he challenged the returns on behalf of Mrs. Aquino.    Mr. Adaza was with Mrs. Aquino on a provincial trip when the revolution began. He flew back to Manila and represented Mrs. Aquino in negotiations with the rebels led by Defense Minister Juan Ponce Enrile and the army's No. 2, Gen. Fidel Ramos, who had turned against Mr. Marcos.    A few months later Mr. Adaza was comparing Mrs. Aquino to, of all people, Mr. Marcos.    &quot;Marcos dissolved the Congress,&quot; he says. &quot;Cory (Mrs. Aquino) dissolved the National Assembly. Marcos tinkered with the constitution, Cory tinkered with the constitution.&quot; His charges are ceaseless: Mrs. Aquino's government is corrupt, she is the captive of her advisers, she has no vision.    Mr. Adaza admits that he was denied one of the cabinet positions he desired, defense, local government, energy or labor. Instead, Mrs. Aquino offered him, among other positions, the head of the Philippine refugee program. &quot;I laughed,&quot; he says. (He did accept directorships of two government-controlled corporations, but when Mr. Adaza began criticizing her, Mrs. Aquino withdrew the appointments.)    Today, the 53-year-old Mr. Adaza spends much of his time talking about the &quot;evils&quot; of the Aquino government on radio shows and at lunches. Last month, he gave the press a tape of confidential phone conversations between Mrs. Aquino and her aides. In the taped conversation, Mrs. Aquino discusses such issues as U.S. nuclear weapons stored in the Philippines. The tapes caused a furor. Mr. Adaza claims to have four more &quot;equally embarrassing&quot; tapes for future release.    Mr. Adaza denies that he is causing fractiousness in a country that can ill afford more division. &quot;I was willing to unite,&quot; he says, had he received the cabinet position he wanted. &quot;It's Mrs. Aquino that has initiated the divisiveness . . .&quot;    Salvador Laurel   Eighteen months ago, Salvador Laurel was the most prominent anti-Marcos figure, in the Philippines and abroad. The international press hung on his every word.    Eleven months ago, he was the most titled member of the new Aquino government. Voters had elected him vice president; Mrs. Aquino awarded him the additional titles of prime minister and minister of foreign affairs.    Today, Mr. Laurel's political party is crumbling. The press, local and foreign, largely ignores him. And he seems to be parting ways with Mrs. Aquino. &quot;It was not a love match,&quot; he says.    Mr. Laurel's transformation provides a look into the unprincipled, undisciplined and baroque world of Philippine politics. It's a world Mrs. Aquino has yet to conquer. After only a year in power, she faces a formidable political opposition, replete with her own former allies, friends of Mr. Marcos, plus a few ambidextrous individuals, such as Mr. Laurel, who have been allies of both.    Mr. Laurel, 58 years old, likes to brag that he was like a brother to Benigno Aquino, the late husband of Mrs. Aquino whose assassination helped lead to Mr. Marcos's downfall. But in 1978, as Mr. Aquino languished in one of Mr. Marcos's jails, Mr. Laurel joined Mr. Marcos's political party to run for the National Assembly. He broke with Mr. Marcos in 1981, formed a political coalition, Unido, and became the main anti-Marcos spokesman.    The 1983 assassination of Mr. Aquino, combined with Mr. Marcos's call in November 1985 for a presidential election, changed the political landscape. The swollen opposition forces looked to Mrs. Aquino, a non-politician, as their leader. But Mr. Laurel announced he would run for president against Mr. Marcos and Mrs. Aquino.    He reversed himself at the 11th hour after Mrs. Aquino agreed to run for president as a Unido candidate. This made Mr. Laurel's party, under then-current rules, one of the two officially recognized political parties. Win or lose, the future of Mr. Laurel's political party seemed assured.    Within weeks, however, Mrs. Aquino suspended the constitution, which voided Unido's designation as one of the two main parties. She abolished the legislature, which put the prime minister out of a job. &quot;I wasn't even notified,&quot; he complains. His supporters began to abandon him, some to join a new party organized by Mrs. Aquino, others to join her foes.    In November, Mr. Laurel said he wasn't sure he would support the constitution Mrs. Aquino was promoting. Manila newspapers said he had allied himself with Mr. Enrile, by then a leading Aquino critic.    If Mrs. Aquino has yet to come to terms with the man she sits next to at cabinet meetings, diplomats and domestic political analysts ask, how will she fare after July when she has to share power with a new legislature?    Jaime Ongpin   If the Aquino revolution appears to be ill served by some of its former foot soldiers, the reverse is also true.    Jaime Ongpin was the president of Benguet Corp., a large mining company listed on the New York Stock Exchange. In 1980, he began criticizing the economic policies of the Marcos administration. By 1985 he was briefing Mrs. Aquino on economics.    Mrs. Aquino named him minister of finance and placed him in charge of a bankrupt treasury, a $26 billion foreign debt and a flattened economy that barely feeds its people. His government salary of $23,000 a year has replaced his $122,000 corporate compensation.    &quot;The burdens and the challenges are really overwhelming,&quot; says Mr. Ongpin, &quot;Jimmy&quot; to his friends. Not the least of the burden is criticism. When it was disclosed that Mr. Marcos's brother-in-law had secretly owned large blocks of Benguet shares, Mr. Ongpin was accused of being a closet Marcos &quot;loyalist.&quot; The press branded him arrogant and corrupt.    Mr. Ongpin became depressed. He lost weight, and friends noticed that his normally easy smile was tense and his sense of humor often faltered. &quot;You might say that time was the pits,&quot; he says. Mrs. Aquino turned down his offer to resign.    By April, according to Mr. Ongpin, the country's immediate financial woes -- if not its long-term economic future -- seemed manageable. But improvements have been blocked by the bureaucratic bungling that has marked the Aquino administration.    Mrs. Aquino's decisions are funneled through aides, led by her executive secretary, Joker Arroyo. According to several government officials, Mr. Arroyo alters appointments he doesn't approve of, sits on decisions he is uncertain about and simply forgets to implement programs championed by officials he doesn't trust. Many officials -- Mr. Ongpin included -- bemoan the bottleneck in Mr. Arroyo's office, and they blame it for the government's dawdling approach.    &quot;It's unfortunate, given the enormity of the problems, we have to put up with such foolishness,&quot; Mr. Ongpin fumes. He says the government is approaching &quot;near paralysis&quot; due to its inefficiencies, and he speaks with distaste about its tendency to &quot;manage by miracle.&quot;    &quot;At a time when the government needs to run at 150% efficiency, it is running at less than 50%,&quot; he says. </TEXT></DOC>