<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871116-0106 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE AND ARTS:TV: U.S.-Soviet Palaver---By Martha Bayles</HL><DD> 11/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   For us, it's no big deal. Quite a few night owls and news junkies -- between four and five million, according to the ratings figures -- have been sitting up to catch &quot;CAPITAL TO CAPITAL,&quot; ABC's series of three live, unedited conversations between U.S. congressmen and senior officials of the Soviet government. But the majority of American TV viewers will probably drift off to sleep, dimly aware that yet another U.S.-Soviet &quot;spacebridge&quot; is going on, but too glutted with glasnost to watch.    For the Russians, by contrast, &quot;Capital to Capital&quot; is a big deal. The first two broadcasts, each of which was aired twice, once live and once on tape, were seen by Soviet audiences officially estimated at 120 million, or half the total population. The first two installments, on arms reduction and human rights respectively, aired on Sept. 22 and Oct. 14. The third, on issues affecting the summit, will pre-empt &quot;Nightline&quot; this Wednesday, 11:30 p.m.-1 a.m. EST, on ABC. Panelists include Sens. Nancy Kassebaum and Bill Bradley and Yevgenii Primakov, director of the Institute for the World Economy and International Relations. According to Nancy Lubin, a specialist in Soviet affairs at the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment who briefed some of the American panelists, most of the recent spacebridges have been &quot;extremely popular.&quot; In places as remote as Siberia and Uzbekistan, Soviet citizens have been reported stopping work in the middle of the day in order to tune into such programs, which Ms. Lubin described as &quot;one of their few windows to the West.&quot;    Now there's a thought to keep drowsy Americans awake. While we slumber, half the Soviet population is peeping in our window. Maybe we should quit snoring and start thinking about how we look.    The good news is that what they see on &quot;Capital to Capital,&quot; doesn't look half bad. In the most recent, human-rights installment, the American panel consisted of Democratic Rep. Steny Hoyer of Maryland, chairman of the Commission on Security and Cooperation in Europe (formerly the Helsinki Commission), and Democratic Sen. Daniel Patrick Moynihan of New York, a member of the Foreign Relations Committee. Its Soviet counterpart included Vadim Zagladin, first deputy chief of the international department of the Central Committee, and Ivan Laptev, another member of the Central Committee who is also editor in chief of Izvestia. For all three sessions, the moderators are Peter Jennings of ABC's &quot;World News Tonight&quot; and Leonid Zolotarevsky, director of the international division of Gosteleradio.    Both sides began with filmed reports on the current state of human rights in their respective countries. The Soviet report informed us, over footage of a busy street scene, that the revised Soviet constitution has made significant progress in the last 10 years toward granting a great many more social, political, economic, religious and personal rights than are dreamed of in the West's philosophy. Then, to praise perestroika, or the &quot;restructuring&quot; of the last two years, an official in the Home Ministry said the visa department is now very lenient toward citizens wishing to travel and emigrate, to say nothing of foreigners wishing to visit.    The American report pointed out that the U.S. Constitution has in the past 200 years not granted, but protected, fewer but more fundamental human rights. Then it turned to the more than 100 political dissidents still incarcerated in Soviet psychiatric hospitals, and to the many refuseniks still living in painful separation from their families in the West. As is customary on American TV, this human drama was then interrupted by a commercial break, during which our side did what we customarily do during commercial breaks, and the other side did what no Soviet audience had ever done before-watch shiny Chevys line up for the joys of Jiffylube.    Then the real fun started. Mr. Jennings tried to seize the initiative by asking whether glasnost meant free speech by permission or by right. But the dapper Mr. Zolotarevsky outflanked him by commenting, &quot;To judge from those commercials, you Americans live very well. But what about your human rights?&quot; Before Mr. Jennings could reply, the dewlapped Deputy Zagladin weighed in with salutations to both congressmen about how stimulating and pleasant he had found their company during a recent conference. Then he added, almost in passing, that a couple of the refuseniks would be allowed to emigrate.    In response to Mr. Jenning's astonishment -- &quot;If this is true, then it's the first we've heard of it!&quot; -- Deputy Zagladin stifled a yawn, and went on buttering up the congressmen, telling them that their presence on the panel had been the main reason for his participation. Then he sighed. Human rights is such an important topic. Of course, there are no ideal situations; both the U.S. and the U.S.S.R. have many failures. The Soviet Union's &quot;communist task&quot; is to &quot;develop the human personality&quot; as fully as possible. Naturally there are problems in attaining such a high ideal . . . .    This particular drowsy American was reluctantly awarding round one to Deputy Zagladin when Sen. Moynihan came to life. True, he remarked in an affable tone, there are no ideal situations. But that doesn't mean some situations aren't better than others. The Soviet Union has always been &quot;a human-rights hell,&quot; even more oppressive than czarist Russia.    At that moment Mr. Zolotarevsky declared, with an expression of regret, that there was no translation coming through his panel's earphones. Still affable, Sen. Moynihan repeated his comment until it penetrated enough for Deputy Zagladin to observe, with equal affability, that the two nations &quot;interpret rights differently.&quot; Alluding to the problems of &quot;hunger and homelessness&quot; under the czars, the deputy boasted that since the Revolution, every Soviet citizen has enjoyed two rights not granted to American workers: the right to a job and the right to get paid.    No one pointed out that these fine-sounding Soviet rights do not include either the right to spend one's pay on edible food and tolerable housing, nor the right, except recently in certain professions, to quit a state job and do something else. But although the congressional panelists occasionally strike out, they have been batting higher than most Americans in the complex game of talking with the Russians.    It's ironic, then, that Phil Donahue should have led the way in conducting these dialogues, because his ideal of let-it-all-hang-out discussion is a blueprint for how not to talk with the Russians. For the Soviet leaders don't regard spacebridges as just another talk show, but as a golden opportunity to influence American policy by influencing American public opinion. They remember what we sometimes forget, that that's a very big deal. </TEXT></DOC>