<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881107-0068 </DOCNO><HL> End Fetal-Tissue Work? Only More of It Will Guide </HL><AUTHOR> Emanuel D. Thorne </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT </CO><IN> PHA </IN><TEXT>   A major step toward the introduction of therapies based on fetal-tissue transplants was taken late last month when an advisory panel to the National Institutes of Health voted that it is &quot;acceptable public policy&quot; to permit research in the U.S. with tissue from induced abortions.    This does not mean that the moral and political issues have been settled. A moratorium on funding of such research by NIH continues, and news reports indicate that even as the panel was preparing to meet, President Reagan had drafted an Executive Order proposing to ban all research with fetuses from induced abortions.    The panel was established to provide guidelines to NIH scientists wishing to transplant fetal tissue into the brains of Parkinson's patients, as physicians in Mexico, England, Sweden and China have already done with some reported success. Experts testified that fetal-tissue transplants have the potential to alleviate a vast amount of suffering among victims of Parkinson's disease, diabetes, Alzheimer's disease, stroke and spinal-cord injuries. But many believe that before large-scale therapeutic use of fetal tissue can gain acceptance, a reassessment of closely held values might be required.    To shape and inform the public debate over how to proceed, we need a technical base that we do not yet have. We know neither the full range of our options, nor their consequences, and so are unable to assess the ethical ramifications of positions we might adopt. Only after such analysis is available can our political leadership regulate effectively and knowledgeably.    It is essential, therefore, that research proceed. Not only basic biomedical research, but also social science research that will enable us to draw the full medical and social consequences of positions advanced by various parties in the debate.    What kind of information and analysis might break the logjam of current thinking and serve as a basis for sensible regulation? Information that would give us a clearer picture of how a world in which fetal-tissue transplants are commonplace might look. Here are five suggestions:   --First, we must establish the effectiveness of such transplants, and if effective, we will want to know the number of fetuses needed; at what stage of fetal development tissues and organs can be used; what abortion methods can yield usable tissue; who will benefit; what alternative treatments are or will become available; and the costs for treating various diseases with fetal tissue and alternatives.    --Second, we must know more about the potential supply of fetuses from induced and spontaneous abortions. Currently, 1.6 million induced abortions are reported in the U.S. annually. We don't yet know whether this supply is sufficient to meet demand, nor do we know whether this supply is assured, given expected challenges to Roe v. Wade and advances in contraceptive methods and abortion-inducing drugs.    Bearing on the supply question is the matter of incentives to abort. The panel was especially concerned that women considering abortion be provided no incentives at all to abort. Prohibiting women from receiving money for their fetuses is an obvious protection against commercialization. However, a more complicated challenge is posed when the influence operating is not an incentive per se: Some are concerned that the potential good uses of fetuses might ease the consciences of women who are ambivalent about aborting.    The panel agreed that all incentives affecting the occurrence, timing and method of abortion ought to be denied and that, in particular, abortions motivated by altruism were not acceptable. Whether altruism might, in fact, increase the number of abortions needs investigation.    Little is known at this writing about the availability and suitability for transplantation of tissue from spontaneous abortions. Best estimates are that between 750,000 and one million spontaneous abortions take place in the U.S. annually. No one has any sense of how many of these fetuses -- as many as half of which may be genetically defective -- would be viable for transplantation. To formulate policy, we will need a better grasp than we currently have of the potential uses of tissue from spontaneously aborted fetuses.    --Third, to provide therapy for the tens of thousands who may benefit, a largescale fetal-tissue industry would have to emerge. We would need to ensure that (a) material and moral incentives are not offered to women to abort; (b) middlemen do not reap the economic value of the donated tissue, especially when the donated tissue is used by profit-making firms to produce marketable products; (c) an efficient national system of non-profit agencies is forged to collect and disburse the tissue, and (d) equitable access is protected, and other such matters are addressed. To regulate this activity properly, we will need to understand thoroughly the industry, its markets, and the behavior of its participants.    --Fourth, with the information outlined here, we could make explicit the extent to which pursuing one ethical choice, say improving the life of an individual Parkinson's patient, would require us to yield on other ethical principles, such as respecting the sanctity of all life, including the life of the fetus. We would know the conditions that could be treated and the number of people who could benefit from each potential source of tissue: spontaneous abortions, first-, second-, and third-trimester induced abortions, and, perhaps, those born with conditions such as anencephaly who are unable to live long but have organs suitable for transplant.    We could address such questions as: Who could benefit if only transplants of tissue from spontaneously aborted fetuses were permitted, and who could not be helped? Who could benefit if, in addition, tissue from abortions induced in the first trimester were used, and who could not be helped? What would it cost, and who would receive the benefits?    Indeed, it may emerge from the data that the current preoccupation with the ethically difficult aspects of this issue reflects a distorted notion of how a world in which we use fetal tissue might look. Or, it might reveal that the demand for fetal tissue will so outstrip potential supply that the practice of conceiving to abort may be a real threat.    --Finally, our regulations must recognize that there are other countries -- such as China, where 14 million abortions are reportedly performed annually -- that are actively involved in therapeutic research with fetal tissue. With about 32 million induced abortions world-wide each year, and the high mobility of both people and fetal tissue, even a well-designed U.S. policy to control abuses is likely to be inadequate in the absence of international consensus on the proper uses of fetal tissue.    Some will object to the approach presented here, arguing that judgments as to the ethical character of a policy should be based solely on whether the means used to implement that policy are ethical, and not on the desirability of the consequences. They might argue that the key issue is the morality of abortion, and that if abortion is immoral, then using the products of abortion is cooperating with evil and all discussion of consequences is irrelevant.    While it is important to the integrity of the debate that this point of view be acknowledged, abortion currently is legal and there is no consensus on whether abortion, or making beneficial use of the products of abortion, violates core ethical values. Good people, relying on respected ethical traditions, disagree on what ought to be done.    When values clash, we must balance claims, establish priorities, reach for compromise, and engage in trade-offs that do not violate core values. At such times, a knowledge of consequences can be clarifying. As University of Minnesota bioethicist Arthur Caplan put it in his testimony before the panel, &quot;Those who would adhere to principle must be willing to answer the question: At what price?&quot;    It is not likely that we will abandon as promising a technology as the use of fetal tissue for moral reasons. Have we ever done so before? The miracle of heart transplantation, which in the last 20 years has given life to thousands of desperate people world-wide, required that we rethink some very old and closely held values: We needed to redefine death in terms of brain inactivity rather than heart stoppage, a step that many advanced societies still have not taken. Unless there is a dramatic technological breakthrough that makes fetuses viable at so early a stage of development that abortion becomes abhorrent to most Americans, it is likely that we will find a rationale for using the fetus consistent with core ethical values.    To bring forth the blessings made possible by transplants of fetal tissue, our laws will have to rest on a thorough understanding of the technology and its implications. Otherwise, our laws could have serious unintended consequences that, if we are careful now, we may be able to anticipate and avoid. We cannot afford the illusion that development of this technology can be halted. The challenge is to forge policy that will steer its progress carefully.    ---   Mr. Thorne is an economist and visiting scholar at Georgetown University's Kennedy Institute of Ethics. </TEXT></DOC>