<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861202-0039 </DOCNO><HL> Speaking of Business:Oil and Economics: King Fahd Faces a Dilemma---By Lindley H. Clark Jr.</HL><DD> 12/02/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDESTPETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   The late word from Saudi Arabia is that Sheik Ahmed Zaki Yamani has had his passport lifted. Sheik Yamani, as you may or may not recall, was until October the dominant figure in the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries. Then King Fahd threw him out as oil minister, and now the sheik can't even visit his favorite watering spots in Europe and elsewhere.    The trouble was that Sheik Yamani wanted to inject a little Economics 1 into Saudi deliberations on oil. The king's position was unequivocal: He wanted to jack up the price of oil immediately to $18 a barrel from the current level of $14 to $15 a barrel. And he wanted to do that without any cut in Saudi output.    Sheik Yamani got the boot in part because he apparently told the king that the royal position made no sense. Saudi Arabia has fewer people than several other OPEC members, notably Iran, and a huge amount of oil. OPEC has survived at all only because Saudi Arabia has served as a swing producer, cutting output occasionally to keep prices up.    Last week King Fahd said Saudi Arabia had gone as far as it would go along that line. It won't &quot;offer more than it has already done&quot; to restrain production levels. The Saudis already have made &quot;tremendous sacrifices&quot; to keep OPEC intact, the king said. &quot;No fair arbiter can ask the kingdom for more.&quot;    Maybe no fair arbiter can, but Iran's Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini, among others, is quite likely to. The king's idea seems to be that other OPEC members will be so grateful for Saudi Arabia's tremendous sacrifices that they will cheerfully chop their own output to push up prices. Lots of luck, King.    In Friedberg's Currency and Commodity Comments, Steve H. Hanke, a Johns Hopkins University economist, points out that Saudi Arabia and the rest of OPEC put themselves on a treadmill when they began jacking up prices in the 1970s.    &quot;To set artificially high prices,&quot; Mr. Hanke writes, &quot;OPEC had to initially reduce its output. This left the cartel with initial excess capacity. Once the artificially high prices were set, market forces began to take hold. In consequence, the world's demand for oil began to drop, falling by 15% from 1979 through 1985, and the supply of non-OPEC oil began to rise, increasing by 48% from 1973 through 1985.    &quot;These market dynamics meant that to maintain artificially high prices, OPEC had to dramatically reduce its output (from its peak in 1977, OPEC output fell by 49%). This, of course, left OPEC with even more excess capacity than it had begun with.&quot;    High prices did more than draw non-OPEC producers into the field. They encouraged several OPEC members to cheat on their output quotas with considerable regularity. This left it up to Saudi Arabia to make OPEC &quot;work&quot; by cutting its own output. As a result, the kingdom's output fell by 80% from its 1980 peak to August 1985.    This couldn't go on indefinitely. Maybe the Saudis' revenue needs were not as great as those of some other OPEC members, but they did need money. The government had launched projects to upgrade the military and build up the economy. And, let's face it, the royal family has always lived well.    Mr. Hanke recalls a story about Crown Prince Feisal bin Abdul-Aziz. Prince Feisal in 1958 seized control of the country from his spendthrift brother, King Saud. When he visited the national treasury, he was stunned to find it contained only 317 riyals. At current exchange rates that comes to about $85. At this point, the story goes, Prince Feisal and other members of the royal family made a vow: Never again would the kingdom's vaults be so nearly empty.    In an effort to keep that vow, King Fahd apparently would like to go back to the old system of posted prices, with the price set at $18 a barrel. Posted prices, however, aren't market prices. Buyers have become accustomed to negotiating prices and they may be able to continue to do so. Late last month there were reports that Kuwait and the United Arab Emirates were exceeding their production quotas. That led to doubts that OPEC ministers, when they meet on Dec. 11, will be able to put together a firm agreement on anything -- prices or production.    A posted price of $18 a barrel does have one advantage for King Fahd: It allows him to issue a budget. The kingdom's 1986-87 budget has been postponed twice this year. Without a posted price, Saudi Arabia would have to forecast oil prices. To do that sensibly, the government would have to reveal its specific oil-output plans. Aside from saying it isn't going to be the swing producer anymore, Saudi Arabia doesn't want to spell out things quite that much.    But an OPEC decision at the Dec. 11 meeting to go back to posted prices would take the Saudis off the hook. They could unveil the new budget on Dec. 15, banking on $18 as realistic, and they would be all set for the fiscal year beginning Dec. 21.    Or would they? Posting an $18 price and selling oil at that price are two different things. Even if all the other OPEC members began keeping output at current quota levels, Mr. Hanke figures the Saudis would have to cut their output by about 43% to keep the price at $18. That would give Saudi Arabia oil revenues of $16.3 billion in 1987, a 52% drop from the figure for 1985. To illustrate further how the mighty have fallen, Mr. Hanke notes that Saudi oil income in 1981 was $113 billion.    What we have here is a Saudi Arabia fiscal crisis, something that isn't likely to dismay many Westerners. Income from the kingdom's foreign investments has been dropping, because of lower interest rates, and the Saudis have had to bring home some capital to finance budget deficits.    Saudi Arabia has already devalued its currency slightly in an effort to squeeze more riyals out of oil sales, which are denominated in dollars. If the kingdom tries to maintain an $18 posted price, it may have to devalue the riyal quite a lot to get enough funds to keep its budget anywhere near balance.    But King Fahd says that his country has sacrificed long enough. If he plans to manage the vast Saudi reserves so as to maximize their present value (which is pretty much what Sheik Yamani had in mind), he will have to step up output. That would mean lower prices per barrel, but Saudi Arabia would be selling a larger share of the barrels.    The trouble with that strategy is that it would surely antagonize the ayatollah. Iran has nowhere near as much oil as Saudi Arabia, and to keep its dirty little war with Iraq going (by buying spare parts from Israel and otherwise), it needs as high a per-barrel price as it can arrange.    So King Fahd, Mr. Hanke comments, surely has a dilemma. If he supports an $18 price, oil revenues will fall. If he maximizes the current value of his oil, oil prices will fall and that big neighbor across the Persian Gulf will be furious.    It would be interesting to know what Sheik Yamani thinks about all of this; one reason his passport got pulled probably was to make it more difficult for him to tell us. It's hard to see how even the agile sheik could have worked his way out of this dilemma, but there may come a time, in the next few weeks, when King Fahd wishes he had let him try. </TEXT></DOC>