<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880928-0066 </DOCNO><HL> Insurance, Not Lawsuits, for the Accident Prone </HL><AUTHOR> Peter Huber </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> INS FIN </IN><G> JUS </G><TEXT>   When it comes to accidents, the made-in-America remedy these days is a lawsuit. Some remedy. The legal system, often as random and capricious as the accident itself, yields less insurance and -- perversely -- still more accidents. This mess should be an issue for both state and federal candidates, most especially because it is not insoluble. A cure is at hand, if we can find judges willing to administer it.    Most accidents arise against a background of commercial acquaintance -- at work, on the operating table, following the purchase of an airplane or ski ticket. Rights and responsibilities, provisions for expert arbitration, and specified levels of insurance could be set out clearly, in advance, by contract.    But judges won't allow anything of the sort. In the 1960s, courts declared that standardized contracts &quot;of adhesion,&quot; between a large institutional or corporate seller and a small consumer, could no longer be enforced, at least not in matters touching on health and safety. The buyer of a hedge trimmer, a contraceptive, or a face lift came to be viewed as a fly near flypaper, ever in danger of sudden death by glue, no different from the unwitting pedestrian who suddenly found himself adhering to the fender of a stranger's car.    The upshot was an amorphous new jumble of contract and tort law, irreverently labeled &quot;contorts&quot; in recognition of its mixed parentage. Contort law calls on American courts to pass judgment on the design of lawn mowers, electrical switches, glass and plastic bottles, powerful drugs, aircraft parts, surgical procedures and countless other things that inexpert juries know next to nothing about. No advance agreement between buyer and seller can reliably insulate the deal from the threat of later litigation if an accident occurs. Under the &quot;collateral source&quot; rule, insurance arrangements made ahead of time, in whatever form, may not even be mentioned in the subsequent lawsuit.    This law of contorts overrules our most important economic freedom, the freedom to make advance commitments and to arrange deals on terms mutually agreeable. It undercuts our freedom to cooperate.    Insurance has declined as a result. In its penchant for coercion over consent, contort law dismisses first-party insurance and demands third-party coverage on terms that the market often cannot accommodate. Insurance for many recreation-related accidents, for example, has been reduced by closing the playgrounds and removing the diving boards.    As awards have grown in size and unpredictability, insurance companies have backed away from entire lines of liability coverage. The gap between premiums paid and coverage provided has narrowed. W.H. Brine Co., a manufacturer of sports equipment, was recently offered a premium of $200,000 for $1 million of coverage; the city of Hartford, Conn., was charged $1.8 million for $4 million of coverage. Insurers have sharply increased deductibles and coinsurance clauses and broadened coverage exclusions, slashing the true level of coverage even as they have raised prices.    Overall safety has been the second casualty. Innovative drugs and medical therapies, new vaccines, novel airplane engines, countless other trailblazing technologies, are delayed or altogether withheld from the market. Contort law strongly favors the old and familiar, which both insurance companies and jurors instinctively feel they can live with. But outside the courtroom, newer is generally safer.    A third victim is American competitiveness. A U.S. firm selling an American-made drug, car, chemical factory or aircraft to say, India, is forced to sell expensive accident insurance along with it; a German firm competing for the same sale is not.    The American competitive position is disadvantaged even within the U.S. market. When an established U.S. company goes shopping every year to renew its insurance policy, it will pay in part for its liability experience with products sold years ago. More recent business arrivals on our shores do not carry the excess insurance baggage of their own past. In industries as diverse as light aircraft, truck wheel rims, machine tools, sporting goods and industrial machinery -- all long-lived products -- U.S. contort law gives foreign manufacturers an important competitive edge.    Economies of scale also play their part. American companies shoulder U.S. liability costs on all their startup development and production. Foreign competitors, however, can build a large base of operations without this element of overhead and then move into the U.S. market when the product is mature enough to make exact warnings possible and insurance affordable.    As a result of all these forces, U.S. manufacturers have lost their edge in markets for vaccines, contraceptives, small planes and hospital equipment.    What's to be done? We can establish some federal standards for product design, limit the more capricious awards, and rein in some of the worst excesses of ambulance chasers. We can channel responsibility more carefully by limiting joint-and-several liability, in which each contributor to an accident -- no matter how small his role -- can be held fully liable for all the costs of that accident. But for more fundamental change, we must rebuild the law of accidents around ancient time-tested principles of consent, cooperation, and a robust law of contract.    The first, all-important step is to repeal the judge-invented collateral-source rule. Direct insurance, from whatever source, should always provide first-dollar coverage for accidents. This will give providers of goods and services a strong incentive to offer more of it.    --Many credit-card companies already offer $100,000 or so of insurance coverage on airplane tickets. Airlines, perhaps in cooperation with aircraft manufacturers, could easily increase this coverage. They would have every incentive to do so if such coverage provided a dollar-for-dollar reduction in liability exposure.    --Before Congress intervened with expensive and convoluted legislation two years ago, drug makers were prepared to offer a fixed-sum insurance policy, capped at $1 million per injury, with every dose of childhood vaccine they sold -- provided that an advance commitment of this sort would be truly binding and exclusive, with questions of cause and effect referred to outside experts.    --Schools in Washington state have established an insurance program for injured high school athletes. Each student athlete pays a couple of dollars a year. Any seriously injured athlete is immediately offered compensation for all medical expenses, and a modest -- but at the same time certain -- disability benefit, in exchange for which the student agrees not to sue the school.    But most providers remain unwilling to offer any such direct insurance, and for good reason. Under current rules, most courts will find a way for the plaintiff to take the guaranteed money up front, and then will invoke the law of contorts to demand more. The insurance coverage provided under the Washington program for athletes, for example, is a voluntary option that the injured athlete accepts, if he wishes, after the accident. Anyone who prefers to sue instead still can. In July, the Washington Supreme Court declared in Wagenblast v. Odessa School District that schools could not demand a general liability release as a condition for student participation in athletic programs.    Direct insurance arrangements would multiply if they offered complete and certain escape from the coils of contorts. It is far cheaper to transfer a dollar under a direct insurance contract established before an accident than to pay it out with the assistance of hordes of lawyers under infinitely fluid rules worked out afterward. To be sure, direct insurance will cut off open-ended damages for pain and suffering, and punitive awards. It will usually rely on simple, standardized schedules to assess damages for such things as lost limbs or death itself. But at the same time, direct insurance need not depend on costly inquiries into negligence, defect or fault, or on the flypaper theories of contract currently necessary to underwrite the rickety Mutual Contort Insurance Co. If direct insurance will not pay as much in the most lurid cases, it will surely pay more often and reliably.    The time-tested instrument of cooperation is the law of contract. We should be using more of it. For that, we must start with the cooperation of judges. And judges, in case anyone has forgotten, are not appointed to office by the Archangel Michael. They come into office on the coattails of governors and presidents.    ---   Mr. Huber, a scientist and attorney, is author of &quot;Liability: The Legal Revolution and Its Consequences&quot; (Basic Books, 1988), and a senior fellow at the Manhattan Institute. </TEXT></DOC>