<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861205-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/05/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   CONGRESS AGREED to form two panels to study U.S. arms sales to Iran.    The formation of special investigatory committees in the House and Senate was expected to eliminate the need for a special session of Congress, but Reagan's final decision won't come until today. The inquiries won't formally begin until next year. Separately, intelligence sources said data intercepted by the National Security Agency Show that former Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord and his business partner, Albert Hakim, played pivotal roles in the arms sales to Iran and the diversion of funds to Nicaraguan rebels.    A Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll found that 64% of Americans don't believe Reagan is as fully in charge as he should be of his administration.    ---   Hong Kong's governor died in his sleep while visiting Peking. The death of Sir Edward Youde, 62, who had been governor since 1982, added to uncertainties about the British colony, which reverts to Chinese rule in 1997. The Hong Kong stock market plunged on the news.    ---   Egypt exposed a plot by a group of Islamic extremists to overthrow the government of President Mubarak. Cairo disclosed the plot in the routine filing of an indictment, under which the government charged four army officers and 29 civilians with stealing arms from the military &quot;to fight the present state policy.&quot;    ---   A court in Grenada sentenced to death 14 people convicted of murdering Prime Minister Maurice Bishop and 10 other people during a military coup in 1983. The assassination prompted the U.S. invasion of the Caribbean island. Three other defendants were found guilty of manslaughter and given prison terms; another was acquitted.    ---   Two Palestinian students were killed when Israeli troops opened fire on a crowd of demonstrators at a university in the occupied West Bank. More than 20 protesters were wounded by Israeli gunfire in violence that spread to a nearby hospital. The demonstration reportedly was to protest Israeli attacks on Palestinians in Lebanon.    Israeli warships attacked Palestinian guerrilla positions near the southern Lebanese port of Sidon. The assault came as fighting flared around two Palestinian refugee camps in Beirut that have been beseiged by Shiite Moslem militiamen.    ---   The Transportation Department said it plans to propose stricter rules to combat drug and alcohol abuse in aviation. The rules could include random testing of commercial flight crews.    ---   The White House budget office drafted a proposal to restructure the way the U.S. reimburses doctors' bills to hospital patients under Medicare, by adopting a system of established rates for specific ailments. It also is proposing a major change in the nation's mass-transit program, Transportation Department aides said.    ---   Weinberger said more than two dozen European companies would participate in a project to study how space-based antimissile technologies can be used against short-range nuclear arms. Weinberger's comments came at a Brussels meeting of NATO defense ministers, who questioned a U.S. offer to eliminate strategic ballistic missiles.    ---   A U.S. arms-control adviser defended Reagan's decision to breach the limits of the unratified 1979 SALT II treaty, saying the Soviets had violated the agreement. Paul Nitze also said chances were &quot;small&quot; that the U.S., which exceeded the accord's ceiling last week, would eliminate enough nuclear weapons to comply with the pact.    ---   Larry Speakes announced that he is resigning Feb. 1 as White House spokesman to become a senior vice president, communications, for Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. Speakes said the move was unrelated to the controversy over U.S. arms sales to Iran. A successor hasn't been named.    ---   Police in Paris fired tear gas and water cannon at demonstrators after a mass march by students protesting education legislation that would tighten university admission policies and increase tuition. About 100 people were injured. The French education minister said the Paris government would modify the bill, but wouldn't withdraw it.    ---   Reagan held talks at the White House with Costa Rican President Oscar Arias. Reagan praised Arias for promoting democracy in Central America. Arias, whose nation has a formal policy of neutrality, denounced violence and said true peace won't come to the region without a dialogue.    ---   Communist negotiators said rebel forces throughout the Philippines have pledged to abide by the 60-day cease-fire agreement with the government. The truce takes effect next week. A guerrilla spokesman said the communists would &quot;prove wrong&quot; U.S. officials who expressed doubt that the cease-fire would lead to a lasting peace.    ---   Shultz urged the South African government to begin talks aimed at producing a multiracial democracy. The secretary of state also said he was sending a special emissary to southern Africa's front-line states to seek cooperation in promoting peaceful solutions to conflicts in the region.    ---   A prototype vaccine has been produced that shows promising results against the AIDS virus in test-tube experiments. Repligen Corp., which was involved in developing the genetically engineered vaccine, cautioned that its results don't necessarily mean that the vaccine will work in humans. </TEXT></DOC>