<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880523-0161 </DOCNO><HL> Last Hurrah: Entering the Stretch, Reagan Sees Summit As Start of New Drive --- He Targets Issues to Tackle After Kickoff in Moscow; Eluding Ridicule at Home --- A Concern: Going With Style </HL><AUTHOR> Gerald F. Seib (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><G> EXE CNG </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   It's just the kind of story that moves Ronald Reagan, and it shows why further improvements in U.S.-Soviet relations are his top priority as the stretch run of his presidency begins.    Earlier this month, Mr. Reagan invited Soviet dissident Yosef Begun to the White House. When the two met, the president reached into his pocket and pulled out a silver bracelet engraved with Mr. Begun's name. He got the bracelet from a Jewish group when Mr. Begun was thrown into a Soviet prison five years ago, the president explained, and had kept it hidden away, hoping that someday he could deliver it personally to the Jewish-rights activist.    Mr. Reagan got his wish. And Mr. Begun's transformation from gulag inmate to White House guest is the kind of dramatic change in Soviet behavior that convinces Mr. Reagan he still has a chance to make historic progress in superpower ties, even as he enters the final months of a presidency increasingly besmirched by revelations about astrologers and detached leadership.    In fact, as Mr. Reagan prepares for his Moscow summit meeting with Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev -- the president leaves Wednesday for the Soviet Union -- friends believe that pushing toward deep arms cuts and other fundamental changes in relations between the two nations has emerged as the president's overriding concern as he maps a broad strategy for his final days in office.    &quot;Everything else pales into insignificance after that,&quot; says Stuart Spencer, a longtime California friend and political adviser.    That means that even if a proposed agreement cutting strategic arms by as much as 50% can't be finished -- and Mr. Reagan is one of the few who still hold out hope one can be -- the president wants to push the superpowers as close to a pact as possible. It means he is intent on increasing cultural exchanges and scoring more successes on human rights, particularly persuading Mr. Gorbachev to expand religious freedom. (The president is said to be convinced the Soviet leader believes in God.) Mr. Reagan has pointedly left the door open to another summit in the fall, though chances for one appear slim.    He has other plans for the rest of his term: hitting what he calls the mashed-potato circuit to implant his deeply held conservative beliefs into the national psyche, refurbishing his administration's drug-fighting reputation and helping put Republicans in charge of statehouses so they can send a new stream of GOP lawmakers to Congress in the 1990s.    But the ridicule at home over disclosures of astrology use in the White House will make the president, his wife, Nancy, and his chief of staff, Howard Baker, even hungrier for a summit that at least appears successful. &quot;It could be that both the president and Nancy, pushed by Howard Baker, (will) try to get as much done as possible&quot; in Moscow, says Brent Scowcroft, a former national security adviser.    This focus on improved U.S.-Soviet relations is a remarkable turnaround for Mr. Reagan, a longtime Red-basher, but it is a natural development. Any president heading into the history books wants to play out his finale on the world stage. &quot;It seems to me if you're in power eight years, you come to feel that the superpower relationship is probably the single most important stewardship of the presidency,&quot; says presidential spokesman Marlin Fitzwater.    In a broader sense, the Moscow summit marks the beginning of the end of the Reagan era. And it brings Mr. Reagan face-to-face with a problem that hasn't been encountered since President Eisenhower left office three decades ago: figuring out how to close out a two-term presidency with style. Even without kiss-and-tell books, it isn't easy; presidential power is waning, and national attention is shifting to the political campaign.    Mr. Reagan's attention sometimes wanders as he contemplates retirement. His son Michael recalls flying to California with his father for Easter vacation earlier this spring. The president stepped off the plane, gazed at the Pacific Ocean and began counting on his fingers. &quot;Ten more months and I can start going to church again,&quot; he declared, explaining that he would then be free of the Secret Service brigade and press circus that dissuade him from attending worship now.    But January 1989 is still a little way off; slowly, a strategy is taking shape for dealing with this stretch run. The Moscow summit is the kickoff event. Beyond that, Mr. Reagan will look for other opportunities to be active in foreign affairs as domestic attention shifts to politics. He will follow the Moscow summit by attending a Western economic meeting next month in Toronto, where aides say he plans to celebrate what he considers the spread of his tax-cutting gospel throughout the alliance during the past seven years.    Then Mr. Reagan will begin roving the country as a kind of itinerant country preacher, giving valedictory warnings about the dangers of big government and extolling the virtues of low tax rates. &quot;Ronald Reagan has his own sense of mission,&quot; says Nancy Reynolds, another longtime California friend. &quot;He carries it in his head and heart wherever he goes, and he'll use the bully pulpit until the end.&quot;    He will also tub-thump for repeal of the 22nd Amendment, which limits a president to two terms in office. Friends and aides say Mr. Reagan has developed a passionate belief that the limit sapped his power halfway through his second term and that it must be repealed if the country hopes to have truly effective leaders.    In addition, Mr. Reagan is hurt and angry over charges that his administration has been lax in dealing with the explosion of drug abuse. At a recent lunch with his staff, he complained bitterly that Democrats are attacking him on that front despite his wife's &quot;just-say-no&quot; drive to draw attention to the drug issue. So he intends to devote time to playing up his administration's anti-drug efforts.    Plans also are taking shape for Mr. Reagan's involvement in the political campaign. Obviously, he will work for the election of Vice President George Bush, the now-certain Republican presidential nominee. White House aides are planning to focus his efforts on a few crucial states, particularly in the South, where he can most help Mr. Bush. And he will try to help keep a grip on the ethnic Roman Catholics in the Northeast, who were drawn into the GOP tent by Mr. Reagan in 1980 but who aren't nearly so attracted to Mr. Bush.    His plan to help pack more Republicans into state legislatures is a more unusual twist on the use of a president's political power. If Republicans can take control of statehouses, they can redraw congressional districts in ways favorable to Republicans after the 1990 census. That, in turn, could pave the way for GOP control of Congress during the next decade, which would be an effective way to cement in place elements of the Reagan revolution.    Frank Fahrenkopf, the Republican national chairman, says the GOP has targeted for special attention every state where it is within 10 seats of winning legislative dominance. Says Frank Donatelli, the White House political director: &quot;This is a unique year for us, in that we don't have one overriding political objective, but several.&quot;    There's a chance, of course, that the recent tarnishes on his image could damage Mr. Reagan's effectiveness on all these political fronts. But there so far aren't any signs of a serious erosion of the president's popularity -- and certainly not within the Republican Party, where he remains the premier fund-raiser of his time. &quot;You haven't seen any kind of drop-off in the huge demands of governors, senators and congressmen who still want Ronald Reagan to visit their states,&quot; says Michele Davis, executive director of the Republican Governors Association.    The more immediate danger for Mr. Reagan may be that the humiliations he has suffered at home could imperil the success abroad that he craves. The Soviets could conclude that recent embarrassing disclosures have so damaged him that they would be wiser to bide their time and do serious negotiating with his successor.    But Mr. Scowcroft, the former national security adviser, says he doubts that backstairs stories from the White House will have that much effect on the Soviets, who are too &quot;baffled&quot; by American politics to base decisions on such internal flaps.    And Mr. Reagan's hand is strengthened by the fact that, even in his lame-duck condition, he has been able to deliver on selected issues he considers most important. He now seems to have mustered enough support in Congress, for instance, to sustain his veto of the most significant piece of legislation this year, the big trade bill.    Of more direct importance for his Moscow trip, the president also seems to have succeeded in putting out a series of brushfires in Congress over details of the treaty he and Mr. Gorbachev signed last year eliminating intermediate-range nuclear weapons. And a chance remains that the Senate will ratify the treaty in time for the president to give a final copy to Mr. Gorbachev.    Finally, Mr. Reagan may have an ace up his sleeve in Moscow: As the Soviet policy of glasnost, or openness, has allowed Soviet citizens to see him more on television, there are indications that they have come to like the longtime anti-Communist warrior. Suzanne Massie, a Harvard Sovietologist, recently visited Russia and encountered a friend who recited verbatim a statement by Mr. Reagan. The friend then commented approvingly in Russian: &quot;Good man.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>