<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880920-0038 </DOCNO><HL> Board of Contributors: Only in America ... and Totalitarian States </HL><AUTHOR> Arthur Schlesinger Jr. </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   Are the American people really so besotted by eight years of Reaganism that they regard the Pledge of Allegiance to the flag as a serious issue in the presidential election? According to the Gallup poll, nearly a third of all voters say that the pledge issue has given them a less favorable opinion of Michael Dukakis. According to the CBS-New York Times poll, 70% of Americans believe that the state should compel teachers to administer the pledge to their students -- half demanding compulsion even if unconstitutional.    What is this uproar all about? For the first century of its existence, the republic somehow managed to stumble along, winning independence, surviving civil war, without any pledge at all. It was not till 1892 that the Pledge of Allegiance was written by an editor of Youth's Companion as a voluntary affirmation for little kids.    In the 20th century the U.S. began to play a role in a large and dangerous world. Some Americans lost the old faith in the power and appeal of American principles. In our alarm, we began to prescribe official rituals of allegiance and to punish those who declined for whatever reason of conscience to go along.    State governments passed laws requiring schoolchildren to salute and pledge allegiance to the flag. Kids who refused were expelled and could be proceeded against as delinquents. Jehovah's Witnesses, regarding the compulsory flag salute as idolatry, fought a West Virginia statute in the courts. In 1943, in the midst of World War II, the case came to the Supreme Court.    Though it was a time of high patriotic fervor, the court threw out the West Virginia law as a violation of the First Amendment. &quot;If there be any fixed star in our constitutional constellation,&quot; the court ruled, &quot;it is that no official, high or petty, can prescribe what shall be orthodox in politics, nationalism, religion, or other matters of opinion.&quot;    The court also doubted the practical efficacy of verbal pledges extorted by the state through threat of punishment. &quot;It is not clear whether the regulation contemplates that pupils forgo any contrary convictions of their own and become unwilling converts to the prescribed ceremony or whether it will be acceptable if they simulate assent by words without belief and by a gesture barren of meaning.&quot;    And the court rejected the attempt to foster patriotism through compulsion as an insult to the American tradition: &quot;To believe that patriotism will not flourish if patriotic ceremonies are voluntary and spontaneous instead of a compulsory routine is to make an unflattering estimate of the appeal of our institutions to free minds.&quot;    The court's decision in West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette settled the question to the satisfaction of most Americans for 45 years. Now the compulsory pledge emerges as a big issue in the 1988 campaign -- and as a daily obligation not just for little kids but for grown-ups as well, even for members of Congress.    I cannot think of another Western democracy that would put itself through such nonsense. Can anyone imagine members of the British House of Commons rising at every session, placing hands on hearts and reciting a pledge of allegiance to the Union Jack? Does any other democratic nation even have a pledge of allegiance to the national flag? Other democracies believe, as Americans have believed until recently, that free institutions rest on consent, not on coercion, and that coercion cannot create belief.    Alas, it is not quite &quot;only in America.&quot; For the compulsory pledge is exactly the sort of thing to which totalitarian states resort -- precisely because they lack confidence in the loyalty of their citizens.    Why in the world are the Republicans, mighty Reaganite foes of statism, mounting a crusade to require the state to coerce thought and behavior? Do they no longer believe in &quot;the appeal of our institutions to free minds&quot;? They apparently have such a bad opinion of the rest of us as to conclude that we can't be trusted unless the state compels us to pledge daily allegiance to the flag.    This sudden panic betrays deep insecurity about the American people and the American future. The rise of the compulsory Pledge of Allegiance is a measure of America's loss of faith in itself.    One doubts that the people who are forcing this issue have thought much about the implications of their actions. What they are really doing, of course, is trying to win the election by making patriotism an issue between the parties. This is not an ennobling political tactic, and George Bush at least knows better. But this campaign has hardly displayed his kinder, gentler self. &quot;I cannot recall a single instance,&quot; writes Lou Cannon, who has covered Ronald Reagan forever, &quot;where Reagan questioned the patriotism of an opponent, as Bush has gratuitously done in depicting Michael Dukakis as a foe of the Pledge of Allegiance.&quot;    Then there is the vice president's denunciation of the Democratic candidate as &quot;a card-carrying member of the ACLU,&quot; as if the American Civil Liberties Union were a terrorist organization, like the IRA or the PLO. In fact, the ACLU's dedication is to the First Amendment of the Constitution, letting chips fall where they may. One present beneficiary of ACLU concern is that great Republican hero Ollie North.    &quot;To Canadian eyes,&quot; Toronto's distinguished Globe and Mail newspaper observed, &quot;what passes for invective in this election is frequently bizarre. Consider the remark by Mr. Quayle: 'The man at the top of our ticket, George Bush, is a life member of the National Rifle Association, while Mr. Dukakis boasts that he is a card-carrying member of the American Civil Liberties Union.' The Republican is good because he supports a group that helps Americans blow each other's heads off; the Democrat is bad because he believes in civil liberties. Note the resonant term 'card-carrying,' used by that old red-baiter Joseph McCarthy to brand people as communist sympathizers. No blow is too low.&quot;    Speaking of J. Danforth Quayle, he takes the cake in his recent attack on Gov. Dukakis as &quot;the most anti-defense candidate&quot; since George McGovern. When it comes to defending our country, Sen. Quayle is hardly in a position to touch the hem of Mr. McGovern's garments. As we all know, Mr. Quayle skulked in the Indiana National Guard while his contemporaries died in Vietnam. Mr. McGovern in his generation's war was a bomber pilot who flew 35 missions, twice brought in planes severely damaged by anti-aircraft fire and won the Distinguished Flying Cross. Sen. Quayle's attack on Mr. McGovern amply justifies the Republican vice presidential candidate's role as the campaign's designated nincompoop.    While on the subject of the Quayles, one must wonder where Mrs. Quayle got it into her pretty head that, as she said the other day in extenuation of her husband's wretched academic record, Franklin Roosevelt failed the New York bar examination seven times. In fact, not that fact seems to count for much in the Quayle household, FDR passed the bar examination on his first try and did so while he was still a student at Columbia Law School.    There is something repulsive about a campaign based on the idea that patriotism is the monopoly of one political party. The exploitation of patriotism for political purposes is a degradation of the national debate, low demagoguery, an abomination. Cannot civilized people stipulate that both candidates are patriots and start talking about the real differences between them?    Above all, what has happened to our sense of humor about ourselves? Imagine Mark Twain commenting on the spectacle of the House rising every morning to pledge allegiance to a flag that too many members dishonor the rest of the day! Think of the joy Henry Mencken would have found in a campaign pivoting on a flag pledge designed for little children!    &quot;We're a gr-reat people,&quot; said Mr. Hennessy, earnestly.    &quot;We ar-re,&quot; said Mr. Dooley. &quot;We ar-re that. An' the best iv it is, we know we ar-re.&quot;    ---   Mr. Schlesinger is Albert Schweitzer professor of the humanities at the City University of New York and a winner of Pulitzer Prizes in history and biography. </TEXT></DOC>