<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870424-0062 </DOCNO><HL> Role of Israel in Iran-Contra ScandalWon't Be Explored in Detail by Panels---By Andy Pasztor and Edward T. PoundStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Hampered by a lack of cooperation and unwilling to buck strong pro-Israeli sentiment on Capitol Hill, House and Senate investigating committees don't intend to delve deeply into Israel's role in the Iran-Contra scandal.    The two committees set up to investigate the affair haven't demanded direct testimony, copies of financial records, or answers to detailed questions about Israeli involvement in the secret U.S. arms sales to Iran, according to lawmakers and law enforcement officials. As a result, according to these sources, the congressional hearings beginning next month won't provide substantial new information about the activities of Israelis involved in the affair.    Critics -- including a number of criminal investigators working for independent counsel Lawrence Walsh -- fault some leaders of the House and Senate select committees for failing to aggressively demand more information and speedier responses from Tel Aviv. These critics contend that Congress, because it controls the flow of U.S. aid to Tel Aviv, has a much better chance than Mr. Walsh does to pin down the Israeli role.    Israeli involvement in the U.S. arms sales to Iran was first disclosed more than five months ago. Rep. Lee Hamilton (D., Ind.), chairman of the House panel investigating the matter, acknowledged in a brief interview earlier this week that &quot;we haven't received any response from the Israelis&quot; to written questions the panel submitted months ago. &quot;But there have been promises of a chronology and other things,&quot; he said.    Israel is expected to provide a chronological summary of its version of the financial transactions involving the arms sales in the next few days, according to Israeli officials. But since the report isn't expected to include testimony from Israeli citizens, it isn't likely to resolve many of the questions confronting investigators. The Israeli government hasn't allowed Mr. Walsh or members of the presidentially appointed Tower Commission to interview Israeli citizens.    Congressional dealings with the Israelis have been handled primarily by Rep. Hamilton and Sen. Daniel Inouye (D., Hawaii), the chairman of the Senate committee. Sen. Inouye is considered a strong supporter of Israel.    In the early stages of the Reagan administration's secret Iran initiative, Israel acted as a conduit for U.S. arms sales to Iran. Investigators believe Israeli officials and private arms dealers could supply the congressional panels with details on how Iran came to pay inflated prices for U.S. arms and where the extra proceeds went -- including whether payoffs were made to Iranian officials.    Mr. Walsh, according to some investigators, has told associates that he remains interested in obtaining more extensive information about the Iran-Contra affair from the Israeli government. To try to piece together the Israeli role in the affair, criminal investigators have questioned Michael Ledeen, an American with close ties to the Israeli government who acted as a consultant for the National Security Council when the issue of arms sales to Iran first arose.    Separately, Sen. Inouye said after a closed door meeting of Senate committee members yesterday that retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord may agree to testify voluntarily before the congressional investigating committees. Associates of Gen. Secord, an important figure in the Iran-Contra affair, said he is eager to tell his story, feeling he did nothing wrong in helping to transport arms to Iran and in funneling arms to Nicaraguan rebels known as Contras.    According to congressional sources, two members of the committees questioned Mr. Secord's business partner, Albert Hakim, in Paris earlier this week. The committees have granted limited immunity to Mr. Hakim, who handled many of the financial matters in the Iran-Contra operations. The grant of immunity shields him from being prosecuted on the basis of material derived from his testimony or records he provided.    Congressional investigators and Mr. Walsh also have been negotiating with an attorney for Manucher Ghorbanifar, the Iranian weapons dealer who was a key middleman for much of the Iran initiative, about whether the Iranian businessman will testify in any criminal proceeding or before the committees.    Mr. Ghorbanifar has told associates that he kept a diary during 1985 and 1986. One Iranian source said that the diary contains details of conversations and meetings that could shed light on the arms sale.    The independent counsel has told the committees he isn't likely to object if they grant immunity to Mr. Ghorbanifar to compel him to testify before them, according to law enforcement officials.    The two committees also are discussing possible immunity for Adnan Khashoggi, the Saudi Arabian businessman who helped finance four of the six arms sales to Iran. </TEXT></DOC>