<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870813-0118 </DOCNO><HL> It Is Time to Re-Base the Budget---By Paul Craig Roberts</HL><DD> 08/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMT TAXESECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   The historic tax-rate reduction that has been the hallmark of the Reagan presidency is in political jeopardy. The administration has based the defense of its policy primarily on President Reagan's threat to veto a tax increase -- a defense that expires in January 1989. Once Mr. Reagan is no longer in the Oval office, the veto threat cannot prevent the repudiation of his policy.    Although voters overwhelmingly supported Mr. Reagan's policy of reining in taxes and spending, many believe that this job has been done. The persistence of the budget deficit and repeated claims that needed social spending has been severely pared to make room for tax cuts and a defense buildup have contributed to the growing belief that Mr. Reagan went too far. Recent White House polls indicate rising public support for increased spending on health and other social programs.    As support for Mr. Reagan's priorities declines, his credibility in opposing a tax increase will wear thin. Already, Congress is maneuvering to renew the Gramm-Rudman deficit-reduction process in a way that is designed to force him to accept a tax increase. Without a credible defense of his policy, his opponents eventually will succeed in portraying his opposition to higher taxes as pigheaded.    Mr. Reagan can slide down the lame-duck slope or he can make a bold move to regain the initiative and control over the explanation of his policies. To regain control, he must explain the deficit and propose a credible way of dealing with it. His budget for the next fiscal year is his last chance. Mr. Reagan has the information at his fingertips that he needs to explain the budget deficit. A call to the Office of Management and Budget, the Treasury, or the Council of Economic Advisers would produce a professional study showing the main cause of the deficit.    The main cause, any well-designed study will show, was the more-rapid-than-expected fall in inflation. Budgets are drawn on the basis of inflation projections, but are recorded in nominal dollars. Spending carries through in nominal dollars even if inflation declines. When inflation collapsed relative to the budget assumptions, the Reagan fiscal program ended up overbudgeted for inflation. Consequently, the government spent more in real terms than it intended. The collapse of inflation also reduced nominal gross national product, which meant the government collected less tax revenues than it expected.    It was never the intention of the Reagan administration or a majority of Congress for federal spending and tax revenues to grow at more than twice the rate of inflation during the decade of the 1980s. The Reagan fiscal plan was based on reducing both tax revenues and federal spending to 19.3% of GNP by 1984. For this plan to succeed, the planned spending cuts and the planned growth in nominal GNP had to materialize.    The unexpected collapse of inflation and the unexpected severe recession of 1981-1982 caused nominal GNP growth to collapse relative to spending. Consequently, the ratio of spending to GNP jumped dramatically. In President Carter's last year the budget was 22.1% of GNP. In 1982 it was 24.3%, going to 25.1% in 1983, 23.7% in 1984 and 24.5% in 1985. These ratios are far above target, and the differences fully account for the budget deficits. For example, in 1984, spending was 4.4% more of GNP than intended, and the budget deficit was 4.5% of GNP.    The ratio of revenues as a share of GNP has not diverged significantly from the goal in Mr. Reagan's 1981 Program for Economic Recovery. The people who have attempted to blame the tax-rate reduction for the budget deficits have yet to explain how cutting tax rates causes spending to rise as a share of GNP. Spending rose as a share of GNP because the Fed collapsed nominal GNP growth relative to forecast.    Part of the public's -- and the administration's -- confusion about the deficit is due to the budget procedure itself. Each year's budget is not debated in terms of what was spent the previous year. Instead, the new budget is compared with a &quot;current-services&quot; budget, which assumes an automatic growth in taxes and spending as the base line for comparison. In this type of budgeting, an increase in taxes and spending is called a cut if the increase is less than is assumed in the current-services concept. By mandating this procedure, Congress has made it difficult to slow the growth of federal spending without creating panic in affected groups that their benefits are being severely cut.    Once Mr. Reagan explains the cause of the deficit, he has a completely legitimate reason to propose bringing the budget in line with the slower-than-expected growth in nominal GNP. The obvious remedy is to take the excess spending that resulted out of the budget by freezing it, thus re-basing future outlays to a lower level. A one-year spending freeze would knock the deficit out of triple-digit ranks and end the futile fight between the White House and Congress in which each tries to shrink the deficit by attacking the other's budget priorities.    Meanwhile, the best way to deal with the &quot;current-services budget,&quot; which allows a larger budget to be described as a cut, is to put it in an appendix. That way budget director James Miller can meet the mandated requirement and still explain to the public that despite seven years of &quot;Reagan budget cuts,&quot; non-defense federal spending has risen 60%. He can show that despite &quot;massive tax cuts,&quot; federal tax revenues have increased $340 billion -- a 65% increase. During this period (1981 through 1987) prices, as measured by the GNP deflator, will have risen 27%.    During the 1980s, various formulations of conventional economic wisdom have been used to throw a pall of doom and gloom over the reorientation of economic policy that has resulted in lower tax rates, disinflation, deregulation and privatization. Separately and together, these developments have been strongly bullish for financial markets and have overridden concerns about budget deficits and the availability of financing. If Mr. Reagan would now move to deal with the deficit in a fundamental way, he would simultaneously remove the political threat to his tax policy as well as the deficit-inspired doom and gloom that tries to destabilize the market at every turn.    By ridding us of the pall cast by the conventional wisdom, Mr. Reagan would open the door to a more hopeful outlook that would further lift the bull market and ensure the continuation of economic renewal.    ---   Mr. Roberts, who was assistant Treasury secretary for economic policy from 1981 to 1982, holds the Simon chair in political economy at the Center for Strategic and International Studies. </TEXT></DOC>