<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880428-0034 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Justices' Highest Duty </HL><SO> </SO><G> JUS CNG </G><TEXT>   The judicial process grinds away on the issue of special prosecutors, with the District Court of Appeals already having ruled that extra-executive prosecutors are unconstitutional, and the Supreme Court hearing oral arguments on Tuesday. In the spirit of the Circuit Court warning that independent counsel are a threat to individual liberty, the case does not concern a well-known or politically powerful target, but Theodore Olson, a former medium-level official accused of nothing more than making alleged misstatements while being badgered by a congressional committee.    In making its final decision, the justices have before them several impressive briefs supporting the Circuit Court opinion. Solicitor General Charles Fried pointed out, for example, that without resort to any prosecutors appointed by or reporting to anyone else, Justice Department officials have managed to prosecute high officials in the Jefferson, Grant, Hayes, Teddy Roosevelt, Harding, Coolidge, Truman and Nixon administrations. Several justices seemed impressed by this point.    An even more eloquent defense of the executive's control of prosecutions has been filed in a brief on behalf of Mr. Olson signed by a bipartisan trio of three former attorneys general: Edward Levi, Griffin Bell and William French Smith. &quot;An executive branch prosecutor operates within a network of intra-branch checks and balances,&quot; the brief says. &quot;They prevent a prosecutor from being overtaken by an excess of zeal or ambition, or by the loss of perspective caused by too narrow a focus on one case.&quot; The attorneys general cited one of their predecessors, and later justice, Robert Jackson. &quot;The prosecutor has more control over life, liberty and reputation than any other person in America,&quot; he said 45 years ago. &quot;His discretion is tremendous.&quot;    Mr. Olson's case is an ideal illustration. His nightmare dates from 1983, when he was the Justice Department official in charge of defending executive privilege from congressional overreaching. Rep. John Dingell charged that Mr. Olson withheld information on a Superfund matter, then compiled a highly partisan 3,000-page report demanding a special prosecutor.    Mr. Olson's prosecutor, Alexia Morrison, looked into the matter. Back in 1986, she came up with a written acknowledgment that Mr. Olson's testimony &quot;probably does not constitute a prosecutorial violation of any federal criminal law.&quot; But she used her discretion to keep hounding him nonetheless. Most recently, when the statute of limitations on any offense by Mr. Olson was about to expire, she blackmailed him into signing away his rights by threatening to indict him despite the lack of evidence; under the congressionally crafted provisions of the independent-counsel law, the indictment would have precluded government payment of any of his enormous legal fees even if he were ultimately acquitted.    On Tuesday Ms. Morrison tried, without much apparent success, to assure that &quot;there is no concern here about congressional aggrandizement of its own powers.&quot; Justice Scalia responded with the understatement, &quot;It is not always a happy occasion for executive branch officials to testify before Congress. Isn't the result here that if a committee thinks there has not been full disclosure, which happens not infrequently . . . there must be an independent counsel? Doesn't that alter the balance between the legislative and executive branches to a significant degree?&quot;    Several justices, including Sandra Day O'Connor and Byron White, said the deep involvement of judges with the independent counsel under the Ethics in Government Act troubles them. Congress mandated that a panel of federal judges name the independent counsel, help determine the breadth of their investigations and have the final say if the President tries to remove one for &quot;good cause.&quot; This creates a perverse alliance between judges and prosecutors. Chief Justice Rehnquist was incredulous that the judges who appointed these prosecutors were judge and jury when they ruled this was constitutional.    What's the likely outcome? Justice Anthony Kennedy recused himself from the case, without explanation but in our guess largely for reasons colored by the supercharged atmosphere surrounding his confirmation, the Bork battle and the Meese-Deaver-Nofziger-North independent-counsel episodes. With eight justices voting, four are needed for a tie that would uphold the appeals-court ruling invalidating these prosecutors. We wouldn't be surprised if Justices Rehnquist, Scalia, O'Connor and White join to invalidate the law. But predicting votes is risky. After all, a finding that independent counsel are unconstitutional would severely jeopardize the cases against Deaver, North, et al. And to keep that from happening, in the view of many summertime civil libertarians and perhaps some justices, Mr. Olson may have to hang.    The decision should come by the end of this term in July. If the Supreme Court upholds the ruling of unconstitutionality, it may offend a powerful branch of government, but it will have done its duty to uphold the supreme law of the land. </TEXT></DOC>