<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880705-0049 </DOCNO><HL> New Political Order Is Profoundly Changing Vietnam --- Nonviolent Revolution Affects the Economy and Role of Communist Party </HL><AUTHOR> Barry Wain (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> HANOI, Vietnam  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Another revolution is under way in Vietnam.    Unlike the first, which brought the Communists to power, this one is nonviolent. But it still aims to overturn the political, economic and social order, and profoundly affects the lives of most Vietnamese.    Similar to restructuring in the Soviet Union, China and some other Communist countries, Vietnam's &quot;renovation&quot; program was embraced at the end of 1986 at the Communist Party's sixth congress.    While foreign attention has focused on Vietnam's attempts to reform its badly faltering economy, political changes have had more impact, especially in loosening controls in what has been a totalitarian state obsessed with secrecy and security and intolerant of criticism.    The changes have had a major impact on members of the Communist Party. This is what renovation means to three of them:   The Pragmatist   Eighteen months after becoming general-secretary of the Communist Party at the sixth congress, Nguyen Van Linh remains something of a mystery. He is more open and accessible than his predecessors, but it still isn't clear where he is going and what inspires him.    At the age of 73, Mr. Linh comes from the same generation as the legendary war heroes who led the country to victory against the French and the Americans -- and then into an economic quagmire. But while he was a life-long revolutionary, he wasn't in the inner circle during the war years and didn't come to power until most Vietnamese yearned to forget the fighting and live better.    Like them, Mr. Linh complains about rising prices, production bottlenecks and poor market management. He assails an inefficient system of state subsidies, denounces uncaring and wasteful bureaucracy and pursues corrupt and incompetent cadres.    He even writes an occasional front-page newspaper column in Nhan Dan, the party's official newspaper, titled &quot;Things Which Must Be Done Immediately,&quot; that zeroes in on economic malfeasance.    For instance, the column exposed the case of the rotting garlic -- 360 tons of it -- that was supposed to have been exported but ended up in a warehouse. He revealed the aviation-fuel scandal: After arriving at the port of Haiphong, fuel must pass through eight paper-shuffling agencies before reaching an aircraft. And he accused officials of crimes, one for demanding sexual favors of women employees, another for selling a government tractor on the black market.    This has made Mr. Linh popular at the grass-roots level, even as the economy continues to founder. But while he is on the wavelength of the masses, it is less clear how he got there, ideologically.    The explanation seems to be that Mr. Linh, though born in the north, spent most of his life in the south, where capitalism flourished until the Communists took over in 1975. He twice served as party secretary in Ho Chi Minh City, the administrative area that includes Saigon, former capital of South Vietnam.    Vietnamese say Mr. Linh has concluded that capitalism delivers the goods more effectively than the rigid, centralized planning long pursued by Hanoi. It was a mistake for the government to try to eliminate private enterprise in its quest for a socialist paradise, he says.    &quot;Yes, we want to go to socialism,&quot; he tells associates. &quot;But we want to go by plane or car, not by bicycle.&quot;    That pragmatism extends to making peace with potential opponents such as religious groups, releasing political prisoners in so-called re-education camps and cutting back the police-state apparatus.    Mr. Linh spent only a few years in school. He was imprisoned at 15 for anti-French activity and was exposed to little but war for the next 40 years.    Informed and astute Vietnamese doubt that Mr. Linh has the physical or intellectual drive to achieve the transformation he seeks. The most he can hope for, they believe, is to start the process and put in place younger leaders to complete it.    The Convert   Le Dang Doanh joined Vietnam's Communist Party and went to East Germany and the Soviet Union for higher education and advanced training. He had no reason to doubt the superiority of socialism.    Then he visited Sweden and West Germany. &quot;I had to reconsider my ideas,&quot; he says. Indeed, he jettisoned much of what he had been taught and embraced the marketplace, competition, private initiative, material incentives and other aspects of capitalism. As he sees it, the sixth congress gave him the green light to promote his once-heretical ideas.    Mr. Doanh, 46 and still a party member, is an adviser in the government's Central Institute for Economic Management. He doesn't want to merely tinker with the system, as do most other reformers, but wants the system overhauled, remodeled, perhaps even discarded.    &quot;We need to be part of the international order,&quot; he says. &quot;We need to open not only a small window but the door.&quot;    A thin, bespectacled man who speaks fluent German and passable Russian, French and English, Mr. Doanh began his working life as a chemist, did a stint as a German translator and got involved in economics by chance, though it has become a consuming passion.    His starting point is that Western nations have outperformed Vietnam's socialist allies: &quot;Hungary can't compete with Austria. East Germany can't be compared with West Germany.&quot; Nearly all socialist countries have economic problems and are searching for solutions, he says.    Ticking off Vietnam's many mistakes, Mr. Doanh regrets the post-1975 emphasis on heavy industry that tied up scarce capital and resulted in a couple of large hydroelectric-power stations: &quot;We made a big monument, but the money is dead.&quot; He laments the dogma and inertia that characterize the economy, and declares, &quot;State ownership is inefficient.&quot;    He ridicules the notion that Hanoi might learn from Moscow, its major backer. &quot;The Soviet Union's export structure is the same as that of any less-developed country,&quot; he says.    Mr. Doanh stops short of urging the wholesale introduction of capitalism. He prefers &quot;some kind of central planning connected with a market economy.&quot;    The Crusader   A journalist for 34 years, Vu Tuat Viet reported on the Viet Cong and North Vietnamese soldiers fighting the U.S.-backed Saigon administration during the war. On more than one occasion he had to drop his typewriter and grab a rifle.    But that can't compare with what is happening today. &quot;This is the most exciting time,&quot; he says. &quot;It's seething now.&quot;    Renovation has unshackled the press. After long functioning as propaganda outlets, newspapers and magazines in the past two years have discovered news. Not only do they cover routine matters -- a big fire, a collapsed bridge, an overseas beauty contest -- but they also venture into sensitive areas, such as the morale of troops on the China border. And they drive state officials from office by identifying bribery, corruption and incompetence. They print readers' letters on almost any subject, including many that had been taboo.    Perhaps the liveliest daily is the popular Saigon Giai Phong, or Liberated Saigon, where Mr. Viet works as one of three deputies to the editor-in-chief. Founded five days after the Communists captured Saigon on April 30, 1975, it combined publications that had operated underground.    Mr. Viet, 54, dressed in slacks, open shirt and sandals, chain smokes as he explains that nobody in the party or government would dare try to openly block the paper's pursuit of the truth. They go at it obliquely, he says.    &quot;They say: 'Yes, it's rather a good article, but some details aren't accurate.' Or, more subtly, 'Yes, the content is good, but the expression is a bit abrupt.' Or, 'Yes, it's good, but do you think it's timely?'&quot;    Mr. Viet has bigger worries. Apart from uncooperative targets, the paper and its 32 journalists face a challenge to become more professional, he says. &quot;Criticizing shortcomings isn't enough. We have to recognize achievements. We have to develop judgment, and that isn't easy.&quot;    &quot;We think people should be able to get the information they need, except for national secrets,&quot; Mr. Viet says. But with the paper answerable to the Ho Chi Minh City party secretary, he concedes that &quot;there probably are some forbidden fields&quot; still.    &quot;I think the most important thing is who forbids and who allows,&quot; he adds.    &quot;If the decision comes from the renovators, it would be on a sound basis and I would accept it. But if it comes from conservatives, bureaucrats and negative elements, I would just do the opposite of what they say.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>