<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880801-0071 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO>  </SO><TEXT>   HUSSEIN URGED an independent Palestinian state in the occupied lands.    Jordan's king, in a speech delivered in Amman, renounced his country's claim to the West Bank and said it was cutting administrative and legal ties to the territory. &quot;Jordan is not Palestine,&quot; he said, adding that an independent state would be &quot;established on the occupied Palestinian land after its liberation.&quot; While Hussein has previously called for such an independent state, it was the first time that he told the Arabs in the Israeli-occupied territories to take responsibility for their own affairs. The PLO immediately convened an emergency meeting.    King Hussein's move appeared to rule out the idea of Jordan representing Palestinians in any Mideast peace talks. Both Israel and the U.S. oppose a Palestinian state in the West Bank.    ---   Shultz is scheduled to begin a 10-day visit to nine countries in Central and South America today. The secretary of state is seeking a common strategy for exerting diplomatic pressure on Nicaragua's government to establish democracy. He is expected to face opposition from several nations to a statement denouncing the Sandinista regime.    ---   The Reagan administration has made low-level diplomatic contacts with Iran through third party nations, Secretary of State Shultz said. The contacts are aimed at improving U.S.-Iranian relations. But Shultz, on CBS-TV, said there hadn't been any direct talks about a deal involving the release of U.S. hostages in Lebanon.    Iran said its forces recaptured towns on the western Persian Gulf war front, and Iraq declared that it would &quot;maintain our finger on the trigger&quot; until peace was assured in the gulf. An Iranian envoy said Saturday that Tehran is willing to hold direct U.N.-backed cease-fire talks with Baghdad.    ---   NASA resumed a two-part countdown for the test-firing of the space shuttle Discovery's main engines after engineers repaired a hydrogen leak and a balky oxygen pump. The problems, detected Friday, caused the fourth postponement in 10 days for the test. It is currently scheduled for Thursday.    ---   The pro-Iranian Hezbollah rejected an appeal by the U.N. Security Council for the release of American hostage Lt. Col. William Higgins, who was was kidnapped in southern Lebanon last February. An official of the extremist group said in Beirut that Higgins, a Marine working for a U.N. observer force in Lebanon, was a spy.    ---   Israel jailed a leading Palestinian spokesman without trial, and Jewish peace activists said the arrest would block efforts to end an uprising against Israeli rule in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. Faisal Husseini, a member of a prominent East Jerusalem family, was ordered detained for six months on suspicion of fomenting unrest.    ---   A pier collapsed in northwestern Malaysia, killing at least 35 people and injuring more than 700, according to authorities in the port city of Butterworth. The pier had been jammed with thousands of people going to a Buddhist festival at the resort island of Penang, in the Strait of Malacca.    ---   A federal appeals panel threw out an FCC ruling that limits the broadcasting of &quot;indecent&quot; material to between midnight and 6 a.m. The court, voting 3-0, said the agency hadn't demonstrated that such a limitation was necessary to protect children. The panel in Washington returned the case to the FCC.    ---   Dukakis preached ethics and economics as he stumped the Midwest and Southern border states over the weekend in pursuit of Jackson supporters and disaffected blue-collar Democrats. Meanwhile, Bush said he has narrowed his search for a running mate to just a few candidates with whom he is comfortable.    ---   Honduras said a decision to pay damages to the family of a leftist student who disappeared while in police custody in 1981 isn't an admission of guilt. Tegucigalpa said the payment would be made out of respect for the Inter-American Court of Human Rights, which ruled Friday that Honduras was responsible for the student's death.    ---   The Communist Party established a yearlong timetable for implementing Soviet leader Gorbachev's program of political and economic restructuring, Tass reported. On Friday, Gorbachev proposed that farmers be allowed to lease state-owned land in an effort to end the country's chronic food crisis. </TEXT></DOC>