<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880726-0094 </DOCNO><HL> U.S. Is Investigating Possible Drexel Role In Boesky Tax-Loss Scheme, Sources Say </HL><AUTHOR> Daniel Hertzberg (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TAXES </CO><IN> STK SCR </IN><G> SEC JUS IRS </G><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Government investigators have unearthed evidence suggesting that Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. may have aided Ivan F. Boesky in an illegal scheme by Mr. Boesky that enabled the former arbitrager's securities firm to violate tax laws, people familiar with the investigation said.    The investigators, the people said, are focusing on a series of tax-motivated stock trades in 1985 between Drexel and Mr. Boesky's firm, Seemala Corp. The trades, in which Mr. Boesky bought stock and sold it to Drexel at a loss, permitted Mr. Boesky to claim immediate trading losses for Seemala for tax purposes.    The government is examining evidence suggesting that Drexel secretly promised to reimburse Seemala for trading losses claimed by Mr. Boesky, and later did so, according to the people familiar with the investigation.    If the government could prove that Drexel knowingly participated in a scheme that allowed Mr. Boesky to violate tax laws by claiming trading losses he didn't really sustain, Drexel could be held in violation of federal tax and securities laws.    Why Drexel might have reimbursed Mr. Boesky's firm for the trading losses isn't clear. However, investigators have evidence suggesting that Drexel and Mr. Boesky collaborated in a wide range of other securities transactions, including a suspected illegal scheme to profit from corporate takeover situations.    A Drexel spokesman said, &quot;We simply don't respond to stories based on rumor or leaks. What we have continually said is that we know of no wrongdoing by our firm or any of our people. That remains our position.&quot;    Harvey Pitt, an attorney for Mr. Boesky, declined comment.    As previously reported, the Securities and Exchange Commission last month approved -- but agreed not to file immediately -- a civil complaint charging Drexel as well as Michael Milken, Drexel's head of junk-bond trading, and three other Drexel employees with a number of securities-law violations.    The SEC's case against Drexel centers on the firm's dealings with Mr. Boesky, according to people familiar with the case. But this is the first time that questions of possible tax-law violations have surfaced.    The SEC, the Manhattan U.S. Attorney's office -- which is conducting a criminal investigation of Drexel -- and the Internal Revenue Service are all looking into the suspected tax scheme, according to people familiar with the government investigation.    Mr. Boesky in November 1986 paid $100 million to settle civil insider-trading charges and agreed to cooperate with the government investigation. He is currently serving a three-year sentence at a federal prison in Lompoc, Calif. Because of Mr. Boesky's previous settlements with the SEC and federal prosecutors, it is believed that Mr. Boesky wouldn't be subject to any civil or criminal charges that might arise from the government's investigation into the suspected tax scheme.    John Sturc, associate enforcement director of the SEC, declined comment. A spokesman for the U.S. attorney also declined comment.    According to the people familiar with the investigation, the trading arrangement was part of efforts by Mr. Boesky to minimize Seemala's current taxes, and it worked this way: Shortly before Seemala's fiscal year ended on March 31, Mr. Boesky bought certain stocks whose value was likely to decline soon after the purchase. This is because the record date for these shares was fast approaching. The record date is the date by which someone has to be the legal owner of a share of stock in order to be entitled to receive the next quarterly dividend payment on the stock.    Mr. Boesky held the stocks long enough to make sure he qualified to receive the next dividend payments on the shares. Then he immediately sold the stocks to Drexel. As soon as the stocks went ex-dividend, the prices of the shares fell briefly, because any new buyer of those stocks wasn't entitled to the next dividend payments -- the seller is. This meant that Mr. Boesky recorded losses on the sales of the shares to Drexel. All of this had to happen by March 31.    Such a strategy allowed Mr. Boesky to claim trading losses on those stocks in Seemala's fiscal year ending March 31, 1985. And since dividends are normally paid some time after the record date, Seemala didn't receive the dividends on the stocks until sometime in April. These stock dividends would be counted as income in Seemala's new fiscal year starting April 1. Experts said that this strategy of dividend tax trades is widely practiced on Wall Street to minimize current taxes while creating future income; if done properly, the technique is legitimate, they said.    However, according to the people familiar with the investigation, the government has evidence suggesting that Drexel secretly promised to reimburse Seemala for its losses on the dividend trades; the very existence of such a secret guarantee could have prevented Mr. Boesky from legitimately claiming he sustained the trading losses.    Any government case that might involve the suspected tax scheme wouldn't necessarily turn solely on the existence of a Drexel guarantee of future reimbursement. The people familiar with the case said the government has evidence suggesting that at least part of Seemala's losses were reimbursed by Drexel as part of calculations leading to a $5.3 million payment from the arbitrager's Ivan F. Boesky Corp. to Drexel in March 1986.    As previously reported, there is evidence that the $5.3 million payment was also connected to an alleged stock parking scheme between Messrs. Boesky and Milken involving more than 20 stocks, most of them takeover-related. According to people familiar with the government's investigation, the $5.3 million figure reflected the net difference between Mr. Boesky's profits and Drexel's on the parked stock. The $5.3 million payment is at the heart of the SEC's case against Drexel, the people said.    Drexel has said repeatedly that the payment was for legitimate investment banking advice it provided Mr. Boesky, and both Drexel and Mr. Milken have denied any wrongdoing. </TEXT></DOC>