<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870302-0064 </DOCNO><HL> Contra Supply Operation Got FundsAfter Weapons Sales to Iran, Data Show---By David RogersStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A secret Contra supply operation received an infusion of funds after U.S. weapon sales to Iran last May, according to White House documents that shed new light on the multilayered financial network used to sustain the Nicaraguan guerrillas.    The papers, some contained in the Tower Commission report issued last week and some cited by other sources, add to the evidence that profits from the arms sales were diverted on behalf of the Contras. They also identify Cayman Island bank accounts controlled by Nicaraguans and Americans linked to the resistance and a larger effort to build political support within the U.S. for the war.    Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North, who oversaw the Contra supply operation from within the National Security Council, reported May 16 that he had more than $6 million available for &quot;immediate disbursement&quot; and predicted more new money in &quot;a few more days.&quot; The memo closely corresponds with transactions taking place in Europe to finance a May 23 shipment of U.S. arms to Tehran; the shipments left profits available to Col. North for potential use by the Contra network.    According to the Tower Commission, set up by President Reagan to investigate the Iran-Contra affair, Adnan Khashoggi, a Saudi businessman, deposited an estimated $15 million on May 14 in a Swiss bank account controlled by one of Col. North's private operatives, retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord. An estimated $6.5 million was withdrawn the next day to compensate the U.S. government for the weapons, leaving as much as $8.5 million available for diversion, according to the commission's report released last week.    Col. North's memo a day later came less than a month after he had been pleading poverty for the Contra operation. In the memo, he appears most concerned with keeping secret the airlift then ferrying arms into Nicaragua and plays down the need to go to third countries for financial help.    Col. North's memo is among scores of computer messages made public by the commission, led by former Sen. John Tower (R., Texas). These documents, together with financial records and other NSC papers not included in the panel's report, portray a complex network of corporations and bank accounts used to assist the Contras and melding clandestine operators in Europe and Latin America with conservative fund-raisers and publicists in Washington.    Front companies disguised the origin of funds, and payments bounced in and out of banks to confuse the paper trail. For example, Southern Air Transport, a Miami-based freight carrier, was directed to use a Panamanian-registered corporation, Amalgamated Commercial Enterprises (ACE), as a front for services Southern provided to the covert airlift beginning in late 1985.    Payments, believed to originate abroad, were passed through Chase Manhattan and Manufacturers Hanover Trust in New York before being deposited in ACE's account at Banco de Iberamerica, a Panama City bank that has figured in past money-laundering schemes. By comparison, direct payments to Southern Air's own U.S. bank in other cases were made by wire transfers from foreign accounts in the name of apparent front companies, such as Toyco SA. Toyco, identified in Col. North's papers as part of the Contra network, paid $50,000 to the Miami carrier last September.    At least two bank accounts identified in Col. North's papers are believed to be controlled by Contra leader Adolfo Calero, and a third, in Costa Rica, was the source of payments to Contra official Alfonso Robelo, according to intelligence sources.    Gen. Secord and his business associate, Albert Hakim, are the two most prominent figures among the clandestine operators who assisted Col. North. Here in the U.S., Col. North's papers indicate close ties to Richard Miller, a principal in International Business Communications, a Washington public relations concern.    Mr. Miller, a former Reagan-Bush campaign worker and ex-aide at the Agency for International Development, has refused any comment, but investigators are pursuing links between the conservative publicist and a Cayman Islands-registered corporation, International Communications Inc. A diagram in Col. North's papers suggests a flow of funds from International Business Communications to a company identified as I.C. Inc., and according to intelligence sources, separate NSC papers include a notation linking the second company to &quot;Miller.&quot;    International Business Communications received an estimated $276,000 contract from the State Department as part of an administration effort to build support for the Contra cause. Mr. Miller has been linked as well to conservative fund-raisers and nonprofit organizations that promoted the administration's policy in Central America.    Though Col. North prepared a memo last April outlining plans to divert an estimated $12 million to support the Contras, sources familiar with the Tower Commission investigation said they found no evidence that the document was shown to President Reagan. The paper was prepared ostensibly for then-National Security Adviser John Poindexter to present to Mr. Reagan for his approval, but the president told the commission he never saw it.    Six months later, in October 1986, a memo by Col. North speaks of the president being briefed on the need to get an attorney for Eugene Hasenfus, a crew member on a plane shot down by Nicaraguan forces while ferrying arms to the Contras. Commission sources said it is unclear what Mr. Reagan might have been told; no records were found of such a briefing or meeting where Col. North, alone, met with the president.    More generally, however, Col. North's tone assumes that Mr. Reagan had some knowledge regarding the Contra supply operation, and investigators say the Marine officer was prolific in the detail he provided his immediate superior, Vice Adm. Poindexter. Former National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane emerges with a larger role than previously disclosed. In one message, he suggests that Col. North join him in retirement and they both could become involved in clandestine activities.    Mr. McFarlane's tenure at the NSC coincided with the early buildup of the private supply network in 1985. Col. North reported an increase of $16.5 million in the funding available to the insurgents between Feb. 22 and April 9, 1985.    At the same time, Col. North was arguing for increased aid for Guatemala, whose military had helped him to obtain necessary certificates to disguise arms exports from Portugal to the Contras.    The Tower report doesn't reflect any record of Mr. McFarlane's response. But a profile of the former NSC adviser published soon afterwards in 1985 says he was instrumental in overriding Treasury Department objections and awarding commodity credits to Guatemala. Agriculture Department records show that Guatemala was awarded a total of $45 million in credits, $25 million in February 1985 and another $20 million five months later. </TEXT></DOC>