<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870424-0069 </DOCNO><HL> Bumpy Ride: Pilots Feel the StressOf Turmoil in the Airline Industry---By Paulette ThomasStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR TEXAIRLINES (AIR) </IN><TEXT>   Capt. Ron Russell was being ordered to break the law, and he was frustrated and angry. His bosses at Eastern Airlines Inc. had instructed him to fly one more trip, even though the Atlanta-to-Houston run would put him over the weekly limit of 30 hours' flying time.    Capt. Russell consulted the Federal Aviation Administration, which initially told him to obey regulations. But after an Eastern official contacted the FAA, warning that if the 30-hour rule were rigidly enforced &quot;Eastern could not operate,&quot; the agency reversed its decision, according to an FAA memo. Still uneasy, he turned to his union, which warned him not to jeopardize his job.    When Capt. Russell finally took off, he was drained from the hours-long dispute. But the 22-year veteran felt even worse when he landed and found that higher FAA officials had slapped him with his first citation ever. It has since been withdrawn, and the FAA is investigating the matter.    In the competitive and chaotic atmosphere created by airline deregulation (the industry saw 26 mergers in the past two years), pilots everywhere are feeling increased and conflicting pressures. This month, pilots from about 20 airlines met in Houston to discuss forming a compact to combat the &quot;constant upheaval&quot; in their profession. Another group recently testified before a congressional committee about the escalating stress they feel. At UAL Inc., pilots have even proposed buying the company's United Airlines unit to assure improved safety, service and management-employee relations.    In response to such concerns, the Air Line Pilots Association is planning an exhaustive review of cockpit stress, mindful that 60% to 70% of airline accidents are attributed to pilot error. &quot;We think it poses a considerable threat, and we're afraid we're only seeing the tip of the iceberg,&quot; says Randy Babbitt, the group's executive administrator.    For their part, airline spokesmen deny that safety has been compromised and argue that improved technology has made the pilot's job in some ways easier.    Pilot stress is perhaps nowhere as apparent as it is at Eastern and at Continental Airlines Corp., the operating units of Texas Air Corp. Texas Air's rapid expansion has made it the nation's largest airline-holding company, representing 20% of the market. Pilots complain that as a result of this growth, the debt-burdened company is often pushing them, like Capt. Russell, beyond safe limits; that they are taking heat from passengers perturbed over delays and other service problems; and that union and non-union pilots have been forced to fly in the same cockpit -- a situation they see as potentially disruptive.    &quot;We can't just pull over for a cup of coffee when things get too tense,&quot; says Jack Bavis, chief of Eastern's pilots union.    Spokesmen for the Texas Air units strenuously deny that their pilots are under any extraordinary pressures. They point out that cost-cutting moves by Frank Lorenzo, Texas Air's chairman, have made him a lightning rod for union-instigated criticism and the unconcealed animosity of many pilots. An Eastern spokesman adds that pilots complain of stress now because they had it &quot;easy&quot; for so long.    Yet there is evidence that stress and poor morale have taken a toll at both airlines. Eastern pilots, for example, are quitting the company at the rate of about 30 a month, twice the rate before deregulation, according to the pilot association. Last month, Eastern pilots picketed in several cities, protesting such work-rule changes as a stricter attendance policy they say encourages them to fly even while sick. (Eastern says it had to tighten attendance rules because it was losing $70 million a year from employee absences, the highest rate in the industry.)    Pilots also point to a recent independent study linking corporate upheaval and pilot stress. Linda Little, a psychologist specializing in occupational stress at Virginia Polytechnic Institute, surveyed 420 randomly selected pilots at Eastern, USAir Inc. and Piedmont Aviation Inc. She found that nearly one-quarter of those at Eastern reported sleeplessness, anxiety and other symptoms of depression -- nearly twice the rate she saw at the other carriers. Ms. Little attributes the disparity to the crisis atmosphere at Eastern, which skirted bankruptcy for several years before it was acquired by Texas Air last year.    &quot;It's clear that pilots at Eastern are already reaching the limits of their coping ability,&quot; says Ms. Little. Eastern executives discredit the study, saying it's tainted because the names were provided by the pilot union.    At Continental, problems in the cockpit were evident during a meeting earlier this month between a group of pilots and the airline's top management. &quot;I do know there are morale problems out there,&quot; said Andrew Childers, vice president for flying, told the pilots after hearing them complain of low pay, poor scheduling and run-ins with inexperienced ground crews. Thomas Plaskett, the airline's president, acknowledged that low morale is prompting a high number of resignations.    Part of the problem is the disarray spawned by Continental's fast growth. The airline is currently in the throes of merging with three others -- People Express Airlines Inc., Frontier Airlines Inc. and New York Airlines Inc. Pilots say they often find themselves at the center of the resulting difficulties -- a situation Continental says it is working to correct. One Continental pilot at the company meeting told executives that a furious passenger had recently tried to barge into the cockpit to take out his frustrations over a missing meal. &quot;The man was at my throat,&quot; the pilot said. Such frustrations, he says, are &quot;becoming quite common.&quot;    Breakneck expansion at Continental has also led to a shortage of adequately trained pilots. According to a memorandum from William Nogues, head of pilot training, to his staff, the airline's flight instructors were asked to fly over Easter weekend because there weren't enough pilots to meet its schedule. &quot;This shortage of pilots is caused by an ambitious marketing plan which has now exceeded our ability to train&quot; new pilots, Mr. Nogues said. The situation is aggravated, he added, by &quot;our well-known scheduling inefficiencies.&quot;    A Continental spokesman calls the memo &quot;overstated&quot; and says only six instructors had to work over Easter weekend. The spokesman dismissed the idea that Mr. Nogues was qualified to judge the situation, noting that he had been in his job for a only a week.    Eastern, too, faces a pilot shortage. Capt. Bavis, the union chief, claims that the extra hours flown by his 4,500 unionized pilots represent the equivalent in manhours of 300 &quot;phantom pilots.&quot; (Eastern denies its pilots are flying beyond their contract's stipulations.)    Personal financial pressures are another source of stress, according to Ms. Little's study. At Eastern, for example, pilots are being asked by management to accept salary cutbacks of 27%.    Such cost-cutting efforts have worsened labor disputes, which have in turn pitted non-union pilots against pro-union pilots. First Officer Guy Casey was once a captain at Continental but lost his seniority during the bitter strike there in 1983, which he had helped to organize. He says he wants to put the experience behind him.    But last year, on his final trip for Continental before retirement, Mr. Casey endured turbulence in the cockpit that rivaled any head winds outside. He recalls that the captain railed during the Denver-New York round trip about why he felt justified in crossing the picket lines during the 1983 strike, while the second officer vehemently pledged that the busted union would rise again. Says Mr. Casey, &quot;There wasn't much camaraderie in there.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>