<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870605-0153 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> LABORTRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA) </IN><TEXT>   Re your May 14 editorial, &quot;The Railroads' Baggage&quot;:    You inaccurately compared a work stoppage by luggage handlers and construction workers with one involving railroad employees. The Supreme Court ruled unanimously in favor of secondary picketing as a proper means of self-help during disputes with carriers. In making this decision, the court recognized the necessity to ignore comparisons between the railroad industry and other industries, and acknowledged that such action might aid in resolving railroad disputes.    As president of the Brotherhood of Maintenance of Way Employes, let me state that our union does not wish to resort to secondary picketing. Unfortunately, circumstances surrounding the bitter dispute with Guilford Industries forced us to employ this action. We did it to protect our members and maintain a fair wage structure. Guilford was unwilling to negotiate under the law. The Supreme Court recognized this and upheld our decision to wage a secondary boycott. Moreover, Congress, an emergency board appointed by President Reagan and a congressional advisory board recognized the intransigence of Guilford management and acted wisely to resolve our longstanding dispute.    Your editorial called for revamping the Railway Labor Act and ending secondary picketing. What you fail to recognize is that secondary picketing is our only means of protection against carriers refusing to negotiate in good faith. You also failed to note that minor disputes in the railroad industry, as opposed to other industries, are subject to final and binding arbitration.    Secondary picketing as a last-resort statutory right must be preserved. It is not only in our best interest, but in the interest of everyone riding our nation's railways.    Geoffrey N. Zeh   President   Brotherhood of Maintenance of Way Employees    Detroit   ---   I applaud your main point, that secondary picketing in the railroad industry should be outlawed. For decades many Railway Labor Act practitioners believed that this law, backed up by federal courts, protected the industry and the public. We thought it did so, and more effectively than the National Labor Relations Act, which allows only the National Labor Relations Board, not the employer, to ask a court to enjoin such activity.    However your suggestion to strike down the anachronistic Railway Labor Act may not be the thing to do. There is a lot more at stake and more to this law than the Supreme Court decision. This is not to say that critical reexamination is out of order. It is appropriate to ask whether, in our contemporary, deregulated transportation environment, the law promotes or encumbers public-interest considerations; whether nothing more is needed than to transfer the two industries to the other law; or whether, in an attempt to change, the collision of special interests in Congress might reshuffle the deck in some unpredictable way that would not serve either the public or the industries.    For people who have invested their careers in one or the other of the Railway Labor Act industries, these are profound questions that deserve more than a throwaway line in what is otherwise a constructive editorial.    Charles I. Hopkins Jr   Chairman   National Railway Labor Conference   Washington   ---   I commend you for urging Congress to repeal the Railway Labor Act. New Yorkers have a direct stake in this issue, both as taxpayers and commuters.    The Metropolitan Transportation Authority (MTA) operates three locally financed commuter railroads that are subject to this law. It is a barrier to our ability to improve productivity and reduce our cost of doing business. The law's structure perpetuates a situation where each of the MTA commuter authorities has to negotiate with more than 20 small rail craft unions to reach a labor contract. This structure turns collective bargaining into chaos, as the 110,000 riders of the Long Island Rail Road discovered earlier this year when they became hostages to a process that encouraged one union local to outdo the next in asserting its demands.    Application of the Railway Labor Act simply does not make sense for commuter railroads. These agencies are public-transit operators, not private freight railroads, and as such, they should fall under the same legal structures covering other public-transit agencies. If Congress removed the commuter authorities from the jurisdiction of the Railway Labor Act, taxpayers would save substantial sums, employees would have increased benefits, and collective bargaining would be far more manageable, timely and efficient.    Robert R. Kiley   Chairman   Metropolitan Transportation Authority   New York   ---   The Railway Labor Act has provided a legislative base for maintaining labor peace and stability in the railroad and airline industries during periods of severe stress and crises -- namely deregulation and fare/rate wars. Despite a relatively few instances of interrupted service due to strikes, the law has achieved settlements without strikes in 97% of the cases handled in the airline and railroad industries. Neither the railroad carriers nor the labor organizations seek to abandon the law in favor of the National Labor Relations Act.    Walter C. Wallace   Member, National Mediation Board   Washington</TEXT></DOC>