<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870828-0014 </DOCNO><HL> North's Top Aide Testifies He Was ToldThat President Approved of Contra Aid---By Andy Pasztor and Edward T. PoundStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMT LATAM MDESTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   As the Iran-Contra scandal began unraveling last fall, Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North indicated to his top aide that President Reagan had authorized his activities, including the diversion of funds to Nicaraguan insurgents, according to the aide's testimony before congressional investigators.    The aide, Marine Lt. Col. Robert Earl, testified that Col. North calmly assured him in November that he hadn't violated any laws and indicated that he acted with the authority of the president and other senior administration officials.    One conversation took place around Nov. 25, the day Col. North left his White House job. Col. Earl said that Col. North indicated that President Reagan knew about the diversion of Iran arms-sales profits to the Contra rebels before the scandal erupted.    A second North assistant, Craig Coy, a commander in the Coast Guard and currently also a special assistant to Attorney General Edwin Meese, had told congressional investigators that Col. North assured him last October that his activities in support of the Contras were legal and authorized by President Reagan. But Mr. Coy, in testimony in March, modified that earlier statement, saying that while he wouldn't deny making it, he couldn't recall Col. North's invoking the president's name.    President Reagan repeatedly has insisted that he wasn't aware of the diversion to the Contras, and Col. North testified publicly in July before the House and Senate Iran-Contra committees that he hadn't discussed the diversion with the president.    The testimony by the two former North aides portrays a man who appeared unconcerned, as the Iran-Contra scandal began unfolding, about whether he had overstepped his authority and whether he faced possible criminal prosecution. Some of his statements, as recounted by the two men, conflict with what Col. North later told congressional committees about the president's knowledge of some of the Iran-Contra activities.    Col. Earl, who also has testified before a federal grand jury here investigating the scandal, also made these points in his four meetings in May with congressional investigators:    --He said that Col. North told him that William Casey, then director of the Central Intelligence Agency, knew that Iran arms-sales profits were funneled to the Contras. Mr. Casey repeatedly denied knowing about the diversion, but Col. Earl's testimony buttresses Col. North's public assertions that Mr. Casey embraced the idea when it was proposed in 1986.    --He said that, along with Col. North and Col. North's secretary, Fawn Hall, he shredded sensitive government documents related to the Iran-Contra affair within hours after learning that Attorney General Edwin Meese intended to have his aides review Col. North's records Nov. 21. He testified that after giving Col. North records to put into a shredding machine, he went back to his own office to begin reviewing files. He said it was &quot;a little unclear to me what exactly to look for, so I erred on the side of destruction.&quot;    --He said that Col. North's preoccupation with aiding the Contras was such that Col. North, in May 1986, told him he might take funds offered by Texas millionaire H. Ross Perot for ransoming American hostages in Lebanon and instead use them to assist the insurgents. Mr. Perot had offered $2 million to free the hostages. However, Col. Earl said, the plan to divert the money to the Contras never was carried out.    --Israeli officials, according to Col. Earl, strongly urged the White House to deny that any arms were sold to Iran after the secret U.S. initiative with Iran was exposed in early November 1986. He testified that the ties between the U.S. and Israel were so close that the White House passed to Israeli intelligence officials information on the extent of &quot;bureaucratic discontent&quot; in the Defense Department and other U.S. agencies about the arms sales.    --Col. Earl said that after a former CIA operative complained last August to two aides of Vice President George Bush about alleged corruption in the airlift operation to resupply the Contras, Col. North ordered it closed down. But Col. Earl said that retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord, who managed the operation along with Col. North, resisted the shutdown order. At the August meeting, Col. Earl said, Mr. Bush's aides also were told that Gen. Secord hoped to sell the assets of the airlift operation to the U.S.    In his testimony, Col. Earl said Col. North told him about a telephone call he received from President Reagan after Col. North was fired. Col. Earl was asked by an investigator: &quot;The implication that was conveyed to you (by Col. North) was that the president could not acknowledge that he knew&quot; of the diversion?    Col. Earl responded: &quot;That is the interpretation that I made.&quot;    Col. Earl acknowledged that Col. North had told him last spring that Iran arms-sales profits were being diverted to the Contras.    He also testified that at &quot;various periods of time,&quot; White House officials expressed concern that criminal investigations by the Federal Bureau of Investigation, the U.S. Customs Service and the Federal Aviation Administration threatened to disrupt Gen. Secord's secret resupply effort. Col. North has denied interfering improperly with any federal inquiries, but Col. Earl testified that he (Col. Earl) realized that such White House intervention could be considered &quot;inappropriate.&quot;    Col. Earl disclosed that some administration officials were concerned that President Reagan's judgment could be clouded because of his intense concern for the welfare of the hostages and their families. At one point, the vice president's task force on terrorism considered recommending that Mr. Reagan stop meeting &quot;with hostage families so that he would not personally be subjected to the emotion of a distraught family.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>