<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870612-0081 </DOCNO><HL> Technology (A Special Report): Frontiers---Promises of Tomorrow...Coming Soon to a Workstation Near You---Compiled by Lawrence Ingrassia,The Wall Street Journal's Boston bureau chief,From bureau reports</HL><DD> 06/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)COMPUTERS (EDP)TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)PHOTOGRAPHY (PIX)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><TEXT>   HOW DID WE EVER live without them?    It wasn't that long ago that automated bank tellers, personal computers, high-speed facsimile machines and on-line databases were twinkles in technologists' eyes. When they first hit the market, they were luxuries. Today, they're necessities.    It won't be long before new gadgets featuring fledgling technologies make their way into everyday life. Here are a few that will become common in the next few years:    CD-ROM: Compact disks that store more than 250,000 pages of information -- enough memory for telephone directories, historical stock quotations, dictionaries -- that can be called up instantaneously on a computer. No more searching through reams of pages or crammed files to find data.    One variation will be the WORM (an acronym for &quot;write once, read many&quot;) disk. Unlike the CD-ROM, which holds pre-recorded information that can't be changed, the WORM will permit users to record information, but not delete it; it will be used to create permanent, unalterable records. And eventually there will be erasable compact disks that will allow users to add and delete data.    PORTABLE CELLULAR PHONES: They're already in many cars, but new, briefcase-sized models are just beginning to gain favor with the pin-striped set. And back in the office, workers who are on the telephone all day will wear tiny wireless headsets so they won't have to be tied to their phone.    ELECTRONIC MAIL: Though largely a flop so far, its day is coming. Computer users will be able to call other computers, just like they reach others with telephones. PCs will handle mail, photocopying and even voice transmission.    VOICE RECOGNITION: It's still in its infancy, but a wide variety of products -- telephones, home security systems, appliances and toys -- will be operated by voice command. Sophisticated word processors that can take dictation, however, probably won't be available until the 1990s.    OPTICAL CHARACTER RECOGNITION: Secretaries will love it. To get information into a computer, many printed documents now must be retyped on a word processor. Optical character recognition devices, some of which already are being sold, &quot;read&quot; documents by scanning them and transferring the data into a computer. The information then can be retrieved electronically.    EXPERT SYSTEMS: Artificial-intelligence software has been around a while, but will become even more common in the next few years. The systems help non-experts make decisions -- on approving loans, managing production lines, etc. -- by using the knowledge of experts programmed into the software. Look for expert systems to be used by stockbrokers, lawyers and even doctors.    DEBIT CARDS: They're already catching on among retailers in some regions and in some European countries. The cards automatically debit a consumer's bank account after a purchase. Shoppers will use them more and more instead of credit cards and cash.    SMART CARDS: Bank credit cards embedded with microchips that store checking, savings and other financial balances, as well as other personal data, such as medical information and telephone numbers. Early generations of smart cards currently are being used in France, though they haven't been a rousing success. Visa U.S.A. next year will test a version that features a small screen and 10-digit keyboard on the back to enter and view information.    COMPOUND DOCUMENTS: Computer documents that will include text, graphics and sound. Managers will be able to send memos, for example, that show charts, include verbal comments and have detailed typewritten instructions. As personal computer screens improve, animated displays will be possible.    SOFTWARE ASSISTANTS: Software that can be programmed to automatically browse through databases for information -- general news, industry developments and scientific reports -- as frequently as you'd like. By searching for the latest developments, the software will help keep professionals apprised of important happenings without having to pore through volumes of printed material.    COMPUTERIZED MAPS: Electronic maps, displayed on a small screen inside a delivery vehicle or auto, will show details of local streets and landmarks and even suggest the best route from one location to another. First-generation systems already exist.    ELECTRONIC CAMERAS: These cameras will record photographs on magnetic disks instead of conventional film. Users will be able to view the photographs on a television or computer screen and decide which ones to print. Early, high-priced versions for commercial photographs are starting to become available, and lower-priced consumer models should be on the market by the early 1990s.    (See related story: &quot;...And the Gaffes of Yesterday: A Look at Some Big-Time Failures&quot; -- WSJ June 12, 1987) </TEXT></DOC>