<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871124-0053 </DOCNO><HL> More White-Collar Criminals FaceJail Under New Sentencing Rules---By Michael AllenStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   Record numbers of white-collar criminals may soon find themselves wearing prison blues.    That, at least, is one aim of the new federal sentencing guidelines that took effect this month. Created to bring consistency to sentencing practices for most types of crimes, the guidelines also call for significant changes in the way courts treat convicted embezzlers, tax cheats, inside traders and swindlers. Probation -- until now a common refuge for the genteel scoundrel -- has been eliminated for most offenders in favor of at least brief confinement. And a &quot;truth in sentencing&quot; provision, mandated by Congress, phases out parole.    &quot;The white collars are going to get hurt pretty badly,&quot; says Rebekah Poston, a Miami criminal defense lawyer who is working with local judges and probation officers to implement the new guidelines.    Such conclusions may be premature, since the guidelines apply only to crimes committed after Nov. 1 and thus haven't fully been put into practice. What's more, judges will have room to deviate from the suggested punishments in unusual situations, as long as they explain their reasons in writing. Finally, the rules may be rendered moot by constitutional challenges.    But the seven-member U.S. Sentencing Commission, which created the guidelines as part of the Comprehensive Crime Control Act of 1984, clearly intends to tighten the screws on white-collar offenders. Commission members cite two main reasons for the policy change. First, they contend that the prospect of a &quot;short but sure&quot; prison term is a particularly effective deterrent to would-be criminals in the ranks of the middle and upper class. Second, they say, fairness demands that wealthier crooks who evade taxes or use computers to steal face the same punishment as poorer crooks who use less-sophisticated methods.    &quot;Whether you work on Wall Street or you drive a truck on Wall Street shouldn't make a difference if you commit a theft,&quot; says Commission Chairman William W. Wilkins Jr., a federal judge in Greenville, S.C.    Additionally, the guidelines don't ordinarily allow judges to take into account the defendant's age, community ties, family responsibilities or previous employment record -- factors that have often mitigated the white-collar offender's punishment in the past. &quot;White-collar criminals are going to find their exemplary backgrounds aren't going to influence a judge's sentencing decision&quot; anymore, says Samuel Buffone, chairman of the American Bar Association's sentencing committee.    The guidelines reduce most crimes to a complex point system ranging in severity from one to 43. Points, representing jail time, are added or subtracted to reflect factors such as the defendant's degree of participation in the crime, whether or not he admits guilt, and, especially, the amount of money involved.    Traditional probation remains an option only for very minor offenses. Under the new rules, a probation sentence will likely include at least brief confinement in a halfway house or weekends in jail.    The case of Randall Cecola, a minor figure in the Dennis Levine insider-trading scandal, illustrates how the new rules could change sentencing for white-collar offenders. Mr. Cecola, a former financial analyst at Lazard Freres andamp; Co., pleaded guilty last year to two felony counts of filing false tax returns involving $66,342 in profits made from securities trading. The judge in the case, noting that the 25-year-old Mr. Cecola was supporting his ailing mother and two brothers at the time of the crime and was unlikely to err again, sentenced him to five years probation.    But under the new guidelines, according to New York criminal defense lawyer William M. Brodsky, Mr. Cecola's crime would likely have mandated a prison term of six-to-12 months. The judge would have had the option of allowing Mr. Cecola to serve that time on weekends or in a community halfway house. But to grant probation without confinement, he would have had to submit his reasons in writing, and the government could have appealed.    Similarly, many recent securities-law violators would probably have received stiffer sentences if the new guidelines had applied. For example, Mr. Brodsky estimates that Mr. Levine, a former mergers specialist at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. who pleaded guilty to four felony counts related to insider trading, would have received between 46 and 57 months in prison if he had committed his offenses after Nov. 1. Mr. Levine's punishment under the old rules: 24 months in prison and a $362,000 fine.    (Mr. Brodsky cautions that his calculations aren't exact, since he doesn't have access to certain non-public information that might have influenced the sentencing judge. Moreover, he doesn't account for the mitigating effects of Mr. Levine's cooperation with the government.)    Among the hardest hit by the reforms will be income-tax evaders, lawyers predict. In recent years, about 57% of tax cheats have received probation with no confinement. The new guidelines aim to reduce that figure to just 3%, the commission says. First offenders who plead guilty to evading more than $10,000 can probably expect some jail time under the rules change.    Predictably, the guidelines have sparked a heated legal debate. The principal complaint by many in the criminal defense bar, and not a few judges, is that the new rules are far too mechanical and rigid, leaving little room for judicial discretion. Jed Rakoff, a defense attorney who has handled a number of celebrated white-collar cases in New York, contends that &quot;there will be equal inconsistency in the new system, but it will be hidden under this mirage of mathematics.&quot;    But defenders of the guidelines say judges' intuition can still play a role. They point out that each suggested sentence actually includes a range of choices and that judges still have ample flexibility to accept plea bargains. And if enough judges deviate from the rules in a given type of case, the rules might be changed. &quot;Those who claim the guidelines represent a computer approach to justice simply haven't studied the guidelines,&quot; says Judge Wilkins, the chairman.    Other critics charge that Congress has guaranteed a crisis in the nation's overcrowded prison system. According to the Sentencing Commission, the guideline changes will likely result in a 6% increase in the prison population during the next 15 years, mostly due to the influx of white-collar offenders. But officials in the Bureau of Prisons say they aren't worried about the increase, since white-collar criminals are much cheaper to house than their more dangerous counterparts.    Even guideline supporters acknowledge that the changes will probably tie up the nation's courts for some time to come. Attorneys and judges alike are scrambling to master the complex rules before the first big cases arrive.    What's more, the guidelines are likely to result in extensive post-trial litigation over factual matters that influence sentence length, such as the exact amount of income tax evaded in a complex case. &quot;Lawyers and accountants are going to have a wonderful time with this,&quot; says New York attorney Lawrence S. Feld, who handles such cases. &quot;But it's not so good for judges and defendants.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>