<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880404-0008 </DOCNO><HL> IBM Tries to Woo Back Buyers in Japan --- Move Follows Years Of Market-Share Erosion </HL><AUTHOR> Stephen Kreider Yoder (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> IBM JAPAN </CO><IN> EDP </IN><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Evidence that International Business Machines Corp. was changing its tack in Japan first came last year in the form of humbler IBM salesmen.    &quot;Before, they would come in and spread out their price lists and say, 'These are the prices and there's no room for negotiation,'&quot; says Goichi Yoshizawa, general manager, Nissan Motor Co.'s information systems department. &quot;Now there's plenty of negotiating room.&quot;    That's not all. IBM is sending more systems engineers to help computer-shy customers. Salesmen are suddenly willing to take on projects that tie IBM computers into rivals' machines. And IBM is joining forces with dozens of powerful Japanese companies like Nippon Steel Corp. to help it crack new niche markets.    That's pretty radical stuff for a company that has been known for going it alone and for not keeping track of Japanese customers' needs. According to data-processing managers here, IBM would sell them hardware and software, but wouldn't help them make sure it all worked and customize it. Japanese makers, meanwhile, held customers' hands the whole way.    IBM calls its changed approach a new openness to customer needs. Other industry executives call it desperation. Despite IBM's new look, they say, the company faces heavy slogging here. Japanese companies are already a step ahead of IBM's marketing moves, they say, and the Japanese offer better service because they have bigger armies of engineers to help users. As long as Japanese concerns lavish more attention than IBM, Japanese users aren't likely to switch.    Archrivals Fujitsu Ltd., Hitachi Ltd. and NEC Corp. have already eroded IBM's market share for the multimillion-dollar &quot;mainframe&quot; computers -- IBM's bread and butter. Now they're gobbling up Japan's juiciest market, &quot;minicomputers&quot; for several hundred thousand dollars or less, that happens to be IBM's weak suit.    &quot;In terms of future growth, IBM is in a weaker position,&quot; says Willam Kooij, senior vice president, Computer Engineering andamp; Consulting Ltd., a Tokyo mainframe-software vendor. &quot;IBM's main concern will be stopping the erosion rather than gaining market share.&quot;    IBM can't afford more erosion here, especially after two years of lackluster results world-wide. Although IBM has reformed its overall marketing strategy, nowhere outside the U.S. are the changes more important than in Japan, the world's second-biggest computer market and one of the fastest growing. About 10% of IBM's profit last year came from its Japanese unit, IBM Japan Ltd. That's more than anywhere else outside the U.S.    Moreover, Japan is a training ground for IBM. Japanese computer makers, who introduce many leading technologies, hone skills in battles at home before exporting the best products. IBM must join the fray to keep up with some of its toughest competitors. &quot;If IBM is competitive enough to succeed here,&quot; says Bill Totten, president of K.K. Ashisuto, a Tokyo mainframe-software house, &quot;it will be competitive enough to dominate everywhere else.&quot;    The past few years have been anything but a success for IBM. Sales fell for the first time ever here in 1986, dropping 4% to 878 billion yen ($7.06 billion), with a sharply rising yen slashing export profits among manufacturers, IBM's best Japanese clients. Profit fell 12%. &quot;Manufacturing customers put the brakes on buying,&quot; says an IBM official.    Meanwhile, Japanese makers' sales have kept rising, forcing IBM's sales into third place behind Fujitsu and NEC. Add to that IBM's paltry slice of the small-computer pie, a market expected to grow 15% to 20% in the next few years, nearly twice the growth in mainframes. &quot;That's the area we need to enhance,&quot; concedes Kakutaro Kitashiro, director, business development, at IBM Japan.    To help plan a turnaround, IBM's Armonk, N.Y., headquarters flew in Japanese-company executives late in 1986 for consultation. Then IBM kicked off a series of reforms. It abandoned its stuffy, even arrogant, sales approach in late March 1987, when it sent a memo to its sales force reversing several policies. The directive called on the sales force to take on projects that integrate IBM computers with rivals' machines. Under the new policy, IBM will even act as a subcontractor, unthinkable at the old IBM.    IBM also astounded computer buyers by offering aggressive discounts, and now IBM sells computer programs that let its mainframes run some software that previously would run only on a Fujitsu or Hitachi. The scheme: Woo users away from Japanese machines without forcing them to discard old programs.    The company also beefed up its small-computer marketing last summer by opening six centers in Japanese cities to help small-computer users customize their computers and software. IBM will expand its small-systems sales force this year and sell small computers through Ricoh Co.    To top it off, IBM has teamed up with banks, broadcasting companies, and manufacturers to tap their expertise and to counteract weaknesses in strategic markets. Since February 1987, the company has formed nine major joint ventures in Japan, and more are expected this year.    For example, IBM announced in January a venture with Nippon Steel, the world's biggest steel producer, to sell IBM's small computer systems. Last year, IBM and Nissan Motor Co. forged a venture to create computer systems to help Nissan's dealers market cars. An IBM joint venture with Sumitomo Electric Industries Ltd. and several insurance companies aims at outfitting &quot;intelligent buildings&quot; with computers and communications networks. A venture with Mitsubishi Bank Ltd., aimed at finance markets, will market banking applications software.    &quot;IBM has become a much more fearsome competitor,&quot; says Tsuneo Uraki, general manager, Hitachi's computer planning division.    Indeed, things are looking up. IBM revenue in 1987 jumped 21% to 1.06 trillion yen. Profit rose 16% to 74 billion yen, but it was still only 2.8% above 1985. &quot;Some of our programs are paying off,&quot; says IBM's Mr. Kitashiro. &quot;If we had done it before we probably would be better off.&quot;    In the past, IBM didn't have to worry about competitors in Japan, where it dominated into the 1970s. Then, government-backed Japanese conglomerates attacked with &quot;plug-compatible&quot; mainframes -- machines that can use slightly modified IBM software. The Japanese machines were far less costly than IBM's and they came accompanied by armies of engineers lavishing attention that clients didn't get from IBM. &quot;We used IBM's weaknesses as our pluses,&quot; says Hitachi's Mr. Uraki.    IBM's market share slid steadily -- its annual sales fell to second place behind Fujitsu's in 1979 -- but it largely ignored the threat. IBM refused to discount and wouldn't combine its machines with rivals' equipment. The refusal flouted Japanese business culture, where a company buys a potpourri of equipment from its best clients to keep up good relations. Customers chafed at what they saw as bully tactics.3   While IBM says its new marketing strategies will change that, many data-processing managers are unimpressed. Shigeki Kubo, systems manager, Kyoto Chuo Shinkin Bank, says IBM salesmen visit him with sales pitches more often than before. But &quot;word in our industry still is that IBM won't look after you,&quot; says Mr. Kubo, who decided not to buy an IBM a few years ago because IBM wouldn't promise to help tailor the bank's software.    Japanese customers, which don't hire many software specialists and depend on outside help, want lots of attention. Computer users say IBM's hand holding still doesn't pass muster, because IBM doesn't have enough hands to go around. IBM says it has &quot;over 10,000&quot; engineers helping put together systems. But Hitachi has an army of 17,000 and Fujitsu has 23,000.    While analysts praise IBM's new Japanese-like marketing approach, they don't think it will bring new sales soon. For one thing, sales this year and next will reflect purchasing decisions made in 1986 and 1987, before IBM shifted gears. Also, Japanese companies have a firm grip on industries such as retailing and distribution that are expected to be big buyers of small computers in the next five years.    Indeed, Japanese makers vow to stay a step ahead of whatever new strategies IBM thinks up. Hitachi, in its own domestic marketing drive, has discarded its policy of selling smaller computers only through subsidiaries. It now also sells through independent dealers and even department store chains. Last year alone, Fujitsu introduced 75 new computers.    Fujitsu also could get a boost from the resolution last year of charges that it stole IBM mainframe software. The resolution will give Fujitsu access to IBM software for the next five to ten years, though Fujitsu may have to pay dearly. Arbitrators will decide. At the least, the resolution removes the cloud of uncertainty that had been badly hampering Fujitsu. </TEXT></DOC>