<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880421-0165 </DOCNO><HL> This Tale Is So Tiring The Reporter Snored While Working on It --- But He Learned a Few Things About His Night Malady; Interested in a Throat Lift? </HL><AUTHOR> Brenton R. Schlender (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> LA JOLLA, Calif.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Dr. Milton K. Erman's orders hit me where I live: Lose some weight, go to bed an hour earlier each night and cut down on the alcohol and caffeine. If my condition persists, he warns, we might have to consider more drastic therapy, like muscle-toning drugs or, at the worst, a throat lift.    &quot;Your problem,&quot; he concludes, &quot;is that you have an overly elongated uvula,&quot; rolling the phrase around his tongue like a shot of mouthwash.    What I have is a snoring problem, as my wife can testily testify. Each night, shortly after lights out, my throat, blocked by that flabby punching bag hanging at the back of the mouth, starts groaning every four seconds like a bus pulling away from the curb.    Or so I am told. Like most of the other 10 million or so heavy snorers sawing logs across the U.S. each night, I sleep through it all, blissfully oblivious. Not so my wife -- and even my children sometimes complain of hearing my adenoidal rumblings down the hall and through two closed doors. I didn't believe them until they played back a tape recording that left no doubt about it. I snore like a foghorn.    &quot;Love may be blind, but it's not deaf,&quot; says advice columnist Abigail Van Buren, who devotes a chapter to snoring problems in her book &quot;The Best of Dear Abby.&quot; &quot;I have long suspected that more people are sleeping apart because of snoring than are sleeping together for all other reasons combined.&quot;    Fortunately, my snoring problem isn't quite that acute. My wife hasn't moved out of the bedroom. And so far, the neighbors haven't complained, perhaps because my nocturnal racket doesn't come close to the 87.5-decibel roar that the Guinness Book of World Records lists as the loudest snore on record. (The record holder was a member of the British royal family, no less.)    But it is annoying. That's why I came here to see Dr. Erman at the Scripps Clinic and Research Foundation. Dr. Erman is the director of Scripps's Sleep Disorders Center, one of a fast-growing number of high-tech sleep clinics around the country where doctors study little-understood nighttime maladies with the aid of computers, infrared television cameras and bottomless pots of coffee.    His orders to me are the culmination of a 24-hour sleep-and-wakefulness study conducted in a dark, windowless room. I was wired up with 18 electrodes that monitored everything from my brain waves and eyeball movement to the muscle tension in my chin. The goal was to find out if there was anything more to my snoring than noise.    &quot;We've been taking snoring lying down for thousands of years,&quot; says Dr. Merrill Mitler, the director of research at the Scripps sleep clinic, who contends that such newfangled scientific study has proved that &quot;snoring is much more than just a social problem; knowing what we know now, the surprising thing is that we took it so lightly for so long.&quot;    Snoring is a key symptom of many health disorders, not all of them sleep-related. It can be a red flag for severe allergies, respiratory diseases, insomnia or even depression. It grows worse as people age, and afflicts men twice as often as women. Left unchecked, it can cause irreparable damage to the tissues of the throat, making snoring even noisier and affecting breathing during the day.    The worst snoring disorder is sleep apnea, an extreme form of snoring in which a victim chokes hundreds of times a night. (According to Dr. Erman, a woman who choked in her sleep 1,076 times in one night holds the world record.) More common in overweight people, sleep apnea can put enough strain on the heart and lungs to cause or aggravate heart disease, and sometimes it even kills people. It also causes daytime drowsiness and, in some cases, narcolepsy -- the tendency to suddenly fall asleep during the daytime.    &quot;It can be a very embarrassing problem,&quot; says Michael Franco, a 39-year-old salesman from San Diego and former Scripps patient whose general fatigue from sleep apnea made it difficult for him to stay awake even during business meetings. &quot;One time while I was having lunch with a vendor,&quot; Mr. Franco says, &quot;the lights went out right there at the table.&quot;    His snoring itself has long been embarrassing, too, especially during his hitch in the Navy. &quot;I found myself sleeping out on the steps in boot camp,&quot; he recalls. More recently, while on vacation in Hawaii, Mr. Franco's teen-age son chose to sleep outside on the balcony of the family's hotel room rather than endure the noise. &quot;Over time, it became damaging to me personally,&quot; Mr. Franco says.    Snoring isn't a victimless disorder. It often causes fatigue and even depression in spouses or roommates and others who have to put up with it night after night. &quot;Those 10 million snorers are disturbing the sleep of 10 million snorees who suffer many of the same consequences,&quot; says Dr. Rosalind Cartwright, the director of the sleep disorders center at Rush-Presbyterian-St. Luke's Medical Center in Chicago. &quot;I've often thought there should be a support group like Al Anon for the spouses of heavy snorers.&quot;    Toni Ponce of Yuma, Ariz., would agree. &quot;It was horrendous,&quot; she says. For years her husband, Sebastian, snored so loudly that it frightened her, especially when the snores turned into the chokes of apnea. &quot;If I didn't fall asleep before he did,&quot; she says, &quot;I'd have to go from one end of the house to the other and close all the doors in between.&quot;    &quot;It's not very romantic to find out that the wonderful man you married is too noisy to sleep with,&quot; says Miss Van Buren, the columnist. &quot;It can put a real strain on a marriage.&quot; Yes, Abby's husband snores. &quot;It's not very loud, though,&quot; she says. &quot;It's like a lullaby sometimes.&quot;    Sleep researchers never had much doubt about snoring's cause. &quot;It is the sound generated when the airway is obstructed,&quot; says Dr. Erman, who sometimes gets a sore throat from demonstrating various kinds of snores at seminars or for patients. &quot;The more you snore, the more your trachea is like a soggy paper straw, collapsing and blocking airflow altogether.&quot;    Probably the best-known place probing the medical mysteries of the night is Stanford University's Sleep Disorders Clinic in Palo Alto, Calif. During a brief meeting there, Dr. German Nino-Murcia pegs me as a snorer within seconds, just by looking at the shape of my face. A quick look down my throat confirms his suspicions. &quot;Yes, it's pretty crowded back there,&quot; he observes, noting that besides having that overly elongated uvula, I have a broad tongue that is confined by a shorter-than-normal jawbone. &quot;Does anybody else in your family snore?&quot; he asks. (My mother, father and two-year-old daughter do.)    Alcohol in the late evening makes things worse. Dr. Cartwright of Rush-Presbyterian says a nightcap increases the severity of snoring and apnea tenfold, and she has told her husband not to have a shot of cognac before bedtime. Smoking, on the other hand, tends to reduce snoring slightly, because nicotine is a stimulant and induces muscle tone in throat tissues. Doctors don't like to mention that, though. Another stimulant, caffeine, doesn't directly affect snoring but can interfere with normal sleeping patterns.    Even with 18 wires stuck to my head and body and a camera trained on me, I didn't have much trouble falling asleep for my overnight sleep study at Scripps. In fact, I fell asleep before I was supposed to and had to be awakened by a technician to plug all my wires into the computer. The data collected overnight confirmed that I snore much of the night, especially when I sleep on my back. After studying the one-third-mile-long data chart, however, Dr. Erman ruled out severe sleep apnea, although I did nearly choke 34 times that night and awakened 30 times.    Others aren't so lucky. Mr. Franco's sleep apnea was severe enough to seriously reduce the amount of oxygen in his blood as well as interrupt his sleep. Consequently, the salesman now takes muscle-toning drugs that keep his trachea tissue more rigid and hence less obstructed. He also stopped drinking. &quot;It's the change I needed,&quot; he says, adding that he has more energy than he has had since his adolescence. &quot;It wasn't much of a life before.&quot;    Doctors prescribe a plethora of other remedies, some not much different from some of the silly-sounding gadgets touted in the National Enquirer. For $12, Dr. Cartwright sells T-shirts with four little pockets sewn in to hold tennis balls that make it uncomfortable to sleep on the back. For the high-tech snorer, $100 buys an electronic sensor that beeps when you roll onto your back. Dentists have begun fitting tongue-retaining devices resembling a football player's mouthpiece, priced at between $100 and $200, that keep the tongue flattened out all night -- and incidentally put a damper on pillow talk. Then there are elastic masks and splints that keep the mouth pried open.    For victims of severe sleep apnea, treatments are more daunting, and expensive. There are machines that force air down the trachea like a reverse vacuum cleaner. There are anti-depressant drugs that maintain muscle tone to help keep airways open. And then there is the dreaded uvulopalatopharyngoplasty, or what Dr. Erman calls the throat lift, which costs at least $3,000, including a two-day hospital stay. It is a painful, seldom recommended form of surgery that scoops out excess flabby tissue that blocks the trachea.    Just to find out whether a snorer needs any special treatment is an expensive proposition. My sleep study cost $1,659 for a single night in the clinic, most of which was covered by my health insurance.    To Mrs. Ponce of Yuma, whose husband went through sleep study that diagnosed him as having severe sleep apnea, it was worth every penny. Now he relies on a rather uncomfortable machine to force air down his trachea, but he is sleeping better than ever, and so is Mrs. Ponce.    &quot;It's funny, but we always thought he was sleeping well because he was snoring so loud,&quot; she says, &quot;And what do we find but that he hadn't really slept for 20 years?&quot; </TEXT></DOC>