<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890807-0077 </DOCNO><DD> = 890807 </DD><AN> 890807-0077. </AN><HL> U.S. Customs' Raid@  On 'Contraband' Art@  Ignites Miami Furor@  ---@  Seizing of Paintings off Walls@  Of Rich Collector Stirs@  Cuban-Exile Hostilities@  ----@  By Jose de Cordoba@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/07/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><DATELINE> MIAMI  </DATELINE><TEXT>   On a sunny afternoon three months ago, half a dozen pistol-packing U.S. Customs Service agents battered down the door of Ramon Cernuda's luxury condo overlooking Biscayne Bay. About the same time, other agents were swarming over Mr. Cernuda's book-publishing office in Miami's Little Havana.    It may have looked like a drug bust, but it wasn't. This was an art bust.    The agents were after the collection of Cuban paintings on the walls of Mr. Cernuda's apartment and office. In 24 hours they relieved him of about 200 paintings that the Customs Service asserts were smuggled into the U.S. from Cuba. Although Cuban art has been bought and sold in the U.S. for years, this was the first time since the trade embargo against Cuba 26 years ago that the U.S. government had seized any as contraband.    The raid climaxed a tale that is bizarre even by Miami standards. It involves ferocious exile politics and vendettas, allegations of abuse of U.S. government power and, on the government's part, broad if less-than-persuasive hints of smuggling conspiracies involving two diplomats -- one American, the other Belgian -- and Cuban officials.    Yet a large number of the paintings seized by the G-men were by an artist whose work had been confiscated before -- by Cuba's secret police. He ekes out a living in Cuba partly by trading paintings for food.    More than 90 days after the seizure, the central figure, Mr. Cernuda, has yet to be charged with any crime. But the slight, prematurely white-haired publisher has already spent more than $130,000 in legal fees. His lawyer, who has asked a federal court to return the paintings, says Mr. Cernuda is the subject of a grand jury investigation into embargo violations. The Treasury Department says anybody convicted of such a violation could be imprisoned 10 years and fined $50,000.    &quot;I didn't think this could happen to anybody in the U.S.,&quot; says Mr. Cernuda between puffs of his (non-Havana) cigar.    Jerry Scott, in Washington, says he feels the same way. Mr. Scott, former press secretary for the U.S. Interest Section in Havana, had brought to the U.S. some of the seized works painted by the Cuban dissident. With his government career under a cloud, Mr. Scott has hired a lawyer. &quot;I feel as if I've been mugged,&quot; he says.    The arts and militant anti-communism have never mixed felicitously in Miami. Singers and playwrights have been routinely banned from festivals and airwaves for having performed or traveled in Cuba.    But this time, the government is deeply involved. The U.S. Attorney's office and the Customs Service appear to have stumbled -- or been drawn -- into an ideological squabble by exile factions, though both agencies deny it. &quot;Politics stop at my desk,&quot; says Customs Service group supervisor Keith Prager. U.S. Attorney Dexter Lehtinen, who trumpeted the seizure at a press conference while agents were still carting away Mr. Cernuda's artwork, blames the &quot;the other side&quot; for politicizing the case.    Mr. Cernuda, who has made a small fortune by selling English-language instruction courses to fellow Hispanic immigrants, blames a conservative lobbying group, the Cuban American National Foundation, and its chairman, Jorge Mas Canosa, for his troubles. &quot;I'm sorry to say that Jorge Mas and the Cuban American National Foundation have used their political influence to loosen a campaign of political intimidation in Miami,&quot; he says.    The reason, says Mr. Cernuda, is that Mr. Mas Canosa and the foundation resent the emergence of another moneyed group of Cuban exiles who take a softer line against the Castro regime, and who challenge the foundation's claim to speak for the exile community. Mr. Cernuda and the foundation also support rival Cuban human rights groups.    Mr. Mas Canosa is a millionaire utility-company contractor who owns an armored Mercedes-Benz. (It once belonged to the late Nicaraguan dictator Anastasio Somoza.) Mr. Mas Canosa denies Mr. Cernuda's accusations. &quot;That's a police problem, not a political problem,&quot; he says of the art seizure.    But three days after the Cernuda bust, Mr. Mas Canosa made a broadcast on Spanish-language radio here. He denied having specifically instigated the Cernuda seizure but said nonetheless that he and the foundation were responsible for the federal investigation &quot;and 20 more like it&quot; that preceded the raid. He says he was referring to the foundation's strong lobbying to strengthen and enforce the trade embargo.    The trouble started 15 months ago, when Mr. Cernuda, then a vice president of the museum, refused to withdraw a handful of paintings by pro-Castro Cubans from a benefit auction. The beneficiary was the Cuban Museum of Art and Culture, founded by exiles 14 years ago. Mr. Cernuda said the paintings had been done before the trade embargo and, therefore, could be sold legally.    The auction provoked furious controversy that aroused the interest of the Miami city commission and led it to request an investigation by the U.S. Attorney's office. The office refused to get involved. &quot;I thought it was horse manure,&quot; Richard Gregorie, then chief of criminal investigators at the U.S. Attorney's office, says of the call for an investigation.    Mr. Gregorie, now in private practice, left the government shortly after Mr. Lehtinen, a conservative Republican state senator, was appointed U.S. Attorney last year. Mr. Lehtinen shares many foundation views. His wife, state Sen. Ileana Ros-Lehtinen, a Cuban-American, is running for the late Rep. Claude Pepper's congressional seat with the foundation's support.    In November, the city again wrote the U.S. Attorney's office about the status of the requested investigation. Then, six months later, the customs agents descended. &quot;It was a nightmare,&quot; says Mrs. Cernuda, who wasn't at home when the Customs agents broke in but who returned home later; she remembers Castro militiamen searching her house in Cuba as a little girl. After the Customs agents arrived, she recovered sufficiently to serve Cuban coffee to two of them who slept overnight on her living-room couches to guard the art before it was hauled away.    The bust also came as a rude shock to the small circle of people who sell, exhibit and collect Cuban art. Most are nostalgic exiles. Hardly any had considered that buying and selling Cuban art could violate the law. Auction houses such as Sotheby's and Christie's, where Mr. Cernuda bought many of his confiscated paintings, had even, until recently, listed post-1963 Cuban works in their catalogs and sold them at auction. &quot;We didn't know we weren't supposed to sell Cuban paintings,&quot; says Lisa Palmer, who started Christie's Latin American division in 1981.    Mr. Cernuda was no more secretive. He published a hardbound book of photographs showing his collection. He gave an extensive interview to a reporter from a Miami newspaper when he bought a batch of paintings, now confiscated, from a Belgian diplomat. He hung many of the forbidden canvases at a college exhibition.    Mr. Lehtinen, the U.S. Attorney, says the Cernuda inquiry concerns the commercial smuggling of artwork possibly worth hundreds of thousands of dollars. In its search-warrant affidavit, the government says the diplomat, now Belgium's commercial attache in Atlanta, set a market price for Cuban art by selling a few paintings at New York auction houses before disposing of the rest. That, says the affidavit, benefits the Cuban government, as it is &quot;the holder of the greatest quantity of Cuban artwork.&quot;    The diplomat had sold 110 paintings to Mr. Cernuda for $54,000, about $490 per canvas. The diplomat didn't answer telephone messages left at his office.    To art specialists, the idea of smuggling conspiracies in Cuban art seems silly. They say that Cuban art is inexpensive and that prices on it haven't risen recently. The average Cuban canvas sells at auction for only $3,000 to $5,000. &quot;Nobody is amassing a fortune in Cuban art,&quot; says Ms. Palmer of Christie's.    The Customs Service seized about 40 canvases (32 of which were returned last month), and 80 paintings and drawings by Nicolas Guillen Landrau, a political dissident in Cuba whose work had been seized before by the secret police.    Said to be half-crazed by electroshock treatments in prison, Mr. Guillen Landrau lives in a dilapidated Havana apartment and survives by selling off his meager possessions and trading an occasional painting for food. As the U.S. press officer in Havana, Mr. Scott had actively supported human rights, and helped Mr. Guillen Landrau with food, cigarettes, clothes and money. In return, the artist gave him some paintings and sold him others for a total of less than $400.    Mr. Scott planned to exhibit the paintings at the Cuban Museum to focus attention on the plight of the artist and other Cuban dissidents. Last December, hoping to allay any official concern, Mr. Cernuda wrote the Treasury Department (of which the Customs Service is a part), informing it that the paintings would be shown, and he enclosed Mr. Scott's government business card. The Treasury didn't respond.    Mr. Scott remains baffled by the affair. &quot;I got caught in the crossfire,&quot; he says.    Kenneth Ryskamp, a federal judge in Miami, also seemed confused. In a hearing last month on Mr. Cernuda's request to have his paintings returned, Judge Ryskamp recalled an announcement by the U.S. Attorney that his office wouldn't prosecute cases involving small amounts of cocaine. This made it hard to understand the priorities involved in expending prosecutorial resources on paintings, the judge said. He hasn't ruled yet on Mr. Cernuda's request. </TEXT></DOC>