<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870702-0135 </DOCNO><HL> How Moscow Makes Its Pitch---By Peter Keresztes</HL><DD> 07/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> MOSCOW  </DATELINE><TEXT>   While General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev presses his economic reforms in the Central Committee across town, an official of the Institute for USA and Canada tells a group of Western visitors that the Soviets trust American businessmen but not the Congress or politicians. &quot;Take,&quot; he says, &quot;the bill in Congress to boycott the South African Krugerrand. Suddenly it included our gold ruble. How can you do business with a country like that?&quot;    Norbert Fischer, chairman of Hornblower Fischer AG stockbrokers in Frankfurt, expresses surprise. &quot;I did not intend to bring up human rights, which Congress had to consider not only for South Africa but for the Russian gold mines. The other issue was the invasion of Afghanistan, which had to reflect on public opinion in the United States and Congress. Economics do not operate in a vacuum. Democratic politicians must reflect the sentiments of the voters.&quot;    Now a second Soviet official jumps to his feet. &quot;Are you a businessman or a politician?&quot; he demands, his voice rising.    &quot;I,&quot; responds Mr. Fischer, &quot;am a realist.&quot;    Realism appears to be gaining ground only slowly in the new Soviet drive to woo the West. That is how it appears to many members of a group of European and American businessmen, academics and journalists who traveled to Moscow for seven days under the auspices of the Brookings Institution in Washington. Mr. Gorbachev's team makes an impressive effort in trying to put across its story to our delegation. But most of the bureaucrats fail to grasp that these heartless industrialists so despised by Lenin and Trotsky actually weigh moral considerations.    We begin with a visit to the State Planning Agency's foreign economic relations section, where Maxim, our interpreter (He parodies the late Leonid Brezhnev: &quot;There is a vicious rumor around that I read my speeches comma . . .&quot;) translates for the Soviet delegation led by Section Chief B.N. Shchegolev and Senior Expert A.V. Baranovskii. The officials lunge into lectures on the need to improve &quot;our methods of planning -- and our use of economic levers.&quot;    The Soviets say the reforms point toward a &quot;broader road for individual labor,&quot; which would give the retired, the housewife with grown children and those who are willing to work after hours a chance to earn extra money. This would put 16 million people out of work over 15 years, they expect. So the state is weaving a broad safety net. It will use techniques such as prolonged vacations, better pensions, a shorter workweek and the like.    The hosts, who mostly wear rugby shirts under polyester suits, graciously accept the Western delegation's gift of neckties with a Brookings Institution logo.    At the Chamber of Commerce and Industry, located in what before the Revolution was the stock exchange, a red carpet leads up to the conference hall under the dome. The first deputy chairman, B.P. Pletnev, seems secure despite his remarkable resemblance to Brezhnev. He is asked whether Soviet diversion of Toshiba's civilian propeller-grinding technology to military submarines showed a lack of seriousness about better relations with the West. Mr. Pletnev recounts how the common button could be strategic when sewn to the pants of a soldier. He, too, gets a Brookings tie.    Some Soviet officials have acquired fluency in English and Western business concepts. The deputy chairman of the state commission for foreign economic relations, Ivan D. Ivanov, asserts the Soviets can no longer afford to sell raw materials on depressed world markets. The country would like to build up its machinery industry, to cut imports of basic chemicals and metals and to become self-sufficient in food. So, he says, prices will no longer be set rigidly on a cost-plus basis, which invites waste, but will be negotiated between consumer and producer, guided by average world prices and socialist goals. The government plans to fully fund only major projects; the state bank will lend money to enterprises at interest rates reflecting the strength of the organization. A business school with Western European participation will be turning out Soviet MBAs.    The Soviets, according to Mr. Ivanov, are ready to participate in some global financial bodies, such as the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, and are prepared to realign tariffs and customs and restructure their foreign trade accounts to suit GATT. They are less interested in the International Monetary Fund, which in Mr. Ivanov's view &quot;improperly runs the international monetary system.&quot;    Yuriy V. Ponomarev, managing director of the state bank's main monetary and economic research department, who has worked at the Soviet Union's Narodny Bank in London, says that the 100 or so enterprises that currently conduct foreign trade have had to serve domestic needs until now and could export what was left over. From here on the priorities will be reversed. He says that the Soviet Union cannot achieve convertibility of the ruble &quot;by simple declaration.&quot; That &quot;must follow naturally&quot; an increased Soviet participation in world markets, he says.    One question much on Western minds is the joint-venture law, put into effect in January to attract Free World know-how and financing. The program would replace the 50 or so centrally directed licensing and cooperative-production agreements with such ventures. They would be owned 51% by the Soviet Union and would independently export and import on the world market. They would be able to accumulate hard currency and Soviet rubles in their own accounts. Costs and prices would be calculated according to world averages and rubles exchanged at rates published twice a month by the government.    The Soviets suggest that the two sides to a negotiation simply sign a confidentiality agreement and start with two blank sheets of paper. Despite this hint of flexibility, businessmen expect tough going on issues such as ruble conversions, pricing, the reliability of access to raw materials, energy and labor, and arrangements involving third-party Soviet suppliers. They point out, for example, that while construction of housing is so slow and sloppy that buildings often begin to crumble before they are finished, the KGB headquarters on Dzerzhinsky Square is now getting a huge second building, which is going up with astonishing speed and is using high-quality materials and workmanship. Businessmen have little faith in being able to compete for raw materials and labor with projects the state suddenly decides have a higher priority.    Once an agreement on a venture is reached, it will be submitted to various Soviet advisory, financial and ministerial bodies. Decisions will take into account expected levels of import and export prices, the expected effect of the venture on foreign trade organizations and on the texts of the agreement and bylaws. Five ventures have been signed in recent weeks with one Japanese, two Finnish and two West German firms in the chemical, wood products, light industry and machinery fields. More are under negotiation. Officials indicated that they plan to sign up perhaps 20 more firms and then monitor the results before inviting more proposals. &quot;We're not in a hurry,&quot; says Mr. Ivanov of the commission for foreign economic relations.    Corporations that do set up shop here usually want no more than a foot in the door to what they see as a potentially huge market, betting that the country will eventually adopt something close to a free market with a convertible currency. That is not enough for many bottom-line-oriented Western companies. Some look for counter trade side deals to get a return on their investments. Others seek operations through a third country such as India, which has a currency-clearing agreement with the Soviets, thus engaging in a sort of money-laundering operation.    Italian, Japanese and Finnish, but not American or West German, corporations can pass the risk of the venture to the taxpayer by having their governments underwrite their financing. Meanwhile, they cash in on the immediate delivery of the equipment to the project and sit back to await nirvana.    A week listening to the Soviet pitch suggests Mr. Gorbachev's perestroika, or reconstruction, needs more realists. But it would be a mistake to view the current Soviet developments in pure black and white terms. The reform initiatives are the clearest admission to this day by Soviet leadership that its system has failed. Such a concession is a major step forward. Yet it is also clear that the Soviets need the West to carry off the restructuring they require to prod their civilian economy off its Third World plateau. As Americans and their allies seek commercial openings to the Soviet Union, it remains as important as ever for them to continue to consider economic decisions within the context of realities such as Afghanistan, Angola, Nicaragua and Eastern Europe, and human rights in the Soviet Union.    ---   Mr. Keresztes is deputy editorial-page editor of The Wall Street Journal/Europe. </TEXT></DOC>