<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880108-0080 </DOCNO><HL> Some Big Banks Plan to Shun Mexican Plan --- Others' Bids on Debt Swap May Be Unacceptable Industry Sources Say --- This article was prepared by G. Christian Hill in San Francisco, Peter Truell in New York And Jeff Bailey in Chicago </HL><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM JPM CCI MHC CHL I WFC BAC FNB SPC BT CIL CIH CMB NOB </CO><IN> MON BNK </IN><TEXT>   Most of the major U.S. lenders to Mexico either don't plan to participate in that country's new debt-for-securities swap, or will submit bids that may prove unacceptable to the Mexicans.    Bankers at New York's Citicorp, Manufacturers Hanover Corp. and Chemical New York Corp. say their institutions are preparing to shun an auction for the swaps, and industry sources indicate that First Interstate Bancorp of Los Angeles and Wells Fargo andamp; Co. and BankAmerica Corp., both of San Francisco, either won't participate or will submit unappealing bids.    &quot;Generally, we don't see the big banks doing it,&quot; says one high-level official at a major West Coast bank. One of the top five lenders to Mexico asserts that participation by big banks other than New York-based J.P. Morgan andamp; Co., the agent for the exchange, will be &quot;near zero.&quot;    Their reluctance may partly reflect posturing to obtain a higher price from the Mexicans. But if they don't participate meaningfully in the swap plan, its success would indeed depend on a willingness by Mexico to accept worse terms than expected, or on aggressive bidding by smaller U.S. regional banks and foreign banks.    As previously reported, Mexico announced a proposal Dec. 29 under which banks, toward the end of the first quarter, may tender their Mexican government loans at a discount for as much as $10 billion of new Mexican government bonds collateralized by U.S. Treasury zero-coupon bonds.    Mexico hopes that banks will accept a loss, or discount, of as much as 50 cents on the dollar, allowing it to retire as much as $20 billion of debt. The zero-coupon bonds are heavily discounted from face value because they don't pay interest, but at maturity would pay off the bonds' principal.    But the big banks were reluctant from the start to accept 50% losses, and other problems have emerged since the announcement. They face additional losses if they wish to resell the new securities, and a Securities and Exchange Commission ruling has raised troublesome accounting issues. Moreover, the swap doesn't make much strategic sense for some lenders.    A crucial problem is the marketability of the new securities. Bankers and financial experts say the banks face two kinds of losses on the proposed exchange: the discount demanded by Mexico, and a discount demanded by investors who would buy the new securities from the banks.    It may be some time before U.S. banks resell the bonds, however. Under the Mexican proposal, the new bonds will be treated as a private placement in the U.S. for the first two years after they are issued. This means they can only be traded by banks and professional investors. Meantime, the bonds will be traded on the Luxembourg Stock Exchange and may be publicly traded outside the U.S., Morgan officials said.    Morgan maintains that the new Mexican bonds will trade at more than 90% of face value, indicating an additional loss of less than 10%. But other bankers and professional investment advisers assert that Morgan's claim defies present-value calculations based on the trading of similarly structured securities.    These calculations indicate that the new Mexican bonds are apt to trade at 75% to 80% of face value, financial analysts say. Under accounting rules, banks participating in Mexico's swap program will probably have to write down the bonds by 20% to 25%, especially if they intend to trade them.    This means that banks may feel they can't accept a discount of much more than 25% to 30% in the initial exchange of their debt for the new securities, or their total eventual losses might exceed 50%. At that point, they would be better off selling their debt directly in the small but rapidly growing secondary market.    The major banks decline to comment officially on their reaction to the Mexican debt plan, or what price, if any, they intend to seek for their debt at the auction. But officers at some of the banks confirm privately that 65 to 75 cents on the dollar is considered a likely range, far higher than the 50 cents which the Mexicans have indicated indirectly they would like to obtain.    Spokesmen for Bankers Trust New York Corp., Citicorp, New York-based Chase Manhattan Corp., Chicago-based Continental Illinois Corp., Chemical New York, Manufacturers Hanover, Wells Fargo and BankAmerica declined to comment on whether their banks will take part in the proposed new debt plan.    Spokesmen for these banks also declined to comment when asked if their institutions are trying to bid up the price for their Mexican debt by saying privately that they don't intend to participate in the new debt proposal.    Security Pacific Corp., Los Angeles, First Chicago Corp. and First Interstate said they are still studying the Mexican proposal.    The SEC ruling earlier this week has also made participation risky for banks, even if their bids aren't accepted. The SEC said the very act of offering the debt for exchange means the banks should either write off the difference between the carrying value of loan amounts tendered and the auction amount bid, or increase reserves allocated to the debt to reflect the difference.    &quot;That ruling is very unfortunate,&quot; says a West Coast banking official. &quot;If you bid it, you have to bid it to win.&quot;    The big banks have larger strategic concerns as well. If they are adequately reserved against losses on Mexican debt, and don't expect Mexico to renege on its remaining bank debt, one lender asks: Why settle for interest on 50% of the debt, in the form of bonds, and take a loss on the remaining 50%?    After all, the banks are currently receiving interest on 100% of those loans, albeit with money they lend Mexico, this lender says. And Mexico is supposed to be in a better position to pay interest on its remaining bank debt after the exchange. He concludes it might be smarter to keep the debt and let smaller regional banks and foreign banks take losses on the exchange.    Another official, Dharani P. Narayana, a senior vice president at Norwest Corp. of Minneapolis, feels much the same way. &quot;I'm tempted to keep what we have,&quot; he says. &quot;Mexico is worth more. It has always met its interest obligations.&quot;    For now, there isn't likely to be much Japanese participation in the forthcoming auction, either. Unless that country's ministry of finance changes regulations, only a small portion of the Japanese banks' Mexican debt may be eligible for exchange.    The British banks may be reluctant to take part, too. According to British bankers and recent news reports, that country's banks may be allowed big tax breaks for their huge provisions against developing-country debts. Buying Mexican bonds would reduce those provisions.    If, as now seems likely, only Morgan, several stronger regional U.S. banks and some German, Swiss and a few Japanese banks offer debt at competitive prices, there may not be that much initial benefit for Mexico. But the program will offer a test of a different way of doing things, and could replace as much as a few billion dollars of Mexican government debt with a smaller amount of bonds.    ---   Mexico's Consumer Prices   MEXICO CITY (AP) -- Consumer prices soared a record 159.2% last year, Mexico's central bank said, just a few weeks after the government unveiled a new inflation-fighting program.    The Bank of Mexico said consumer prices skyrocketed 14.8% in December alone, the highest one-month increase since the government began collecting such statistics in 1968. Consumer prices rose 105.7% in 1986, the previous record.    The government says its new economic program should reduce the inflation rate to a monthly pace of 1% to 2% by year's end. But analysts are skeptical that the program, which calls for indexing wages and prices beginning in March, will achieve such success.    The Bank of Mexico report blamed the fresh surge in prices partly on the new economic program, which in mid-December nearly doubled prices for some basic goods and services controlled by the government. </TEXT></DOC>