<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871113-0043 </DOCNO><HL> Inside-Trading Indictments Face DelayPending Winans Ruling, Sources Say---By James B. StewartStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)SUPREME COURT (SUP)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Any more insider-trading indictments stemming from the government's massive investigation of Wall Street will be delayed until after a key Supreme Court ruling, according to people familiar with the investigation.    The high court's ruling, which involves former Wall Street Journal reporter R. Foster Winans, could come within the next two months, but might not be announced until June. The appeal of Mr. Winans's insider-trading conviction was argued before the Supreme Court Oct. 7.    Manhattan U.S. Attorney Rudolph Giuliani is expected to announce the delays shortly, the people said. They said that U.S. District Court Judge Milton Pollack, who is presiding over civil cases involving former arbitrager Ivan F. Boesky, has been told by Mr. Giuliani's office of the decision to delay seeking any indictments.    Neither Mr. Giuliani nor the U.S. Attorney's office could be reached for comment. A spokeswoman for the Securities and Exchange Commission, which has been conducting an investigation of possible civil violations and is cooperating with the U.S. Attorney's office, declined comment.    Any further delays are likely to renew criticism of highly publicized arrests last February of three prominent Wall Street arbitragers on insider-trading charges. The charges against Robert Freeman, head of arbitrage at Goldman Sachs andamp; Co., and Richard Wigton and Timothy L. Tabor, former arbitragers at Kidder Peabody andamp; Co., were subsequently dropped after the government said it needed more time to investigate the charges. At the time, government prosecutors vowed to seek new indictments during the summer, later saying that they expected to seek new charges during the fall.    Delay is also fueling uncertainty about the government's progress in its investigation of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and the head of its high-yield junk bond operations, Michael Milken. As previously reported, Drexel, Mr. Milken and others have been under investigation as a result of disclosures by Mr. Boesky, who has pleaded guilty to a felony for his role in a takeover conspiracy and who settled civil insider-trading charges last November for a record $100 million.    Government officials have indicated that other as-yet-unnamed people also are targets of the continuing probe.    People familiar with the investigation insisted that the latest delays don't signal any weakness in the government's expected case, noting that any decision about whether to seek indictments of Drexel and Mr. Milken weren't expected before January anyway.    People familiar with the decision to delay any indictments said it results from the uncertainty caused by the Supreme Court review of the Winans case. Mr. Winans was convicted of securities fraud in 1985 for misappropriating information about the Journal's &quot;Heard on the Street&quot; column. At stake in his appeal is the so-called misappropriation theory of insider trading, which was relied upon by the judge in the Winans case.    Misappropriation is the principal doctrine that underlies much of the government's current crackdown on insider trading. The theory holds that it is the theft, or misappropriation, of confidential information by an investment banker or lawyer, for example, that gives rise to criminal liability.    Using this theory, the government has prosecuted people who don't fit the Supreme Court's narrow definition of a corporate insider: usually an officer or director who possesses market-sensitive information. The argument against the theory is that people who aren't corporate insiders -- but who have confidential material information that might affect the price of a security -- have no duty to disclose their knowledge prior to trading the security.    The misappropriation theory also formed the underpinnings of the insider-trading charges that were dismissed against Messrs. Freeman, Wigton and Tabor. While no one can predict how the Supreme Court will rule, the betting in legal circles has been that some reinterpretation of the theory is likely to emerge. And law enforcement officials have warned that if the theory is thrown out altogether, it could be damaging to the government's current investigations.    The government in September dropped insider-trading charges against David W.C. Clark, a New York lawyer and an alleged co-conspirator in the Winans case, citing the Winans appeal. (Mr. Clark is being tried on embezzlement charges, however, which he has denied.) On the other hand, the government recently went ahead with insider-trading charges against another New York lawyer, Israel Grossman, and relied on the misappropriation theory. Mr. Grossman was convicted last month.    Criminal defense lawyers said they doubt that the mere possibility of a Supreme Court reversal of the Winans conviction would have required the government to delay any indictments. They note that there are alternative insider-trading theories that could be used. Several said they suspect the delay is a tactical ploy to gain more time for an investigation that appears to have become more complicated than was originally anticipated. &quot;This takes the heat off them for a fast resolution of these highly publicized investigations,&quot; said one defense lawyer.    Another lawyer, however, said that he agreed with the government's decision. &quot;Any indictment that would have to be modified because of the Supreme Court ruling, even if it ultimately held up, could be an embarrassment for the government and might be exploited by defense lawyers. These matters are so important and so high-profile that prosecutors can't afford to risk anything that would be perceived as an error.&quot;    Lawyers for Messrs. Freeman, Wigton, Tabor and Milken and for Drexel couldn't be reached. </TEXT></DOC>