<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880224-0053 </DOCNO><HL> Doctor's Orders: British Health Service Is Ailing, and Thatcher Has a Remedy in Mind --- Plans for More Private Care Stir Outraged Protests By Unions and Laborites --- Thousands May Strike Today </HL><AUTHOR> Joann S. Lublin (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP LFT CMY LABOR </CO><IN> PHA INS </IN><DATELINE> EDINBURGH, Scotland  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Anger heats the air of a dingy work shed at Gogarburn Hospital here as maids decry Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher's plans to alter Britain's National Health Service. &quot;She wants to get rid of it,&quot; Helene Walson, 39, says bitterly. &quot;Things will be like they were years ago -- when you couldn't afford a doctor, you just dropped dead.&quot;    The hospital maids are just back from a six-day protest walkout. It wasn't the first disruption focusing on the dismal state of the NHS and proposals for change, nor will it be the last. With the Conservative government moving to cut health costs by inviting companies to bid for certain hospital services, 40,000 health workers throughout Scotland are threatening to stage a 24-hour strike today.    Britain's tax-financed system of socialized medicine, once the envy of the world for its relatively low costs and universal free care, is on the brink of chaos. Wards are closing for lack of cash or nursing staff. Doctors are complaining of run-down facilities and equipment shortages. Newspaper headlines are shouting about delayed surgery for desperately ill children and long waiting lists for others. English nurses struck for a day earlier this month -- for the first time ever -- and disgruntled patients are marching and suing.    For a long time, Mrs. Thatcher ignored demands for a huge cash injection, instead offering lists of data about health-service spending increases during her tenure and on the number of patients being served. The litanies inspired one critic -- a Conservative no less -- to dub her &quot;the Marie Antoinette of statistics.&quot;    But now it is clear she seriously underestimated the public rage. The third term she began comfortably last summer has exploded into the Tories' winter of domestic woe, and the outcry over the health service is at the center of the turmoil. And late last month, Mrs. Thatcher reversed course by launching a sweeping review of the NHS, the most far-reaching in its 40-year history. Many people think she will propose radical surgery.    The expected operation: An attempt to relieve the budget pressure by greatly increasing the private sector's health-care capacity to pay and care for the sick. The prime minister wants to quintuple private health care's role in the British economy. Her health minister, John Moore, has signaled that the government will seek to end the NHS principle of free health care for all. The strategy could prove treacherous, even for a prime minister who denationalized other government enterprises and won re-election last June on a course of trying to destroy socialism.    Curing -- or even substantially changing -- the ailing, behemoth NHS won't be easy. The government-run service touches all Britons' lives, offering everything from new glasses to new hearts. Its enormous size also makes it a formidable political foe. The NHS is Europe's biggest employer, with about one million people on its payroll. It is difficult to find a British family without at least one relative working for the service.    Many Britons view the health service as the most visible success of the postwar welfare state, a national institution treasured second only to the Queen. &quot;People are feeling dissatisfied with the health service -- except I feel disloyal saying that,&quot; confesses John Springett, a pencil manufacturing executive recovering from a coronary bypass operation at private Princess Grace Hospital in London. Mr. Springett, 52, didn't want to wait for up to two years to have the surgery at the NHS. His choice of private treatment lands him a nicely carpeted single room with a leather armchair at his bedside.    Private health insurance now covers nearly 10% of Britons, double the share when Mrs. Thatcher took office nine years ago. There now are 200 private hospitals performing about 600,000 operations a year, roughly 20% of the total (and up from 13% in 1981). The increases reflect not only increasing unhappiness with NHS waiting lists, but also growing affluence, aggressive marketing by U.S. health-care concerns, and some new tax breaks for insurance coverage.    Private health care, however, remains a far smaller factor in Britain than in other industrial nations. Spending for such care accounted for 6.3% of gross domestic product in the U.S. in 1984, for instance, but only 0.6% in Britain. This, along with years of penny-pinching and rationing by the NHS, explains why Britain as a nation spends less per person on health than other major countries.    Britain, of course, isn't the only place where growing demand for health care -- driven by aging populations and medical advances -- is running up against tight government budgets. To cope with the demand, countries like the U.S., West Germany and France are enforcing strict cost controls on government spending -- long a fact of life for Britain's socialized system -- even as Britain under Mrs. Thatcher moves to expand private medicine's role.    But her focus stirs some fierce resistance. Further expansion of private medicine in the U.K. will create &quot;a top-class health-care system for those who put the extra money in and a second-class health-care system for the rest,&quot; argues John Eatwell, economic adviser to Labor Party leader Neil Kinnock. &quot;I hope (the Tories) do&quot; try that approach, Mr. Eatwell adds. &quot;We will crucify them.&quot;    Even relatively minor attempts to expand private-sector involvement in the 2,500 NHS hospitals provoke outrage from the highly unionized work force. That's what resulted in Scotland last month after health officials ordered competitive bids for hospital cleaning, laundry and catering services -- a Whitehall request they had resisted for nearly five years. Edinburgh police were forced to close a street when Gogarburn Hospital maids and 1,000 other protesting NHS workers picketed the Lothian Health Board, the Scottish capital's second biggest employer.    One banner bearer was Elizabeth Delworth, a 34-year-old catering assistant at Royal Victoria Hospital's nursing college. Today, sporting an &quot;I love NHS&quot; button on her wide-brimmed white hat, she proudly shows off the cafeteria's immaculate kitchen. &quot;We have to go hell to leather to keep it up,&quot; she says, opening the door to a scrubbed oven. She believes a private contractor wouldn't clean as thoroughly -- and would cut her #37 ($65) weekly wage, making it all but impossible for her to support the two children she is rearing alone.    Letting companies bid for the catering work &quot;is just a steppingstone,&quot; she insists, clenching her arms and biting her lower lip. &quot;Before you know it, there will be private hospitals everywhere,&quot; and the NHS &quot;won't exist as we now know it.&quot;    Efforts to forge closer ties with the private sector elsewhere in Britain sometimes have cost NHS officials their jobs. Freddie Lucas, a retired army brigadier general, was one of many outside managers the health service recruited after a 1983 Thatcher inquiry assailed the way much of it was run. (Florence Nightingale &quot;carrying her lamp through the corridors of the NHS today,&quot; the report said, would &quot;be searching for the people in charge.&quot;)    Mr. Lucas took over an NHS health authority in Birmingham, in the industrial heartland of England, but within nine months he had quit under pressure. His chief problem was that he had proposed letting a U.S.-based company, Community Psychiatric Centers, build and run a 160-bed psychiatric facility -- for half the NHS's #14 million price tag.    In one union demonstration against the idea, a man dressed in a cowboy costume and Ronald Reagan mask pushed a wheelbarrow filled with fake dollars. &quot;This is a #7 million giveaway to the Americans,&quot; the protester's sign read. &quot;You would have thought I had started World War III,&quot; Mr. Lucas recalls. (The health authority later hired a British company to build the hospital, for a price the NHS won't disclose; the NHS will run it itself.)    Despite his experience, change of some sort seems sure to come, simply because of the NHS's cash crisis and the ruling Conservatives' push. For instance, the Tories offered a bill in November to let NHS hospitals make a profit -- instead of just recovering their costs -- when private patients use their beds. Parliament is expected to approve it.    The proposal encouraged Hospital Capital Corp., a U.K. unit of U.S.-based Lifetime Corp., to forge a novel bargain with Guy's Hospital, a major London teaching institution. It will pour #5 million into new bathrooms, beds and X-ray equipment for a run-down four-story building where Guy's physicians formerly treated 62 private patients. Hospital Capital then will run it as a profit-making facility beside the NHS hospital, which will collect revenue by supplying catering, pharmacy, pathology and similar support services.    Other legislation also is likely to emerge. Among the possibilities: government health vouchers that consumers could spend on NHS or private care; a requirement that affluent patients pay for their food and lodging in NHS hospitals; and a drive to widen use of private health insurance by adding tax breaks and assigning low NHS priority to minor and elective surgery. The government also may stage &quot;a whole series of experiments where the private sector builds, equips and runs hospitals,&quot; a senior official says.    Such proposals remain in the future, because the review is expected to take about six months. Assuming they come, resistance can be expected not just from Labor politicians and unions but from some health-service doctors as well. Though no one can say how all the maneuvering will come out, what has just happened at Churchill Hospital in Oxford offers some clues.    The outpatient surgery unit at the NHS hospital squeezes 14 beds side by side in an outmoded ward with gray linoleum floors and blazing fluorescent lights. Patients journey to their operations down a drafty, unheated hall with unpainted concrete beams. Because certain equipment is lacking, women who have gotten word of suspect Pap-test results must wait anxiously for two months before a further test clarifies the diagnosis, and then, if precancerous changes are confirmed, another three months for treatment.    Last fall Bioplan Holdings PLC, a private British operator of outpatient surgery units, proposed a remedy: It would build (and own) a new unit at Churchill, treating patients for a fee. The idea accorded with the approach of the Thatcher government. But Douglas Ellis, a Churchill gynecologist and board member involved in the discussions, felt obliged to oppose the plan.    A private unit with its own employees might threaten NHS staffers, he warns, and &quot;we could have industrial action in the middle of the hospital.&quot; As a result, he figures that &quot;we're far, far better off having their money to run our own unit.&quot;    So Dr. Ellis helped fashion an innovative plan under which Churchill and Bioplan will jointly build and use a new #800,000 outpatient surgery unit. Bioplan will invest #300,000 in it. And the private company will gain a foothold by offering Oxford's first private day-surgery services. </TEXT></DOC>