<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870513-0009 </DOCNO><HL> Boeing May GetStake in AllegisWith 747 Order---Notes Convertible to 16%Of Firm's Stock IncludedIn $1.5 Billion Contract---By Scott McMurray and Scott KilmanStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AEG BA LABOR EUROP MDAEROSPACE (ARO)AIRLINES (AIR)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><DATELINE> CHICAGO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Boeing Co. apparently has become a rescuer of Allegis Corp. in an unusual arrangement involving an aircraft order and financing agreement.    The arrangement was announced by the United Airlines unit of Allegis as part of a $1.5 billion order for 11 of Boeing's 747-400 jumbo jets. But more significantly, the transaction includes a provision by which Boeing could become the largest shareholder of Allegis. Boeing agreed to acquire $700 million of a new issue of Allegis notes. The notes are convertible into the equivalent of as much as 16% of Allegis's common or into a new issue of Allegis preferred shares.    The move also indicates the fierce competition among airplane builders to sell planes to airlines. In Seattle, a Boeing spokesman said this was the first time Boeing provided this kind of financing in an aircraft sale. &quot;It's a more competitive environment today for airplane builders,&quot; he said. &quot;So this (providing the financing) was a necessity. We had to put together a deal that would win the business.&quot;    Industry officials and analysts were quick to view the agreement as a major defensive move for Allegis, which has been the subject of takeover rumors for more than a month and whose United unit is the target of a buyout effort by its pilots union. The two companies have had a close relationship for decades and some analysts doubted that Boeing needed to agree to such a transaction for competitive reasons. They argued that United for some time has been resolved to buy the 747s.    The view that the proposal is a defensive step was supported by details of the transaction. The preferred shares would contain special rights and provisions that give Boeing a legal voice in any takeover attempt aimed at Allegis or the United unit. They also include covenants affecting United's level of debt and other factors, including the sale of subsidiaries.    Boeing, however, agreed not to pursue a takeover bid itself. Its arrangement includes a standstill agreement that prevents it from becoming more than a minority holder of Allegis.    Analysts said United's arrangement with Boeing represents a major blow to the pilots union and will help Allegis Chairman Richard Ferris in his effort to transform the company into a diversified travel company. &quot;This is quite a coup for Ferris,&quot; said one United executive. &quot;He's improved the equity in the company and placed it in a better defensive posture with regard to takeovers.&quot;    A spokesman for the United chapter of the Air Line Pilots Association said the transaction with Boeing appeared to be a defensive measure aimed at preventing a takeover. The union didn't have further comment.    Boeing's president and chief executive officer, Frank Shrontz, said &quot;the financing package provided by Boeing reflects our confidence in Allegis's future growth and its long-term success.&quot;    A spokesman for Boeing said the company had no comment on analysts' statements that the Boeing move was designed to rescue Allegis.    In addition to the 11 747-400s ordered by United for the first time, the airline also upgraded a previous order for four 747-200s to the 747-400 model. The total order for 15 of the new 747 model is the largest Boeing has received, United said. The 747-400s would be delivered starting in 1995.    United said it will use the wide-body jets to replace and expand the fleet it uses to fly the Pacific Ocean routes that United obtained when it acquired the Pacific division of Pan American World Airways, a unit of Pan Am Corp.    As part of the aircraft order, Boeing agreed to help United dispose of most of the existing jets used on its Pacific routes, including a fleet of specially-shortened 747s and some L-1011s originally made by Lockheed Corp.    It has been known for some time that United was shopping for new planes for its Pacific routes. Still, despite the size of yesterday's order, United will have to buy additional planes. United officials said the company will need more jets on the Pacific routes than it ordered and that the company is continuing talks with other manufacturers before it rounded out its Pacific purchases.    The principal competitor is McDonnell Douglas Corp.'s new MD-11, the wide-body successor to the DC-10. United also has held talks with Airbus Industrie, the European jet-making consortium, although aircraft industry specialists doubt that any of Airbus's offerings would be well-suited to United's Pacific routes.    One company source said United is seriously considering purchasing as many as 12 of McDonnell Douglas MD-11s. He added that the airline has almost ruled out a purchase of Airbus Industrie's proposed new long-range jet, the A-340, which would compete with the 747 and the MD-11. He said the fact that the McDonnell Douglas plane will be ready for delivery two years earlier than its Airbus rival is the main reason it represents the better choice.    The official said Boeing and United had been negotiating the plane order for more than a year, but that the recent effort by the union representing United pilots to find a partner to help them purchase the company probably led to discussions with Boeing on the stock plan.    Louis Marckesano, an airline analyst with Janney Montgomery Scott Inc. in Philadelphia, said that &quot;it appears that (Allegis) may have created an ally by having so many shares in probably friendly hands.&quot;    United also said it confirmed previous orders for 15 more of Boeing's smaller 737 jets, bringing its total firm orders for the plane to 56. United has tentative plans to order as many as 110 737s.    Boeing's decision to acquire Allegis convertible notes continues a long and very close relationship between the two companies. United Airlines was once owned by the former Boeing Airplane Co. and was spun off as a separate company in the early 1930s.    Under the financing agreement, the $700 million in notes Boeing received come due in three equal installments beginning in May 1990. Boeing can convert the notes any time after 30 days into Allegis common stock based on a 20-day average price for Allegis stock, which wouldn't be less than $65.125 and more than $76.125, the United spokesman said.    The notes also can be converted into a new series of Allegis preferred shares valued at $500 a share, which is convertible at Allegis's current share price into 1.4 million Allegis shares, the United spokesman said.    In composite trading yesterday on the New York Stock Exchange, Allegis stock closed at $67.75, up 50 cents, while Boeing closed at $45.25, up 12.5 cents. The aircraft purchase and financing was announced after the close of trading in New York.    ---   Judith Valente in Chicago and Earl C. Gottschalk Jr. in Los Angeles contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>