<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871002-0080 </DOCNO><HL> Athwart a Growth Economy---By George Gilder</HL><DD> 10/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN FORGNECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)COMPUTERS (EDP) </IN><TEXT>   Congress may posture by passing a trade bill, but it's the &quot;gapologists&quot; who really have the ear of policy makers. Gapologists are intelligent enough to realize that the trade deficit is really a function of capital flows, not of the unfairness by foreigners that protectionists decry. But there the insight ends.    The gapologists' bugaboo is the U.S. budget deficit. They believe it sucks in capital from abroad that must, under one of the laws of economics, be squared by a trade gap. So the real trade solution, their theory goes, dictates getting enough tax hikes from President Reagan to win some domestic spending cuts from the Democrats and get the country back to an even keel (of the sort we reached in 1979).    This contemporary wisdom conflicts with the realities of the new world economy. For one thing, some seeming tax increases can bring in less revenue. The converse has certainly been true with the tax-rate cuts of 1981 and 1986.    Since 1982, federal intake has grown 13.9% in 1982 dollars. During the past four years, income tax revenues, rising at an annual average rate of 9.4%, have been growing more than twice as fast as inflation. U.S. tax-rate reductions have augmented revenues between two and three times as fast as the rising tax rates of West Germany and other European countries where inflation continued to push taxpayers into higher brackets.    But the main flaw in the gapologists' conception is that it confuses the order of causation. Foreign money hasn't been sucked into the U.S. by a budget gap. It poured in, responding to America's more competitive capital markets and other opportunities.    The flow of Japanese funds into the U.S. was impelled by an abrupt change in that country's economy. After growing nearly 10% a year for three decades, Japan's rate of growth dropped precipitously, beginning with the first oil shock, by more than one half and capital investment slumped. But its savings rate continued at world-beating levels, lowering interest rates, doubling and tripling the price of Japanese real estate, and then moving into the Japanese stock market.    As these forces approached their climax in the early 1980s, the return on investment in the Japanese economy was dropping sharply in relation to yields in the U.S. Continued growth and inflation, moreover, were pushing the Japanese into very high tax brackets, avoidable only by yet more increases in tax-exempt savings.    Finally, with the emergence of fully efficient global capital markets, the fiercely insular Bank of Japan unleashed Japanese investment overseas in volume for the first time since World War II. Japan's net foreign holdings increased by a factor of 10 in five years.    Japanese financiers did not send the funds to the socialist third world or to Europe, afflicted with general economic sclerosis. They sent it to the U.S., which was undergoing a transformation nearly the opposite of Japan and Europe.    U.S. tax rates were dropping; returns on investment, and the investment rate, were going up. During the recovery beginning in the fourth quarter of 1982, U.S. gross private domestic investment rose 61.4% and investment in capital equipment rose 51%, both in real terms through the end of 1986.    Contrary to widespread claims of a U.S. consumer binge, total outlays on personal consumption rose only 16.3% during this period, or between a quarter and a third as fast as the various investment indexes. Contrary to the theory that U.S. growth was impelled by a huge budgetary deficit, U.S. government debt and deficits were lower than the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development average throughout the 1980s.    Rising overall to real levels at least a quarter above previous highs, all key investment indexes -- except structures, about which we hear so much -- climbed as a share of GNP, which itself was racing ahead at a pace of 4.1% a year. The crucial index of capital equipment outlays rose from 7.6% of GNP in 1981 to a new high of 8.7% in 1986.    Analysts who deny an investment boom as an explanation for the trade gap point out that as a share of GNP, total investment has yet to exceed its 1970s highs. But the oil investment and construction booms of the 1970s were part of an inflationary crisis replete with price controls and tax shelters that distorted investment values. The current investment boom is heavily focused on advanced technologies with ever higher yields.    The new electronic gear -- from a semiconductor wafer stepper to a circuit simulator or a fiber optic network -- yield large multiples in product per square foot of factory or laboratory space over previous technologies. Such machinery, typical of much new equipment usable across the range of U.S. industries, has skewed the investment totals away from structures.    To take advantage of such opportunities, surplus Japanese savings flooded into the U.S., largely assuming the physical form of an influx of producer durables -- from chips to machine tools -- that helped fuel a productivity boom in U.S. manufacturing. That productivity growth rate more than doubled after 1981, to an annual average of 4.5%, the best extended upsurge since World War II.    As Alan Reynolds has explained, the key to the trade gap is relative rates of investment. He points out: &quot;No other major country has increased 'investment rates' -- fixed investment relative to GNP -- since 1980; and no other major country has reduced unemployment since 1981. This is the missing dramatic change that has been needed to explain the dramatic change in trade balances.&quot;    Foreign funds have been channeled into investments here instead of being spent on U.S. goods. This episode in world economic history was a signal triumph for free-market economics. With global capital markets operating with uncanny efficiency to channel resources to the most productive entrepreneurs, the U.S. boomed, growing twice as fast as the rest of the world. In the teeth of a near depression in domestic demand in Europe and Latin America and a capital formation slump in Japan, the U.S. was responsible for a continued expansion of the world economy after 1982.    Investment in the U.S. is paying off. In the face of the fiercest possible competition in the semiconductor and computer industries -- widely targeted by industrial policy -- the U.S. has gained share in most of the leading-edge markets. In particular, the U.S. regained or expanded its edge in small computers, PC clones and software, all increasingly important components of value-added in the industry. Over a four-year period, the U.S. also launched multibillion-dollar markets, unexpectedly led by new companies, in advanced work stations (Sun and Apollo), fault-tolerant computers (Tandem and Stratus), and minisupercomputers (Convex, Alliant, and an array of others). In 1986, U.S. electronics production was some 2.5 times all Asia put together.    In mid-1987, the size of the U.S. semiconductor open market -- excluding huge captive producers such as IBM, GM, and ATandamp;T -- again exceeded Japan's. It was the brief Japanese lead in this index that had panicked American open-market chip producers and led many observers to conclude that a permanent shift had occurred in the location of electronics production.    Although electronics investment dropped in 1986 after the previous upsurge, a brisk recovery is already under way. Some 150 new semiconductor &quot;minifabs,&quot; for production of leading-edge custom devices, are under construction or in use in the U.S. In East Fishkill, N.Y., and Essex Junction, Vt., IBM is completing -- with the help of the Japanese firm Shimizu -- two of the largest electronic plants in the world. These symbiotic high-technology sectors in the U.S. and Japan are both reviving.    Meanwhile, one of the chief problems for the U.S. is the semiconductor trade agreement, which forced Japan to impose close surveillance and control on production of memory chips. The U.S. Semiconductor Industry Association, the leading advocate of the agreement, is now begging the Japanese to increase production of one-megabit Dynamic Random Access Memory Chips. But only Toshiba, threatened with a congressional ban, and IBM, which keeps its chips to itself, are producing at high volume. Now made in the U.S. only by IBM and in small but growing quantities by the newly profitable Micron Technology, megabit DRAMs are increasingly crucial for the manufacture of the advanced computers and telecom equipment that constitute the bulk of demand for America's advanced microprocessors and other integrated circuits.    Government officials must learn the facts of life in the integrated world economy. It is no longer possible or desirable to control borders, manage trade, manipulate currencies or otherwise interfere with global commerce. The fabric of relationships among American, Asian and European businesses is woven too tight.    In the midst of supremely fruitful international collaboration, however, the U.S. Congress has been throwing a trade-gap tantrum. Analysts see portents of &quot;a loss of U.S. sovereignty&quot; in movements of capital similar to decades of U.S. foreign investment in other countries. Economists and congressmen see disaster in a governmental deficit that has shrunk by 30% in the past year. They panic over a government debt already lower as a share of GNP than Japan's or than the average debt of other OECD countries.    Because the U.S. is the spearhead of the world economy and the leader of world capitalism, the behavior of its Congress has become the chief threat to global prosperity. American politicians, and the gapologists who counsel them, must come to recognize that the old nationalist measures of competitiveness and soundness are obsolete. In the newly integrated global economy, counting widgets on the borders and obsessively looking for fiscal balance are unrevealing ways of measuring national performance.    ---   Mr. Gilder's book &quot;Microcosm,&quot; on the semiconductor and computer industries, is due next year from Simon andamp; Schuster. </TEXT></DOC>