<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870721-0114 </DOCNO><HL> Brazil's Ruling Party Might Be Headed for a Breakup---Conservatives and Reformers FailTo Agree About Economic, Social Woes---By Roger CohenStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM </IN><DATELINE> BRASILIA, Brazil  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Paper airplanes waft across the Brazilian Congress. A bongo drum accompanies a chant berating the International Monetary Fund. A combination of songs, cheers and jeers contributes to a continuous cacophony.    &quot;Please! We cannot work in this tumult,&quot; yells Ulysses Guimaraes, leader of the Brazilian Democratic Movement Party, which holds 22 of the country's 23 state governorships and absolute majorities in the lower house and the Senate. He presses insistently on a bell in a bid for order, but scarcely anybody attending the two-day convention of the party, which ended Sunday, appears to hear it. From the tumult comes the image of a deeply divided party, so split that it represents both the government and its main opposition. United only in name, the party, known by its portuguese-language initials PMDB, has emerged eight months after its sweeping November electoral victory as a many-headed monster, torn between conservative forces supporting the administration of President Jose Sarney and those who believe the government has infiltrated the party to betray its reformist dreams.    How the PMDB resolves its divisions is crucial to Brazil's future. At a time of delicate political transition from military to democratic rule, deep social tensions and economic uncertainty, many believe the party now will split, making solutions for those problems even more unattainable.    At the least, the party's internal battles seem certain to determine the length of the current presidential mandate, the shape of the constitution being drafted, and how effectively social unrest can be controlled. Beyond that, analysts believe, the intraparty struggle may decide whether Brazil remains a society of vast social divisions, where the richest 1% has as much wealth as the poorest 50%, or embarks on a process of social change.    At the convention, the battle lines in these crucial conflicts were so acute that at one point a progressive, Waldir Pugliesi, called Carlos Sant'Anna, a supporter of President Sarney, &quot;a Nazi-Fascist.&quot; In the end, they were so paralyzing that the party voted not to vote on anything.    &quot;It's just a big mess,&quot; says Fernando Henrique Cardoso, Senate leader of the PMDB. Former Agriculture Minister Dante de Oliveira is more graphic: &quot;We've become a boneless elephant.&quot;    The faction led by Sao Paulo Sen. Mario Covas, the biggest winner in the November congressional elections and now clearly a presidential candidate, claims the true inheritance of the PMDB, a party formed in 1979 out of the MDB, the main opposition force during two decades of military rule that ended in 1985.    This group perceives the party's identity as inextricably linked to reform and change. &quot;We are a movement shaped along the the lines of European Social Democracy,&quot; says Mr. Covas, who is 57 years old. Such issues as raising Brazil's $37 minimum monthly wage, cutting the working week to 40 hours from 48, providing greater job security and improving health and education are fundamental to his platform. A strong nationalist tinge, involving a hard line on foreign debt, opposition to the IMF, wariness of multinationals and rejection of debt-equity swaps, is also perceptible among his supporters.    Most immediately, this faction wants a four-year presidential term and direct presidential elections next year. Without it, Senate leader Mr. Cardoso, who is also a sociologist, believes it will be hard &quot;to avoid a social convulsion.&quot;    Opposed to Sen. Covas are the government politicians, such as President Sarney and Justice Minister Paulo Brossard, who were supporters of the military regime and its Arena Party and opposed the MDB for many years. They generally switched to the PMDB in the 1980s when it was clear military rule was crumbling. According to Brasilia political scientist David Fleischer, a majority of PMDB members come from an Arena background.    This group, which also includes several state governors, is concerned, in the words of Mr. Sant'Anna, to &quot;work with the old regime as the only means to peaceful transition.&quot; It is worried by the reformist, sometimes utopian, ideals unleashed under the PMDB banner. Its critics say it is none other than the old regime dressed up in new clothes -- a &quot;military government in disguise,&quot; says Mr. Fleischer.    It is generally opposed to agrarian reform -- 1.6% of Brazil's landowners own about half the land -- and rejects using the new constitution to push through changes on such issues as the length of the working week or minimum wage levels. It is generally more amenable to opening the economy to international competition and adopting a conciliatory stance on Brazil's $107 billion foreign debt.    Between these two factions stands the party leader, Mr. Guimaraes, and a shrinking group of his acolytes. Mr. Guimaraes, now 72, led the opposition to the military regime and doesn't hide his ambition to become president. But his attempt to find middle ground has left him increasingly isolated.    The result of these divisions -- attributed by social scientist Bolivar Lamounier to &quot;the party's extreme difficulty in changing from an opposition front into a government force&quot; -- may be social unrest and deepening conflict.    The convention demonstrated that President Sarney, who wanted it to endorse a five-year term, can't control the PMDB. Nor did the Covas factions have the force to push through a four-year term. In the end, this and other decisions were left to the Constituent Assembly, ensuring a period of further uncertainty during which the Covas faction will try to take its struggle into the streets, analysts and congressmen believe.    A general strike has already been called for next month and demonstrations for direct elections are planned. The frustrations of a society fed with months of optimism under last year's Cruzado anti-inflation plan and suddenly subjected to rapid inflation and cuts in real salaries is certain to feed this movement. Recent demonstrations in Rio and Sao Paulo show that &quot;the big cities are a tinder box,&quot; one analyst says.    Against this trend, there may be an increasing use of hard-line measures to repress agitation, including press censorship and widened use of the National Security Law, which gives the military sweeping powers of arrest and detention and subjects suspects to judgment in military court. At the same time, President Sarney may press his PMDB loyalists to defect and link with other conservative forces in the Assembly, assuring him a majority and the end of the current PMDB.    The survival of the PMDB seems to depend most crucially on the success of the recently launched &quot;Bresser&quot; economic plan. If this can stabilize the economy, analysts believe, President Sarney probably can control the situation. But if the plan collapses and high inflation returns, his position could become untenable just as Brazil and the PMDB attempt to complete the drafting of a new constitution, negotiate a foreign debt accord, and complete the long transition to democracy. </TEXT></DOC>