<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880520-0084 </DOCNO><HL> Doctors Don't Tell All on Drugs' Effects --- Side Reactions Are Common, Often Harmful </HL><AUTHOR> Frank E. James (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> PHA </IN><TEXT>   Most over-the-counter drugs come with elaborate warning labels that list potential side effects. Prescription medicines, on the other hand, don't.    Does this make sense?    Though prescription drugs are far more likely to produce adverse reactions, they come in plain containers because doctors are supposed to make sure their patients use the medicine properly. But physicians often don't warn their patients about side effects. And that can be dangerous.    For instance:   A doctor at Chicago's Michael Reese Hospital gives a patient Prolixin and Thorazine, two drugs used to control certain mental disorders. But the physician never tells the patient that the drugs can cause drowsiness and slow reactions. Shortly after being discharged, the patient loses control of his car and is in a serious wreck that leaves a passenger injured.    Joseph Gary, an Illinois railroad worker, is given a potent anti-cancer drug, methotrexate, for a severe case of psoriasis. Although this is an acceptable treatment, his physician allegedly never warns him of the drug's possible side effects, including liver disease. Not watching for the symptoms, Mr. Gary develops liver disease and dies.    Such horror stories underscore a serious health-care issue: the failure of physicians to give their patients enough information about the drugs they are prescribing. &quot;It's a considerable problem,&quot; says Quentin D. Young, a practicing physician who is president of the Health and Medicine Policy Research Group in Chicago. &quot;I think there's a growing practice and desire to warn about side effects, but it's not nearly universal.&quot;    Each year, doctors in the U.S. write 1.6 billion prescriptions. And even the most popular drugs often cause side effects. Erythromycin, for instance, is one of the safest antibiotics. But its common side effects are nausea, vomiting, diarrhea and rashes. It also can trigger fever and jaundice and even cause deafness.    Another popular drug, cortisone, is used to treat a broad array of allergic and inflammatory conditions. But the drug's frequent side effects are indigestion, weight gain and acne. Less common but sometimes more serious are dermatologic reactions, muscle weakness and mood changes.    Although it's difficult to measure how many prescriptions aren't accompanied by adequate warnings, some surveys suggest the number may be high. For instance, in a 1983 study conducted by the Food and Drug Administration, 70% of respondents said their physicians didn't tell them about drug side effects. More recently, a survey of patients over 45 years old by the American Association of Retired Persons found that fewer than 30% of all patients ask their doctors about side effects.    What's more, some medical specialists say the problem could get worse as efforts to cut health care costs intensify. They fear doctors will have less time than ever to discuss treatments with their patients, including potential side effects. &quot;To a degree, the change in the way health care is provided is responsible,&quot; says Terrill Washington, a clinical pharmacologist with the Howard University Drug Information Service in Washington, D.C. &quot;HMOs and other plans . . . don't have the time to inform patients.&quot;    The situation is little different at many pharmacies, where druggists are measured by the number of prescriptions they fill -- not the advice they give customers.    Some doctors argue that giving patients information about side effects is more complicated than it might seem. Among other things, they worry about frightening patients away from useful therapies. &quot;If you read patients the risks of known reactions that you can find in the PDR (the Physician's Desk Reference, a widely used compendium of drug data) and associated drug-company material, no patient would take the medication,&quot; says Dr. Young of the Health and Medicine Policy Research Group. &quot;Some of the side effects sound horrid.&quot;    Tagamet, for instance, is one of the most widely prescribed and effective drugs for treating ulcers. However, it has been known to trigger such adverse reactions as mild and temporary diarrhea, dizziness, drowsiness and rash. Tagamet also can cause mental confusion, agitation, psychosis, depression, anxiety, hallucinations and disorientation. Doctors say that some patients, if informed of those potential outcomes, might choose not to take the medicine.    Nevertheless, many doctors agree that patients need to be better informed than they are now, even when it comes to relatively mild side effects. More information can help patients determine whether a drug is having an unintended effect, whether they should make life-style changes (such as not driving a car or drinking alcohol with drugs that cause drowsiness), even whether a certain course of treatment -- especially in elective areas -- justifies the risk.    Not being warned about a side effect can prompt startled patients to abandon their medicine prematurely, causing complications that are worse than the side effects. For instance, hypertension patients, not expecting side effects like dizziness or impotency, have been known to stop taking their drugs, which has led to strokes, heart attacks or kidney failure.    Mr. Washington of Howard University tells of a construction worker in his 40s suffering from hypertension who came to his clinic. Tests found the worker's kidneys impaired and his blood pressure out of control at 180/110.    After taking the man's history, Mr. Washington learned he had stopped taking clonidine as frequently as he should have because it made him dangerously drowsy at building sites and caused some impotency as well, side effects about which his physician hadn't warned him. Mr. Washington's medical team placed the man on another medication.    Lula Parks, a New York City telephone technician, visited a surgeon with a superficial case of phlebitis, or inflamed veins, in her legs. He prescribed Butazolidin, which she took for 18 days before allegedly experiencing a reaction called Stevens-Johnson syndrome, a severe inflammatory disease that causes blisters and lesions on the skin and in mucous mebranes. She lost 25% of her hair and suffered burn-like wounds over 85% of her body, resulting in significant permanent scarring. She was permanently disabled.    So far, efforts to remedy the prescription-drug problem haven't gotten very far. In 1981, the FDA proposed a test program that would require health professionals to dispense informational leaflets bearing side-effect warnings and other facts with a dozen drugs. If the program proved successful, the FDA planned to expand it gradually to include other drugs.    But the American Medical Association, pharmacists and drug makers lobbied against the plan and -- along with the Reagan administration, bent on reducing the role of the federal government -- killed it. The plan's opponents objected to its being mandatory. The doctors and pharmacists also worried about the logistics of storing all the leaflets, while drug makers argued that the leaflets wouldn't be effective. &quot;We thought physician counseling with some written material would be better,&quot; says Jeffrey Warren, a spokesman for the Pharmaceutical Manufacturers Association, which conducted a patient study supporting that conclusion.    Today, only a few prescription drugs -- birth-control pills and estrogens used in estrogen replacement therapy, for example -- are routinely accompanied by informational fliers about the drugs.    The AMA has a voluntary plan in which it supplies doctors with informational leaflets they can give patients covering most prescription drugs. But it concedes the leaflets aren't widely used.    Jere Goyan, dean of the school of pharmacy at the University of California, San Francisco, and a former FDA commissioner, is more blunt. He says private efforts to help educate patients have &quot;fallen flat on their face.&quot;    The best hope most patients have of avoiding problems with side effects is to question their doctors. The National Council on Patient Information and Education, a nonprofit group in Washington created by drug makers, the AMA and other medical groups, recommends that patients given prescriptions ask their doctors five questions: What's the name of the drug, and what is it supposed to do? How and when do I take it, and for how long? What foods, drinks, other medicines or activities should I avoid while taking this drug? Are there any side effects, and what should I do if they occur? Is there any written information about the drug?    Consumers also can get information on their own by consulting the Physicians' Desk Reference, published yearly by Medical Economics Co. of Oradell, N.J. The book contains information from drug makers on their products, including side effects and contraindications -- symptoms or circumstances that, when present, mean a person shouldn't use the drug.    Random House recently published the AMA's Guide to Prescripton and Over-the-Counter Drugs. In addition to information on side effects, it has an introductory section that explains how drugs work as well as advice on what a patient should do if he misses a dose or takes an overdose. </TEXT></DOC>