<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870227-0190 </DOCNO><HL> Changing Tactics:Battling a High Yen,Many Japanese FirmsShift Work Overseas---They Are Closing Facilities,Idling Workers in Japan;Some Cut Back Exports---But Firms May Get Stronger---By Bernard Wysocki Jr.Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPANMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT)ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN) </IN><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   With the Japanese yen now up roughly 55% against the American dollar since September 1985, business leaders finally seem to be changing their approach to dealing with the &quot;yen shock.&quot;    The clearest signal yet came two weeks ago, when Nippon Steel announced the closing of five major blast furnaces and the elimination of 19,000 jobs over four years. To cope with losses that may reach $700 million this year, the world's largest steelmaker also said it would accelerate its diversification into new business, eventually reducing the steel segment to 50% from 80%.    Until recently, many Japanese bankers and business executives had seemed to regard the yen's rise as a passing nightmare. Despite faltering sales, they assumed that the Japanese economy would soon be revived by a resurgence of exports, and they hewed to their traditional lifetime-employment, no-layoff policies.    No longer. In the past few months, they apparently have concluded that the strong yen is here to stay. So they are launching strategies that will fundamentally change the Japanese economy.    They are closing plants and eliminating jobs in Japan. They are going overseas to build more factories and to buy more parts and supplies, mostly from cheaper Asian sources. Some Japanese companies are even cutting back their exports, a move long sought by the U.S. and some other trading partners.    &quot;The Japanese economy has come to an important historical turning point,&quot; says Kaneo Nakamura, the president of the Industrial Bank of Japan.    The restructuring resembles what American multinationals did when the dollar was strong. And many of the same fears, of &quot;sunset industries&quot; and a &quot;hollowing out&quot; of the industrial base, are increasing here. Economists and politicians fret about unemployment, currently just under 3% but expected to rise.    If Japan's economic growth -- now a sluggish 2%, adjusted for inflation -- dwindles further, the slump could trigger slowdowns in other nations. The U.S. has repeatedly urged both Japan and West Germany to stimulate their economies, to act as locomotives of global growth.    Yet the Japanese government shows no sign of taking major stimulative steps -- for several reasons. Powerful bureaucrats at the Ministry of Finance are adamantly opposed to spurring the economy with more government spending; they note the current big budget deficits. There also is disagreement on what stimulative steps would be taken. Meanwhile, the austerity program is holding down outlays on highways and parks, and home building is being thwarted by rigid bureaucratic rules. Tax &quot;reform&quot; is turning out to be a tax increase -- a damper on consumer spending.    Some observers see outside pressure as the only hope. &quot;Japan needs a bigger shock, an external shock,&quot; says Ryuzo Sato, a New York University economist. One possible source of pressure, apart from the strong yen, is the threat of harsh protectionist legislation by the U.S.    Although the yen has strengthened and the restructuring of the Japanese economy has begun, the huge American trade deficit with Japan, which topped $56 billion last year, isn't likely to decline quickly. &quot;The imbalances may not change all that much,&quot; says Makoto Kuroda, a senior official at the Ministry of International Trade and Industry. Consequently, protectionist sentiment in the U.S. Congress will probably continue strong this year.    Over the next couple of years, however, the trade imbalance will probably be reduced significantly as Japanese corporations replace more and more of their exports with products that they make in the U.S. and other local markets.    Japan's push overseas is accelerating rapidly. The Ministry of Finance says that last year Japanese direct investment overseas soared to $14.48 billion, more than double the $6.45 billion in 1985. One government survey lists more than 40 major investments in the U.S. alone last year. Among the Japanese companies making such commitments were Mazda, Nissan, Yamaha, Fujitsu, NEC, Hitachi and JVC; they will make products ranging from golf carts to compact disks in the U.S.    &quot;We have a severe business situation because of the yen's appreciation and trade friction,&quot; an official of Brother Industries says. In mid-1977, the company will begin making electronic typewriters in Bartlett, Tenn. It set up a similar plant in Wales in 1985.    Partly spurred by protectionism in Western Europe, Japanese investment is rising fast there, too. Toshiba, for example, said it will make about 300,000 microwave ovens annually in France in a joint venture with Thomson S.A., of Paris.    As Japanese companies move manufacturing offshore, jobs will inevitably be lost back in Japan. Sanyo Electric, for example, recently decided to dismiss 1,200 part-time workers at its factory in Osaka because it is shifting some color-TV production to Southeast Asia. Over the longer haul, Japanese manufacturing employment is likely to drop sharply -- perhaps by a million jobs by 1990, some economists here estimate.    The high yen has disrupted plans that would have increased Japanese exports. In the automotive industry especially, deals are falling apart, leaving only an afterglow of blueprints and unsigned contracts. At the end of 1986, Borg-Warner backed out of a plan with Diesel Kiki to buy auto air-conditioning compressors from a joint-venture plant in Gumma Prefecture. Similarly, American Motors broke off talks with Daihatsu Motor about a plan under which the Japanese auto maker would have shipped parts from Japan to Venezuela for a small AMC Jeep-production line.    The surge in the yen's value is also forcing Japanese companies to reconsider other strategies. Last year, many Japanese exporters held the line on their U.S. prices, absorbing the &quot;yen shock&quot; by taking reduced profits. Signs that that strategy is breaking down are spreading:    A few weeks ago, Matsushita Electric Industrial sought to increase prices on color-TV sets sold to General Electric for resale in the American market. GE wanted a price cut, Matsushita said. The upshot: Matsushita severed the relationship.    Toray Industries, a major fiber producer, recently stopped exporting a polyester product because it couldn't make money on it at 160 yen to the dollar. Toray, which cut its internal exchange-rate projection to 150 yen, may suspend exports of additional products.    And at Mazda, &quot;We're agonizing over price increases,&quot; says Kenichi Yamamoto, the president. During the past 12 months, the auto maker, which depends heavily on exports to the U.S., raised prices five times, but the increases were kept small -- totaling only 12.9% -- in an effort to retain market share. Mazda's earnings plunged almost 75% in the year ended Oct. 31.    The Japanese auto industry is going through especially striking changes. Toyota, Nissan, Honda, Mazda and other Japanese auto companies have built or are building American plants. By 1990, they are expected to make about 2.1 million vehicles a year in North America. Most analysts doubt that, on top of that, the Japanese can continue exporting 2.3 million vehicles to the U.S. The new American plants probably will remain open, but older ones in Japan may well be closed.    &quot;All can't live. There should be mergers,&quot; says Yoh Kurosawa, the deputy president of the Industrial Bank of Japan. He declines to specify which of the nine auto companies should merge. Asked whether the slimming down of the industry is being discussed seriously in Japan, he replies, &quot;In our bank, yes.&quot;    MITI officials say they haven't any plans to push for a consolidation, however. In the late 1960s, they failed to win industry consent to a plan to reduce the number of Japanese auto makers to only two.    But the downsizing of many Japanese industries seems inevitable. Shipbuilding and mining have already gone through a painful squeeze, and the steel industry is beginning to do so. Shortly after Nippon Steel announced its cutbacks, Kawasaki Steel said its Chiba works, east of Tokyo, will reduce capacity 30%. Kawasaki also will slash its work force and managerial salaries more deeply than previously planned.    Other stalwarts of the Japanese export economy may also have to shrink. &quot;In electronics, there may have to be some forced mergers,&quot; says Ron Napier, a vice president at Salomon Brothers Asia Ltd. Speaking of the smaller makers of radio-cassette players, Mr. Napier says, &quot;It isn't clear that they can survive.&quot;    To avoid drastic solutions, Japanese companies are pushing cost cutting. They are setting up sources of supply in other Asian lands to take advantage of cheap wages and raw materials. Last month, for example, Fujitsu Ltd. decided to expand its production of lower-cost computer keyboards in Malaysia.    Within Japan, manufacturers are squeezing suppliers to cut prices and are taking a tough line on wages. The annual spring &quot;labor offensive&quot; is expected to produce pay increases averaging only about 3%. Recent year-end bonuses were cut even at many healthy companies.    Meanwhile, some of Japan's rivals are increasing the pressure. South Korean machinery makers have begun an aggressive export drive; a Korean machinery dealers' group recently said it plans to sell $24 million of goods to Japan this year, up 23% from 1986. And Japan has even begun to import a few more cars. Recently, Mitsubishi began importing some made in Australia by Australia Mitsubishi Motors, and Nissan may import a small number of Taiwanese cars called &quot;The Feeling.&quot;    Eventually, though, Japanese industry may well emerge stronger than ever. The high yen is forcing executives and bureaucrats to swallow medicine that, sooner or later, would probably have become necessary. Restructuring will push the companies further into internationalization -- and thus into operating closer to local markets than they did as exporters. It also is pushing them to raise spending on research.    Beneath the worry lies a strong strain of optimism. Komatsu, a heavy-equipment maker, says it can be profitable at 155 yen to the dollar. Toyota is talking of adjusting to 140 yen. And Honda is said to be preparing itself for 120 yen. In private, bankers and business executives are less alarmed than their public statements suggest.    &quot;Underneath, people are basically optimistic,&quot; says Gary Saxonhouse, a University of Michigan economist and specialist on Japan. &quot;In part, it's because they surmounted the oil crises. Are things as bad here as they were eight years ago? No.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>