<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880208-0090 </DOCNO><HL> Asia: People Power Under Siege in the Philippines </HL><AUTHOR> William McGurn </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> MANILA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   &quot;One peso, sir. Please, one peso.&quot;    Turning toward the voice a taxi passenger finds it accompanied by an outstretched hand, attached to a slender arm, which in turn leads outside the cab window where it culminates in an eight-year-old boy. He is wearing a faded Dallas Cowboys T-shirt and is surrounded by other boys, all displaying the same unmistakable dirt of poverty. More outstretched hands crowd their way into the car. Then the light turns green, and a visitor is whisked away to the protective affluence of his hotel.    Poverty here in the Philippines is insistent, almost impossible to avoid, and the shock to the comfortable is compounded by the realization that each dirty little boy probably has five or six brothers and sisters, part of the 59-million-and-growing Philippines population. Too many people, say the experts, and under Marcos -- with direct pressure from American and other foreign aid groups -- the answer was to try to breed the poor out of existence rather than help them grow rich. Although the millions of dollars pumped into this effort achieved neither, the Malthusian assumptions that helped impoverish one generation of Filipinos have survived the dictatorship to find new life in a controversial population resolution that comes before the Philippine senate this month.    The critical decisions made this year on population will have an impact beyond this Southeast Asian archipelago, particularly for other Catholic developing nations in Africa and Latin America. The irony is that an administration that toppled a dictatorship under the banner of &quot;People Power&quot; now appears to have accepted the conclusion that the problem with the Philippines is too many Filipinos, with zero population growth by the year 2010 the elusive Holy Grail of economic development.    &quot;The problem with the economists is that they look at people as numbers,&quot; says the Secretary of Social Welfare and chairman of the Population Commission, Mita Pardo de Tavera. &quot;They never see the human side.&quot; Adds the author of &quot;Wealth and Poverty,&quot; George Gilder, at a symposium here on economic growth: &quot;The idea that people are a burden derives from the materialist superstition that people are mouths rather than minds.&quot;    If President Aquino and her entourage are confused about population, it's understandable in light of nearly two decades of foreign experts plumping the line that more people means a smaller slice of pie all around. It may even be the most pernicious legacy of the American relationship with Marcos: U.S. officials, including an ambassador, helped push population control on an unwilling Philippine public. One Filipino official who balked found himself shunted off to another department. Another has publicly attributed the clause in the Marcos constitution mandating the state to &quot;achieve and maintain population levels&quot; to lobbying by the U.S. Agency for International Development.    Foreign aid groups are touchy about charges of coercion, and it's true that the Philippine programs were nothing like, say, the forced abortions in China. They did, however, spawn an entire industry with its own vested interests. For if the Marcos administration was initially reluctant to make itself more unpopular by adopting population control, the carrot of millions in development aid soon changed that. Over the last five Marcos years alone, for example, the Population Commission spent more than 1.19 billion pesos ($94.5 million) -- of which a good chunk came from AID, the World Bank, and the U.N. Fund for Population Activities. For all this an internal study last year showed that the results in bringing down population growth were &quot;disappointing.&quot; They didn't need a study to show it didn't do much to alleviate poverty, either.    The assumption behind all this activity was that the way to development lies not in boosting productivity but in reducing the number of producers. Zero Population Growth is looked to as the key to development in much the same way ancient Canaan looked to Baal for good harvests. Now, a 2.1 total fertility rate -- the average number of babies a woman has over a lifetime -- is replacement level, and the U.N. estimate of 3.91 TFR for the Philippines is held by the experts to be bad. But, as the UNFPA's Jeannie Peterson concedes, no one knows what the &quot;carrying capacity&quot; of a nation is. &quot;There has never been a suitable definition of optimum fertility rates,&quot; she says.    Nevertheless, zero growth by the year 2010, spelled out in the government's latest development plan, remains the all-important if arbitrary goal. The act of setting such a target, moreover, even a voluntary target, contradicts the assertion that population policy is designed simply to facilitate responsible parenthood by increasing personal options: apart from the dubious validity of the ZPG itself, a population policy cannot claim to be geared only to the individual if the raison d'etre is to bring down population as a whole. The failure of any of this to work, moreover, only convinces population officers that the people are more ignorant than first supposed. Or they blame the Roman Catholic Church.    What makes this latter plausible is the tendency in Catholic developing nations to lump together the quite distinct issues of abortion, contraception, and population. Abortion here is banned by the new constitution, and whether foreign aid officials like that or not this was a constitution drafted by a democratic government with the overwhelming approval of the nation.    Contraception is an entirely different kind of issue. Unlike abortion, artificial contraception, although also condemned by the church, is not a human life issue. There do exist Catholics, not to mention Muslims, in the Philippines who think that what their faith defines as a private sin ought to be a public crime. But that is not the position of the Catholic Church. &quot;It's true that the church argues that the government should not be distributing contraceptives,&quot; says the vice chairman for the diocesan commission on marriage and family issues, Msgr. Cesar B. Pagulayan. &quot;But it's not true that the church is seeking to have contraception prohibited by legislation.&quot; Contraception is legal in the Philippines, and the only reason the issue arouses so much passion is because AID, the World Bank, the U.N. and others have taken it from the realm of private choice and demanded it as public policy.    At it's heart, the chicken-in-every-pot-and-condom- in-every-home approach to development is a confusion about economics, not population. It sees only half the equation, people consuming valuable resources, and gives no thought to the nature of resources themselves or their relation to the people that ultimately create and give them value. It is not an ethos that should find a home in the People Power administration.    &quot;Population reduction deflects responsibility from the government by allowing them to say 'the problem is too many people, not us,'&quot; says a former population officer, Sonny de los Reyes. &quot;But if you have zero productivity it doesn't matter whether you divide that zero by two, four, or eight. Instead of trying to figure out how many people we should be dividing the pie by we should be asking why the pie is so small.&quot;    ---   Mr. McGurn is deputy editorial page editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal. </TEXT></DOC>