<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880831-0125 </DOCNO><HL> Test Candidates On Moral Lessons Of Vietnam </HL><AUTHOR> Richard Nixon </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   A quarter-century after President Kennedy sent the first 16,000 U.S. combat troops to Vietnam, the war has become a major political issue in the presidential campaign. But the news media's frenzied attacks on the Republican vice presidential nominee's military record have missed the point. In terms of the Free World's future, each candidate's actions during the war matter less than what lessons they learned from the war.    Patriotism and privilege are not the issue. Sen. Dan Quayle clearly could have volunteered for active service in Vietnam rather than joining the National Guard. Likewise, Democratic presidential nominee Michael Dukakis could have enlisted during the Korean War instead of taking advantage of education deferments. But both served their country. We should not make service in combat a litmus test for serving as commander-in-chief.    Since the Vietnam issue has been raised, however, each candidate should present his reflections on those times. Vice President Bush served as a dedicated and loyal member of my administration during the war. Gov. Dukakis said that as early as the mid-1960s he opposed the U.S. role in Vietnam, but did not explain his reasons. Thus, both candidates should answer two questions that provide a measure of their judgment and statesmanship.    First, was the Vietnam War a moral cause? A central tenet of '60s-style liberalism held that the U.S. acted immorally by intervening in Indochina. Liberals then and now have echoed the words of New York's Mayor John Lindsay -- &quot;Our best young men went to Canada&quot; -- and have argued that those who fled the country or burned their draft cards acted as morally as those who volunteered to serve in Vietnam. Anti-war activist Tom Hayden has even made the suggestion that a monument be built to honor those who opposed the war. These views are morally indefensible.    Moral judgments revolve around not only the intentions of our policies but also the consequences. When we went into Vietnam, our intentions were noble. When the anti-war left triumphed and the U.S. abandoned its friends, the consequences were a human and moral disaster.    Presidents Kennedy and Johnson sent American combat troops into Vietnam not to conquer territory or resources. Rather, they did so to prevent the expansion of Hanoi's totalitarian communism -- and the holocaust that would inevitably follow in its wake -- and to protect important Western interests in the region. As president, I operated with those same goals in mind. After the fall of Saigon and Phnom Penh in 1975, our worst fears came true, with more than two million Cambodians killed by the Khmer Rouge and more than 600,000 Vietnamese &quot;boat people&quot; perishing at sea. The war against the communists killed fewer people than the peace imposed by the communists.    Anti-war activists claim to have had good intentions. But they should have realized at the time the consequences their point of view would have for the people of Indochina. It was no secret that Ho Chi Minh killed more than 50,000 peasants upon taking power in North Vietnam in 1954, that the Viet Cong systematically used terror tactics against civilians and had assassinated more than 30,000 local non-communist leaders in South Vietnam in the 1960s, and that 3,000 civilians were found in mass graves -- many buried alive -- after the monthlong communist occupation of Hue during the Tet Offensive in 1968.    In addition, the anti-war activists should have known that their actions would give aid and comfort to Hanoi's warlords. As the anti-war protests mounted, North Vietnam's representatives dug in their heels at the Paris peace talks, all the while taking pleasure in quoting our shrillest domestic critics, and even in asking why Hanoi should bother to negotiate as America's home front neared collapse.    Those who violently opposed the war prolonged the war. Those who sought an American defeat must share the blame for the tragic consequences.    Second, what were the key lessons of Vietnam? One lesson is that destabilizing the government of an ally in wartime risks disaster. In 1963, the Kennedy administration encouraged and supported the coup that led to the murder of South Vietnam's President Diem. While his rule had been harsh, the alternatives were worse. By toppling Diem, the administration removed the linchpin that held the system together and bequeathed to President Johnson a stark choice between a large-scale American intervention or an American defeat.    Another lesson is that a great power must strike at the source of aggression. For years, the U.S. sought to defeat the insurgency in South Vietnam without first stopping the influx of men and materiel from North Vietnam. I tried to correct that by bombing and raiding the communist sanctuary bases in Cambodia in 1970, interdicting the Ho Chi Minh trail in Laos in 1971, and bombing and mining Haiphong Harbor in North Vietnam in 1972. Military pressure finally forced Hanoi to sign the Paris peace accord. My greatest regret as president was that I had not blockaded North Vietnam's harbors sooner.    A third lesson is that the U.S. must do at least as much for its friends and allies as the Soviet Union does for its clients. With our support, South Vietnam and Cambodia could have survived as independent, noncommunist nations after the 1973 Paris Peace Agreement. But while the Soviet Union delivered record levels of arms, ammunition and equipment to the communist government in Hanoi, Congress prohibited the U.S. from taking military actions to enforce the peace accords and slashed economic and military assistance to the anticommunist government in Saigon by 80% in 1974 and 1975. As a result, the policies of the anti-war left won, and the free peoples of Indochina lost.    We should not disqualify candidates for national office who could have served but did not serve in Vietnam. But we should rule out those who -- with 13 years' hindsight -- still cannot understand the moral stakes and strategic lessons of the war. </TEXT></DOC>