<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870327-0063 </DOCNO><HL> Role Reversal:Drexel Burnham ShiftsTo the Defensive in BidFor Takeover Business---Under Its Regulatory Cloud,It Suspends Growth PlansAnd Fends Off Its Rivals---Preparing a Junk-Bond Bash---By Steve SwartzStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   As Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. gets ready for its annual junk-bond conference in Beverly Hills, Calif., it may be facing an unaccustomed problem. A Drexel attorney worries that during the lavish 3 1/2-day bash, which begins next Wednesday, the federal government may launch the opening salvo in a legal case against the firm.    For Drexel, in any event, the conference -- which is often called the &quot;Predators' Ball&quot; because of the prominent corporate raiders who normally attend it -- is unusually significant this year. Drexel customers -- scores of money managers and corporate executives -- will be looking for signs that the firm is as strong as ever.    That is a strange position for Drexel, which, after a late start in the 1980s takeover boom, clamped a hammerlock on the market for high-yield, high-risk bonds often used to finance acquisitions. As a result, Drexel was poised to challenge bigger, more established investment-banking firms for the cream of Wall Street's business -- acting as financial adviser to major corporations.    Only four months ago, the firm was wooing competitors' top employees and clients with impunity while squeezing rivals out of the distribution network for its highly successful junk-bond offerings. Rival firms grudgingly admitted admiration for its savvy and, in the same breath, bitterly complained about its tough tactics and flamboyance.    But now, Drexel is on the defensive. Since last November, it has been the subject of investigations by a federal grand jury and the Securities and Exchange Commission into Wall Street's huge insider-trading scandal, which erupted last May with the arrest of Dennis B. Levine, a Drexel investment banker. No charges have been filed against the firm, which says it knows of no wrongdoing by any other employee.    Drexel says it remains largely in the dark about the direction and extent of the government's investigations. But the uncertainty has weighed heavily on the firm and its 10,000 employees.    Drexel has tabled some growth plans. Competitors are circling the firm like sharks, courting its clients and refusing to do certain trades with it. New clients and recruits are harder to come by. The firm has lost retail customers and investment-banking business because of publicity surrounding the investigations, Drexel officials acknowledge.    And perhaps most serious of all, Drexel's drive toward the stratosphere of investment banking may have boomeranged. Last month, Staley Continental Inc., the kind of blue-chip client coveted by Drexel, sued the firm in federal court in Chicago. Staley alleged that Drexel tried to &quot;extort&quot; the big food concern into doing business with it. The suit charges that Drexel's actions were part of a pattern of stock-trading schemes and seeks treble damages under the Racketeer-Influenced and Corrupt Organizations law. Staley asks for about $70 million in compensatory damages and twice that in punitive damages.    Drexel vehemently denies the charges.    Meanwhile, morale at Drexel has been rising and falling, depending on whether the latest development is a round of reassurances from Drexel executives or another negative news story.    However, employees say the morale problem has abated a bit since other firms have been drawn into the government investigations. Firms whose employees have been implicated in the insider-trading scandal are Goldman, Sachs and Co.; Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co., a unit of General Electric Co.; Lazard Freres and Co.; Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., an American Express Co. unit, and Jefferies Group Inc.    For Drexel executives, headed by Chief Executive Frederick H. Joseph, the turmoil has created a mammoth job of crisis management. Although the scandal has been spreading, it is Drexel that has lived with the specter of the investigations for the past four months.    Just yesterday, there was an indication that Drexel's problems, at least in terms of public perceptions, extend beyond the investigations. Scores of balloon-toting labor-union officials and activists protested outside Drexel's lower-Manhattan headquarters about what they term the anti-employee effects of some of Drexel's investment-banking activities, such as the financing of hostile takeovers. &quot;Can you hear them shouting?&quot; asked Leon Black, Drexel's co-head of mergers and acquisitions, as the protesters chanted, &quot;No more takeovers,&quot; five floors beneath him.    Some Drexel officials say they don't expect the government investigations to end for some time. The government is investigating whether Drexel officials, including junk-bond chief Michael Milken, engaged in an illegal scheme to profit from corporate takeovers with Ivan F. Boesky, the speculator who has been cooperating with the government after agreeing last Nov. 14 to plead guilty to a felony.    Dealing with the crisis has been complicated by the uncertainties of the situation, Drexel says. It has begun an internal investigation, but officials concede that it hasn't been very aggressive. They say they have been limited by warnings from Drexel's outside attorneys not to do anything that could be construed as interfering with the government inquiries. And the uncertainty has been deepened, Drexel officials say, by the limited contact that the firm has had with government investigators and with Drexel employees being questioned by the government. The employees are being represented by their own lawyers, who have told them not to talk to the firm about certain subjects.    Some Drexel officials have said publicly that the Securities and Exchange Commission might levy civil sanctions against the firm. But Mr. Joseph says the firm doesn't have any indication of this.    Drexel officials insist that the privately held firm is doing well. Though declining to disclose numbers, Mr. Joseph says January was the fifth-best month in its history. Another official says that was achieved even though the firm &quot;reserved like crazy&quot; for, among other things, expenses related to the investigation. Industry sources estimate Drexel's 1986 profit at $500 million, which would put it among the leaders of the securities industry.    Competitors say they are impressed with the amount of business Drexel is currently doing. The firm says it is a contender to lead the Street in equity underwritings in the first quarter on the strength of two large issues, for Fruit of the Loom Inc. and Occidental Petroleum Corp. Drexel has maintained its hold on the junk-bond market. And it says that some of its trading activities have been highly profitable and that its corporate-finance and mergers-and-acquisitions businesses are running ahead of last year.    Nonetheless, interviews uncover signs of the strain due to four months of uncertainty and public scrutiny. &quot;At times, I get depressed, I'm human,&quot; Vice Chairman Edwin Kantor says. &quot;But I can't show it to these guys,&quot; he remarks, looking through his office window at the trading floor. &quot;I've got to be up all the time.&quot;    Adds Allan L. Sher, who heads the retail network: &quot;1987 was going to be so great, and that frustrates me. We had everything structured the way we wanted it. Instead, we're trying to hold it together.&quot;    Mr. Joseph, the slightly built, soft-spoken, 49-year-old chief executive, has assigned four senior executives to work on the crisis full time. Among other things, they lobby in Washington against tighter takeover legislation and give pep talks to employees.    A task force of senior executives and advisers meets for about 20 minutes every weekday at 9:45 a.m. The group reviews public-relations, advertising and lobbying tactics and sometimes is briefed on the government investigation by Drexel lawyers. Late last year, Drexel's top 200 executives watched films on crisis management.    Slumping into a high-backed chair, with one leg tucked beneath him, Mr. Joseph acknowledges that, to some extent, the future is out of his hands. &quot;Everybody's waiting to see what happens,&quot; he says, but he adds: &quot;During the interim, it looks like we're OK.&quot;    Mr. Joseph also acknowledges he has delayed some expansion plans, including the opening of new branch offices. Late last year, the company canceled a move into a new headquarters building. Mr. Joseph adds that the firm has done contingency planning because of the investigations. But he says even a worst-case forecast shows Drexel &quot;still doing business -- make that doing business effectively.&quot;    Since November, Mr. Joseph says, his two biggest concerns have been maintaining Drexel's business and morale.    The investigations have hurt the most, some Drexel officials say, by impeding the firm's search for new clients -- which it needs if it is to grow. They say Drexel has lost two merger assignments because outside directors of the potential corporate clients were skittish about Drexel and the publicity surrounding it. Some companies are &quot;still a little bit reluctant to go to the board and say, 'We've retained Drexel,'&quot; says Mr. Joseph's brother, Stephen, an investment-banking executive at the firm.    Among other problems, some foreign banks won't do interest-rate swaps with Drexel. Some regional banks won't give Drexel short-term loans backed by government securities. Others have refused to trade certain commodities with the firm. Drexel officials say such moves haven't materially hurt its profitability, but they concede that its growth has been slowed.    Drexel officials say at least two firms -- Salomon Brothers and Shearson Lehman Brothers -- have stopped trading commodities with Drexel solely so they can urge Drexel customers to switch to them. Both firms decline comment.    Drexel also accuses some competitors of spreading false rumors that it will soon enter bankruptcy proceedings or that it intends to pay the government a highly damaging $500 million settlement or that some of its executives soon will be arrested. When this newspaper reported last month further details of the government's investigations, several firms temporarily refused to join in Drexel underwritings, a Drexel official says. &quot;Many of them said, 'Don't come to us with a deal,'&quot; he adds.    When the Staley suit was filed, some competitors, including Salomon, sent copies of the complaint to Drexel clients, Drexel officials say. They add that one client got four copies of the suit, one from Salomon, one from another competitor that they won't identify, and two in unmarked envelopes. &quot;Not all of our competitors are wishing us well,&quot; Mr. Joseph says. Salomon Chairman John H. Gutfreund says he is &quot;unaware&quot; of any such activity.    Drexel has been fighting back on several fronts. It opened an aggressive public-relations campaign; it hired Sawyer/Miller Group, a political-image consulting firm, which in turn retained John Scanlon, a publicity agent specializing in crisis management.    A Drexel newspaper ad listed the names of 238 clients. Another boasted of the good that, Drexel says, junk bonds have done for corporate America. Drexel had hoped to list the number of jobs that it has indirectly created by financing emerging growth companies with junk bonds, but assembling credible statistics has been difficult, according to a Drexel official.    Drexel has sent out bankers and salesmen with orders to make as many new-business calls as possible, Drexel people say. &quot;The best defense is a good offense,&quot; says a Drexel investment banker, who says he did more prospecting for new business in January than in all 1986.    Drexel people stress to clients that no charges have been brought against the firm and that it has about $1 billion in capital in excess of regulatory requirements. Mr. Joseph says this approach apparently is working. New business is &quot;better than I would have anticipated,&quot; he says.    Ironically, the recent publicity has made individual investors more aware of the firm and more open to sales pitches from Drexel brokers. A sales executive says new accounts are up substantially from last year, although defections among the firm's own brokers have been brisk.    Drexel's retail brokers have long engaged in &quot;cold-calling&quot; prospective customers on the telephone. The sales pitch begins: &quot;I'm calling from Drexel Burnham Lambert. Have you heard of our firm?&quot; Given the recent flood of publicity, &quot;that's kind of funny,&quot; says Mr. Sher, the head of the retail-sales force.    The firm has monitored in-house morale through focus-group interviews. Employees are &quot;concerned but optimistic,&quot; a spokeswoman says. But they themselves say morale plunges after negative news reports and rises after a couple of days of reassurance by management. &quot;Reading the papers makes me depressed,&quot; one Drexel investment banker admits. Says Mr. Sher, &quot;We do a lot of hand-holding, and it works great until the next article.&quot;    Stephen Joseph says a recent dinner with colleagues turned quickly from discussions of collateralized mortgage obligations to how to bolster employee morale.    Such distractions have been a major problem for Drexel managers. Mr. Sher, for example, has visited about half the firm's 37 branches to rally his brokers. &quot;I have never traveled as much as I have since November,&quot; he says.    &quot;It's distracting, even on weekends,&quot; when family and friends call to ask how things are going, says Michael J. Kugler, the head of government-securities trading. Rather than reassure people, Mr. Kugler says, he would like to &quot;ride my bike and sit in the sun.&quot; He recalls that at a recent party someone asked him jokingly: &quot;'Can we talk to you, or are you wired?' I didn't think it was funny.&quot;    Mr. Joseph has addressed the entire staff about six times since the crisis began, answering questions by speaker-phone. He lunches regularly with managers at headquarters, and Drexel recently ran a double-page newspaper ad listing the last names of all 10,000 employees. Drexel has overlooked no opportunity to throw a party. In January, it raffled off Super Bowl tickets, and it plans a bash next month to celebrate its 52nd anniversary.    Industry sources say that to keep employees happy, Drexel has guaranteed that the 1987 bonus pool -- which would make up most of employee compensation -- will remain at the high 1986 level; some on Wall Street estimate last year's bonus pool at a staggering $600 million. A senior Drexel official declines to confirm the bonus guarantees but suggests that such promises would be &quot;a responsible thing for senior managers to say to juniors this year.&quot;    An important facet of Drexel's strategy is to rapidly replace key employees who leave. Drexel says that when a top trader departed, partly because the specter of the investigations was hobbling his business, it zeroed in on a Salomon trader. Stephen Joseph boasts that it took only a week to sign up the Salomon man, at a 50% raise. &quot;He was underpaid,&quot; insists Mr. Joseph, a former Salomon executive.    A Salomon official, after a few expletives, says the offer was more like triple the trader's previous pay. He calls it &quot;outrageous.&quot;    So, even on the defensive, Drexel hasn't lost its ability to rankle competitors. At least one Drexel official says that after the investigation has ended, Drexel has some scores to settle. &quot;When all this is over,&quot; he says, &quot;we're going to be ugly tough.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>