<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871210-0147 </DOCNO><HL> Sweden, Nobel Are Taking PrecautionsAgainst Further Arms-Export Scandals---By Marcus BrauchliStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROPAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><DATELINE> STOCKHOLM  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Sweden and its biggest weapons maker, Nobel Industrier Sverige AB, are trying to come to grips with a paradox that troubles most of Europe.    Most European countries want to maintain a strong, independent arms industry, but to do that they must export, and that means selling to combatants such as Iran and Iraq. In Sweden and some other countries, that has meant maneuvering around legislation that bars arms sales to countries at war or those likely to become involved in conflict.    The latest soul-searching in Sweden grows out of a series of arms-trade scandals. In trying to skirt the arms-export dilemma, government prosecutors have discovered, Nobel employees arranged to sell arms to Persian Gulf countries through third parties. A state prosecutor recently released notes made by a government arms inspector that point to official sanction for the improper sales, blurring the distinction between what was legal and what wasn't.    In hopes of preventing a repetition, Nobel has begun to exert more control over its weapons division and, to reduce the company's dependence on the arms trade, has been rapidly reshaping itself through divestments, acquisitions and development of new products.    The Swedish government, acknowledging the paradox arms makers face, says it will encourage the present level of arms exports to legitimate customers but close the gaps through which the illicit arms traffic flowed.&quot;The government is very well aware that . . . it is vital to keep the industry alive,&quot; says Sven Hirdman, the government's war-materials inspector.    Other European countries are grappling with variations on the same theme. Sales-starved weapons makers evaded bans on arms sales to Iran and other off-limits countries. But often, many of the manufacturers assert, they had their governments' tacit acquiescence. Prosecutors throughout the continent are conducting a broad crackdown on such illicit transactions.    Nobel Industrier, formed three years ago, inherited a legacy of troublesome paradoxes. The company's formation brought together AB Bofors, the biggest maker of war materials in a country that has remained neutral through 173 years of European conflict, and KemaNobel AB, a chemical concern founded by Alfred Nobel, the pacifist-inclined inventor of dynamite and smokeless gunpowder and endower of the Nobel Prizes, including one for peacemakers.    Interviews with past and present company officials indicate that financial troubles at Bofors helped precipitate the scandals. Bofors survived for nearly four centuries as a domestic armory without substantial exports. A decade ago, Bofors's orders from a budget-conscious Swedish Defense Ministry began to fluctuate, taking profits on a roller-coaster ride. In 1982, the company had to lay off 1,000 of its 6,000 employees. Company officials say they began to approve the export deals that since have come under fire.    &quot;Every sale I made preserved the jobs of people I know,&quot; says Mats Lundberg, a former marketing manager for Bofors's Nobel Kemi AB unit. Like most Bofors employees, he lives in Karlskoga, a one-company town of 34,000 in central Sweden.    In May, Mr. Lundberg and Karl-Erik Schmitz, an independent Swedish trader, were indicted for allegedly smuggling Swedish explosives to Iran. Both deny breaking the law, which doesn't restrict sales that go through intermediaries, as did most of those involving Iran.    In September, a colleague of Mr. Lundberg, Goeran Karlsson, was charged with smuggling explosives to Burma in connection with the same scheme. He also maintains his innocence. Both men have been transferred to administrative posts within Nobel pending a trial.    &quot;The only way for Bofors to get out of its financial slowdown was to increase the sales of arms, and the only way to do that was to export, which we did,&quot; says Martin Ardbo, a 61-year-old former Bofors president who was fired over the arms scandals. &quot;All the people on the marketing staff knew that.&quot;    In 1978, the company received a large order from Bahrain and Dubai for surface-to-air missiles. Sweden routinely prohibits sales to countries in the volatile Persian Gulf, and the government said no.    So Bofors executives decided to sell to off-limits countries through a Bofors affiliate majority-owned by Singapore's Defense Ministry. From 1977 to 1986, nearly 11% of all Swedish arms exports went to Singapore, most apparently for re-export.    The scheme came to light in 1984. Bofors denies any wrongdoing, and police are still trying to determine whether such reexports violated Swedish law. Even so, after Bofors's merger into Nobel Industrier a year later, top executives ordered an end to the questionable sales. The order was ignored. When Anders G. Carlberg, Nobel's president, found out last January, he promptly fired Mr. Ardbo and Bofors's marketing director.    Since then, Sweden and Singapore have turned up evidence that officials of the Singapore affiliate may have forged end-user certificates to obtain Swedish weapons. The former general manager of the affiliate has been arrested in Singapore and accused of fraud and taking bribes from Bofors. No Swedish executives have been charged. Mr. Ardbo maintains that he and other Bofors officials did nothing illegal. He says he didn't need to, because government inspectors sanctioned all the sales.    On Jan. 15, the day he fired Mr. Ardbo, Mr. Carlberg met with the government arms-export inspector, Adm. Carl-Frederik Algernon, to ask what the government knew of the sales. According to investigators, Adm. Algernon replied that he hadn't known of the true destinations of the arms. Hours later, Adm. Algernon either fell or jumped under a commuter train and was killed.    Last month the prosecutor released notes retrieved from Adm. Algernon's briefcase that clearly indicate he knew of missile shipments to Oman. If he knew where the shipments were bound when he approved them, there would be no legal case against Bofors.    Mr. Schmitz, the trader who arranged the explosives shipments to Iran, says he thinks government officials also must have been aware that Iran was the true destination of munitions Bofors sent to Yugoslavia. He says governments across Europe have long been aware that arms makers have been supplying Tehran in spite of official policies against the trade.    Sweden plans legislation to tighten controls over arms exports, possibly restricting shipments to a few industrialized Western countries where the origin and legitimacy of orders is verifiable.    Some experts suggest that new methods of monitoring arms exports internationally may also be needed. Because end-user certificates are routinely forged, governments may have to cooperate in spot-checks to ensure that weapons go where they are supposed to, they say. </TEXT></DOC>