<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870609-0041 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> SHE AXP TAXES GOVMT TMK LABOR KT UNP GOVMTSECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)PUBLISHING (PUB)SUPREME COURT (SUP)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)FEDERAL COMMUNICATIONS COMMISSION (FCC)INTERSTATE COMMERCE COMMISSION (ICC) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>    The Supreme Court ruled thatsecurities-fraud claims under federal securities andanti-racketeering laws must be resolved by arbitration if theagreement between a broker and investor requires it.   The ruling, in favor of Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., an American Express Co. unit, will substantially hasten the trend toward arbitration of securities-fraud disputes as an alternative to court battles.    By a 5-4 vote, the high court said arbitration agreements should be followed for claims under Section 10(b) of the 1934 Securities Exchange Act. This anti-fraud section is the most widely used legal provision for securities lawsuits by customers against their brokers.    By a 9-0 vote, the justices also said arbitration should be used to resolve securities-law violations alleged under the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act, a 1970 federal law that permits individuals to sue for triple damages for a &quot;pattern of racketeering activity,&quot; including securities fraud.    The decision has considerable, immediate practical significance. More than a dozen other appeals raising the arbitration issue have been filed with the Supreme Court. And the question of whether arbitration is required in securities-fraud cases is pending in hundreds of lawsuits in federal courts throughout the country.    The issue arises frequently because investment contracts between brokers and their customers typically call for submitting disputes to arbitration. These arbitration clauses have been applied to a variety of securities disputes in the past, and increasingly to fraud claims.    But it has never been clear whether investors making fraud claims can be required to go to arbitration or whether they may insist on a right to take their cases to court. Before yesterday's Supreme Court ruling, eight different federal appeals courts, including the court in New York that ruled against Shearson last year, had ruled that arbitration couldn't be required in such disputes. Only one appeals court, in St. Louis, ruled that arbitration of fraud claims may be compelled.    Lawyers representing investors have generally favored going to court, while those for brokerage firms have preferred arbitration.    Plaintiffs' lawyers say it may be easier to persuade a jury than an arbitrator to sympathize with a person who has lost savings. They also say that, in court, they may be able to persuade a judge to charge their legal fees to the losing brokerage and may sometimes collect punitive damages.    Defense lawyers counter, as the Securities Industry Association said in a friend-of-the-court brief, that &quot;arbitration is an efficient, fair, speedy and economical manner of resolving disputes.&quot;    Hartley Bernstein, a New York lawyer who represents investors, agreed that &quot;for someone who has just lost a lot of money, it is much less expensive and less time-consuming to go to arbitration.&quot; He said that some of the complaints of plaintiffs' lawyers are the result of state laws rather than the arbitration system itself. In most states, he said, arbitrators are prohibited from awarding punitive damages and attorneys' fees to the winning party.    The high court opinion, written by Justice Sandra O'Connor, said that a 1953 Supreme Court decision that arbitration was inadequate for some securities disputes doesn't apply to fraud claims under Section 10(b). She said investors' rights will be protected because the Securities and Exchange Commission regulates the rules used in arbitration proceedings.    Justices Harry Blackmun, William Brennan, Thurgood Marshall and John Stevens dissented from the ruling on Section 10(b). They said the 1953 decision should apply to fraud claims.    The case began when a New York couple sued their broker and Shearson, alleging that there was excessive trading in their account and that false statements were made to them. The suit alleged fraud under securities and anti-racketeering laws. A federal district court said the securities-law claims should be arbitrated, but not the racketeering claim. A federal appeals court ruled that none of the claims should be arbitrated.    Taxing Ginnie Maes   The justices ruled 9-0 that mortgage-backed securities issued by the Government National Mortgage Association aren't exempt from state taxation. In an opinion by Justice Stevens, the court upheld the imposition of an Illinois state property tax on the value of Ginnie Mae bonds, even though Ginnie Mae is a federal agency.    The case was appealed by Liberty National Life Insurance Co., the parent of Rockford Life Insurance Co. in 1978 when Illinois officials assessed Rockford for the Ginnie Mae securities it held. Rockford has been sold to Reliable Life Insurance Co., but Liberty National, a Torchmark Corp. unit, retained the right to appeal.    The Justice Department supported the view that Ginnie Mae bonds aren't exempt from state taxation.    Railroad Mergers   The high court, interpreting a federal law narrowly, made it tougher for unions or others to persuade the Interstate Commerce Commission to reconsider its approval of railroad mergers. The high court said a reconsideration request alleging &quot;material error&quot; can't be appealed to the courts if the ICC rejects it.    In an opinion by Justice Antonin Scalia, the court rejected arguments by the Brotherhood of Locomotive Engineers and the United Transportation Union in a dispute with Missouri-Kansas-Texas Railroad Corp., a unit of Katy Industries Inc. The dispute grew out of the merger of Union Pacific Corp., Missouri Pacific Corp. and Western Pacific Railroad Co.    Justices Stevens, Brennan, Marshall and Blackmun agreed in a separate opinion that the ICC properly refused to reconsider its 1982 approval of the merger, but they objected to the ruling that such decisions can't be appealed.    Antitrust Dispute   In an important antitrust case, the high court will decide whether an agreement between a manufacturer and a retailer to cut off another retailer for reducing prices is automatically illegal when the evidence doesn't show that the move was aimed at fixing retail prices. The justices agreed to decide a dispute between Sharp Electronics Corp., a Sharp Corp. unit, and one of its former retail dealers in the Houston area, Business Electronics Corp.    The high court has said price-fixing automatically is illegal under federal antitrust law, while many other practices are illegal only if shown to be unreasonable. The question in the Sharp case and in other lawsuits around the country is whether agreements between manufacturers and dealers to stop other dealers from slashing prices are a form of price-fixing or are simply a way of regulating sales and services offered by retailers.    A jury awarded about $2 million in triple damages to Business Electronics after it was cut off by Sharp in 1973. But a federal appeals court in New Orleans ordered a new trial.    Fairness Doctrine   The high court let stand a Federal Communications Commission decision, upheld by a federal appeals court, that the fairness doctrine, requiring the airing of opposing viewpoints, doesn't apply to teletext services. Teletext involves sending printed and graphic services, such as weather and news reports, by use of television signals.    Gay CIA Worker   The justices agreed to hear an appeal by the Justice Department and the Central Intelligence Agency challenging a federal appeals court ruling that a government decision to fire a CIA employee who is a homosexual is reviewable in court. The government argues that a CIA decision to fire a covert electronics technician in 1982 can't be reviewed in court. </TEXT></DOC>