<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870210-0002 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 02/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   MCFARLANE WAS HOSPITALIZED after taking an overdose of tranquilizers.    Police in Montgomery County, Md., said they are investigating the incident as an attempted suicide. McFarlane, a former national security adviser and a major figure in the Iran-Contra affair, was admitted to Bethesda Naval Hospital, where he was listed in good condition. Police said he had taken 20 to 30 Valium capsules. McFarlane was said by associates to be under stress since the secret arms sales to Iran were disclosed last year.    The White House conceded that it may have dealt with radical groups in Iran. The administration had insisted for months that it had been in contact only with moderate elements, a linchpin of its defense of arms sales to Tehran.    ---   MOSLEM KIDNAPPERS EXTENDED the deadline for killing American hostages.    In a handwritten Arabic statement delivered to a news agency in Beirut, Islamic Jihad for the Liberation of Palestine said the deadline was extended &quot;until further notice.&quot; The group, which holds three Americans and an Indian, had threatened to kill the captives at midnight. The statement said the decision was in response to pleas from the hostages, their families, nationalist Lebanese organizations and the Indian government. A picture of Robert Polhill, one of the hostages, accompanied the statement.    The U.S. reiterated its policy against concessions to terrorists and said it hadn't discussed with Israel the group's demand to free 400 jailed Arabs.    ---   A Reagan spokesman said the president has decided that the broad interpretation of the 1972 ABM treaty with the Soviets is legally correct, allowing him to move toward a decision on developing a space-based anti-missile system. Reagan also has pledged consultation with U.S. allies before ordering the project into a new phase of research.    ---   The U.S. is considering new arms sales to Jordan and Saudi Arabia in the face of congressional concern about such sales. The sales would include a Saudi purchase of helicopters, and sources said the administration is considering providing Jordan with gear to convert stationary anti-aircraft missiles into mobile units.    ---   A Soviet-made jet crashed after it was hit by a rocket near a military airstrip in eastern Afghanistan, radio reports and sources said. At least 30 people were reported killed. Moslem guerrillas fighting the Soviet-backed Kabul government said their forces hit the plane with a missile.    ---   Commerce Secretary Baldrige announced measures to streamline the system for controlling exports of strategically important U.S. goods. The steps, some of which will take effect immediately, were designed to meet Reagan's call for quicker processing of export licenses.    ---   A Reagan panel will call for tougher sanctions against South Africa if Pretoria doesn't move quickly toward dismantling apartheid, according to sources familiar with the advisory committee's report. The report is to be presented to Secretary of State Shultz today.    ---   A U.S. magistrate in Florida ordered Carlos Lehder Rivas, described as among the world's leading cocaine traffickers, held without bond on 11 drug-smuggling counts. Lehder, who was captured last week in Colombia and immediately extradited to the U.S., pleaded innocent to the charges in federal court in Jacksonville.    ---   An explosives-laden car blew up in a crowded Shiite Moslem neighborhood in Beirut, killing at least 15 people and injuring 80 others, police said. The Shiite Amal militia, which has been battling Palestinian guerrillas for control of two Beirut refugee camps, accused PLO leader Yasser Arafat of engineering the blast.    ---   The Rev. Hosea Williams was arrested with seven other civil rights demonstrators as they picketed a television talk show featuring the residents of all-white Forsyth County, Ga. Williams, a veteran civil rights worker, had pledged to protest the talk show because the host refused to have blacks participate in the program in Cumming, Ga.    ---   The Philippine government began formal peace talks with leaders of a 14-year-old Moslem rebellion on Mindanao and other southern islands. Meanwhile, as Manila's troops prepared for possible clashes with communist insurgents, the rebels urged Aquino to withdraw the charter approved last week as a basis for peace talks.    ---   Soviet officials confirmed that dozens of political prisoners have been released recently, and said more would be freed soon. They also said that since the beginning of the year about 500 exit visas had been granted to Soviets with relatives abroad.    ---   The Vatican named a three-member committee to &quot;assess the current situation&quot; in the Seattle archdiocese, where Archbishop Raymond Hunthausen had been disciplined last year and stripped of some authority within the Roman Catholic Church.    ---   Libya defended its involvement in neighboring Chad and called on France to withdraw its forces, allowing the Organization of African Unity to resolve the conflict. In Paris, the Defense Ministry said France sent 1,000 extra soldiers and new materiel to the central African country as concern mounted over a possible Libyan offensive.    ---   China opened talks with the Soviet Union on a border dispute that led to an armed conflict in the 1960s. The talks in Moscow, the first such discussions in nine years, are expected to last two weeks and focus on waterways and islands along the rivers dividing northeastern China and Soviet Siberia.    ---   Singapore effectively has banned The Asian Wall Street Journal indefinitely because it refused to publish a letter from a government official. The government notified the Asian Journal that it is limiting the newspaper's circulation in Singapore to 400 copies per issue. It currently sells about 5,000 copies there.    ---   U.S. and Vietnamese officials met in Bangkok, Thailand, for two days of talks aimed at settling differences that have hampered efforts to permit Vietnamese emigration to the U.S. and other Western nations. </TEXT></DOC>