<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890801-0060 </DOCNO><DD> = 890801 </DD><AN> 890801-0060. </AN><HL> The End of the Spending Orgy@  ----@  By Robert S. Gay </HL><DD> 08/01/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><IN> ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO) </IN><TEXT>   An amazing transformation has taken place since the stock market crash: Americans are saving more money. Or, at least, so it seems according to official statistics. As recently as 1987, at the height of the consumption binge, personal saving had sunk to an abysmally low 3.2% of after-tax income. But in the aftermath of the turbulence in the equity market, consumers began to adopt a more precautionary approach to spending. As a result, the personal saving rate staged a moderate recovery to 4.2% in 1988 and then jumped to 5.5% during the first six months of 1989.    The stunning snapback in saving, if genuine, is of no small consequence. At the rate reported for early 1989, households are stashing away almost $100 billion more per year than they were in 1987. Presumably, those additional domestically generated funds represent a potential source of financing for federal budget deficits or for new investment. Yet despite this impressive rebound, the personal saving rate is still well below the 7% to 8% norm of the 1960s and 1970s.    Speculation about the causes of the revival of saving runs from claims that the baby-boom generation has suddenly matured into its high-saving years to suggestions that much of the rebound is a statistical illusion. While these extreme positions may contain some small kernel of truth, they distract attention from a more obvious explanation: namely, the timing of discretionary purchases has been heavily influenced during the 1980s by large fluctuations in household wealth and by prices of big-ticket items. The current softness in consumer spending should be viewed in part as a natural payback period to compensate for earlier overconsumption now that households no longer perceive that the value of their assets will continue to soar.    Any explanation of the gradual recovery in personal saving must also come to grips with the reasons it dropped so dramatically earlier this decade. The flip side of deficient saving, of course, is overconsumption. At its peak in 1987, household expenditure as a percentage of national income was 74%, almost four percentage points above the highest levels reached during the previous two decades.    Strikingly, however, almost all of the overconsumption can be traced to a buying binge on discretionary items. Of the 3.6 percentage-point increase in the consumption-to-income ratio between 1981 and 1987, 3.5 percentage points were attributable to discretionary purchases.    The essence of discretionary purchases is that they can be timed to coincide with periods of well-being or can be postponed when households feel that their fortunes look less bright. As a result, there is a tendency for big-ticket purchases to be bunched into periods when times are good, especially when real incomes and wealth are rising rapidly. By their nature, buying sprees often borrow from future sales not only because durable goods do not need to be replaced frequently but also because the additional debt and depleted saving frequently associated with big-ticket purchases damp enthusiasm for subsequent buying.    During most of the 1980s, Americans felt exceptionally rich on at least two counts. First, household net worth soared, led by the spectacular rallies in the stock and bond markets and extraordinary gains in house prices on the populous east and west coasts. Between 1980 and 1987, household wealth as a share of national income climbed 40 percentage points, retracing all the decline over the previous two decades within just seven years.    Second, discretionary items became exceptionally cheap during the 1980s. The average price of discretionary purchases relative to that of all other consumer goods and services fluctuated within a fairly narrow range throughout the 1960s and 1970s. But beginning in 1980 and continuing throughout the decade, prices of big-ticket items fell precipitously compared with the cost of other consumer expenditures. That decline is all the more impressive given that one important nondiscretionary expense -- energy costs -- also plummeted.    At first, the availability of inexpensive imports probably contributed to overconsumption in the 1980s. The relative price of imported consumer durable goods, including automobiles, began to head down in the late 1970s, long before the dollar soared. But by the early 1980s, U.S. manufacturers were coming to grips with intensified foreign competition by slashing costs. Between 1982 and 1988, unit labor costs for manufacturers of durable goods fell by about 11%. For all non-farm businesses, unit labor costs rose by 17% over the same period.    Much of the buying binge can be understood as Americans with their new-found wealth rushing out and snatching up bargains. Most of the remainder of the increase in consumption occurred because national income had been redistributed in such a way so as to depress the average saving rate. For example, by 1987, the share of national income received as pension payments by retirees had risen 1.2 percentage points above its average value during the 1970s. Similarly, government transfer payments to low-income households and retirees rose about two percentage points as a share of national income, despite cutbacks in some benefits in recent years. Both these groups tend to spend most, if not all, of their current income. Retirees with accumulated capital may even spend more than all of their income flow.    The other main beneficiaries of income redistribution were recipients of interest payments, whose share of total income in 1987 had climbed almost 50% above the average value for the 1970s, thanks to historically high real interest rates and the spread of interest-bearing accounts under the deregulation of financial institutions. Here again, retirees tend to own a disproportionate share of interest-earning assets. Conversely, income received by high-saving proprietors was on the decline in the 1980s. Taken together, these shifts in income distribution accounted for about 40% (2.1 percentage points of national income) of the overconsumption through 1987.    This characterization of the changing distribution of income as a cause of the decline in personal saving during the 1980s stands in sharp contrast to other explanations that stress the importance of the changing age profile of the work force. According to one of these views, baby boomers were responsible for the decline in saving as they entered their high-spending, and hence low-saving, years earlier this decade. And now they are supposedly maturing into their high-saving years, which is elevating the saving rate.    This thesis rests on thin ice. For one thing, there is no direct evidence that the baby-boomers were a generation of low savers. As long as the government subsidized consumer financing through tax deductions for interest charges and as long as real interest rates were high, it made good sense to borrow and save as much as possible. Between 1970 and 1983, the proportion of families with no financial assets declined, and average holdings increased 15% in constant dollars primarily because of a greater proportion of small holdings.    Besides, wages and salaries, which represent the wherewithal for spending by the baby-boom generation, actually declined as a share of national income during the 1980s. Even if baby boomers were low savers, which does not seem to be the case, they simply did not receive sufficient earned income to explain the buying binge. Likewise, to rationalize the recent recovery in personal saving since 1987 in terms of a maturing of the baby boomers into their high-saving years is purely fanciful. After all, the proportion of the population between the ages of 20 and 44 will not begin to decline until 1991, and by 2000 it will have returned only to the level of 1979. Any foundation for a secular rise in saving throughout the 1990s will not be built on demographic changes but rather on real wage gains and hence productivity performance.    Since 1987, two developments have helped to discourage overconsumption and hence to promote greater saving. First, the stock market crash depressed household wealth, both directly by lowering equity values and indirectly by slowing the rate of appreciation in house values especially in the Northeast. This reduction in net worth could explain a good deal of the consolidation in consumption spending. By early 1989, household net worth still had not recovered its previous heights.    Second, many big-ticket items have become considerably more expensive now that income-tax deductions for consumer interest charges are being phased out. As of 1988, the after-tax cost of the average car purchase with a standard four-year loan had risen 3.3% relative to what it was when interest rates were fully deductible. By 1990, the after-tax cost will have increased by 4.2%.    None of this is to say that the U.S. has resolved its saving problem. Although the current payback period for earlier excesses may persist for a while, it will not last forever. Perhaps within the next year or two, the personal saving rate could be restored to the norms of previous decades, but further actions -- both public and private -- to stimulate saving are still needed if the U.S. is to wean itself completely from the premium interest rates that have been required to finance new plant and equipment.    ---   Mr. Gay is vice president and senior economist at Morgan Stanley. </TEXT></DOC>