<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880801-0147 </DOCNO><HL> Europe: Unions Join Italy's Tax Revolt </HL><AUTHOR> Antonio Martino </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP TAXES LABOR </CO><TEXT>   Italian citizens are finding an unlikely ally in their loudening protest against this nation's prohibitive taxes: Italy's unions. These powerful organizations, long symbols of the West European left, have made an about-face and joined taxpayers and some politicians in efforts to untangle Italy's fiscal mess. But this nation's unstable political life means even this broader front will have difficulty getting the government to frame a tax reform of the magnitude Italy urgently needs.    Politicians early on began paying lip service to a movement whose magnitude first became clear when some 30,000 irate citizens marched against taxes back in 1986. Leaders from various parties promised that efforts to cut Italy's budget deficit would not include a net increase in taxes -- that there would be no shift in the ratio of tax revenue and gross domestic product. But while the promises have been repeated whenever convenient, new indirect taxes or increases in existing ones have nevertheless been introduced. A government decision Friday to adopt some revenue-raising measures and a partial, two-month moratorium on public spending is a mere stopgap in a situation that's now out of control.    In terms of revenue, the results of these higher levies have wildly exceeded even the most optimistic of forecasts. From 1980 to 1987 total public-sector revenue, including income-tax revenue, more than tripled in nominal terms, with a 42% increase in real terms, and its share of the GDP has risen from 34.4% to 41.4%. This very large increase -- an extra seven percentage points of GDP in just eight years -- is made even more remarkable by the fact that, in the interim, the official GDP figures have been revised upward.    Taxpayers' hopes of taming runaway, confiscatory taxation, however, have been raised by developments on another side. When the march of 30,000 socioeconomically diverse but uniformly disgruntled taxpayers took place in Turin in 1986, the most remarkable aspect of its success was that it had come about despite the open opposition of the large labor unions and the organizations of employers.    On Feb. 7, 1988, however, the situation changed. Some 100,000 people met in Milan to voice both their opposition to the current fiscal mess and their belief that tax reform was unavoidable. Sponsors of this massive meeting were none other than Italy's three major labor unions.    The change in the unions' attitude toward taxation can be easily understood. The Italian General Conferation of Labor, Italy's largest union, is mainly communist. But &quot;communists&quot; had a change of a heart when their research showed that take-home pay in 1987 accounted for only 54.8% of labor costs. With all forms of taxation amounting to 82% of net pay, the effects of such a formidable tax on official employment are clear. From 1980 to 1987 employment rose by 348,000, while the labor force increased by 1,497,000; the ranks of the unemployed grew by an incredible 68% and the jobless rate hit a record 12%.    The unions, however, seem more preoccupied with the impact of taxation on pay than they are with its consequences on unemployment. Their reasoning is as follows: Considering that from 1981 to 1987 gross pay has increased 89% while taxation has gone up 155%, it seems obvious that the 2.2% decline in net, after-tax real pay is entirely due to a poor policy. In the words of l'Unita, the Communist Party paper, that policy &quot;uses taxation as an ax against wages and salaries.&quot;    These figures put doubts in the minds of those active in the labor movement. Government spending and taxation are proving to be a much more concrete and substantial form of exploitation than the traditional Marxist one. Both workers and management are being exploited by the same &quot;boss&quot;: Why shouldn't they join forces against the common enemy? Incredible as it may seem, this is what is beginning to happen. The Confederation of Industry and other employers' associations are prepared to join forces with the unions in the fight for tax reform. This should make the orthodox Marxists shudder: big business and organized labor united against the coercive apparatus of the state.    Not all of the unions' ideas in fiscal matters are sensible or coherent. For example, union leaders insist on blaming the excessive tax burden on the anti-social behavior of Italy's substantial number of tax evaders. This thesis may have great demagogic value, but it lacks any real mathematical plausibility. Even granting that tax evasion should be strongly fought against for reasons of justice, it is obvious that the success of the fight would not solve the problem of excessive taxation. There is simply no way that taxation on labor could be light when public spending amounts to 52.4% of GDP.    Even if tax evasion could be substantially reduced and even if the increased revenue would be returned to honest taxpayers, it would reduce the tax burden by only a trivial amount. The true cause of excessive taxation, in other words, is clearly the astronomical level of spending. Union leaders, however, refuse to disavow the social welfare state.    Not all of the unions' proposals, however, are quite as demagogic. For example, they have proposed the indexation of income-tax brackets in order to eliminate bracket creep and they insist that income-tax rates on labor income should be drastically reduced. Italian taxpayers currently face a marginal rate of 27% on a taxable income of $8,200.    All of this does not mean, of course, that Italy will have the kind of tax reform it needs -- one based on a reduced level of taxation, a substantial reduction in marginal rates, and a simplification of the tax code. Given the heterogeneity of the tax-reform front, no one knows what kind of &quot;reform&quot; could be adopted. The fabled &quot;stable instability&quot; of Italian political life poses another problem. Frequent changes in government have caused so much trouble that now many leaders of all political persuasions are convinced it is time to focus on constitutional reform. Talks have centered on possible changes in the electoral system, or a repeal of secret voting in Parliament.    As a result, the most important issue in Italy's system of government has not attracted much attention: spending and tax policy. Public spending continues to grow without any regard to the need to finance it, and the deficit increases exponentially. Italy has the largest deficit as a percentage of GDP among the Group of Seven. In the vain attempt to curb the deficit, taxation is then increased. The tax revolt now in progress is the final outcome of such a process.    The problem is one that is now endangering economic performance and threatening the very fabric of society. Public-sector debt is quickly approaching more than $740 billion, and public insolvency is no longer just an abstract eventuality. The evidence of the past two decades shows unequivocally that tax increases do not result in a reduction in the deficit. This is why tax protesters, while pursuing their immediate self-interest, are also performing an essential civic duty. They are reminding politicians that public spending must be controlled.    ---   Mr. Martino is professor of monetary history and policy at the University of Rome. </TEXT></DOC>