<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870126-0002 </DOCNO><HL> Insider Trading Cases Involving StudentsPose Dilemma for Some Business Schools---By Michael W. Miller and James R. StewartStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><TEXT>   At Harvard Business School, the Dennis B. Levine insider trading scandal might have made an intriguing case study for students. Instead, the scandal has created a real-life dilemma for the school's administrators.    One of the supporting players in the Levine drama is Randall D. Cecola, a young former financial analyst at Lazard Freres andamp; Co. In December, the Securities and Exchange Commission charged that while at Lazard, Mr. Cecola leaked confidential information about takeovers to an investment banker who tipped off Mr. Levine. The SEC also charged that Mr. Cecola personally profited by trading on inside information.    Without admitting or denying guilt, Mr. Cecola, who had since left Lazard and was in the middle of Harvard's M.B.A. program, agreed to disgorge $21,800 in trading profits. He also pleaded guilty to two criminal charges of failing to report on his tax return profits from trading stock options.    Mr. Cecola will be sentenced later this year, but another penalty has already been imposed. A few days after he made his guilty pleas and settled the SEC charges, Harvard suspended him indefinitely.    Mr. Cecola's case highlights a complex issue for university officials across the country: How should a school deal with a student who pleads guilty to a crime? When is it right for a school to add its own judgment in a student's criminal case? Harvard's policies on these questions are very different from those at New York University's business school, which faced a similar insider trading situation recently.    At Harvard, business school administrators say they place a heavy emphasis on ethics and morality in matters of student affairs. &quot;We have standards that we have set forth for our community,&quot; says John Lynch, the assistant dean in charge of the M.B.A. program. &quot;We feel it's perfectly appropriate to deal with people within our community who violate the standards that we set forth.&quot;    Sometimes a course of action is clear. University deans wouldn't punish a student who admits to double-parking. Similarly, they wouldn't have many qualms about how to treat someone who admits to murdering his wife in a campus apartment, as happened at Harvard Business School four years ago.    Insider trading falls into a vast gray area between those two extremes. &quot;There are some very interesting legal and institutional issues here,&quot; says Thomas Piper, the Harvard Business School associate dean who made the decision to suspend Mr. Cecola. &quot;How far can the administration reach when it observes conduct troublesome to everyone, but which did not interfere with the educational process? Where do you draw the line?&quot;    Harvard officials say insider trading is a crime that clearly calls for the school to step in and add its own penalty to the government's proceedings. &quot;Anybody who doesn't think the Harvard Business School is involved in this matter hasn't read The Wall Street Journal articles that mention him and the school in the same sentence,&quot; says one of Mr. Cecola's professors.    Indeed, any criminal activity would normally be grounds for suspending a student, Harvard officials say. &quot;The fact is, insider trading is business-related, and we're a business school,&quot; says Mr. Lynch. &quot;But I think our posture would have been the same if it were any kind of behavior that was of a criminal nature.&quot;    Harvard won't discuss the specifics of the Cecola case, and Mr. Cecola didn't return phone calls seeking comment. But according to his lawyer, Harvard has given Mr. Cecola a more optimistic view of his prospects for obtaining a degree than its public statements would suggest. &quot;This semester is out,&quot; says the lawyer, Alan Kaufman, &quot;but when he can resume is still up in the air. Randy has been in Cambridge trying to work this out.&quot;    Harvard hasn't given Mr. Cecola any guarantees, Mr. Kaufman says, but officials have been encouraging. &quot;They want to see Randy get a real job and have a supervisor evaluate his work,&quot; Mr. Kaufman says. &quot;If he demonstrates integrity and good character, they say they'll look favorably on his reapplication.&quot;    NYU officials faced the case of Marcel Katz, a former Lazard Freres aide charged with passing inside information about General Electric Co.'s planned acquisition of RCA to his father. The father and son settled the SEC charges last summer, without admitting or denying guilt. Marcel Katz was permanently barred from employment in the securities industry.    In contrast to Harvard, NYU officials say the school shouldn't become involved when a student gets in trouble with the law. They say their school's approach has roots in the historical role of the earliest universities as refuges from oppression by civil authorities. &quot;What happens to a student outside the university shouldn't affect his position within the university,&quot; says NYU spokesman Stuart Dim, summarizing the institution's formal written policy.    Nevertheless, for Mr. Katz, the policy was moot. He had applied to and been accepted by NYU's business school when his alleged insider trading came to light last summer. NYU says it didn't have to confront the dilemma that Harvard faces because Mr. Katz didn't show up for classes in the fall.    NYU won't elaborate, citing privacy laws. Mr. Katz couldn't be reached for comment, and his lawyer, George Berlstein, didn't return phone calls. One lawyer familiar with the case, however, says NYU officials may have discouraged Mr. Katz from enrolling by, among other things, suggesting that he might be subject to an investigation by an NYU review board. Mr. Dim declined to comment, but he confirmed that if an NYU faculty member or administrator files a complaint against a student, it is considered by a university judicial board. The board could apply sanctions against a student if it concludes that an offense &quot;seriously affects his position as a member of the academic community.&quot;    A spot check of other business schools reveals uncertainty about how to handle the issue of students with criminal problems. A spokesman for Stanford University's business school said the school has never confronted the problem of insider trading among its students. But he cited a policy that students can be expelled if they fail to respect &quot;order, morality, personal honor and the rights of others.&quot;    At the University of Pennsylvania's Wharton School, a spokesman declined to discuss the issue.    Columbia University's business school has no written policy. But for a student guilty of insider trading, a spokesman says, &quot;termination would be seriously considered.&quot;    Robert Yavitz, a former dean of Columbia's business school and now an ethics professor there, is harsher. The offense &quot;goes to the heart of what we're teaching,&quot; he says. &quot;We do a fair amount of preaching. If that's to be effective, we must also act. It's a tough decision to expel a student, but we're training future business leaders to make tough decisions. We're setting an example for our students.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>