<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870706-0085 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor:Boland vs. Self-Preservation</HL><DD> 07/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAMMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   Gordon Crovitz is to be commended for his insightful article &quot;Boland Laws May Be the 'Real Crime'&quot; (editorial page, June 4). He effectively articulates how a more fundamental controversy has evolved during the Iran-Contra hearings about separation of powers.    Liberals in Congress who began the Iranagua media spectacle almost drooling over prospects of crippling the president now find themselves the focus of well-deserved criticism for getting Congress to overstep its authority. Beginning with the War Powers Resolution in 1973, Congress incrementally has usurped the president's authority granted in the Constitution for the defense of our nation. The five versions of the Boland amendments restricting aid to the Nicaraguan resistance are only the latest in a series of restrictions designed to micro-manage U.S. foreign policy to the detriment of national security.    The only thing I would like to add to Mr. Crovitz's article is that the constitutionality of the Boland amendment is currently the subject of a lawsuit filed in the District Court for the District of Columbia. As the lead plaintiff in this suit, I have been joined by 14 of my colleagues in the House who welcome the Iran-Contra hearings as an opportunity to establish a clear and lasting precedent. I can imagine no better timing than now to carefully delineate the limits of congressional authority in the foreign-policy arena.    Hopefully the voice of Alexander Hamilton's ghost will come in loud and clear as the federal courts consider the merits of our constitutionality challenge: &quot;It is vain to impose constitutional barriers to the impulse of self-preservation.&quot;    Robert K. Dornan, (R., Calif.)   U.S. House of Representatives   Member, Foreign Affairs Committee   Washington   ---   The conflicting views concerning the constitutionality of the Boland amendment are not easily confuted by either side; yet I would suppose that all would agree the one forum -- and the only forum -- in which the issue could be ultimately and authoritatively decided is the Supreme Court.    It might be instructive to know what the court stated when it touched on the issue of presidential prerogative in foreign affairs in an analogous case some 53 years ago. In United States v. Curtiss-Wright Export Corp., the court faced the contention that President Roosevelt had acted unconstitutionally in a matter of foreign policy because the law under which his action was taken was an unconstitutional grant of legislative power to the executive. In the current situation, it is alleged that President Reagan acted unconstitutionally on a foreign-policy issue because Congress had proscribed such action by its failure to grant the requisite legislative power to him via the prohibitions contained in the Boland amendment.    The court in Curtiss-Wright found that President Roosevelt's action was fully congruent with the Constitution, not chiefly because Congress had granted power to him by legislation but, more important, because it inhered in the very nature of his office under the Constitution. I respectfully submit that the court would reach the same conclusion regarding Mr. Reagan's actions vis-a-vis the Boland amendment.    The reasoning of the court in Curtiss-Wright is both clear and trenchant. Justice Sutherland wrote of &quot;. . . the very delicate, plenary and exclusive power of the President as the sole organ of the Federal government in the field of international relations -- a power which does not require as a basis for its exercise an act of Congress. . . .&quot; Justice Sutherland wrote that congressional legislation &quot;. . . must often accord to the President a degree of discretion and freedom from statutory restriction which would not be admissible were domestic affairs alone involved. Moreover, he, not Congress, has the better opportunity of knowing the conditions which prevail in foreign countries, and especially is this true in time of war (in other nations). He has his confidential sources of information. He has his agents in the form of diplomatic, consular and other officials. Secrecy in respect of information gathered by them may be highly necessary, and the premature disclosure of it productive of harmful results.&quot;    There may, of course, be those who would argue that the Boland amendment, even if of questionable constitutionality, still should have been followed in the strictest sense. To them one might answer with a thought expressed early in our constitutional history by a rather gifted observer: &quot;A strict observance of the written laws is doubtless one of the high virtues of a good citizen, but it is not the highest. The laws of necessity, of self-preservation, of saving our country when in danger, are of higher obligation.&quot;    The author was Thomas Jefferson.    Daniel F. Minahan   Southport, Conn.   ---   Mr. Crovitz's Boland law column is interesting but it ignores the basic issue. The real crime is that Congress has abandoned the Monroe Doctrine.    We have a situation where: The Soviets with impunity have established a base in this hemisphere and are steadily reinforcing such; there has been an incursion of numerous contingents from nations subordinate to the Soviets; airports have been constructed capable of serving as takeoff points for attacks on our East and West Coasts; a submarine base has been constructed; sophisticated military equipment in great variety and in considerable quantity is pouring in; and Congress is plunging us toward disaster by burgeoning deficits, with this bad situation steadily worsening because of rapidly mounting interest costs, but do they warrant ignoring the tremendous sums that the Soviets are sending in various forms?    The defects in this operation probably would have been avoided had Congress involved itself.    Frederick N. MacMillin   Madison, Wis.</TEXT></DOC>