<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870130-0138 </DOCNO><HL> ---By Barbara RosewiczStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST </IN><DATELINE> KUWAIT  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Persian Gulf's rich-but-vulnerable Arab oil states are looking both to radical Islamic Iran and to moderate Egypt as they scramble to avoid the spillover from the Iran-Iraq war.    As fickle as that may sound, the Arab states appear to be pursuing a dual policy: improving relations with Egypt, which has the Arab world's largest army and population, while making limited accommodations to appease the Iranians -- as, for example, on oil policy.    None of this is official foreign policy, of course. The Gulf states keenly support Arab Iraq in President Saddam Hussein's six-year-old war against the Iranians. And -- except for Oman -- the Arab states in the Gulf still officially blackball Egypt, which also supports Iraq in the war, for making peace with Israel in 1979.    But considering their preoccupation with security in the face of the war, Iranian-inspired terrorism and religious fundamentalism, the Gulf states with their small armed forces and limited populations can't help but be eyeing Egypt's military machine. So far, there isn't any evidence that any Gulf states might call on Egypt to lend military might in a crisis.    &quot;They haven't asked, but it's in their minds,&quot; says a source close to the Egyptians. For now, he says, the Gulf states seem more interested in help in uncovering terrorist plots and Moslem extremists within their own borders.    Meanwhile, the Gulf states also are being careful not to antagonize Iran and bring down its wrath on them.    The Iranian seizure of Iraqi territory outside the southern port city of Basra this month can only reinforce the Gulf states' desire for more security guarantees. While the latest war news doesn't pose a military threat to any Gulf states, it does make Iran more of a force to be reckoned with both on and off the battlefield.    Even if the Iranians get no closer than they are today to Basra, they are in a position to sit tight and harvest political benefits around the Gulf. The Iranians learned that lesson last year when they captured their first significant piece of Iraqi territory by overrunning the Fao peninsula just off Kuwait's coast. A few months after Fao collapsed, the Saudis, and later the more-resistant Kuwaitis, let the Iranians take the lead in setting oil policy within the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.    &quot;It is a process that started after Fao and will probably continue and gain momentum,&quot; says a diplomat based in the Gulf.    Also in the past year, the Kuwaitis and Saudis have been paying special heed to Cairo. They've sent delegations of rich businessmen to investment-starved Egypt. And the Egyptians have sent experienced advisers on religious fundamentalism and terrorism into four Gulf states: Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Iraq and the United Arab Emirates, according to an Egyptian source.    The most visible -- though mostly symbolic -- sign of Egypt's reemergence was its inclusion for the first time at a pan-Islamic summit held in Kuwait this past week; it groups all the top Arab leaders, and marked the first time Egypt's President Hosni Mubarak met many of them as a head of state. But more substantially, some Gulf officials at the conference privately predicted that five or six Arab countires will renew diplomatic relations with Egypt this year.    In addition, according to an Egyptian source, the Saudis and Kuwaitis recently made an unannounced contribution to ease Egypt's severe financial bind. And they are discussing ways to help Egypt pay its military bills to the U.S., perhaps by having Arab banks refinance some or all of the $4.5 billion debt, the source said.    No amount of bankrolling, however, can guarantee the Egyptians would ever consider sending their soldiers to fight in Iraq or in the Persian Gulf. Since Egypt's heavy losses when it intervened in South Yemen, public opinion has opposed sending Egyptian soldiers to fight on foreign soil.    Gulf officials who favor Egypt's return to the Arab fold say troops aren't the only thing Egypt can offer to help strengthen and solidify the Arab world and make it more of a counterweight to Iran. &quot;We aren't facing a shortage of armies,&quot; says one high-ranking Gulf official. &quot;What we are trying to prepare is the will&quot; among Arab states to plan and to act.    For now, the Gulf states don't live in panic of the war spreading. Only little Kuwait, which neighbors Iraq, frets that Iranian or Iraqi troops might invade.    After more than six years of war, the nations in the Gulf say they're confident of Iraq's ability to defend itself -- although not in a long war of attrition that favors Iran's much larger population. Some are even ready to believe Iranian leaders who profess they never intended to take Basra. As in Lebanon and Afghanistan, they foresee more trouble than it might be worth for the Iranians to try to occupy a hostile city.    Even if Basra were to fall, they also aren't convinced the loss would bring down the Iraqi regime of Saddam Hussein. They note that in 1967, when Jordan lost the West Bank, Egypt the Sinai and Syria the Golan Heights, none of those regimes toppled.    More troubling, though, would be Iranian installation of a Shiite Moslem extremist government in Basra. As Kuwait was reminded only a week before it defied Iran and hosted the Islamic summit -- when bombs started fires simultaneously at three of its oil installations -- the Iranians don't need to send shells and troops to shake up the Gulf. The threat of terrorism and Moslem extremism -- inspired directly or even indirectly by Iran -- is enough. </TEXT></DOC>