<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880107-0095 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint: Democrats Shun Their Hidden Electorate </HL><AUTHOR> Hodding Carter III </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   We're just about one week into the New Year. That means the inevitable reviews of 1987 have been written or broadcast, with all the usual, and usually fatuous, attempts at prophecy by men and women who should know better. In the best of current fashion, columnists have wryly admitted to their (modest) share of bloopers in the preceding year, the same columns of self-denigration being carefully laced with references to their prescience as well. So what's new?    The answer is, very little, and in no area quite so potentially important to the nation's future as in the Democratic Party's obstinate dedication to its losing presidential rut. As one particularly acute Washington bureau chief recently remarked, while he once wondered whether Ronald Reagan's presidency would outlive him, he now expected that he would in fact die before another Democrat was elected to the White House.    There is an element of unfairness in that and similar sentiments, not to mention a failure of memory. John F. Kennedy was no shining knight of the media or the polls in early January 1960. Neither was Jimmy Carter in January 1976. Until Barry Goldwater was nominated, Lyndon Johnson was no odds-on favorite for reelection in his own right. A great deal can happen in the forge of both the Republican and Democratic campaigns between now and November. Even more can happen at home and abroad to the economy or to the fundamental issue of war and peace.    But that said, it remains that you have to be a masochist, a sucker or a yellow dog Democrat of the old school to take a bet without heavily favorable odds on a Democratic presidential victory this year. The problem is that the candidates in the field, with only partial exceptions, and more particularly those who are the guiding figures in their campaigns and the party, are still looking for painless prescriptions for what ails the country. Risk-taking is not in vogue, whether rhetorical or actual, and the result is that the electorate has no reason to believe that anything dramatically different could or would be forthcoming from a Democratic win.    Exactly, comes back the mainstream leadership reply. The voters aren't looking for dramatic departures. They want fine-tuning, but no real course corrections. If the Democratic Party goes too far afield with its program or its candidates, 1984 will be seen as the high-point of the party's power, rather than its low.    One version or another of this is repeated so often that it now no longer requires references to any kind of proof. The assertion is, ipso facto, in itself regarded as revealed truth.    And all the while there are, drifting out there in democratic limbo, some 43 million Americans who are not registered to vote and therefore will not be able to vote in November. Added to their number are 45 million Americans who are registered but who, on the strength of past behavior, won't go to the polls this year either. These 90 or so million Americans are making a statement, and it translates as an indictment of the Democratic Party's intelligence and courage.    It is both an indictment and statement because the party and its leaders have no discernible interest in trying to tap that reservoir in any substantial way. This is true despite the fact that a majority of these non-voters are men and women whose causes are those with which the Democratic Party has been identified in the past. They are people who might respond if someone seemed to be promising something that was not more of the same, but will otherwise stay away again.    Many Republicans fear the nature of that hidden electorate, which is natural enough, but so do many Democrats. Locked into the politics of the known, they would seemingly rather continue to lose presidential battles while maintaining control of Congress and lower levels of governments than risk disturbing this tidy division of the spoils by changing the nature of the battlefield.    Thus the debate over what approach to take is ended virtually before it begins. The electorate that currently votes is heavily middle class in fact as well as theory, which means its world view and aspirations must be at the center of any politician's considerations. But that acceptance of a status quo in which less than half of all adult Americans participate means acceptance of a political dialogue permanently skewed to the right.    There is nothing inherently wrong with such a skew, but it is one for which Republicans have a natural affinity and from whom it is only natural. When Democrats, through fear, indifference or a narrow calculation of short-term interest, offer little more than a modified version of the same approach, they deliver themselves to folly. Circumstances may give them a victory by default -- as with an economic collapse in the late summer -- but that is the only way they will be able to win. &quot;Me-too&quot; did not work for the Republicans in the long political winter of the New Deal-Fair Deal years, and it will not work for the Democrats in this new year and beyond.    ---   Mr. Carter is a political commentator who heads a television production firm. </TEXT></DOC>