<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870316-0060 </DOCNO><HL> Unions Seek Job Security,Some Fear 'Whipsawing'---National Pay Patterns Fade---By Jacob M. SchlesingerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR </IN><DATELINE> DETROIT </DATELINE><TEXT>   The triennial ritual begins again in mid-July.    With cameras clicking and reporters scribbling, United Auto Workers representatives will extend the traditional handshakes across the table to officials of General Motors Corp. Across town, Ford Motor Co. will hold a similar ceremony, and another round of national contract talks will begin.    In contrast, virtually no one was on hand in Columbus, Ohio, on Feb. 2. That's when UAW Local 969 signed an agreement with a GM plant that changed certain seniority and wage provisions, cutting production costs by $17 million a year and saving about 770 jobs in the aluminum moldings department. Or the following week in Flint, Mich., when 750 workers at another GM plant combined various job classifications and slashed the price of producing an oil filter by 22%.    Yet such little-noticed local negotiations are going on in more and more factories in a wide range of industries, and their cumulative effect may be greater -- on companies, unions and the overall economy -- than anything occurring at national bargaining tables.    &quot;All the gains that we're making are at the local level,&quot; says F. James McDonald, GM's president. &quot;That may be the most important thing happening in heavy industry in the U.S. today.&quot; Indeed, the era of big-time national labor talks -- in which union and management leaders butt heads over pennies an hour -- is waning.    If the national auto talks collapse, of course, a strike still could shut down GM or Ford and send half a million workers to the picket lines. And national contract talks can produce savings in such areas as health care and training, as well as setting the tone for local-plant relations.    But wages, the main focus of national negotiations, are becoming less important than work rules, which are usually handled in local contracts. That's where U.S. companies are furthest behind their major international competitors and can make the most progress. Thus, when General Electric Co. announced last month that it would resume production of color-television sets in the U.S., it said its decision hinged not on wage reductions but on the willingness of the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers local in Bloomington, Ind., to help improve plant efficiency.    &quot;It has to happen at the local level,&quot; says Richard W. Miller, GE's senior vice president in charge of consumer electronics. &quot;If the people in the plant don't want to cooperate, you don't have a chance of going very far.&quot; He adds that &quot;managers and union officials alike have probably focused too exclusively on wages and benefits as opposed to looking at productivity and work rules.&quot; And he comments: &quot;Working in that area is a lot more palatable in working with the unions&quot; than trying to cut wages.    In some industries, even wages, long the sacred domain of national talks, are now being bargained company by company and plant by plant. At a plant in Oklahoma City, Okla., Firestone Tire andamp; Rubber Co. is struggling to get the United Rubber Workers' approval of a contract that would eventually trim wages $1.20 an hour below the national contract. If the international union's executive committee approves the local agreement -- a move that Firestone calls crucial to keeping the plant open -- four of Firestone's eight U.S. plants will have waivers from the master contract; in other words, the company really doesn't have a national wage rate.    That represents a major change. Years ago, industrial unions rose to power mostly by shifting the most important issues to national contract talks. Pattern bargaining provides strength in numbers and prevents one factory from reducing wages and other benefits and thereby forcing others to do the same in order to compete. That's why the International Union of Electrical Workers resisted when Westinghouse Electric Co. tried to negotiate its 1985 contract with separate locals. Westinghouse executives &quot;felt they could maximize their profits if they dealt local by local, because some are weaker than others,&quot; says William H. Bywater, the IUE president.    But unprecedented competition in the economy is making it harder for other unions to preserve that concentration of power.    &quot;There is now incredible diversity of economic pressures across firms and plants and across industries,&quot; says Harry C. Katz, a labor-relations professor at Cornell University. &quot;In the face of that kind of diversity, you can't maintain national standards and national patterns.&quot;    In recognition of that problem, the United Steelworkers union last year abandoned its practice of negotiating one master contract and, instead, worked out separate agreements with each of the six major steelmakers. Under the old package, base wages were roughly even throughout the industry at $14.20 an hour, says Ray MacDonald, a union economist. Under the new agreements, changes in wages vary, ranging from a freeze at Inland Steel Industries Inc. to a $1.58 hourly cut at LTV Corp.    &quot;We have a very sick industry,&quot; Mr. MacDonald says. &quot;There was no one overall solution; so the best thing you can do is take the individual companies and try to do what makes sense at each company.&quot;    Deregulation is what destroyed national wage bargaining in the telecommunications industry. In 1983, the Communications Workers of America negotiated one wage contract for 525,000 workers with American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. Last year, the union negotiated 22 different contracts with ATandamp;T, the Bell operating companies and their various subsidiaries.    &quot;You truly can tailor a contract to the needs of individual operating companies,&quot; says Dennis Johnson, the vice president for labor relations and compensation at Ameritech, the Chicago-based Bell company covering five Midwestern states. Last year, Ameritech negotiated 17 different contracts with the CWA and the IBEW. Its Wisconsin Bell subsidiary, for example, abandoned cost-of-living adjustments, while the other companies simply agreed to certain limits on the inflation-adjustment formula.    In industries that have preserved the national wage pattern, wages have diminished in importance. Although the subsistence-level pay of developing countries such as Mexico and South Korea still poses a threat to U.S. industrial workers, the dramatic plunge in the dollar has put the Americans roughly on an even footing with their Japanese and West German competitors. A recent Data Resources Inc. study concluded that Japan's unit labor cost was only 4% less than America's and that West Germany's was 57% higher.    And even before the big shift in currencies nearly equalized wages, U.S. manufacturers realized that they weren't organizing work in their factories as efficiently as their overseas competitors were. In 1984, a GM-Toyota Motor Co. joint venture reopened a Fremont, Calif., factory that GM had closed two years earlier. The plant pays roughly the same wages as other GM plants, but it is managed the Toyota way, with flexible work rules and significant worker control over operations. The factory is about 50% more efficient now than it had been and roughly 40% more efficient than a currently operating, otherwise-comparable GM plant, according to a recent Massachusetts Institute of Technology study.    It is nothing new for work rules to come up in local talks, but the importance of those discussions is rising rapidly. &quot;Almost every plant involved in the basic steel industry has made some form of accommodations in crew size and job combinations that lend to more efficient operations,&quot; says Sam Camens, a United Steelworkers official. Moreover, 12 of GM's 22 assembly plants now have &quot;competitive&quot; agreements, in most cases because the local unions agreed to reopen local contracts before their September 1987 expiration. The contract changes usually consist of reducing classifications (increasing the variety of jobs that one worker can do) and limiting the times workers can switch jobs.    Chrysler Corp. illustrates the savings that companies say they can get through such changes. In October 1985, the auto maker took a 12-day strike before agreeing to a national contract that included a return to an annual guaranteed wage increase. But last year, Chrysler negotiated &quot;modern operating agreements&quot; at five of its 31 factories. It figures that the changes increased net income some $28 million to $35 million.    But not only the companies are benefiting from the changes. For industrial workers, job security has become the top issue. While union leaders are struggling to make some headway in that area at the national table, the companies are making it clear that a &quot;competitive&quot; local contract is the best thing a union can do to keep a plant open or to retain work in-house.    GM was scheduled to close its Fairfax, Kan., plant by the end of this year, but, in 1985, it said it would replace it with a new plant that it might put near the antiquated facility. Two months after the union local signed a letter of intent saying it would consider drastic changes, the company agreed to build the new plant there. Local 31 believes that its cooperation was &quot;damn important&quot; to preserving the 4,900 hourly jobs, says Charles Knott, the local's president. &quot;Had we taken a hard line and said we weren't willing to look at anything, chances are we wouldn't have a $1.05 billion plant along the Missouri River.&quot;    However, unions are increasingly afraid that the emphasis on local talks is threatening their power. Workers at Mack Truck plants in Hagerstown, Md., and Allentown, Pa., recently approved concessionary local contracts providing various wage cuts and a no-strike clause in return for job guarantees. But the UAW International vetoed the agreements, saying they would &quot;compel accommodations by our members . . . at present and future Mack facilities.&quot;    That fear -- that separate local negotiations will force equal concessions at other plants -- was borne out in the telephone industry, according to a Communications Workers spokeswoman. She dismisses the companies' notion that they needed separate contracts tailored to the needs of individual workplaces. And she argues that wages have, in fact, remained consistent throughout the business -- but lower &quot;because of the divisiveness.&quot;    &quot;The more decentralized bargaining,&quot; says Cornell's Prof. Katz, &quot;becomes a vehicle by which management is able to lower employment conditions. Clearly, management has the upper hand in terms of bargaining leverage.&quot;    The debate over the wisdom of the local approach has recently become most intense among the auto workers. Armed with the bargaining weapon of overcapacity, the companies are not too subtly telling locals that if they don't change their contracts, their plants could be shut down -- a threat that triggers competition among the locals for the shrinking number of jobs.    Last month, Chrysler angered the UAW by abruptly halting work on improvements at its Newark, Del., plant and telling workers there that if they didn't agree to contract changes, a major job would be moved to another plant. In two important decisions announced in February, GM decided against placing new vehicles -- and thus jobs -- in plants that rejected its requests to renegotiate their contracts. Instead, the products -- a new minivan and a new medium-duty truck -- were given to locals that, just before the decision, had adopted new accords.    Donald F. Ephlin, the UAW's vice president in charge of its GM Department, says he isn't worried. &quot;In most instances, we are able to control {whipsawing},&quot; he says. &quot;Nobody has given away the store.&quot;    But workers, especially at GM, are increasingly complaining that they are being forced into actions they consider undesirable. On Feb. 27, the UAW local at GM's auto-assembly plant in Leeds, Mo., voted to adopt a &quot;team concept&quot; approach to production. &quot;If I'd had a choice, I wouldn't have done it,&quot; says Charles Johnson, Local 93's shop chairman. But he notes that the company's two other plants making the same type of car had recently adopted such agreements, and he says, &quot;It kind of put us under the gun. . . . We had to do it, too.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>