<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870224-0108 </DOCNO><HL> Oil and Ecology Do Mix---By John Baden</HL><DD> 02/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTPETROLEUM (PET)NATURAL GAS, PIPELINES (LNG)ENVIRONMENT (ENV) </IN><TEXT>   America's increasing dependence upon foreign oil clearly is cause for concern, a concern reflected in a National Petroleum Council report that is scheduled to be released today. Given current geological theories, all of the lower 48 states' huge &quot;elephant fields&quot; of more than a billion barrels have been discovered. But there is a promising area yet to be tapped -- federal lands. And their exploration and development would work best under the aegis of private environmental groups.    Most people assume there is an inherent conflict between oil and gas development and environmental quality, but these concerns can be complementary. The challenge is to create new decision-making processes and incentive structures for the management of federal lands. Environmental quality and the development of oil and natural gas on federal lands can coexist, but not under the matrix of existing institutions. Although the production of oil and gas can present significant environmental risks to some of the most pristine areas of the country, these risks can be dramatically reduced. The oil- and gas-producing lands owned by environmental groups and managed primarily for wildlife provide excellent models.    In a country that prides itself on the private ownership of land, the government is a surprisingly large owner of real estate. The 760 million acres of federally owned land represent about one-third of the land area of the U.S., and less than one-fourth of it has been explored for oil and gas. Some 600 million of these acres are administered by the U.S. Forest Service and the Bureau of Land Management. Given the possibility of supply interruptions from the Middle East, the potential of the federal lands is of great importance.    Today, between 40% and 65% of all federal lands are closed to oil and gas leasing. Yet the Government Accounting Office estimates that as many as 261 million acres of federal land outside Alaska have productive oil and gas potential. Mean estimates are for 15 billion barrels of recoverable oil in the lower 48 states.    The best geological prospect in North America is in Alaska's 18-million-acre Arctic National Wildlife Refuge (ANWR). A U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service report last December estimated that there is a 95% chance that the ANWR's coastal plain contains more than 4.8 billion barrels of oil.    Some of the potentially productive Alaskan properties are home to the last great caribou herds in North America. Potential producing properties in the lower 48 states include the Greater Yellowstone Ecosystem (outside the national parks) and other ecologically fragile areas in the northern Rocky Mountains.    But the government's record on preserving the environment is, at best, spotty. And the Forest Service and the Bureau of Land Management have no incentive to encourage the use of federal lands for development of oil and gas.    Energy development doesn't add to the agencies' budgets since any payments go to the U.S. Treasury, not to the Forest Service or the Bureau of Land Management. Neither is the agencies' political power augmented by increases in land value that result from the discovery of recoverable oil and gas. In fact, a significant disincentive may arise to the extent that the agencies are diverted from timber cutting and grazing by the necessity of managing oil and gas exploration and production.    The result of this failed incentive system has been a woeful misuse of the resources over which these agencies exercise administrative authority. For example, the Forest Service currently is conducting extensive, money-losing logging operations in the Big Hole River drainage of Montana and the 16.4-million-acre Tongass National Forest of southwest Alaska. The economic costs of harvesting timber in these areas far exceed the commercial value of the timber. Furthermore, much of the timber is harvested by environmentally destructive methods and there is extensive road building to submarginal, remote timber stands. These permanent roads -- with eight times the mileage of the U.S. Interstate Highway System -- cause substantial erosion and destroy wilderness. No private logging firm would consider such operations, due to the excessive road-access and management costs. Unlike the Forest Service, firms that pursue such objectives become bankrupt.    Another prime example of the failure of agency incentive structure is the Bureau of Land Management's permit program for livestock grazing on federal ranges. The prices paid for the limited number of assigned federal permits commonly range from 10% to 50% of those for grazing on adjacent private property. Grazing fees, like oil production royalties, go to the U.S. Treasury, not to the Bureau of Land Management. There is no incentive to seek fair market value for these permits. Underpriced grazing rights serve to build political constituencies that in turn foster the bureau's pursuit of greater budget allocations to manage the land.    It would be far better to turn over management of these wilderness and ecologically sensitive federal lands to private, nonprofit environmental concerns. Such groups as the Audubon Society and the Welder Wildlife Foundation Refuge have demonstrated an ability to foster energy production and environmental quality.    For example, the Audubon Society operates the 26,000-plus acre Rainey Sanctuary Preserve in southern Louisiana. Natural-gas wells have operated within the preserve for more than 25 years without measurable damage to the surrounding ecosystem. The preserve is home to ducks, geese, and a variety of mammals including mink, otter and deer. On the Welder Wildlife Foundation Refuge in Texas -- the country's largest private refuge -- an oil and gas field has been operating since the 1930s with no significant disturbance of the indigenous wildlife.    In fact, oil and gas production has actually benefited these preserves. Royalties from oil and gas production have allowed Audubon to purchase additional wildlife habitats while improving the management and ecological integrity of the Rainey Preserve. Revenues from the Welder Refuge wells have contributed to wildlife research and the operation of the foundation itself. These relationships are symbiotic, not confrontational.    This model could be expanded to the federal lands with the creation of &quot;wilderness endowment boards&quot; made up of environmentalists and sportsmen. These boards would foster environmental values and have the authority to sell, buy and manage specific wilderness lands.    The boards would face incentives to dispose of land with low wilderness or wildlife value but high commercial potential and to acquire land of low commercial value but high wilderness potential. Revenues generated from land sales and oil and gas royalties would be deposited into accounts managed by each board for wilderness purchases and wildlife management. Like the boards of the Audubon and Welder refuges, the boards administering what are now federal lands would have incentives to develop oil and gas prospects in an environmentally sensitive manner.    The environmental record of oil exploration and production in the Arctic is highly encouraging. The National Wildlife Federation states that, &quot;The oil industry spent the last 15 years profitably developing Prudhoe Bay and did a commendable job in protecting its wildlife resources.&quot; Audubon's Rainey Preserve in Louisiana successfully supports drilling by several different companies on a &quot;mere&quot; 26,000 acres. Surely the 1% of the 1.5-million-acre coastal plain that would be disturbed by drilling on the 18-million-acre ANWR can also be developed while preserving environmental values.    Major environmental groups, including the Sierra Club and the Wilderness Society, adamantly oppose any development on the ANWR. But if these organizations were given control over the ANWR and royalties from its oil production, their incentives would change dramatically. The nation and its wildlife would surely be ahead if environmental groups managed -- or even owned -- these lands. These groups would then face incentives to develop the area with reasonable environmental constraint much as Audubon developed Rainey.    The Reagan administration, however, seems immune to creative ideas in environmental policy. It seems that when officials hear the words &quot;environmental politics,&quot; they can think only of Jane Fonda chaining herself to a tree.    As we approach the 1988 presidential election, the twin concerns of energy and environment offer huge potentials for policy reform. The candidates who articulate visions that bring these good things together will indeed be attractive.    ---   Mr. Baden, a member of the National Petroleum Council, heads the Maguire Oil and Gas Institute at Southern Methodist University in Dallas. Pat Spillman assisted with this article. </TEXT></DOC>