<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870116-0106 </DOCNO><HL> Struggling Back:Job Programs HelpWorkers Get Rehired,But Often at Less Pay---Cost of Retraining Plans IsToo High for Some Firms;Some People Won't Move---A Venture-Capital Idea Flops---By Jacob M. Schlesinger and Melinda Grenier GuilesStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR </IN><TEXT>   After being laid off five years ago from General Motors Corp.'s Chevrolet assembly plant in Flint, Mich., Mary C. McEnrue landed a variety of jobs -- from baby-sitting to driving vans -- but none of them paid well or lasted long. &quot;I was doing nothing,&quot; she says, &quot;waiting for GM to call me back.&quot; It didn't.    But in 1984, she got a letter inviting her to the newly formed United Auto Workers -- GM Human Resource Center. The center gave her a series of courses -- from basic math to &quot;self-awareness&quot; -- and paid her $3,000 tuition at a barbering college. As a result, she now has &quot;a skill I can take anywhere&quot; and a job at Eklips Hair Designers that she never would have got without the help. But there's a catch: At age 30, she makes less than half what she did assembling pistons at age 23.    Ms. McEnrue's mixed fortunes mirror those of other blue-collar workers squeezed out of manufacturing jobs as American companies scramble to become more competitive. An increasing number of people now are covered by so-called safety nets -- job search, security and retraining programs that help them find new jobs after they are laid off.    Such programs are a growing priority in the U.S. President Reagan has recommended nearly tripling the amount of government funding available for them, and, earlier this week, a Labor Department task force proposed establishing a new federal dislocated-worker unit to administer expanded training and reemployment assistance. Programs already in existence have aided thousands of workers.    But for thousands of others, the nets have holes. The new jobs often pay less, require relocation or extensive retraining, and force some workers to start over when they should be planning for retirement.    Consider, for example, the job-search center and federally supported vocational-retraining program set up by B.F. Goodrich Co. last March in Miami, Okla. Foreign competition forced Goodrich to close the Miami plant, which employed 1,900 workers. The closest jobs listed at the center were &quot;probably 70 to 80 miles out,&quot; says Clifford Whitehead, vice president of the disbanding United Rubber Workers Local 318. Some were as far away as Kansas City, Mo., and Nashville, Tenn.    And wages in the new jobs were &quot;a comedown&quot; from Goodrich's approximately $15 an hour, adds Wendell Prentice, the local office manager of the Oklahoma state employment service. &quot;Now, anything else is $5 or $6.&quot; The upshot: 1,100 of the workers are still in Miami and still unemployed. &quot;The company really did make a good effort,&quot; Mr. Whitehead says. &quot;I can't fault them at all.&quot; But, he adds, &quot;it just wasn't what our people needed.&quot;    Undoubtedly, job-security programs have helped &quot;remove the threat hanging over workers' heads,&quot; says Donald F. Ephlin, a UAW vice president who heads the union's GM department. He adds that the UAW wants to strengthen these programs in contract talks this year with GM and Ford Motor Co. But, he adds, &quot;the best job-security program in the world is not an acceptable alternative to . . . a well-paying job in an industry that is booming.&quot;    In the past, industrial booms reduced the need for job-security and retraining programs. Blue-collar layoffs were generally viewed as temporary responses to short-term or seasonal problems. Workers in a few industries, such as auto and steel, received supplemental income assistance to tide them over.    Times have changed. More than 2.7 million blue-collar workers have permanently lost their traditional jobs since January 1981, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics. Such losses are continuing as companies face increasing foreign competition, more sophisticated technology and the realization that only efficient concerns will survive. GM alone plans to eliminate at least 26,000 blue-collar jobs over the next three years as it closes or consolidates 11 plants.    The upheaval is persuading governments, unions and companies to expand job-security programs. The UAW led the way for labor in its 1982 and 1984 contracts with an elaborate safety net consisting of no-layoff guarantees for some workers and retraining for others. Other industries, such as steel, rubber and communications, have adopted similar provisions. Communities help by searching for retraining funds and persuading healthy companies to create jobs. Congressional and administration officials have made aiding dislocated workers a top legislative priority.    Michael G. Utley has the ultimate employment security: He can't be laid off. His job has disappeared at GM's Delco Remy plant at Anderson, Ind., because of technological change, but since 1984 the UAW has signed contracts with the Big Three auto makers that put workers who lose their jobs for certain reasons into a &quot;job bank.&quot; They get full wages and benefits and do odd jobs at the plant until a regular slot opens up.    Mr. Utley, 39, currently administers the payroll for the 650 people in the plant's job bank, but placing other job-bank workers has been a struggle. Some of his colleagues at the Anderson plant helped remodel Boy Scout camps; another works as a secretary for the local March of Dimes. A union official at GM's Saginaw, Mich., plant says it will have job-bank workers do yard work at the factory site. Ford workers in Saline, Mich., painted a local YMCA building.    Furthermore, the number of jobs that a company can guarantee is limited. The auto-company job banks cover only workers facing layoff because of automation, productivity improvements or outsourcing -- moving work outside the company, often to a nonunion shop. They don't cover workers affected by changes in sales or market conditions -- the vast majority of blue-collar employees threatened. Of the 26,000 hourly jobs to be eliminated by the GM plant closings, only &quot;a very small percentage will be covered under the jobs program,&quot; says Donald G. Gardner, GM's general director of employment relations and job security. &quot;I'd be surprised if the figure was as high as 10%.&quot;    Some GM workers could be offered jobs at other plants under contractual transfer provisions. Such provisions, which have been written into many labor agreements, have helped preserve jobs for some workers whose companies were laying off people in one location while hiring at others. Not all employees take advantage of such opportunities, however. Since 1982, for example, Ford has offered 18,000 laid-off workers the chance to work if they moved elsewhere. Almost 60% rejected it.    Joseph Szramka, a steering-linkage assembler in Buffalo, N.Y., until last April, has had offers to transfer to GM plants in Massachusetts and Pennsylvania. But his wife just had a baby, he owns his home, and he doesn't want to move from the area in which he has lived for all his 31 years. &quot;Just to pick up a family and leave is pretty hard to do,&quot; he says. So he is collecting unemployment benefits and searching for a local job -- without much luck. &quot;There are signs for help wanted at places like McDonald's,&quot; he says, &quot;but I'm looking for something a little better.&quot;    Even if a worker is willing to move, his colleagues at the new location might want a neighbor to get the job. In 1985, the UAW local at American Motors Corp.'s Jeep plant in Toledo, Ohio, waged a bitter, though unsuccessful, court battle to prevent the transfer of 400 workers threatened with layoff from the company's Kenosha, Wis., assembly plant.    Moreover, transfer rights aren't much use when a company is slashing its entire work force. Partly as a result of this, programs that help people find jobs outside their company have become more widespread. Some retraining programs have had spectacular results. An A.G. Edwards brokerage office in Buffalo has promised to take up to five laid-off auto workers from the local UAW-GM Human Resource Center. One furloughed Ford worker used his tuition to become a baseball umpire. Another became a lawyer. Of the 113,600 workers who participated in federally financed programs in 1984 and completed their training by June 1985, 65% had found jobs, according to a government study.    Despite these successes, job-search and retraining programs face a thicket of difficulties. Often such programs are a nightmare to administer, and ideas that sound great in principle fall flat in practice. One innovative aspect of the 1984 GM-UAW contract was a $100 million venture-capital fund to help workers start new businesses. Not a penny has been spent so far; the company and the union have had difficulty generating interest in and defining the purpose of the fund.    Another problem is cost, which can be prohibitive for companies already trying to cut expenses. The placement cost for Buffalo industrial workers in a 1983 demonstration project averaged $3,014 per person -- partly because the project included expensive retraining. Job-search programs that offer classes in resume-writing and interviewing techniques -- but no retraining -- can be cheaper. When Dana Corp., a Toledo-based maker of truck parts, closes a plant, it spends about $125 a person to provide such services to displaced hourly workers.    Because of the expense, companies and communities often seek government funds. However, Congress slashed the fiscal 1986 budget for Title 3 of the Job Training Partnership Act, the main federal program for displaced workers, to about $96 million from $223 million in fiscal 1985. The fiscal 1987 funding is slated to go back up to about $200 million. For fiscal 1988, President Reagan has proposed a new $980 million program that would combine Title 3 with other dislocated-worker programs.    However, that won't help Minnesota, which has barely enough in its current budget to cover one plant closing but faces shutdowns at a frozen-foods plant, a meatpacker, a toy manufacturer, a farm-machinery company and a building-supply firm. About 1,500 workers will be &quot;left to fend for themselves,&quot; says Jeff Farmer, the Minnesota AFL-CIO coordinator of the programs.    Some job-program problems lie with the jobless themselves. &quot;There are probably 25% that won't come no matter what you offer just because they can't see beyond their own anger and hostility to the company,&quot; says Frederick W. DeRoche, vice president of Arbor Consulting Group Inc., a Plymouth, Mich., outplacement firm.    Another problem is poorly structured training. Sandra Riffle says she saw a robot only once in a 10-month, county-sponsored electronic/robotics course in 1982, shortly after being laid off from Michigan Bell in Pontiac, Mich. She says the 20 people in the class got plenty of technical training but never any hands-on experience. &quot;We could tell you what was a diode,&quot; she says, but she couldn't figure out &quot;what was wrong with a TV.&quot; After the course, she took a job in a flea market.    The most unsettling aspect of job search and retraining programs is that many workers who find stable jobs must sacrifice their former standard of living. A recent federal study concluded that earnings of workers displaced from durable-goods industries fell an average of 21%, to $273 a week from $344.    John Truszkowski, a 41-year-old father of three, feels the pinch. After almost 20 years at Goodyear Tire andamp; Rubber Co.'s Jackson, Mich., tire plant, he was laid off when it closed in 1984. Goodyear offered counseling on interviewing techniques and resumes, but, he asks, &quot;What kind of resume would I have, graduating from high school and starting off in a shop in a rubber factory?&quot; As for federally financed training programs, he asks, &quot;What do you do, quit a job to go to school, or do you try to feed your family?&quot;    For two years, he took odd jobs. Today, he is a route salesman for a dairy, making half what he did at Goodyear. &quot;I feel fortunate I've at least got a job,&quot; he says. </TEXT></DOC>