<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880129-0009 </DOCNO><HL> Credit Markets -- Looser Reins: Signs of a Slowdown Suggest Fed Will Ease Its Grip on Credit --- Move to Trim Interest Rates Could Help Avert Slump; GOP Might Benefit, Too --- Is a Recession Already Here? </HL><AUTHOR> Alan Murray and Tom Herman (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> FIN BON BNK ECO MON EMI </IN><G> TRE FED </G><TEXT>   With signs of a slowing economy on the horizon, interest rates are headed down.    In the credit markets yesterday, yields on long-term bonds dropped again, and signals from the Federal Reserve suggest the central bank may soon ease its grip on credit. That would allow a broader retreat in interest rates, with widespread effects. A further mortgage-rate decline, to cite just one of them, could help to resuscitate housing construction, possibly helping head off any recession.    There are political as well as economic ramifications. A weak economy is good news for Democrats, who would use it to try to pin the blame on President Reagan and on GOP policies generally. But if lower interest rates head off a serious downturn, the Republicans' chances will be brighter at the polls this fall.    The latest rate declines have been sparked by new signs that economic growth is turning sluggish. A report Wednesday showed that the strong economic growth in the fourth quarter of last year was sustained only by a huge buildup in inventories and that consumer spending was down sharply. If inventories are high and consumers aren't buying, manufacturers have little choice but to curb their production -- and presumably their employment -- at some point.    And yesterday, the government did report pressure on employment, a surge in claims for unemployment insurance. &quot;The markets are becoming increasingly convinced the economy is slowing down dramatically,&quot; says Irwin Kellner, chief economist at Manufacturers Hanover Trust.    Fed officials have also been surprised by the latest economic news and are apparently beginning to consider an easier monetary policy. The Fed's next policy-committee meeting is scheduled for Feb. 9 and 10, but the central bank could ease modestly before that meeting if signs continued to point toward slower growth.    The result is likely to be lower interest rates across the board. Long-term Treasury bonds, for instance, are yielding below 8 1/2% for the first time in more than six months. Rates on 30-year fixed-rate mortgages have already fallen to 10% or below at some banks. Other consumer interest rates are likely to follow, though with a lag.    Some analysts believe the latest signs foreshadow a recession. In fact, both Mr. Kellner and economic consultant Pierre Rinfret believe one already is under way. &quot;I say the recession has started,&quot; Mr. Rinfret says. &quot;We're in it now.&quot;    Most economic forecasters, however, are still predicting that the economy will muddle through the next few months without a recession. They believe weak consumer spending will be offset by growing exports and increased investment. One factor is that much of the big inventory buildup appears to have been among retailers and wholesalers, not manufacturers, so the pressure on factories to cut production may be delayed.    In any case, the Fed's actions are crucial. Some critics, including White House economist Beryl Sprinkel, have worried in recent weeks that the Fed is holding policy too tight and precipitating a slump. The central bank, while it eased policy and let rates fall immediately after the stock-market crash, has kept a steady policy since then, fearful that any further easing might increase inflationary pressure or encourage a drop in the dollar.    But the recent rally in the bond market suggests inflation fears may be easing. Another closely watched indicator, the price of gold, also suggests that inflation fears have moderated. Gold fell to $466.50 an ounce on the Commodity Exchange in New York yesterday, down about $20 since the start of the year.    Lower interest rates might be expected to pose a further threat to the weak dollar, with all of the economic dangers inherent in that. However, the dollar has shown stability in recent weeks, following several months of sharp decline. So the Fed has more freedom to bring down rates.    A decline in interest rates, of course, could help head off a possible recession, especially through its effect on housing and car sales. Rates for home-buyers respond quickly to changes in market interest rates. &quot;Mortgage-backed securities vary on price and yield right along with those on Treasury bonds. There is very little lag these days,&quot; says Lyle Gramley, chief economist for the Mortgage Bankers Association and a former governor of the Fed. And the mortgage rates banks charge respond &quot;almost instantaneously&quot; to the market for mortgage-backed securities, he adds.    Other consumer loan rates react more slowly, but faster than they used to, Mr. Gramley says. More and more consumer loans -- even some credit-card interest rates -- fluctuate with market interest rates.    To be sure, the recent rate declines are based on tenuous evidence of an economic slowdown, and there are some contradictory signals. Orders for factory goods, for example, surged in December. A new survey of economic conditions in the various Federal Reserve Districts concludes that the stock market's decline has had little economic impact.    As a result, some economists warn that it would be dangerous for the Fed to ease. &quot;I put myself back in my shoes as a Fed governor,&quot; Mr. Gramley says. &quot;Here we have had two quarters back to back in which the economy grew at a 4% rate. Suppose you're wrong and the economy doesn't go into recession; it just slows down. You could be pouring gasoline on a developing fire.&quot;    Fed officials also worry that if they ease too much, they may spark renewed consumer spending, which in turn would increase imports and prevent the trade deficit from narrowing.    These reasons suggest that any easing by the Fed is likely to be modest, unless further evidence appears that the economy is indeed headed for a recession. And despite the dollar's recent stability, the Fed can't ignore the risk that lower rates would make foreign investors nervous enough to sell the currency heavily and send it falling. That, in turn, would raise the prices of imports and give U.S. manufacturers more leeway to raise their own. Federal Reserve Vice Chairman Manuel Johnson warned Wednesday that &quot;further sharp downward movement in the dollar would run the risk of being symptomatic of growing inflationary pressures.&quot;    The dollar stability that gives the Fed some maneuvering room stems from several factors. One was a determination by the Group of Seven industrial nations a few weeks ago to arrest its fall. Another was a suggestion by Japanese Prime Minister Noburo Takeshita, during his recent visit to Washington, that his nation's central bank may allow Japanese rates to come down somewhat. Lower Japanese interest rates could permit the Fed to ease without narrowing the interest-rate spread needed to attract foreign investors to dollars.    Japanese investors' appetite for U.S. securities will be tested next week, when the Treasury plans to sell $27 billion of notes and bonds. Some traders fear the huge new supply will give the credit markets a case of indigestion and thus create pressure for higher interest rates. Others contend that the Japanese, encouraged by the dollar's recent firmness and the continuing large difference between U.S. and Japanese rates, will buy huge amounts of the new Treasury securities and that U.S. interest rates will continue to drop.    In a speech yesterday, White House economist Sprinkel appeared to be prodding the Fed toward an easier policy. He noted that growth in the nation's money supply has been extremely slow lately, and he said if that continues &quot;we would have a shortfall from our forecast&quot; of economic growth of 2.4% this year.    Mr. Sprinkel and some other monetarists -- economists who see a predictable relationship between money-supply growth and economic activity -- have been concerned about the slow growth in the money supply over the past year.    But some recent reports suggest that it may be just a technical problem. In the last part of 1987, businesses apparently reduced the &quot;compensating&quot; balances they normally keep in banks to offset the costs of servicing their accounts. Because checking-account deposits are a major component of M1 -- the most basic money-supply measure -- M1 fell in November and December. This made it look as if the Fed were tightening, but some Fed watchers believe that wasn't the case.    There are indications that businesses may be rebuilding their compensating balances. At any rate, M1 growth recently turned up; in the week ended Jan. 18, this measure of the money supply surged $3.3 billion to a seasonally adjusted average of $761.5 billion, according to the Fed.    The latest survey of economic conditions by the regional Fed banks suggests that manufacturing continues to lead the economy. &quot;Manufacturing activity is reported to be strong in all districts, with increased orders and, in many cases, increased backlogs as well,&quot; says the report, which was prepared for the coming meeting of the Fed's policy-setting Open Market Committee.    But the economic reports this week indicated that manufactured goods may be piling up as inventories rather than being sold. Inventory accumulation was clearly the reason for the strong 4.2% annual growth rate in the quarter; consumer spending dropped 3.8% in the quarter, while non-residential fixed investment dropped 3.6%.    Fears of a slowdown increased yesterday, when the Labor Department reported that initial unemployment claims rose 35,000 to 390,000 in the week ended Jan. 16, marking the fourth straight week of increase.    In the credit markets yesterday, an index of long-term Treasury bonds, compiled by Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., rose 5.08 points to close at 1309.07. It ranged between 1305.99 and 1314.43. That followed Wednesday's surge of 22.77 points.    Among actively traded issues, the Treasury's latest 30-year bonds were quoted late yesterday at a price of 104 4/32, up from 103 18/32 Wednesday. The yield dropped to 8.49% from 8.54%. At the end of last month, this issue stood at 98 29/32, to yield 8.98%.    The government's latest 10-year notes rose yesterday to a price of 103 22/32 from 103 1/2 Wednesday, while the yield fell to 8.31% from 8.34%. At the end of last month, this issue stood at 100 2/32 to yield 8.86%.    Most short-term interest rates also declined again yesterday. The latest three-month Treasury bill was quoted late in the day at 5.69% bid, down from 5.73% Wednesday. The latest six-month Treasury bill rate fell to 6.05% bid from 6.08%. In mid-October, shortly before stocks collapsed, three-month bills stood at 7.17% bid, while six-month bills were at 7.59%.    But the federal-funds rate rose slightly yesterday. The rate on funds, which are reserves that banks lend each other overnight, averaged about 6.70%, according to an estimate by Fulton Prebon (U.S.A.) Inc. That was down from 6.57% Wednesday.    ---   Rose Gutfeld and David Wessel contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>