<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870928-0104 </DOCNO><HL> SMALL BUSINESS:With an Eye on '88 Election,Politicians Court Businessmen---By Steven P. GalanteStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)INSURANCE (INS)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   POLITICIANS ARE PAYING more attention to small business as they gear up for next year's presidential race. Already, Democrats and Republicans are courting business owners for campaign funds and policy advice.    To shed its pro-Labor, anti-business image, the Democratic National Committee has begun hosting roundtable meetings between entrepreneurs and members of Congress. &quot;I appreciate the fact that these guys have reached out to hear the voice of relatively smaller businesses, rather than the IBMs of the world,&quot; says Richard Kendall, a principal in New York-based Aztech Financial Printers and one of a dozen or so small-businessmen invited to meet earlier this month with Sens. John Glenn and Bill Bradley and other Democratic notables.    The meetings are intended to help the Democrats formulate small-business policies. But, notes the committee's national finance chairman, C. Victor Raiser, &quot;There's often a fund-raising function involved. It's not unusual for us to raise $75,000 or $100,000 at these kinds of affairs.&quot;    THE DEMOCRATIC National Committee also recently in stalled a new chairman with strong credentials at its Small Business Council, which is primarily a fund-raising panel.    The new chairman, Donald Rappaport, headed the small-business division of accounting firm Price Waterhouse until his retirement in June.    The Republican National Committee, meanwhile, is paying more attention to the policy recommendations of its Small Business Advisory Council than it did in the last campaign. In 1984, the Republicans got around to adopting a general statement of support for small business only late in the platform-writing process, council officials say. This time, the council is working earlier and in more detail on small-business policies, which will be passed along to Republican candidates as well as written into the party platform.    Small-business groups themselves are encouraging political activism by their members. The National Federation of Independent Business has seized the lead, urging its more than 500,000 members to run as delegates to the Democratic and Republican conventions next year. It has established an information center in Washington and a toll-free telephone number (800-255-3396) to advise members on how to become delegates.    &quot;By supporting, educating and helping our members become convention delegates, we are ensuring big dividends for small business, no matter who sits in the Oval Office,&quot; says John Sloan, president of the federation.    Ironically, both the NFIB and National Small Business United have clashed with the presidential hopeful who has sought to identify himself most closely with small-business interests, Massachusetts Gov. Michael S. Dukakis. Both groups have sharply criticized the Democrat for supporting legislation in his state that would require businesses over a certain size to offer health insurance to employees.    ---   Michigan to Share Formula for Finance    Michigan has improved upon a financing idea pioneered in California, and now the Great Lake State wants to share its advances with the rest of the country. The Michigan Strategic Fund, part of the state's commerce department, is sponsoring a conference Nov. 2-3 in Detroit on a financing mechanism known as a business and industrial development corporation, or Bidco.    Both in California and Michigan, Bidcos are intended to fill a gap by financing businesses too risky for banks but not attractive enough for venture capitalists. Michigan's Bidcos are more versatile than those in California; they have greater capital and can make loans with equity features rather than just conventional loans.    To spur the creation of Bidcos, Michigan initially offered to invest up to $2 million in each one, as long as private investors put up $2 for every $1 of state money. So many investment groups have started forming Bidcos, though, that the strategic fund this month doubled its total budget for such investments to $24 million.    &quot;What we will see in Michigan in four or five years is a whole industry of 20 to 25 Bidcos, each with its own financing niche,&quot; says Steve Rohde, director of policy and program development at the strategic fund. The November conference, he says, will assist similar efforts in other states.    ---   HOSTILE MEGAMERGERS may or may not be good for the economy overall, but they are decidedly bad for small businesses. That is the contention of the newly formed Coalition to Stop the Raid on America!, a diverse group of organizations and individuals, including prominent small-business spokesmen, who seek legislation to control hostile takeovers and preserve state laws governing corporations. The address: P.O. Box 18198, Washington, D.C. 20036.    ---   CONFERENCE CORRECTION: A Senate proposal to establish a permanent White House Conference on Small Business does have a companion bill in the House of Representatives. Because of an error by a spokesman for the House Small Business Committee, it was reported last week that no such bill was pending in the House. </TEXT></DOC>