<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870701-0130 </DOCNO><HL> Data SuggestReagan SignedIran Document---Investigators Are SeekingCopy of Secret FindingApproving Role of CIA---By David RogersStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   House and Senate investigators are pursuing evidence indicating President Reagan signed a secret finding authorizing the Central Intelligence Agency's role in a November 1985 arms shipment to Iran.    A copy of a signed finding hasn't been found, but investigative sources said information received by the committees disputes previous suggestions that the president was unaware of the document. The finding, hastily prepared in November 1985 in order to ratify the agency's role, bluntly describes the shipment as an arms-for-hostage transaction. The evidence follows previous testimony of high-level efforts in the White House and CIA to cover up the administration's involvement in the sale.    Former White House aide Lt. Col. Oliver North will be questioned about the 1985 sale when he testifies before the Iran-Contra congressional committees next week, and former National Security Adviser John Poindexter has been examined at length in secret depositions by the committees.    Prior testimony indicates that both men last fall sought to mislead Congress about the nature of the 1985 shipment, and that former CIA Director William Casey acquiesced to the scheme and later gave false testimony to the House Intelligence Committee.    Col. North, who will testify under a grant of limited immunity, made a brief appearance before the committees yesterday to turn over copies of personal papers related to the Iran-Contra operation. The documents, contained in seven large binders, include telephone logs from his former National Security Council office, as well as the contents of an estimated 21 spiral notebooks in which he recorded his activities.    The notebooks, previously identified in public testimony by Col. North's former secretary Fawn Hall, may be a major source of information, but legal maneuvering delayed their delivery. Their contents have been edited in some cases to delete personal and unrelated classified information, but investigators will have an opportunity to review the originals, if needed.    In a transcript released after yesterday's proceeding, Col. North described the notebooks with understatement as &quot;containing day-to-day notations of some of my conversations and activities which may relate to the subject matter of your inquiry.&quot; According to the transcript, the documents also included personal calendars, correspondence, photographs and a code book.    However low-key, Col. North's comments constituted the first time he has answered any questions from Congress since the Iran-Contra affair broke last November. The limited immunity covers evidence obtained both from the documents subpoena and his testimony. To underscore this point, the Marine officer was first led through a series of questions by Arthur Liman, the Senate committee's counsel. At each juncture, the Marine officer, dressed in uniform and his medals for valor, invoked the Fifth Amendment until the grant of immunity was formally ordered to compel his compliance.    Col. North will be questioned further at a private session with select committee members and staffers today. But this testimony and the depositions by Adm. Poindexter are closely guarded under an agreement reached with Lawrence Walsh, the independent counsel investigating the Iran-Contra affair.    As former national security adviser, Adm. Poindexter is regarded as the most important witness in determining what Mr. Reagan was told of his aides' plan to divert profits from the Iran arms sales in order to benefit Nicaraguan insurgents. The testimony is expected generally to support the president's contention that he didn't know of the diversion, but two sources have said elements of Adm. Poindexter's testimony will be &quot;disturbing&quot; for the administration as it seeks to quell the controversy.    The November 1985 shipment, involving Hawk surface-to-air missiles, was the second of two transactions carried out that year in which U.S. weapons were taken from Israeli stocks and sold to Iran. Both cases raise questions of potential violations of the Arms Export Control Act, and the CIA prepared the November finding to ratify its own participation under intelligence laws.    When the program was revamped weeks later, a secret finding signed at that time by President Reagan allowed for the sale of U.S. weapons from American stocks and spoke of a much wider foreign-policy initiative than simply an effort to swap arms for American hostages held in Lebanon. When the sales became known last fall, the White House insisted it had begun with this wider purpose.    But if it proves correct that the president signed the November finding, he would have known at that time of the earlier, blunter goal it states. </TEXT></DOC>