<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870526-0145 </DOCNO><HL> We Need Routine Testing for AIDS---By William J. Bennett</HL><DD> 05/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   The AIDS epidemic may be the most serious health threat of this century. How best to deal with it has been the subject of a vigorous national debate. And out of this debate is emerging a growing and welcome consensus on a number of issues.    We can all agree, for example, on the need to care for those afflicted with AIDS, by helping to ensure that families, states, localities, hospitals and others have the resources to provide adequate medical care for those suffering from this disease. We can all agree that we must prevent violations of the civil rights of those who are carriers of the AIDS virus. And we can all agree on the need to educate all of our citizens, including young people, about how the AIDS virus is transmitted and how to guard against it. Moreover, there is now nearly universal agreement on a further point: the need for more widespread AIDS testing.    We need more testing for several reasons:    --Testing provides important epidemiological information, allowing us to determine just how widespread the virus is.    --Testing informs individuals if they have contracted AIDS so they can seek proper medical treatment.    --If an individual tests positive, he will know that he must refrain from activities that would endanger the life of another person.    --If an individual tests positive, he or the public health authorities can alert others who may be at risk.    While there is general agreement on the need for more widespread AIDS testing, some balk at going about this in the most effective way. They call for more testing, but only voluntary testing. They reject out of hand proposals for routine testing of individuals upon certain occasions: for example, for some or all of those admitted to hospitals, for those being treated at clinics serving &quot;high-risk&quot; populations, for couples seeking marriage licenses, and for prison inmates. Some individuals are so concerned about guaranteeing privacy that they will not allow even the confidential notification of other individuals possibly infected, or at risk of being infected, by someone found to be an AIDS carrier.    What has emerged, then, is a troubling paradox: Confronted with this grave public health threat, with a disease that is expected to claim more American lives by 1991 than did the Vietnam and Korean wars combined, we have failed to employ routine testing and contact notification -- commonly accepted public health measures for other similarly transmitted diseases.    An extraordinary gap has developed, between the recognition of the magnitude of the threat of AIDS and the failure to adopt eminently reasonable and useful public health measures to respond to it, measures for which there is long precedent.    Opponents of routine testing offer several arguments against it. None is convincing.    One argument is that routine testing would drive the principal classes of AIDS victims (homosexuals and intravenous drug users) &quot;underground,&quot; because some individuals would be so fearful of discrimination as a result of testing positive.    First of all, even if a few individuals did go &quot;underground,&quot; we would have to balance this fact with the crucial information more widespread routine testing would produce for individuals, and for society. This information would save lives.    Second, the possibility that some individuals may avoid testing can be minimized by strong guarantees of appropriate confidentiality and nondiscrimination.    Third, we would not, of course, eliminate voluntary AIDS testing sites even as we adopt a policy of select, routine testing. Routine testing would serve in conjunction with, and not in lieu of, voluntary and even voluntary anonymous testing. And states and localities could, in certain circumstances, allow exceptions to routine testing.    It is precisely by making testing routine, by dealing with it just as we treat other similar communicable diseases, that we will go a long way toward lessening the stigma that now surrounds AIDS tests.    Above all, I would point out that most estimates are that the great majority of AIDS carriers are currently unaware that they are infected. Routine testing at appropriate occasions -- along with much more readily available voluntary testing -- would surely decrease the number of individuals who might be unwittingly spreading the disease.    A second argument against routine testing is that it could lead to violations of confidentiality, particularly as it relates to the notification of past sexual partners.    A number of precautions can be taken to guard against this. For example, in many states today, if a person tests positive for syphilis, health authorities will ask the names of people with whom that person has been intimate. Then, without mentioning the name of the syphilis carrier, health authorities will confidentially notify those people who may have contracted the disease and recommend that they come in and be tested. This has long been standard public health practice. It can be done for AIDS as well. To protect others, it certainly should be done.    The American Medical Association's Principles of Medical Ethics recognize that a physician may reveal otherwise confidential information if this is necessary to protect the welfare of another individual or the community. There has long been recognition of the need in some instances to balance a patient's right to confidentiality and a physician's obligation to protect lives. In the case of AIDS, confidentiality would be superseded only in certain circumstances, such as to inform public health officials or to inform a wife that her husband has AIDS.    A third argument made against routine testing is that the AIDS test is costly and unreliable.    In fact, experience at the Department of Defense shows that testing can be done for less than $5 a person. The additional cost of counseling those who test positive is well worth the money.    The AIDS tests are reliable and have been used successfully. Moreover, a proper testing program includes provisions for double-checking positive test results.    There is no denying that a program of routine testing and contact notification presents some challenges. Few decisions on AIDS are easy. But the difficulty of the task cannot discourage us from facing up to our responsibilities. For what is the alternative? To go on as we have been? We cannot do that.    By now, the facts are clear: Business as usual is not enough. If we are to contain the spread of this deadly epidemic, routine testing must play a part. The real question we face is whether we will adopt aggressive public health measures now when time is still on our side and the spread of the virus can be curbed. Objections noted, cautions observed, civil liberties protected: We must now do what is essential to save lives.    ---   Mr. Bennett is secretary of education. </TEXT></DOC>