<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890830-0032 </DOCNO><DD> = 890830 </DD><AN> 890830-0032. </AN><HL> In Crowded East, Water Becomes Gold@  ---@  Heavy Demand,@  Pollution Strain@  Supplies, Nerves@  ----@  By David Stipp@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/30/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><IN> ENVIRONMENT (ENV)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON) </IN><DATELINE> UPTON, Mass.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Zoning board meetings in this bucolic little town usually are snoozers. But when developer Robert Moss recently sought board approval to build a golf course, some 200 people showed up, ready to tar and feather.    The issue was water. Many people in Upton have a well, and many of the wells yield only a trickle. Watering the golf course would devastate Upton's strained aquifer, the residents complained. And if that didn't do it, the runoff from fertilizers and pesticides surely would.    &quot;I'll leave town rather than drink water contaminated by his pesticides,&quot; thundered one homeowner.    Such a reaction is increasingly common in the Eastern U.S., where a growing number of cities and towns are confronting water shortages and impurity problems they never had before. A drought intensified the issue this spring. But droughts come and go, as the recent one did. Still, the long-term problem won't go away with this summer's heavy rain. In Upton and many other places, the possibility of a chronic water crunch is looming, portending radical changes in the way Easterners think about and use water.    &quot;The East will experience many of the same water resource problems that the West has faced,&quot; says Steven J. Shupe, editor of Water Market Update, a Santa Fe, N.M., newsletter. Eventually, he adds, water will be so precious in the East that reserves of it will be bought and sold -- just like in the West.    Western-style water fights already are breaking out. In Florida, farmers are squaring off against cities for rights to groundwater. New York City has been feuding with environmental groups and the city of Poughkeepsie, N.Y., about siphoning water from the Hudson River. Towns on Cape Cod are clashing with developers about groundwater pollution.    For more than a century, Eastern cities have expanded their water supplies by tapping ever more remote sources. Before the recent drought, New York drew an average of 1.5 billion gallons a day from a 2,000-square-mile watershed spread over the Catskill Mountains north of the city, and many of its reservoirs are more than 100 miles away. Fifty years ago, Boston extended a big concrete straw 65 miles west to the Quabbin Reservoir, out of which the city now takes about 300 million gallons of water a day.    But further major expansions have become prohibitively expensive or politically untenable in many places. Among New England towns &quot;there's tremendous interest in protecting water supplies&quot; from encroachment by outsiders, says Peter Shelley, a water expert with the Conservation Law Foundation, a Boston lobbying group.    Meanwhile, millions of people have migrated to coastal cities, dishwashers and Jacuzzis have proliferated and countless suburban lawns have spread. Pollution and increasingly strict purity standards have shut down dozens of water supplies in the East during the past decade. And many of the area's old, leaky water mains are hemorrhaging like sliced arteries.    Some Eastern towns perennially exceed their water systems' &quot;safe yields,&quot; the maximum output sustainable in a prolonged drought. Since 1969, New York has been in the habit of consuming more than its estimated safe yield of 1.29 billion gallons a day. Despite that, the city only last year began to install water meters. Historically, its consumers have paid flat rates.    During periods of normal or above-normal rainfall, huge systems like New York's can meet high demand. But during dry times, reservoir levels can drop faster and farther than in the past.    A drought from 1962 to 1967 lowered Boston's main reservoir to 45% of capacity. If the same drought had hit today, the reservoir would have fallen to 10%, given current demand, says Marcis Kempe, an official with the Massachusetts Water Resources Authority. Even at a level of 20%, muck at the bottom of reservoirs can be sucked into aqueducts.    And because usage is higher, recovery is harder. Boston's reservoir took about nine years to completely refill after the 1960s drought. At usage levels of recent years, recovery from a similar drought would take decades, says Mr. Kempe. But the long-term weather cycle would probably roll around to another drought before the reservoir refilled.    Some Eastern towns' water seems scarce even when rainfall is normal. In parts of Upton, southwest of Boston, families can't wash cars, water lawns or take two showers in a row without emptying their wells. Hoses sometimes snake across streets -- telltale signs that neighbors are borrowing water from each other again.    The East's water problems, however, mainly involve quality rather than quantity. In many fast-growing areas, a growing population has led to more pollutants; as more water is pumped out of wells to meet demand, contaminants are sucked into them faster from surrounding ground.    Cape Cod is particularly vulnerable to pollution because &quot;there are no alternatives&quot; to the area's aquifer, says Bob Mant, environmental coordinator for Brewster, Mass., a town on the Cape. He adds that some 90% of household cleaners, paints and solvents used in the area are poured down drains or tossed into the trash -- creating potential time bombs for the Cape's wells.    As chronic water problems worsen, Murphy's Law more readily comes into play. Consider recent events in Franklin, N.H., a town that once boasted some of New England's cleanest water.    In January, a maintenance man at Franklin's post office noticed that water coming out of faucets had slowed to a trickle. When he unscrewed the aerators on the faucets, fibrous gunk oozed out. Soon the same thing was happening elsewhere in town. A sample of the stuff was taken and sent to a lab. The good news: It was only tissue-paper-like material. The bad news: It was infested with coliform bacteria, protozoa and other germs.    Heavy doses of chlorine soon killed the microbes in Franklin's water and eliminated the slime. No one got sick, and the town's water is now perfectly safe to drink, say city officials. But &quot;when you take a shower, it's like opening a bottle of Clorox,&quot; gripes a Franklin resident.    Franklin's water problems have been building for years, but it isn't known precisely what triggered the recent crisis. Perhaps when two of the town's wells were closed last year because of pollution, water-flow patterns changed, loosening watermain deposits built up over decades, says Edward Kent, a consultant with Whitman andamp; Howard Inc., a Wellesley, Mass., firm that tested the water. Anti-corrosion chemicals the town dumped into its water last year also may have stirred up the creatures of Franklin's deeps.    In the thickly settled East, tainted water in one place doesn't have to travel far to affect another.    When New York City draws water from the Hudson River to augment reservoirs depleted by drought -- as it did this spring -- people upstream in Poughkeepsie fret about the &quot;salt front.&quot; That's the boundary between fresh water and sea water, which moves inland when there is less fresh water to push it back.    Salt-front migration endangers fish and other wildlife. If the front moves far enough, it could devastate Poughkeepsie's water supply, which draws from the Hudson about 10 miles from New York's pumping station. There is talk in New York of tapping the Hudson permanently, and &quot;we are very much opposed to that,&quot; declares Anna Buchholz, Poughkeepsie's town supervisor.    The salt issue is particularly corrosive in Florida, where burgeoning cities wrangle with farmers. In some places near Tampa, irrigation periodically draws down aquifers so much that people fear the subterranean salt front may soon move inland and ruin wells.    So far, water prices generally haven't given a hint of the East's developing pollution problems. On average, each American uses 105 gallons of water a day -- and that's just at home, says the American Water Works Association, a trade group in Denver. The average bill? One thin dime. (Sewer rates are going up in some places, though. Boston residents' average water-and-sewer bills will quadruple to an estimated $1,200 annually by 1999, largely to fund the cleanup of Boston harbor.)    There are some signs that the East is starting to take its long-term water problems seriously. Besides installing meters, New York City has permanently banned midday lawn watering, required restaurants to give water to customers only on request and made it illegal for building owners to neglect leaks. In March, Massachusetts became the first state to require that builders install toilets that use no more than 1.6 gallons-per-flush, compared with up to seven gallons for older models.    And in Boston, the Massachusetts Water Resources Authority has launched an ambitious water conservation campaign. &quot;It's very hard to market conservation,&quot; says Paul Levy, the agency's executive director. &quot;But from every point of view, it's the way to go.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>