<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880519-0007 </DOCNO><HL> Red-Ink Rhetoric: Deficit Talk Is Tough, But Candidates Offer Little on Budget Plans --- Bush, Dukakis Find Success By Being Vague on Ways To Trim Nation's Debt --- Voters May Find Issue Taxing </HL><AUTHOR> David Rogers (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TAXES GOVMT </CO><IN> ECO </IN><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   Michael Dukakis and George Bush talk tough on deficits but are soft on solutions.    The Massachusetts governor -- heading toward the Democratic nomination -- decries &quot;government by credit card.&quot; Vice President Bush, who will head the Republican ticket in November, calls the deficit &quot;public enemy No. 1.&quot; He adds: &quot;We mean business. The old ways are over.&quot;    But what of the new ways? One of the two men will be the next president, yet neither has offered anything approaching a budget plan, and both tread lightly on taxes and curbing entitlements -- critical ingredients in any deficit-reduction package. The debate focuses on less than one-fifth of government spending. After eight years of red ink that have nearly tripled the national debt, the bottom line is there is no bottom line.    Mr. Bush reiterates President Reagan's pledge of a balanced budget, but he isn't likely to reach it any faster than his boss -- unless the economy grows and interest rates fall at a pace few analysts believe possible. He vows no new taxes or Social Security benefit cuts, and his staff can't name a single major weapon in the current budget that would be sacrificed. As a result, his &quot;flexible freeze&quot; on spending could force more than $15 billion in unspecified cuts from domestic programs during his first year in the White House.    While Gov. Dukakis is more prone to say &quot;no&quot; to the military, he has proposed several billion dollars in new domestic initiatives. He believes government investment -- from public works to welfare changes -- will help reduce deficits. And, like Mr. Bush, he rests his platform on often untested optimism. He won't rule out new taxes but plays down the possibility by claiming that $3.6 billion spent on tax-law enforcement and taxpayer assistance will increase collections by as much as $90 billion over five years.    Both candidates have triumphed by being vague, but whoever is elected won't have that luxury for long. The next president will confront early deadlines to raise the debt ceiling and meet a Gramm-Rudman deficit target of $100 billion in fiscal year 1990 -- at least $50 billion below the expected level in fiscal 1989.    Equally important will be the budget-cutting plan expected from the National Economic Commission. The panel, created last year, could offer political cover from any flak generated by tax increases and spending cuts in the post-Reagan years, and hopes to report in December to influence the next administration.    Mr. Bush, who opposed establishment of the commission, makes no promises to cooperate with the bipartisan panel, but he endorses the Gramm-Rudman targets whatever the consequences. Gov. Dukakis vows to consider the panel's recommendations but would ask Congress for a clean slate if he judges that the Gramm-Rudman targets can't be met.    By failing to be more specific, the candidates rob themselves of a mandate, critics say, and cheat the voters of budget alternatives. Yet after years of frustration, an almost cynical conspiracy of silence has descended on Washington, where even ardent deficit cutters say that taking fixed positions on taxes and spending now can only impede progress later.    Mr. Bush successfully insulates himself from budget questions, and months after his &quot;flexible freeze&quot; was announced, he has yet to make the proposal's details public. Most simply, the plan aims to balance the budget in fiscal 1993 by not allowing spending to grow faster than inflation while hoping that revenues grow faster. It assumes low enough interest rates to reduce the interest on the national debt for the first time since the mid-1950s and total deficit reductions of around $30 billion to $40 billion each year.    Simple calculations give a rough idea of the difficulties ahead. Multiplying the administration's proposed budget -- less interest on the national debt -- for next year by an assumed inflation rate of 4% would allow spending growth of $38.2 billion in fiscal 1990, the first year for which the next president will write a budget.    Nearly four-fifths of this increase would be absorbed by the rising cost of Social Security benefits and the cost of keeping outlays for defense and education even with inflation, as Mr. Bush has proposed. Spending for all other government programs would be $15 billion to $18 billion less than what the Reagan budget assumes for fiscal 1990.    Mr. Bush must still find room for his long-term health plan, which could cost the Treasury at least $350 million to $500 million a year. He has proposed a college savings-bond program that will cost $200 million by fiscal 1993. And his campaign is under pressure to adopt more-generous welfare and child-care positions.    Mr. Bush wants a line-item veto to help curb spending, but examples of savings he gives are piddling next to the problems ahead. He also has proposed a cut in the capital-gains tax rate. Mr. Bush says this would raise revenue, but the CBO says it could cost at least $3.9 billion a year.    Two additional problems are defense and interest on the national debt. Pentagon analysts estimate as much as $200 billion in spending authority must be cut from planned military budgets through fiscal 1993 to meet the administration's goal of holding the rise in spending to two percentage points above the inflation rate. The freeze proposed by Mr. Bush, a member of the National Security Council, would require deeper reductions, but his staff has repeatedly refused to discuss the spending implications of his military policy. His public statements rarely go beyond citing stricter management controls. His campaign says he supports the costly Midgetman missile, which even Defense Secretary Frank Carlucci is prepared to surrender.    Mr. Bush's true Achilles' heel is his claim that in just a few years he can reduce that portion of the budget that finances the burgeoning national debt. It is a scenario that echoes Mr. Reagan's optimism eight years ago and is crucial to Mr. Bush's argument that he can cut the deficit without a tax increase.    Taxes are &quot;still the biggest issue dividing the Democratic and Republican parties,&quot; says Bush campaign manager Lee Atwater. He remembers the night in 1984 when the last Democratic nominee, Walter Mondale, told the nation he would raise taxes. &quot;I thought I was having a dream,&quot; Mr. Atwater says.    Mr. Dukakis remembers, too. He has long watched Democratic fiscal plans -- like the one proposed by Mr. Mondale or George McGovern's $1,000-for-everyone &quot;demogrant&quot; in 1972 -- come a cropper in presidential campaigns. He is determined to cut spending and minimize tax increases in the face of potential deficits in Massachusetts this year, and anxiously promotes accelerated collections of back taxes as the answer to future revenue needs at the federal level.    His deficit-reduction target -- $25 billion to $30 billion a year -- is more modest than the vice president's, and Mr. Dukakis strikes the pose of a man who asks only for time to be rational in an illogical world. He will need it. He hopes to save billions of dollars in farm subsidies by reversing current policy and raising crop price levels but first must win legislation. His major Medicare savings initiative is to promote elderly enrollment in health maintenance organizations, which haven't yet drawn big numbers. And since only one in 30 elderly people is currently enrolled in an HMO, it will take years before the proposal has a significant impact.    Mr. Dukakis would consider taxing interest earned by foreign holders of American financial assets but shies away from committing himself to even this option, valued at about $5 billion a year. His preference is improved enforcement and taxpayer services, where he boasts every dollar spent will bring in $25 in new revenue.    In fiscal 1990, the campaign predicts a $5.6 billion gain in revenue from stiffer enforcement; a proposed amnesty for tax cheats would bring in $10 billion more. Together this would put Mr. Dukakis halfway to his deficit-reduction target, but the provisions are controversial and, many say, unrealistic. Even some close advisers question whether he can increase collections by 25 times his planned rise in the Internal Revenue Service budget. And former IRS Commissioner Donald Alexander says the five-year yield would be closer to $50 billion -- not $90 billion.    Like Mr. Bush, the governor opposes any reductions in Social Security but is more willing to turn to higher payroll taxes to finance new benefits. He proposes more generous Social Security benefits for many elderly between 65 and 70 years of age who are currently penalized because of wages they earn. He endorses an expensive health-care plan that would raise more than $30 billion over five years by extending the 1.45% Medicare payroll tax to all income over $45,000.    The governor pledges a &quot;stable&quot; military budget that will shrink only with inflation. He carries in his head a balance sheet that totals the savings he envisions from the president's Strategic Defense Initiative against commitments he would make to domestic programs.    It's neat, perhaps too neat. Mr. Dukakis would shrink SDI spending from $3.9 billion to $1 billion annually, but even the Democratic House this month rejected such a deep cut. He goes a step further than many of his allies in proposing to rescind $6.3 billion appropriated last year for two new aircraft carriers. He favors submarines, but the planned Seawolf attack sub carries a price tag near $1.5 billion. He wants Europe and Japan to carry more of the defense burden, but, when pressed, his staff cites only Belgium as having failed to meet NATO commitments.    Barring a strategic-arms pact with the Soviets, Mr. Dukakis wouldn't cut defense below the projected $294.5 billion level expected when he would take office. This means his best hope of military savings compared with current forecasts is less than $12 billion in fiscal 1990.    Space and science projects -- all of which are supported by Mr. Bush -- are a second source of savings. For a man so identified with high tech, Mr. Dukakis would halt further federal contributions to the development of a new-generation supersonic aircraft, expected to total $2.5 billion by fiscal 1993. He is open to a cheaper alternative to the $20 billion-plus manned space station and says he hasn't made a &quot;judgment&quot; on the estimated $4 billion super-collider project.    By comparison he is confident that more conventional investments will help reduce the deficit. He is likely to increase spending from the highway trust fund and would reverse administration efforts to cut mass-transit and Amtrak funds. He promises $500 million in new money for economic development, and he would begin to add as much as $3 billion -- not in the first year alone -- to spur low-income housing.    His remaining Democratic rival, the Rev. Jesse Jackson, is demanding that Mr. Dukakis be more specific, but he has succeeded so far in skirting many commitments. Mr. Dukakis supports a $2.5 billion authorization for child care but doesn't promise full financing for the program. His only specific dollar pledge in education is a $250 million &quot;teacher excellence&quot; program equal to about 1% of the current budget. He describes a novel college-loan fund but sets no date for capitalizing the idea, which could cost $10 billion.    His confidence can exceed his grasp of problems. A strong advocate of changes in the welfare system, he insists that job-training programs will begin to show savings in six months -- a rate achieved in Massachusetts but at a much faster pace than other states have experienced. And he greatly underestimates the cost of his plan to rebuild the nation's railroads. </TEXT></DOC>