<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880125-0158 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor: FDA: Life-or-Death Decisions </HL><SO> </SO><IN> PHA </IN><G> FDA </G><TEXT>   Your editorial &quot;First Do No Harm&quot; (Dec. 21) is an important contribution to public awareness of the delays involved in approval by the Food and Drug Administration of new drugs, and it is hoped it will result in speeding up an unnecessarily slow process, particularly with regard to life-saving medications.    Your reference to the Italian study, unfortunately, suggests that 758 people died unnecessarily. In order to appreciate the true results of the study, it should be pointed out that there were 11,806 patients in this study, of which 5,860 were randomized to streptokinase -- the drug that results in dissolution of blood clots -- and 628 patients in this group died, as compared with 758 who died out of 5,852 treated with conventional therapy. At 21 days, the overall hospital mortality was 10.7% in the streptokinase group vs. 13% in the control group that received conventional treatment. This represents an 18% reduction in mortality.    This study is outstanding, and it provides the basis of convincing evidence of efficacy of the clot dissolver, streptokinase. As a result, it is not necessary to repeat such a large-scale study with an improved clot-dissolving drug in order to prove that it can lower the mortality from acute heart attacks. The Italian group deserves our congratulations. Knowledge of the total number of patients in the study as well as the number in each treatment group and the number of patients who died in each group is vital in order to assess the importance of the study. This cannot be provided by only mentioning the number of deaths in the conventional therapy group.    The editorial page of The Wall Street Journal should be commended for bringing the important issue of FDA tardiness in the approval of drugs to the attention of the public so that its mechanism for approval can be expedited without surrendering considerations of safety.    Joshua Lynfield M.D.    New York University Medical Center   New York   ---   The recent FDA approval of TPA appears to be a direct response to pressure from the Journal. I believe you are correct in continuing this pressure by demanding review of the process the federal government requires before allowing use of new drugs and also medical devices and implants.    John W. Brantigan M.D.    Fremont, Neb.   ---   You continually imply that clinical studies relegate the control group to death. In the case of TPA, people in a particular control group may well be given streptokinase, which has been proved to be effective. The difference in the marginal survival rates may well indicate that TPA is even more effective, but there is only one way to know.    Yes, the FDA's process of approval does mean that there is a delay between product development and product marketing. That delay is indispensable if we are to avoid flooding the market with drugs whose efficacy is unknown or nonexistent. There simply is no other reasonable choice.    Robert A. Bohrer   Professor of Law   California Western School of Law   San Diego   ---   Your editorial criticism of the FDA (&quot;TPA: Tip of the Iceberg,&quot; Dec. 2.) contains an unfortunate allusion to the FDA's handling of the drug THA, a potential treatment for Alzheimer's disease. You suggest that the FDA will impose needless delay on the development of this drug, without any reference to the extraordinary efforts of Dr. Paul Leber, head of the FDA division of neuropharmacology, to expedite the development of THA while still safeguarding the victims of Alzheimer's disease.    In my former position as vice president, clinical therapeutics for Warner-Lambert/Parke-Davis, I worked closely with Dr. Leber and his staff, and with members of academia and the National Institute of Aging to design and implement the THA program. We had the full cooperation of the division of neuropharmacology in this effort. We were all fully aware of the potential hazards and unproven efficacy of THA, and designed the THA trial to evaluate the risk-benefit ratio of this substance.    Your editorial, while failing to appreciate that drug development is scientific research that may lead to positive or negative assessment of a drug candidate, implies that the recent interruption of the THA clinical trial is due to &quot;needless delay the FDA system imposes on the THA study.&quot; On the contrary, because THA did not go through the usual early testing in humans required of other drug candidates, and because hepatotoxicity is a concern with this and similar chemical substances, the finding of hepatotoxicity in the THA trial is full justification for the FDA's action.    As a member of regulated industry, I am well aware of the bureaucratic delays and frustrations involved in dealing with the FDA, and the excruciatingly slow process of drug approval in the U.S. An enlightened review of the system will be far more useful than unfair and inflammatory criticism of the FDA that assumes that every delaying action taken by the agency is unwarranted.    Scott A. Reines M.D.    New Hope, Pa.   ---   As an academic cardiologist who considers himself unbiased (I want my patients with heart attacks to live; I am a TIMI participant; I am not receiving funds from a pharmaceutical concern; I am not now nor have I ever been a member of the FDA), there are a number of essential points to consider:   Though TPA may save lives, this has not been proved. Use of TPA has been associated with serious complications including brain hemorrhage. Salvage of a left ventricular ejection fraction of 7% is not dramatic and, though most likely favorable, may result in persistent chest discomfort after a heart attack and potentially an abnormal heart rhythm. Hence, TPA is no latter-day penicillin. And, the field of reperfusion injury caused by acute clot lysis is in a nascent stage.    Given its yet unproven efficacy in &quot;across the board&quot; mortality reduction and its risks, as well as its costs, a sensible scientific approach would be to identify those patients who most benefit from TPA infusion (past medical history, type of heart attack, time to TPA administration). Unfortunately, acquisition of these critical data takes time. In my opinion, the American public is being judiciously protected and not being denied a &quot;silver bullet.&quot; When the paths of medicine and business cross, &quot;first do no harm&quot; needs to take precedence over &quot;let's make a killing.&quot;    Jeffrey Fisher M.D.    New York Hospital-Cornell Medical Center   New York   ---   Both as a consumer and provider of medical services, I share the public's (and your) frustration with the &quot;conservative&quot; approach taken by the FDA as described in your Dec. 2 editorial. As a small, innovative medical-device manufacturer and marketer, we are often frustrated, even intimidated, by the lengthy process of FDA approval, which often inhibits or prohibits small companies from even beginning the process of product development, much less moving to market.    However, the FDA is perhaps the smaller part of the overall problem, since it must execute legislative policy created by Congress. The legislation that controls our company could not have been drafted by people informed of the balance necessary between the risk of a procedure failure and the benefit from innovation to improve devices used in such procedures. This legislation seriously impedes the innovative possibilities for our business sector and, in turn, is limiting international competitiveness.    The problem is that our society has been led to expect and demand perfection from its medical system (and all of its components). When perfection is not achieved, even in a small percentage of cases, the results are all too well known (massive public criticism, litigation, expense and worse). No aspect of human endeavor has been or ever will be totally effective. Those of us who attempt to develop the medical advances this country enjoys routinely go to the extreme in an attempt to guard against potential failure.    A certain percentage of operative procedures may not succeed. For those few, we are crucified by a bizarre tort-liability system. This aspect of our risk profile plays an ever increasing role in our product decision-making process.    Unfortunately, the FDA faces an analogous situation, for it must &quot;approve&quot; the products that we have developed. Thus, the FDA exposes itself to many of the same criticisms as we do if the inevitable procedure failures occur -- no matter how small the percentage. The &quot;conservative&quot; approach for which the FDA is being so roundly criticized is only a natural reaction -- a futile attempt to eliminate this risk.    Because of these circumstances, we all lose. The FDA is slow, tort liability is bizarre, and many companies -- such as ours -- make decisions not to pursue projects from which many people could potentially benefit.    Charles A. Homsy   President, Vitek Inc.    Houston</TEXT></DOC>