<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880401-0137 </DOCNO><HL> Keeping NATO Strong and Solid </HL><AUTHOR> David Boren </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP FREST </CO><IN> NUK ARO </IN><TEXT>   It is ironic that the current difficult challenges now facing the North Atlantic Treaty Organization are in part the result of recent successes of the alliance. After all, it was because of the united determination of the NATO allies to deploy intermediate-range nuclear weapons in Europe that the Soviets finally came back to the bargaining table and agreed to remove their SS-20 missiles under the INF Treaty.    While all of the allied leaders support ratification of the INF Treaty, the agreement has created a new political dynamic in Western Europe that calls for great care on the part of the U.S. On a recent tour of NATO countries, Democratic Sens. Robert Byrd of West Virginia, Sam Nunn of Georgia, Claiborne Pell of Rhode Island and I had discussions with the leaders of many of our NATO allies. During this trip, the nature of the challenge was made very clear.    We are confronted with a very clever competitor in Mikhail Gorbachev. He has two immediate objectives. First, he seeks to divide the Western alliance by using any available means. Second, he is intent upon keeping the focus in arms-control deliberations squarely on nuclear weapons, where there is parity, instead of on conventional weapons, where the Soviets have clear superiority.    West Germany appears to be the first target in the Soviet strategy to divide the alliance. There already are economic and social forces pulling West Germany in an Eastward direction. Last year five million East Germans out of a total of 17 million were allowed to visit family members in West Germany, and the German right is being tantalized by well-placed signs that reunification might be possible if West Germany began to distance itself from NATO.    At the same time, Moscow is courting the German left by noting that in the aftermath of the INF Treaty, only short-range nuclear weapons will be left in Germany -- weapons whose ranges limit them to use within German territory. Germany, the argument goes, has become the singular nuclear battlefield, to be sacrificed ultimately for the security of the rest of Europe. The Soviet strategy will be to press the German government to negotiate the &quot;third zero&quot; -- the complete removal of battlefield nuclear weapons -- before conventional arms talks get under way. This would leave the Soviets clearly dominant because of their conventional superiority.    The French have shown their sensitivity to the situation by trying to become a more important magnet for drawing Germany back toward to the West. The recent creation of the Franco-German brigade is an important step in this direction. The French also are seeking closer bilateral relationships with the British in the design of weapons systems. These actions have caused other alliance members to worry that the French are seeking to create a structure to compete with NATO.    What should be the reaction of the U.S. to all of these crosscurrents?    First, we should not overreact. There still are real strengths in the alliance. Italy has proved to be a very reliable partner and stabilizing force. Turgut Ozal of Turkey has initiated discussions with Andreas Papandreou of Greece that it is to be hoped will reduce tensions between these two members on the southern flank of the alliance. Helmut Kohl of Germany and Margaret Thatcher of Britain are firmly committed to a collective NATO strategy.    Second, we should avoid the public airing of any differences of opinion within NATO about the best way to proceed under the Montebello agreements to modernize nuclear forces. Premature public debate in Congress about funding specific programs before NATO makes its own collective decision could cause unnecessary division within the alliance.    Public threats to reduce American presence or participation in NATO if certain steps are not taken are harmful and play into the hands of Soviet strategists who seek to divide the alliance. Instead, we should stress that West Germany in particular is not alone in taking risks for collective security. The almost one million American and British troops and their civilian dependents now living in Germany demonstrate the concept of shared risk as well as shared strength.    Third, we should welcome improved bilateral security relationships between France and Germany and between France and Britain while making clear that they are complementary to, rather than competitive with, NATO. These bilateral relationships, including the new Franco-German brigade, can help reduce any feelings of German isolation and strengthen that pillar of European defense.    More important, these relationships may alter the Soviet calculation of what it might expect from NATO during a crisis, thereby enhancing deterrence.    Fourth, as NATO makes decisions about the modernization of nuclear weapons, it should take full account of the legitimate concerns of the German people. The burden of modernization should be shared equally, and it should emphasize longer-range capabilities such as &quot;stand-off&quot; weapons launched from aircraft. NATO should also avoid any appearance that modernization is being used as an excuse for adding more weapons to compensate for those eliminated under the INF Treaty. Modernization should be seen as part of a continuing process to ensure the effectiveness of our weapons systems, whether conventional or nuclear.    Fifth, the effective and verifiable reduction of conventional arms, in which the Soviets enjoy clear superiority, should become the top priority of the alliance. NATO should build on the concept of asymetrical reductions in INF Treaty by challenging the Soviets to make the reductions necessary to achieve an equilibrium with NATO in troops and equipment. The objective, as concisely stated by Sen. Nunn, is to deny the Soviets the ability to threaten NATO with a short conventional attack with little or no warning.    The right kind of leadership by the U.S. within the NATO family is critical. We must pursue quiet, unhurried discussion within the alliance. President Reagan and his NATO colleagues set the right tone at the recent summit. A united front by NATO led to the withdrawal of Soviet intermediate missiles under the INF Treaty. A united front now can help bring the Soviets under world-wide pressure to support the cause of peace by reducing their conventional armaments to allow for the creation of a stable balance. NATO is stronger today than it was 10 years ago. A decade from now, it can be even more effective if we are wise enough to stay the course.    ---   Sen. Boren (D., Okla.) is chairman of the Senate Intelligence Committee. </TEXT></DOC>