<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871021-0083 </DOCNO><HL> A Recession Isn't Required:U.S. Can Escape Sentence of History---By James Dale Davidson</HL><DD> 10/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   Monday's stock market crash signals that the U.S. may be facing an economic catastrophe similar to the one that followed the end of the British empire earlier this century -- unless it can immediately face up to the tough choices to slash costs, especially in government.    For years an irresponsible Congress has made economic decline and ultimate collapse inevitable by escalating American costs. The growth of federal spending and runaway deficits are telling evidence that the U.S. is falling prey to the same challenges that ruined its predecessors: high costs and inflexible leadership.    There is no better example of a nation that underwent an imperial crisis of costs and spent itself into oblivion than Spain, the great power of the 16th century. Spain's leadership was dominated by tax-consuming interests: the military, bureaucracy, church and nobility. Long after it became obvious that the economy was in trouble, leaders resisted every effort to cut costs. They treated each new economic setback as an occasion to launch a grand new program. Taxes tripled between 1556 and 1577. Spending went up even faster. By 1600, interest on the national debt took 40% of the budget. Spain descended into bankruptcy and never recovered.    A similar pattern of high costs and rigid leadership marked the decline of late-17th-century Holland. The Dutch had succeeded Spain as the world's leading economy. But Holland's heyday did not last long. It also was cut short by high costs and high taxes that fatally overextended resources and undercut the economy.    A similar crisis of costs overtook Holland's successor, Britain. After two centuries at the pinnacle of the world economy, Britain began to overtax its resources during World War I. The high costs of the fighting left Britain practically broke; taxes and inflation skyrocketed.    British leaders, like the Spanish and Dutch before them, responded to the crisis not by cutting costs but by proposing expensive new spending ideas. Important factions of the cabinet wanted to garrison Armenia, send troops to Afghanistan and Iraq, and even invade Russia. Domestic spending grew like Topsy.    The problem was not that spending was too low, but that it was too high. Yet Parliament was paralyzed; the only significant pressure for cost-cutting came from outside the government.    Under pressure from the Anti-Waste League, a group of vigorous industrialists, Prime Minister Lloyd George appointed a Committee on National Economy from outside Parliament to slash costs. This committee, headed by Sir Eric Geddes, made sweeping recommendations, especially for cuts in the military. Some -- but not many -- of these cuts were implemented. Like Gramm-Rudman-Hollings today, the cuts of the &quot;Geddes Ax&quot; were not nearly deep enough to lower costs to levels enjoyed by competitors. Then as now, resistance of spending constituencies to cost reduction predominated over efforts at reform.    In the case of each faltering empire, the leaders responded to the crisis of costs in the same way. They ignored proposals for reform. Instead of reducing costs to competitive levels, they increased spending, especially for the military, fatally over-extending resources. These past failures should be taken to heart today, before the U.S. wastes its chance to pull back from the brink of economic decline. Among the more important points to remember:    A budget deficit is a symptom of fiscal distress, but raising taxes to close the deficit achieves little. The problem is that costs in the predominant economy are too high.    Every nation must periodically deflate costs to remain competitive. Those with flexible economic and political institutions do so successfully.    Predominant economies seem suddenly to lose their flexibility when a shift in conditions (such as technological innovation) makes high costs within the government the main obstacle to continued economic vitality. In the past, this has always been associated with rapidly rising military spending. When leaders must decide between restoring the competitiveness of the economy and maintaining their international military authority, they opt to preserve the empire.    In no case in which a leading economy has faltered have members of the public failed to see that trouble was at hand. Many reformers advanced plans to cut costs but lacked the power to take decisive measures.    Part of the explanation for the decision to maintain the empire at all costs is institutional. Tax-consuming interests in the military and bureaucracy have greater incentives to cultivate the leadership. Often they are the leadership.    The few cases in which costs were cut were those in which the leaders of the faltering countries stood to gain. The one cost-cutting proposal that Spain's leaders could accept, for example, was the abolition of the frilled collar, a dress requirement at court that had saddled the nobility with ruinous laundry bills.    The U.S. is today struggling through a crisis similar to those faced by Spain, Holland and Britain. Must the U.S. decline as its predecessors have? No. The Founding Fathers, who were well aware that great nations can be led to ruin, gave us a way out. A key element of the elaborate system of checks and balances they instituted is the right of the people in Article V of the Constitution to call for a constitutional convention. It is a power with several facets. Thirty-two state legislatures have invoked it in calling for a balanced-budget amendment. Such an amendment, if properly drafted, could go a long way toward restraining fiscal excesses.    But a balanced-budget amendment is only a part of the advantage a constitutional convention could provide. It is also a method for shaking up a rigid leadership in which 98% of House incumbents seeking re-election were returned to office in the last election.    A convention would open the door to a whole new group of leaders. An election to choose convention delegates would be like a special election to pick a new Congress. Under legislation passed by the Senate, a constitutional convention would be made up of one member elected from each congressional district and two at-large from each state. No current members of Congress could participate.    A convention could launch new political careers. Media stars would emerge. When the convention completed its work, many delegates would no doubt challenge sitting members of Congress in the next election. With the incumbency advantage reduced, we would see the largest turnover in Congress in decades.    Every Congress that has ever sat has been an unlimited constitutional convention. More than 100 such amendments were proposed in the last Congress.    Yet you hear little fire and brimstone about the dangers of a &quot;runaway Congress.&quot; The reason is simple. No one is afraid of constitutional amendments being proposed. What they are afraid of is that an entirely unknown group of leaders might emerge to challenge the status quo. They are afraid that a convention could be exactly what Jefferson hoped -- a method for reversing the course of the country. With more than a trillion dollars in the federal budget on the line, many groups have a lot at stake.    We all do. The authors of the Constitution gave the U.S. the opportunity to escape the sentence of history -- by circumventing inflexible leadership that has failed the challenge of reducing costs. A constitutional convention could revive America -- if we have the will to pursue it.    ---   Mr. Davidson, chairman of the National Taxpayers Union, is co-author, with William Rees-Mogg, of the doomsaying &quot;Blood in the Streets&quot; (Summit, 1987). </TEXT></DOC>