<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880621-0031 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88: While Bush Swims Against Tide on Drug Issue, Other GOP Politicians Turn It to an Advantage </HL><AUTHOR> Gerald F. Seib and Andy Pasztor (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> MON </IN><G> EXE CNG JUS </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Drugs have soared to the top of voters' lists of important campaign issues, posing a political problem that Vice President George Bush's presidential campaign is scrambling to overcome.    But the drug issue has been more of a political opportunity for many GOP Senate and House candidates, who are having an easier time turning the potent drug-fighting issue to their advantage.    Democrats, led by likely presidential nominee Michael Dukakis, are gleefully denouncing what they call the Reagan administration's spotty, often contradictory policies against narcotics trafficking and are attacking Mr. Bush's prominent role in the administration effort as head of the South Florida drug task force. Mr. Dukakis continually stressed drugs on a Southern tour last week, asking why &quot;after all the rhetoric we've heard about declaring war against drugs, we've just begun to fight.&quot;    These attacks have forced Mr. Bush into a vigorous counteroffensive in which he has just endorsed a new package of tough law-and-order legislation and called on Democrats to stop making drugs a &quot;shrill political issue.&quot;    Though Mr. Bush is scoring points with his counterattacks, even some jittery Republican lawmakers, eager to distance themselves from an administration they believe has lost momentum on the issue, are attacking the White House record on drugs. Sen. Alfonse D'Amato (R., N.Y.), for example, contends that the administration's anti-drug education programs &quot;have been shockingly inept.&quot;    Meanwhile some Republicans, not as closely identified with the Reagan record as Mr. Bush, are discovering ways to take the offensive, including playing up the GOP's tougher anti-crime image. In New Jersey, the Republican candidate for the U.S. Senate makes hay by pushing the death penalty for drug-related killings. The GOP candidate for governor in Indiana chooses as his running mate a prosecutor with a strong drug-fighting record.    At the national level, &quot;Democrats have been able to move and perhaps seize the issue,&quot; says Mitch Daniels, a former political director in the Reagan White House. &quot;At the state level I think things are very different.&quot;    The two parties can agree on one thing: In a campaign with few passionate issues, drugs have exploded as a topic on which voters demand action. In a recent poll sponsored by the Americans Talk Security project, a bipartisan program to sample Americans' opinions on national-security issues, more people named drugs as the nation's most urgent problem than any other issue.    Such widespread concern naturally puts the Reagan administration on the defensive -- even though the deep personal involvement of the president and Mrs. Reagan in anti-drug publicity campaigns helped fix national attention on the issue in the first place. Mr. Bush's work on the South Florida task force helped draw attention to the problem, and is credited with helping coordinate government efforts to slow the flow of drugs to the Florida coast.    The political problem for Mr. Bush is that critics point to some sobering facts and say they show the administration's commitment to battling drugs often has fallen well short of its rhetoric. Most illicit drugs now are more plentiful, purer and cost less than they did eight years ago. &quot;I certainly wouldn't tell you that we're winning the war,&quot; John Lawn, head of the Drug Enforcement Administration, told the Senate Judiciary Committee recently.    The much-touted crackdown on trafficking along the U.S.-Mexican border, according to a House government operations subcommittee's recent report, &quot;lacks a coherent and consistent&quot; operational plan and command structure. Rep. Glenn English (D., Okla.), the panel's chairman, asserts that &quot;Operation Alliance,&quot; as it is called, initially reduced enforcement resources in some areas and was &quot;nothing but fluff, show business and a public-relations game.&quot;    Meanwhile, Mr. Reagan's proposed budget for fiscal 1989 doesn't request a single new Federal Bureau of Investigation agent for narcotics cases. And the administration continues to resist major spending increases for treatment and prevention, arguing that nobody yet knows which methods are most effective.    White House officials, worried about the deficit, quietly eliminated -- and then fought for months to keep Congress from finding out about -- plans for some $300 million of additional helicopters, radar and interceptor planes and other equipment that the Customs Service, the DEA and other agencies believe they need to get the job done. And the White House's drug-fighting image was further harmed by recent offers to drop felony charges against Panamanian strongman Gen. Manuel Noriega, who was indicted for drug smuggling.    Against this backdrop, members of Congress are pushing a $2 billion anti-drug package that seems likely to pass. But congressional action won't be enough to thwart drugs as a hot issue on the campaign trail, where Mr. Bush and Mr. Dukakis are trying to outflank each other on the topic.    Mr. Bush proposes putting his vice president in charge of all anti-drug efforts, suggests an international drug-fighting force, and complains that it actually was a Democratic-controlled Congress that once cut funding for Coast Guard patrols. He has just endorsed a Republican bill that would deny some federal benefits to drug offenders. Mr. Dukakis proposes appointing a federal drug-fighting czar, spending more on local anti-drug programs and using U.S. troops to help other nations eradicate drugs.    Their clearest disagreement is on the death penalty: Mr. Bush favors it for big drug traffickers and those who kill during drug-related crimes, while Mr. Dukakis has opposed the death penalty.    The death penalty, in fact, has emerged as a tool several Republicans are using to try to score points on the drug issue in statewide races. In New Jersey, for instance, Pete Dawkins, the Republican candidate for U.S. senator, has proposed a broad drug program that includes a call for the death penalty in drug-related killings. Now Mr. Dawkins is attacking his Democratic foe, incumbent Sen. Frank Lautenberg, for voting to block a Senate measure, approved this month, that would permit the death penalty in drug-related killings.    In Ohio, another Democrat is under attack on the capital punishment questionbut this time because he voted in favor of the death penalty. Sen. Howard Metzenbaum, up for re-election, voted for the Senate's bill. Now his Republican foe, George Voinovich, charges that the senator did a politically inspired flip-flop on the death penalty simply to show he is tough on drugs; Sen. Metzenbaum has opposed the death penalty in other cases.    In Indiana, Republican gubernatorial candidate John Mutz has found another way to put the drug issue on his side. He has chosen as his running mate for lieutenant governor Steve Goldsmith, a tough, energetic 41-year-old prosecutor who has initiated anti-drug campaigns in Indianapolis.    But even Republicans such as Slade Gorton from Washington state, who has made drug-fighting a centerpiece of his effort to return to the U.S. Senate, find that the record can get in the way. Democrats are charging that Mr. Gorton voted to hold down spending on drug-related programs during an earlier stint in the Senate. And in Connecticut, Republican Sen. Lowell Weicker is under attack by Democrat Joe Lieberman for voting recently against greatly expanding the use of military forces to intercept drug shipments.    &quot;Yes it's an issue, and yes it's an issue where we are keeping our opponent's feet to the fire,&quot; says Marla Romash, an aide to Mr. Lieberman.    ---    Presidential Candidates' Proposals on Drug Problem   Bush    -- Put vice president in charge of government efforts    -- Enact mandatory sentencing for drug dealers    -- Authorize death penalty for major drug trafficking, drug-related killings    -- Create an international anti-drug force   Dukakis    -- Appoint an anti-drug czar to lead government efforts    -- Cut off aid to nations that refuse to help in war on drugs    -- Let armed forces help foreign nations eradicate drug crops    -- Provide more funding for local treatment and rehabilitation programs</TEXT></DOC>