<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870910-0097 </DOCNO><HL> Toshiba's Vow on Exports, New LawsIn Japan Could Mitigate U.S. Sanctions---By Eduardo Lachica and Stephen Kreider YoderStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN FREST GOVMTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   Toshiba Corp.'s vow to create a model export-screening program, combined with moves by the Japanese government to toughen export-control laws, could induce Congress to moderate its proposed sanctions against the Japanese company, well-placed Senate staff members predicted.    Toshiba yesterday released results of an investigation into the illegal technology sales to the Soviet Union by its Toshiba Machine Corp. unit, which were revealed earlier this year, and announced a package of measures to prevent such sales in the future.    Last Friday, a bill to tighten controls on Japanese strategic exports to communist countries and to increase penalties for violators was approved by parliament's upper house. It already had been approved by the lower body.    &quot;All of that will be mitigating,&quot; acknowledged a spokesman for Sen. Jake Garn (R., Utah), the principal author of the sanctions bill that, if approved, could deny Toshiba the right to export a wide range of products to the U.S. for as long as five years.    Other Senate staff members involved in writing the legislation now expect the Garn bill eventually to be stripped of sanctions specifically aimed against Toshiba. Instead, they said, the bill probably will retain only &quot;generic&quot; provisions aimed at future violators.    &quot;One of the purposes of the Garn bill was to get Japan's attention. It has already done that,&quot; one of these aides said.    However, Toshiba still isn't home free. When a Senate-House conference meets later this month to decide the bill's final form, a number of conservative Republicans are likely to press for keeping tough sanctions on the company. A Senate aide who speaks for this bloc rejected Toshiba's claim, reiterated in yesterday's report, that it had no prior knowledge of its subsidiary's illegal shipments of milling machines to a Soviet shipyard.    &quot;It's hard to believe the parent didn't know that its subsidiary was selling the Russians machines that weigh 200 tons each,&quot; this aide said.    In addition to the Garn legislation, there are 17 other bills pending in Congress that would punish Toshiba, according to a Reagan administration estimate. Even if Toshiba and the Japanese government persuade Congress to soften the Garn bill, which is considered the most stringent, they will have a hard time getting lawmakers to reject all of the bills.    The Commerce Department yesterday issued only a mild endorsement of Toshiba's efforts. It said in a statement that it &quot;welcomes the fact that Toshiba developed its own export-compliance program,&quot; and it added: &quot;We think that all companies dealing in sensitive technology should have such a program.&quot;    To bolster the Japanese effort to avert sanctions, Hajime Tamura, Japan's minister of international trade and industry, currently is making another round of contacts with administration and congressional policy makers to convince them that Japan is delivering on its promises to reform its entire export-control system. His calls yesterday on Treasury Secretary James Baker and Trade Representative Clayton Yeutter were &quot;encouraging,&quot; a Tamura aide said.    Toshiba's Washington-based lawyer, David Houlihan, said the company's elaborate plan to protect its high-technology products and those of its subsidiaries from diversion to the Soviet bloc is &quot;just what the Reagan administration and Congress asked for.&quot;    The plan, announced yesterday, calls for the creation of a new independent division to double-check all strategic exports, as well as the legitimacy of buyers, both abroad and in Japan. Toshiba also will demand that its subsidiaries and affiliates take similar action. That effort will be coordinated by the parent company.    The new strategic-products control division will report directly to Toshiba's president, Joichi Aoi. Besides screening exports and customers, the division will educate Toshiba employees on export controls and initiate compliance audits. Stiff penalties are planned for violators, including employees who know of violations but don't report them.    Toshiba officials also said Toshiba Machine will take punitive measures against middle managers involved in the illegal sales. The controversy surrounding the sales forced the resignation of Toshiba Machine's president earlier this year.    Toshiba's announcement yesterday followed final approval Friday by the Japanese parliament of an export-control law that lengthens the maximum prison term for violators to five years from three and recognizes even attempted violations as a crime. Previously, Tokyo authorities couldn't penalize exporters who falsified shipping documents unless the goods were actually shipped.    The new law also increases to three years from one the period for which the government can ban violators from selling their products to communist nations. A one-year ban is in effect against Toshiba Machine. It also allows for closer consultations between the Ministry of International Trade and Industry and the Foreign Ministry over the regulation of exports.    Along with the announcement of its new export-screening program, Toshiba yesterday released a report -- prepared by the U.S. accounting firm Price Waterhouse and two U.S. law firms -- reiterating its earlier claim that Toshiba officials didn't have any prior knowledge of the sales of sophisticated milling equipment to the Soviets by Toshiba Machine. The sales violated both Japanese law and rules of the Paris-based Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls, which regulates exports to communist countries.    &quot;The laws were circumvented {by Toshiba Machine} by deceiving the Ministry of International Trade and Industry,&quot; said John Altieri Jr., a partner at the New York law firm of Mudge Rose Guthrie Alexander andamp; Ferdon, which helped conduct the investigation. &quot;Toshiba Machine deceived Toshiba {Corp.} just as it had deceived MITI.&quot;    Toshiba Machine executives first considered violating the guidelines after they lost a 1974 bid to sell milling machines to the Soviets, the report said. Toshiba Machine salesmen understood that the French company Forest Line and the Norwegian company Kongsberg Vaapenfabrikk AS won the order by selling the Soviets 10-axis milling machines and software to run them, the report said. The equipment violated Cocom rules, and the Japanese company had refused to sell it.    Loss of the 1974 order, the report said, &quot;led Toshiba Machine Co. personnel to conclude that Japanese export-control laws were being more stringently enforced than those governing their foreign competitors.&quot;    U.S. diplomats on Tuesday said that a French company called Forest Line is being investigated by French authorities. But Louis Paul Demesse, Forest Line's chairman, yesterday said the company &quot;doesn't know anything about this affair&quot; and added, &quot;Our company isn't in question.&quot; A spokesman for the French Foreign Ministry said: &quot;We are interested in the affair but we cannot comment on it. It is an affair that we are following.&quot;    It was revealed earlier this year that Kongsberg Vaapenfabrik took part in the illegal sale of technology to the Soviets along with Toshiba. Earlier this month, a Norwegian police official said he was reviewing more than 100 transactions by the state-owned arms-maker to see if Cocom rules were violated. </TEXT></DOC>