<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870206-0150 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas:Has the Mexican Government Rigged the Oil Business?---By David Asman</HL><DD> 02/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM LABORPETROLEUM (PET) </IN><DATELINE> VILLAHERMOSA, Mexico  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Spread out over an open lot the size of a football field are row after row of neatly stacked pipes, oversized diesel engines, miles of steel cable and chains, and huge metal blocks used to pound drills deep into the earth and pump out rich Mexican crude. The disassembled pieces of rigging are well maintained; one can easily see how the pieces fit together to complete the dirty, noisy process of oil drilling. But there is an eerie silence in the yard. A silence accentuated by seeing such powerful and aggressive equipment lying dormant.    Such inactivity is a common sight in this oil town, hit hard after last year's oil-price crash: Houses and luxury hotels sit half-built; fancy restaurants now find that there are more waiters than customers; high-priced hookers (one is told) have left town for Mexico City, and the poor, who perhaps could be overlooked in the hustle and bustle of the good years, stand out all the more in makeshift shacks built on vacant lots. Villahermosa is a boom town gone bust.    Certainly this scene is being played out in dozens of oil capitals around the world. But here the crash is particularly painful. Villahermosa is the capital of Tabasco -- a tiny, Gulf Coast state (less than 2% of the Mexican land mass) rich in oil and agriculture and the prize jewel in the crown of the government's oil monopoly. In the past two decades, the oil boom transformed Villahermosa from a sleepy, tropical state capital of 30,000 to a fast-paced metropolis of 300,000. A constant flow of income was budgeted to support this fast-growing infrastructure, and of course the crash in oil prices stopped the flow.    But what makes matters worse is that in Mexico, economically rational decisions often take a back seat to political considerations. This was supposed to have changed somewhat following the recent loan package worked out between Mexico and its foreign creditors. However, conflicting interests among businesses, bureaucracies and unions continue to force decisions that help neither the industry in particular nor the Mexican economy in general.    Take those dormant oil rigs described above. They belong to one of seven private rigging companies hired by the government to explore and drill for Mexican oil, made exclusively the property of the Mexican government by presidential decree in 1938. Petroleos Mexicanos (Pemex), the government oil monopoly, has its own rigs and drilling crews. However, the private drilling companies have always been more efficient. Says a manager of one of the private firms, who, like every other private rigger interviewed for this story, agreed to talk only if his name would not be used: &quot;In the time it takes a Pemex operation to produce oil from a well, a private company can begin pumping oil under the same conditions in approximately half the time.&quot; Thus, if in the name of economic efficiency cutbacks in exploration and drilling had to be made, one would naturally expect cuts to be made in the least efficient area. But this is Mexico.    Last August, five of the seven private rigging companies -- Protexa, Permargo, Istmo, Mexico and Central -- were told by Pemex that they had to suspend their land-drilling operations in the Tabasco region and cap their wells. The only two private companies allowed to continue exploring and pumping -- Aguila and Pevesa -- are controlled through stock ownership by the powerful Oil Workers' Union of the Mexican Republic (STPRM). The 110,000 member STPRM is the most powerful arm of the Confederation of Mexican Workers (which is affiliated with the ruling party), and STPRM holds five seats out of 11 on Pemex's board.    According to Pemex's public relations director in Tabasco, Mario Martinez Rubio, &quot;All of our activities, including exploration and exploitation of oil, are continuing without stoppages.&quot; Thus, only the operations of the efficient, fully private rigging concerns have been halted. The effects of the work suspension at these firms have been devastating.    Since there is a world glut of oil rigs, most of the private rigs had to be dismantled and stored; they could not be moved to operations in other parts of the world. Protexa's Tabasco work force of 450 men was reduced to a 15-man maintenance team. Permargo had 500 workers in the Tabasco region, of which about 20 are now working to maintain the rigs and guard the facilities. The other private firms suffered similar cutbacks. And because of the all-powerful oil union, workers must be paid despite the work stoppage. At this rate, most of the companies agree that they can only carry the costs of maintaining the rigs for two more years at most. &quot;If these operations go bankrupt,&quot; said one private rigger, &quot;we will have to sell our rigs at enormous discounts.&quot;    The only likely customer for those rigs, if they must be sold, would be Pemex -- in other words, the Mexican government. And the government could make a killing on the deal. The number of land rigs ordered shut down by Pemex is about 20 (not including several smaller rigs). Each of these rigs cost the private firms anywhere from $5 million to $7 million. Since it is now a buyers' market, most of the private companies would be forced to accept practically any price offered for their rigs. Several oilmen suggest that the figure may even sink to the $1 million range.    But the sweetest part for Pemex is that the five private oil companies now own the rigs outright. Just a few months before the government ordered the rigs to shut down, all five companies had finished paying off foreign bankers and lending institutions for the loans originally needed to buy the rigs. If Pemex were to buy the rigs now, it could pay for them in Mexican pesos, rather than owing part of the payment to U.S. banks in hard-to-get dollars. The timing of the decision to close the rigs, coming so close to the ending of the companies' debt payments, is not lost on the private oilmen. &quot;The most we can hope for now,&quot; says one oilman &quot;is that there will be some kind of change in attitude after the presidential election {in 1988}. We can't hold on much longer after that.&quot;    Spokesmen for Pemex in Tabasco are not usually willing to discuss policy issues, such as Pemex's relationship with the private sector. And after this week's announcement that Mario Ramon Beteta is stepping down as director of Pemex to run for governor of the state of Mexico, Pemex officials were more reluctant than ever to talk about policy. However, it is unlikely that the new head of Pemex will alter the fate of Tabasco's private riggers.    Mexican entrepreneurs engaged in oil-related businesses have always been at the mercy of the Mexican government. Articles and bylaws of the Mexican Constitution specify in great length the limitations placed on private-sector activity in the oil business. This is one reason why Tabasco's business sector was afraid to speak on the record for this article. Nevertheless, the Mexican government has been assuring its foreign creditors that there will be an opening in Mexico toward the private sector. These assurances run counter to the decision to force the private rigging companies of Tabasco to shut down their operations, with the possible consequence of &quot;nationalizing&quot; those riggers' assets altogether. &quot;Business as usual&quot; in Mexico, at least in the petroleum industry, apparently has little to do with business.    ---   Mr. Asman is editor of the Journal's Americas column. </TEXT></DOC>