<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880810-0136 </DOCNO><HL> Gorbachev Needs to Keep 'Em Down on the Farm </HL><AUTHOR> Valery N. Soyfer </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST LABOR </CO><TEXT>   Mikhail Gorbachev has focused much attention on the need for Soviet industrial reforms. Agriculture, however, has not been totally ignored. The leadership has begun to criticize central agricultural management and to offer some freedom to collective farmers. But a central problem that has not been addressed is the shortage of agricultural labor -- particularly workers with the training to lead Soviet farming out of the 19th century -- and the government's continuing failure to address it.    Mr. Gorbachev, who comes from peasant stock and in the Brezhnev era was party secretary of the Stavropol region, one of the most important agricultural regions, surely knows agricultural perestroika has a difficult row to hoe. The record of the Brezhnev period's Food Program, prepared by a team in which Mr. Gorbachev played a major role, bears this out.    According to the Food Program, issued in 1982, &quot;The basic tasks of the agricultural complex will be to reach stable growth of agricultural productivity, reliable supply of food and raw materials for the population. . . . The average annual output of agriculture will increase by 14% to 16%.&quot; In 1987, productivity increased a scant 0.2%. This is despite constant claims in party documents that the Food Program was being realized. According to a report of the U.S.S.R. Central Statistical Board published in Pravda in January: &quot;The number of unprofitable farms has increased from 6.5 thousand to 7.2 thousand.&quot; With the total number of Soviet farms at 26,000, this means about one in four is unprofitable.    The overriding cause is the shortage of labor. Brezhnev-era numbers, and the few more recent figures available, cast light on the problems that continue to confront Soviet agriculture today.    Between 1970 and 1979, the number of agricultural workers fell from 23.5 million to 21.8 million. Labor requirements didn't change during that period and the result was fewer people to do the same amount of work, a situation that was especially critical during planting and harvesting seasons, when labor needs are at least doubled.    A related problem is the distribution of farm workers. There are regions, such as in parts of Uzbekistan and Central Asia, with a surplus of workers, and regions, such as Estonia and Kazakhstan, with shortages. Distribution can even vary within regions. According to a 1978 study of 651 farms in one part of the Russian Republic, more than half had a constant shortage of workers.    In almost any other country, this situation could be improved by the redistribution of workers and the introduction of incentives to attract workers to areas with shortages. Not in the Soviet Union, though, where no one is permitted to change his address without official permission.    When extra farm workers are needed, local party leaders are likely to recruit them from other sectors of the economy. In 1970, the number of non-farm workers recruited to help out in agriculture was 600,000. By 1979, that figure had reached 1.3 million. Today, it is more than 1.5 million.    When factory workers are called in to help with the harvest, this leads, of course, to a drop in industrial productivity. This issue has been raised many times under Mr. Gorbachev, but to no avail.    Soviet demographics exacerbate the situation. The rural population has been decreasing for years both in raw numbers and as a percentage of the general population. The rural population decreased by 3.1 million people between 1959 and 1970 and almost seven million between 1971 and 1978. There is no evidence that such a pattern has changed. And not all workers who live in such regions work in agriculture itself, or are able-bodied. The able-bodied share of the population is smaller in rural than in urban areas and is falling precipitously. In addition, in many rural areas there is a shortage of young women.    While advances in farm technology and a more highly trained farm population are a major factor in rural population decreases in the West, this is not the case in the Soviet Union. The agricultural workers are still needed, but they are harder to come by. For many years, the Soviet Union has had shortages of agricultural workers -- from milkmaids to shepherds to skilled specialists -- the people who can increase output per worker. The country now has a shortage of 13.4 million specialists trained to operate agricultural machinery. By 1990 this figure is expected to increase to about 14 million.    Despite these persistent shortages, education of skilled farm workers has not increased markedly. There are many articles in the Soviet press about &quot;agrotechnical training courses&quot; operating on the farms themselves, but there is little evidence of them. The majority of farm workers have received no professional training. In addition, well-educated and highly skilled workers are leaving the farms for factories.    The number of agricultural-machine operators is insufficient even for the relatively limited number of machines available. About 70% of agricultural workers do their jobs by hand, about two times higher than in industry. Agricultural production is three to five times as labor-intensive as that in the U.S., and potato, sugar beet and livestock production are seven to 10 times as labor intensive.    Mr. Gorbachev needs to begin paying more attention to the labor-supply side of the equation.    ---   Mr. Soyfer is a visiting professor at the biotechnolgy center and department of molecular genetics at Ohio State University. </TEXT></DOC>