<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870427-0015 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 04/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   FUNARO TENDERED his resignation as Brazil's finance minister.    The move by Funaro, architect of the country's debt moratorium, reflected problems with the Brazilian economy. It had been expected. Funaro, who submitted his resignation to President Sarney, said his decision was &quot;irrevocable.&quot; In recent months, Funaro had been viewed as an obstacle to both debt talks and domestic economic measures because he was disliked by international bankers and much criticized in Sao Paulo. It wasn't immediately clear who would succeed him.    It is believed that Funaro's resignation may result in a more pliant approach to debt negotiations and an attempt to push through a program to reduce Brazil's inflation rate.    ---   Congressional panels are exploring whether as much as $10 million from the U.S. arms sales to Iran went to middleman Albert Hakim or his associates, sources said. Bank records show that Hakim took large sums from the arms transactions, but the committees haven't determined what he did with the funds.    Israel has completed an audit of the funds it handled in the U.S. arms sales to Iran, a senior official said in Jerusalem. The Israeli government is expected to send its findings to Washington today.    ---   Former CIA director Casey was admitted Saturday to a suburban New York hospital for treatment of pneumonia. Casey, who underwent surgery for brain cancer in December, was listed in critical condition. He resigned the CIA post Feb. 2 amid investigations into the Iran-Contra affair.    ---   Yasser Arafat was reelected as the leader of a reunified PLO by the 340-member Palestinian National Council, which ended a six-day meeting in Algiers. Terrorist Abu Abbas, who is wanted in the 1985 hijacking of the Achille Lauro, was reelected to serve &quot;provisionally&quot; on the PLO's governing board, sources said.    ---   The Soviet Union marked the first anniversary of the Chernobyl nuclear-reactor accident with a tribute to the emergency crews that coped with the disaster near Kiev and with reassurances that the incident didn't pose any long-term health risks. Across Europe and in Japan and the U.S., anti-nuclear protests were held.    ---   Sri Lanka's president announced that he would cancel elections scheduled for 1989 and seek to extend his term unless the problem of Tamil separatist violence is resolved. Meanwhile, government warplanes bombed Tamil rebel strongholds in Jaffna, and a land mine killed seven soldiers and a police officer in eastern Trincomalee district.    ---   The U.S. denounced a weekend raid into Zambia by South African commandos. Lusaka said the cross-border incursion left four of its citizens dead and one injured. Pretoria said the raid was aimed at suspected members of the African National Congress, but diplomats said the facilities weren't used any longer by the ANC.    ---   Britain ordered a high-level intelligence investigation into a car-bomb attack Saturday by the outlawed Irish Republican Army that killed Northern Ireland's second most senior judge and his wife. London said the inquiry was needed to determine how the IRA knew of the judge's travel plans.    ---   A judge in New York struck down as unconstitutional a set of regulations that would have limited smoking in most restaurants, workplaces and public buildings in the state beginning May 7. The rules had been considered the most stringent in the U.S.    ---   Police in Florida said the suspect in last week's shooting spree in Palm Bay was being held under a suicide watch. Six people were killed and 14 others injured in the incident. Prosecutors said they may seek the death penalty against William B. Cruse.    ---   A federal grand jury indicted Rep. Harold Ford (D., Tenn.) and banker C.H. Butcher on conspiracy and fraud charges involving a $350,000 loan. The move last week indicated the Justice Department's increasing interest in public corruption cases.    ---   Malaysia's leader faces a political reassessment following a narrow victory in Friday's triennial party elections. Only 51% of the delegates supported Mahathir Mohamad's bid for a third term as president, and some believe that challenges to his leadership could be likely.    ---   Iceland's prime minister conceded defeat in the country's general elections, and said he would submit his resignation tomorrow. Results from Saturday's balloting showed that the left-wing Woman's Alliance party appeared to hold the balance of power in negotiations to form a new government.    ---   Poland announced that nine people held on terrorism charges would be granted amnesty. The banned Solidarity union had said the nine were political detainees. Meanwhile, security police in Warsaw rounded up 500 other political opponents for &quot;warning talks&quot; and seized illegal publications.    ---   Philippine authorities placed security forces on full alert following reports that soldiers loyal to deposed leader Marcos were planning another bid to topple the Manila government. At least five coup attempts or revolts have occurred since President Aquino took office 14 months ago. </TEXT></DOC>