<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870622-0085 </DOCNO><HL> Asia:Philippine Church Entangled in Marxist Insurrection---By William McGurn</HL><DD> 06/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> MANILA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Little more than a year ago the archbishop of Manila, Jaime Cardinal Sin, turned a revolt by two military men into a full-fledged &quot;people's revolution&quot; when he called members of his flock to take to the streets to shield the mutineers with their bodies. Take to the streets they did, Philippine priests and nuns leading the faithful armed with religious statues, rosary beads and prayers in a dramatic -- and peaceful -- ousting of President Ferdinand Marcos.    Today, with democracy restored and a seasoned communist insurgency in the provinces now threatening to bring the war to Manila, the cardinal and his brother bishops are having trouble persuading some of the clergy to go back to their pulpits. The attempt here to lay down just what ought to be rendered unto Caesar comes at a time when church-state relations around the world are at a critical stage, compounded by the growing influence of a liberation theology whose adherents appear more inspired by &quot;Das Kapital&quot; than the &quot;Sermon on the Mount.&quot; From Singapore and Poland to Nicaragua and the U.S., the church is under attack for its politics. How Asia's only Christian nation deals with the dilemma is thus being watched by anxious faithful everywhere.    &quot;Partisan politics should be left to the laity,&quot; says the 59-year-old Cardinal Sin in an interview at his Villa San Miguel residence. On the wall behind him hangs a signed picture of Pope John Paul II, hands upraised in the now-familiar papal blessing. &quot;The moment the church as an institution marries a political system she becomes a widow in the next generation,&quot; the cardinal says.    As part of the new effort to prevent such marriages from being consummated, the Philippine bishops in January forbade the clergy from membership in groups that promote the class struggle. Despite this, a number of priests and nuns have opted to live by the sword: indirectly, through one of the communist-dominated National Democratic Front's dozen member groups such as Christians for National Liberation, or even directly, through the NDF's military wing, the New People's Army.    Although the chief of the armed forces, Gen. Fidel Ramos, has said the church has been infiltrated by the insurgents, it's more accurate to say that churchmen have moved over to the insurgency. Ex-priest Luis Jalandoni, for example, is today the NDF's top international fund-raiser, heading a network that operates out of the Netherlands but has taken him to Libya. The past few weeks alone, moreover, have seen one priest accused of taking part in a communist ambush, another priest killed and several priests captured by the army. Perhaps the most blatant sign that the insurgency has become the opiate of the clergy is that on the regional cease-fire committees during peace talks earlier this year five of the 20 National Democratic Front's slots were filled by priests.    For their part the Marxists have worked hard to fudge the line between out-and-out communists and well-intentioned democratic social activists in United Front fashion a la Nicaragua, another poor Catholic country that threw off a corrupt dictatorship. The irony is that the Marxist clergy President Marcos so railed about never really threatened his government the way it does Cory Aquino's. A series of articles two months ago in the now-defunct daily Business Day traced the general pattern of church support for the insurgents, particularly through the Philippine bishops' social action wing.    Called the National Secretariat for Social Action (NASA), this church group screens proposals for many international funding agencies. The Business Day series charged NASA with channeling money to the NDF through various projects. The bishops' effort to prevent this is made more difficult because NASA denies them access to its project files. &quot;NDF sympathizers have taken over many of the project desks at NASA,&quot; says Bishop Francisco F. Claver, a Jesuit clergyman who has worked in poor areas, &quot;and they are particularly strong in the areas of communications and funding.&quot;    NASA responded with a long rebuttal also published in Business Day. Accusing the author of the offending articles of misunderstanding the way NASA operates and of lacking any understanding of Christian values, the letter included a few corrections about names, dates and procedures. But not once in its 10 pages does it refute the main charge: that NASA is in effect a conduit for money to those backing the insurgency. A visit to NASA's offices in Manila does little to dispel such fears. The library walls are covered with posters from foreign and local organizations expressing solidarity with just about every cause imaginable; anything, says Sister Evelyn Coronel, a project officer at NASA, &quot;so long as it's not the Falwell type.&quot; An NDF poster occupies a central position.    Both Sister Evelyn and Aleli Marcelino, another projects officer, deny that NASA funds the insurgents. But they also say they have no control over monies given out, insisting that they &quot;are not a monitoring agency.&quot; The women defend NASA's refusal to grant the bishops access to projects files on the grounds of &quot;professionalism.&quot; They also shun criticism of the NDF. &quot;It is beside the point whether {a project} comes from the NDF; what matters is the project itself.&quot; The upshot is that whatever NASA's good works it is an organization that (1) denies its own board access to project files; (2) has no objection to NDF-sponsored projects, and (3) refuses to keep track of disbursements in a country where a communist insurgency challenges President Aquino's fledgling democracy in 65 out of 73 provinces.    Top churchmen acknowledge the division in the ranks but emphasize that the percentage of radicalized brothers, priests and nuns is small. They hope, moreover, that the outright repudiation of the hard left by the Philippine electorate will persuade some of these lost sheep to return to the fold. During the Marcos regime the church was reluctant to address the problem lest it be seen as throwing its brethren to the dogs and giving its blessing to a crackdown. But now, says Cardinal Sin, &quot;the time has come for us to clean house.&quot;    The job probably would be easier if leaders such as Cardinal Sin were more scrupulous about their own involvement in politics. Only days after the guidelines for the clergy were announced, for example, His Eminence was shown on television endorsing 10 politicians in the May election -- all Aquino people. It was a mistake, he says, pointing out that in fact he had only endorsed a lay effort to come up with the 10 best candidates. Technically true, the defense nonetheless smacks of counting angels on pinheads. It is not unreasonable to expect church hierarchy to be a little more circumspect in adhering to its own principles.    Whether the Philippines will succeed in preserving its new-found freedom is thus entwined in the effort of its Catholic Church to preserve its integrity, with powerful implications for the world either way. Today many clergymen are falling into the same trap that snared the former president. &quot;Marcos always made the mistake of looking at the church as a political force,&quot; says Bishop Claver, &quot;forgetting that there is something else.&quot;    ---   Mr. McGurn is deputy editorial-page editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal. </TEXT></DOC>