<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870610-0003 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 06/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   SUMMIT LEADERS CALLED for new efforts to end the Iran-Iraq war.    In their first joint statement, leaders attending the seven-nation economic summit in Venice urged &quot;just and effective measures&quot; by the U.N. Security Council to end the conflict in the Persian Gulf, saying free navigation through the gulf &quot;is of paramount importance.&quot; The document didn't mention the U.S. naval effort in the region, and didn't offer any help, military or nonmilitary. The leaders also proclaimed unity on East-West ties and pledged specific steps to fight terrorism.    Terrorists exploded a car bomb near the U.S. Embassy in Rome and fired rockets into U.S. and British compounds in attacks linked to the summit.    ---   THE SUPREME COURT ISSUED a ruling over landowners' property rights.    In a 6-3 decision with an impact on fights between land-use planners and developers, the justices ruled that local governments must pay damages to landowners if zoning regulations deprive them even temporarily of all use of their land. The court ruled that the Fifth Amendment, which bars the taking of property &quot;without just compensation,&quot; requires that landowners be reimbursed not only when the government seizes property, but also when it thwarts the use of property by land-use rules.    The court, in a case involving Muslims, ruled that the religious practices of prison inmates can be restricted to insure a penal institution's security.    ---   Fawn Hall told the congressional Iran-Contra panels that National Security Council computer files show a draft -- not yet found in paper form -- of a 1986 memo outlining plans to divert to Nicaraguan rebels proceeds from U.S. arms sales to Iran. Following Hall's testimony, the panels adjourned until June 22.    ---   The U.S. is preparing a civil suit to place the Teamsters union under receivership because of the union's reputed links to organized crime, the Los Angeles Times reported. The newspaper said the planned Justice Department suit is aimed at ousting the union's 21-member executive board. Teamster aides said they weren't aware of the report.    ---   The Soviet Union proposed mandatory inspection of nuclear test sites by an international team if violations were suspected. Moscow, at a 40-nation disarmament conference in Geneva, also put forward a reduction in the size of test explosions in what it said was a concession prompted by a U.S. refusal to discuss a test ban.    A Kremlin spokesman said that U.S. and Soviet arms-control delegations may complete a draft treaty by October, and that a Reagan-Gorbachev summit could be held once the talks are completed.    ---   Pope John Paul II praised a pro-Solidarity priest killed in 1984 by Polish police. The pontiff's remarks came during an outdoor Mass in Lublin that was attended by more than one million Poles. The pope, on a weeklong tour of his native Poland, condemned political oppression during a visit to the site of a Nazi death camp in Majdanek.    ---   Thatcher returned to London from Venice with the latest public-opinion polls showing the Conservatives poised to win a comfortable majority in the House of Commons. A Marplan poll showed the Tories with 45% of the vote, the Labor Party with 32% and the Alliance of the Liberals and Social Democrats with 21%.    ---   South Korean police clashed with protesters as nearly 10,000 students staged demonstrations demanding President Chun's resignation. Thousands of riot police had been placed on alert and more than 3,000 people were arrested prior to today's planned nationwide opposition rallies.    ---   New York's highest court ruled that a Long Island school district violated constitutional rights against unreasonable search and seizure by ordering teachers to submit to drug tests. The decision by the state's court of appeals is believed to be the first such ruling by any top state court.    ---   South Africa sought to end a year-old rent boycott by blacks, unveiling legislation that would require employers to take the arrears out of defaulters' wages. Separately, the Johannesburg Star newspaper reported that Pretoria would renew and possibly reinforce the state of emergency when the rules imposed last June expire later this week.    ---   Sen. Biden of Delaware announced his candidacy for the 1988 Democratic presidential nomination. The three-term senator, seeking to attract younger voters, indicated plans to make the welfare of children and the integrity of government touchstones in his campaign.    ---   A House committee approved a bill prohibiting physicians from profiting from drug sales. In addition, one of the Energy and Commerce panel's subcommitees cleared catastrophic-health-care legislation after adopting amendments to provide a prescription-drug benefit and to provide certain home-care services.    ---   The National Cancer Institute said urban dwellers and inhabitants of industrial areas face the greatest risk of cancer, but the rate among rural residents is rising because of cigarette smoking among women and fast-food diets. The report also found a sharp rise in cancer of the lymph glands among farmers because of exposure to herbicides.    ---   Guerrillas attacked a camp in northern Afghanistan last month and 80 Soviet soldiers were killed, Western diplomats reported. Fighting also was said to be continuing around Kabul. If confirmed, the Soviet death toll from the May 30 attack would be the worst for a single skirmish in the eight-year-old Afghan conflict.    ---   The Philippine government granted administrative autonomy to five northern provinces. A rebel Roman Catholic priest who leads about 200 armed fighters was put in charge of security. The order is to be formally signed by Aquino next week.    ---   Switzerland has expelled a Soviet diplomat suspected of buying computer secrets. Bern said he was ordered to leave last month. The Kremlin responded by ordering a Swiss Embassy official out of Moscow. </TEXT></DOC>