<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861211-0077 </DOCNO><HL> Unlikely Gusher:Exxon Strikes It RichDeveloping Its LandsFor Homes and Offices---Deep Pockets, Patience HelpIt and Other Oil GiantsSucceed in Huge Projects---Doing Well Even in Houston---By James TannerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/11/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MND RD SC CHV MOB XONREAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)PETROLEUM (PET) </IN><DATELINE> CLEAR LAKE CITY, Texas  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Nearly 50 years ago, Humble Oil andamp; Refining Co. paid $8.5 million for a sprawling 30,000-acre cattle ranch here abutting the Gulf of Mexico. Humble didn't much care about cattle. What it wanted was the oil that it hoped was underneath the ranch.    Alas, Humble didn't find a gusher. At its peak, the Clear Lake oil field produced only 2,000 barrels of oil a day -- a few drops by Humble's standards -- and in recent decades production has dwindled to just 230 barrels a day.    But for Humble's current parent company, Exxon Corp., the purchase has been anything but a disappointment. As the home of the Johnson Space Center, scores of high-technology companies, a giant petrochemical complex and one of Houston's fastest-growing residential communities, the old cow pasture is one of the best pieces of real estate in the Southwest.    &quot;It turned into a gold mine,&quot; says Bennett H. Wall, a retired history professor who is writing a book on Exxon.    The developer of the ranch was Friendswood Development Co., an Exxon subsidiary named after a nearby oil field, and it has become Houston's biggest, fastest-growing developer. In the past two decades, more than 31,000 homes and apartments have been built in Friendswood communities, which ultimately will house more than 200,000 people. The Exxon unit also has constructed two million square feet of retail and office space.    The combined value of all the land and improvements in Friendswood's developments is estimated at nearly $19 billion. To put that in perspective, the present value of Exxon's U.S. oil and gas reserves is estimated at $14.3 billion.    Now, buoyed by the success of its real-estate projects in the Houston area, the little-known developer is expanding to Washington, D.C., and is looking at other areas. Exxon says it isn't trying to make its real-estate developments as well known nationally as the tiger associated with its gasoline. &quot;But it's been a very successful growth business,&quot; says U.J. LeGrange, Exxon USA senior vice president.    Exxon isn't the only big oil company moving aggressively into real-estate development. Several oil giants that acquired huge tracts of land for refineries, tank farms and drilling rigs during the industry's heyday are using the properties -- in this era of depressed energy prices -- to build houses, hotels, resorts and a variety of commercial projects. In doing so, some members of Big Oil have joined the ranks of the nation's top developers.    Two other large energy companies, the Royal Dutch/Shell Group (through its pension fund) and Mitchell Energy andamp; Development, are behind the development of huge, &quot;master-planned&quot; communities around Houston. Like Exxon's, the projects are upscale, resortlike communities.    Mitchell Energy, for example, is developing a rustic-looking &quot;new town&quot; carved out of piney woods 30 miles north of downtown Houston. The Woodlands, as it is called, has golf courses, tennis courts and hiking trails. It even has a computer system that is hooked up to homes and provides residents' medical histories to help the community's ambulance service in emergencies.    In addition, the Woodlands has jobs. Aided by its &quot;research forest&quot; of colleges and research centers, the development has attracted 280 mostly high-technology businesses that already provide 6,000 jobs for the 21,000 residents. By the time the development, which will be 1 1/2 times the size of Manhattan, is completed in 2010, Mitchell Energy says it will have housing for 180,000 people and local jobs for everybody who wants one.    In other areas as well, big oil companies also are active in real estate.    On the West Coast, Chevron Land andamp; Development is one of the biggest players. The Chevron Corp. unit is pumping handsome profits from properties rendered &quot;surplus&quot; by the oil glut.    A few years ago, the company launched a 6,000-home development near Seattle on a 2,200-acre tract acquired in the 1950s for a refinery that was never built. In the Los Angeles basin, it is building six major residential developments, two of them on the depleted flanks of a big oil field. Near San Francisco and Bakersfield, it is converting former sites for crude-oil storage tanks into industrial, commercial and residential use. And it is developing the former Ontario, Calif., motor speedway, which it acquired in 1980, as a residential, commercial and industrial site.    Similarly, Mobil Corp. has become a giant developer on both coasts. Its growing portfolio includes Reston, Va., the &quot;new town&quot; acquired from Gulf Oil Corp., and multimillion-dollar luxury housing projects in Florida and California. &quot;Our real-estate operations have turned out quite well,&quot; says Allen E. Murray, Mobil's chairman.    That may surprise people who still remember Big Oil's past diversification fiascoes. Flush with cash from the energy boom in the 1970s, oil companies spent billions of dollars on ventures ranging from department stores to electric motors to esoteric office systems -- many of which rewarded shareholders with little better than dry holes. But real estate, experts say, is different.    &quot;It's a natural extension of their businesses,&quot; says Larry Sherry of Kenneth L. Leventhal andamp; Co., an accounting firm specializing in real estate. &quot;Real estate is entrepreneurial, capital-intensive and high-risk, the same as oil.&quot;    In many ways, real-estate experts say, the oil giants even have a decided edge on rival developers. Blessed with large landholdings, deep pockets and good credit ratings, the companies' real-estate arms have the strength to survive in an industry that, like oil, is often racked by booms and busts. Says Lawrence G. Rawl, Exxon's president: &quot;We've made money in Houston real estate through thick and thin.&quot;    Indeed, amid the worst local real-estate crash since the Depression, Exxon's Friendswood subsidiary has become the envy of Houston developers, many of whom are either in or near bankruptcy proceedings. Fast-growing Friendswood, with 44,000 acres of prime real estate in the area, is the largest landowner in Harris (Houston) County.    Although Friendswood's borrowings aren't backed by its parent's assets, John Walsh, the subsidiary's president, says it raises capital on its own for its multimillion-dollar developments at rates comparable to those paid by the Fortune 500. Generally, such companies can borrow short-term at about one percentage point below the prime rate, the banks' basic lending rate to good customers. Smaller, independent developers often pay several points above prime. The difference in rates can translate into millions of dollars.    &quot;Funding gives them a cushion other developers don't have,&quot; says Stewart Robinson, senior vice president of Horne Co., a big Houston real-estate company. &quot;As a broad-spectrum developer,&quot; he adds, &quot;Friendswood has no equal in Harris County.&quot;    What sets Exxon and several other oil giants apart from most developers is their tendency to take the same approach to developing a cow pasture or timberland as they would an oil field -- slowly, methodically and with the focus on big, long-term payoffs rather than on making a fast buck. While many developers might assemble a few hundred acres, put in the utilities, build cookie-cutter homes and complete an entire subdivision within a year, Exxon tends to develop what it calls &quot;master-planned communities&quot; on thousands of acres over a quarter-century or more.    Take Kingwood, for example, a 13,000-acre residential project northeast of Houston that is being developed by Exxon's real-estate subsidiary. After 15 years of building a six-mile-long series of rustic villages in the forests of Lake Houston's northern shores, Kingwood is only half finished. Friendswood expects the community, now with 32,000 residents, to swell to 75,000 by the time it is completed in the late 1990s.    In many ways, Kingwood looks more like an affluent resort than a suburban development. It has hiking trails, a 30-mile greenbelt, four 18-hole golf courses, 16 swimming pools and 25 tennis courts, and even a community equestrian center. Residents boast that their vacations are usually a bore because they can't find anything equal to what they have at home.    &quot;On weekends, you don't have the urge to get out and get away,&quot; says James Elmore Jr., a sales consultant and triathlon athlete who runs 40 miles a week and also trains in biking and swimming in Kingwood facilities. Adds Austin Cordray, a recently retired petroleum engineer who moved to Kingwood years ago despite a 40-mile trip to the West Houston offices of Shell Oil Co.: &quot;It has all the amenities.&quot;    Kingwood's homes -- spacious, well-manicured and priced from $100,000 to $1 million -- are attracting buyers even as some outlying residential developments are fast deteriorating. Over the years, Kingwood has prospered from a constant influx of oil-company transferees attracted by Friendswood's advertising and word of mouth. But these days, the Friendswood projects are luring more and more Houston residents who prefer a community that seems almost immune to the vicissitudes of the Houston housing market. Knowing that the community's developer is backed by deeppockets Exxon helps.    &quot;People that move here feel secure,&quot; says Pope Shealy, Kingwood's project manager. &quot;And that's particularly important when the economy is down because we have staying power.&quot;    Perhaps this explains why only about 6% of Kingwood's 8,900 homes are currently vacant or up for resale, compared with 14% in all of Houston. And in a city with more empty commercial and office space than any other in the U.S., Friendswood manages to do well with both; its 1.1 million-square-foot Greenspoint office and commercial project under development north of Houston, for example, is 87% leased. Friendswood executives say they are benefiting from a mass movement of tenants from standard office buildings to space in elite developments that now can be leased at lower rates than previously.    With so much to offer both to homeowners and to businesses, the oil companies' giant developments, taken together, now account for almost 25% of Houston's new-home sales, up from only about 10% five years ago, according to Michael Inselmann, who heads a local market-research firm. Oil-company developments have prospered at the expense of other communities, he says, by selling &quot;prestige, a quality place to live and a feeling of solid planning and control.&quot;    Most Kingwood residents seem to agree. Ben Johnston, now a newspaper broker, moved to Kingwood a year ago after selling a newspaper that he had published for 25 years in Bastrop, La. &quot;I could have lived anywhere,&quot; Mr. Johnston says, &quot;and had Kingwood not existed, I would not be in Houston.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>