<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870813-0012 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 08/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN ACCEPTED full responsibility for the Iran-Contra affair.    In a nationally broadcast address, the president said he was &quot;stubborn in my pursuit of a policy that went astray,&quot; and noted that the &quot;biggest lesson&quot; from recent hearings is that he and Congress must &quot;regain trust in each other.&quot; Reagan criticized former National Security Adviser Poindexter, who testified that he never informed the president about the diversion of proceeds from the Iranian arms sales to Nicaraguan rebels. &quot;No operation is so secret that it must be kept from the commander in chief,&quot; Reagan said.    Reagan also outlined his agenda for the remainder of his administration, including future U.S. policy in Central America and a possible arms-control agreement with the Soviet Union.    ---   SOUTH AFRICAN POLICE ARRESTED at least 78 striking mine union members.    Authorities said the charges against the members of the National Union of Mineworkers included subversion and conspiring to murder miners defying the strike. The arrests at a union meeting southwest of Johannesburg came as union leaders said black workers at the plant that processes gold for export had voted to join the walkout by as many as 340,000 workers at 44 coal and gold mines.    Both union officials and mine owners said there weren't any plans for new talks over worker demands for a 30% wage increase and improved benefits.    ---   The U.S. accused Iran of obstructing peace efforts in the Persian Gulf, and urged the U.N. to move toward an anti-Iranian arms embargo. In Tehran, East European diplomatic sources said Iran and the Soviet Union are about to sign a treaty that would bring Iran military and economic aid, according to a report.    A fifth floating mine was found in an anchorage just south of the Strait of Hormuz where a Texaco-owned tanker was damaged Monday. Four of the explosive devices were discovered Tuesday. In Kuwait, three reflagged oil tankers prepared to load cargo for a return voyage through the gulf.    ---   Nicaragua notified the World Court that it would withdraw a case against Costa Rica that accused its Central American neighbor of tolerating anti-Sandinista rebel operations. The move by Managua's government, which also urged the U.S. to suspend aid to the Contras, followed the signing last week of a five-nation regional peace proposal.    ---   Labor unrest continued to spread throughout South Korea, and the government again warned that it would crack down on strikes that threaten social and economic stability. As many as 200 major companies reportedly have been affected by walkouts for higher wages.    About 2,000 South Koreans fought riot police at an anti-government protest in Seoul, with demonstrators demanding the release of political prisoners held by the government of President Chun. Rally leaders called for another protest Saturday.    ---   A report by weapons experts concluded that Reagan's space-based antimissile system probably would be useless against the next generation of Soviet rockets. Researchers at the Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory in California said the shield's &quot;kinetic kill&quot; vehicles would be effective only against current Soviet arms.    ---   China's Communist Party expelled or forced the resignation of three liberal intellectuals this month, Western diplomatic and Chinese sources said. The unexpected move appeared to be part of an effort by Beijing's reform-minded leaders to placate hardliners prior to October's party congress.    ---   West Germany exchanged three convicted Soviet bloc spies for two people convicted in East Germany of conducting espionage activities for Bonn, sources said. It was considered the first major East-West prisoner swap in 16 months, and reportedly included the return to East Berlin of master-spy Manfred Rotsch, a Soviet KGB agent.    ---   Supreme Court Justice Brennan left the Mayo Clinic, where it was determined that he doesn't need surgery performed on his &quot;somewhat enlarged&quot; prostate. Separately, Justice Marshall was admitted to Bethesda Naval Hospital suffering from a blood clot in his right foot. A hospital spokeswoman said Marshall was in good condition.    ---   British researchers have located a gene believed responsible for a form of inherited colon cancer. The report in the science journal Nature said the discovery may lead to a test that could determine who is susceptible to the disease and improve treatment.    ---   Two Indian soldiers were killed by a land mine in northern Sri Lanka, the first casualties since New Delhi's troops began enforcing a July 29 peace treaty aimed at ending ethnic turmoil. Two other members of the peace-keeping force were wounded.    ---   Portugal's President Soares appointed Social Democratic leader Anibal Cavaco Silva as prime minister. The move followed an unprecedented victory by the Social Democrats in July 18 parliamentary elections. Cavaco Silva immediately named a youthful cabinet to form Lisbon's first one-party majority government in 13 years.    ---   The Philippine Supreme Court ordered the government elections panel to proclaim former Defense Minister Enrile the winner of a contested Senate race, rejecting another candidate's demand for a recount of the May vote. Enrile's victory is to be certified tomorrow, an election official said. </TEXT></DOC>