<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881021-0179 </DOCNO><HL> Send Congress Back to Civil-Rights Front </HL><AUTHOR> Jim Courter </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> CNG SUP </G><TEXT>   The civil-rights case of the year, a reopening of the 1976 Runyon v. McCrary decision, was just argued in the Supreme Court. In the end this case may say more about Congress than it does about the Supreme Court or about civil rights.    Runyon involved a Virginia private school, not a recipient of public funds, that openly refused admission to blacks. The Supreme Court decision barred discrimination in the making of contracts by reaching back to an 1866 law protecting newly emancipated slaves from racist Southern legislatures. Because the 1976 case barred nongovernmental discrimination while, according to some legal experts, the 19th-century law was intended to prevent discrimination only by state and local government officials, Runyon's legal foundation is at issue and the case has been reheard.    No party to today's argument believes that racial discrimination -- in education, housing, or employment -- is morally acceptable. A consensus of national public opinion opposes discrimination by race or color. Yet Congress stays on the sidelines, preferring to let the Supreme Court lead by reaffirming a shaky ruling based on old law. Instead of passing clear legislation to define and combat current discrimination, Congress acts as if it has done its job by signing amicus briefs informing the court about individual congressmen's feelings.    In the mid-1960s the modern civil-rights struggle peaked when a bipartisan majority in Congress assumed the lead and passed the Civil Rights and Voting Rights acts. Announcing Republican support for the landmark 1964 measure, the conservative Sen. Everett Dirksen said: &quot;Stronger than all the armies is an idea whose time has come.&quot; Although our elected representatives have legislated additional civil-rights measures since then, popular debate has waned as the vanguard of the movement shifted to the unelected courts and the bureaucracy.    The current Supreme Court case reveals a major gap in modern civil-rights protection. For while the civil-rights laws contain remedies of various types, virtually none allow the one sanction common sense would suggest: that individual victims be allowed to sue and collect monetary damages from those who intentionally discriminate. The threat of being forced to pay compensatory and punitive damages is clearly one of the most effective deterrents against racial discrimination a free society can provide.    In 1866 a Republican-dominated Congress enforced the anti-slavery provisions of the new 13th Amendment by passing the first Civil Rights Act. That law gave nonwhite citizens the same right to make and enforce contracts in courts of law as white citizens. Lincoln's congressional Republicans argued that if formerly enslaved black Americans were barred from going into court to enforce contracts in employment, in housing, in education, in property and all other commercial transactions, they would be stripped of the rights of citizens as if the 13th Amendment had never passed.    Freedom of contract does not refer only to formal written agreements. Hiring someone for a job is a contract; buying a loaf of bread in a grocery store is a contract; almost every act in which money changes hands for some product or service is a contract. Contracts define our way of life in a modern free society.    Lincoln's Republicans attached as much importance to freedom of contract as the Framers did when they drafted the Constitution in 1787. While freedom of speech, press, religious exercise, and the other liberties of the Bill of Rights had to be added to the original Constitution, freedom of contract was guaranteed against interference by state legislatures in the Constitution's first article. As the beginning of the Declaration of Independence indicates, America's founding generation thought of freedom of contract as the fundamental right of individuals in societies based on consent. Free societies rest on a social contract agreed to by all the citizens. Freedom of contract is the natural right from which all civil rights follow.    While it would be better for the Supreme Court to continue implementing the 12-year-old Runyon rule, on which a substantial body of case law has now been erected, there are at least three reasons for Congress to write into law the principle that those who commit willful acts of racial discrimination in contracts can be made to pay damages. First, legislation passed by Congress has a stronger claim than judicial rulings to the support of the people. Second, congressional legislation is useful in providing guidance for the courts in applying the law to cases before them. Third, it is less easily overturned by changing court majorities applying different legal standards.    The Civil Rights Enforcement Act, which I introduced last month, is designed as interpretive language to the old civil-rights law. It extends the law to nongovernmental racial discrimination. It applies the threat of lawsuit to all businesses reached by Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. And it establishes clear guidelines and limits, providing an exception for providers of personal services such as baby sitters or housekeepers to recognize the privacy of the family, the marriage contract and the home.    A final advantage of this bill is that it does not take the circuitous route of imposing conditions on federal funds, which has become Congress's method of choice to avoid debating constitutionally suspect assertions of authority. Based on Congress's indisputable power to enforce the 13th Amendment, the Civil Rights Enforcement Act respects both federalism and constitutionalism.    As a result of Congress's reluctance to lead, the nature of the civil-rights movement has been transformed. The Civil Rights Enforcement Act is an excellent vehicle to reopen discussion while closing a loophole in the federal government's protection of individual rights in our colorblind society.    Rep. Courter is a Republican from New Jersey. </TEXT></DOC>