<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881006-0037 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   BENTSEN AND QUAYLE SPARRED on a variety of issues during their debate.    In a nationally broadcast confrontation in Omaha, Neb., that was marked by sharp exchanges, the vice presidential candidates argued over Social Security, the deficit and campaign donations. The debate was dominated from the start by questions over the qualifications of the 41-year-old Quayle. The Republican likened his experience to that of President Kennedy, but his 67-year-old Democratic rival responded, &quot;Senator, you're no Jack Kennedy.&quot; The 90-minute debate also covered the environment, national defense and taxes.    The Democrats were helped by Bentsen's strong performance, but it wasn't clear that Quayle did so poorly that he undermined Republican chances.    ---   CHILE APPARENTLY REJECTED Pinochet's bid to extend his presidency.    Early results from centrist and left-leaning radio stations indicated the general's proposal to rule for nine more years was losing by a wide margin in most regions. But the junta disputed those projections, and there was widespread confusion over vote counting. Many of the 7.4 million Chileans casting ballots had never voted before, though the nation had a long democratic tradition before Pinochet ousted Marxist President Allende in 1973.    If Pinochet loses, he is supposed to call open elections by the end of 1989. But many fear maneuvers by the junta if the vote favors the opposition.    ---   Yugoslavia's Communist Party faces a shake-up. Its chief said the policy-setting Central Committee will probably vote on changing membership in the ruling Politburo Oct. 17. Party leaders have been blamed for economic problems and their failure to defuse tensions between the Serbian minority and Albanians in Kosovo.    ---   U.S.-Vietnamese teams retrieved two sets of human remains during a joint search for airmen missing since the war. But investigators said one set, found buried near the Chinese border along with remains of Vietnamese, probably isn't American. The eightday hunt was the first time Hanoi has allowed the U.S. to search the countryside.    ---   A Senate panel approved 11 of Reagan's judicial nominees but left at least 14 others with practically no chance of approval this year. The 11 will join four others awaiting confirmation by the full Senate, but approval isn't guaranteed. This Congress is Reagan's last chance to move the federal judiciary toward conservative control.    ---   Reagan denied authorizing assassinations by U.S. agents fighting terrorism. But White House spokesman Fitzwater conceded that language in 1984 and 1985 intelligence findings was later rescinded. The Washington Post reported that Reagan signed documents in those years that were interpreted by some as &quot;a license to kill.&quot;    ---   Some U.S. officials now suspect the PLO, not Iran, played a leading role in Monday's release of hostage Mithileswhar Singh in Lebanon. They theorize that the PLO may have taken custody of the Indian-born educator and the three Americans kidnapped with him by Iranian-backed terrorists in 1987 in Beirut.    ---   The FAA sharply reduced landings at Chicago's O'Hare airport during peak evening hours after air-traffic controllers made four mistakes in a week. Since Monday, landings between 5 p.m. and 8 p.m. CDT have been cut to 80 an hour from 96. The agency also cut peak evening landings at Chicago's Midway.    ---   The U.S. is broadening efforts to find out how many Americans carry the AIDS virus. The Centers for Disease Control plans a pilot survey of households, probably in the Pittsburgh area, which could lead to a nationwide study. Plans for a survey in Washington failed when minority and gay organizations balked.    Children with AIDS can benefit from the drug AZT just as adults do, the New England Journal of Medicine reported. A study found children with AIDS-related brain disease and developmental abnormalities had higher IQ scores after receiving the drug. Nearly 1,200 of the 75,000 U.S. AIDS patients are children.    ---   A Chicago judge was convicted of accepting bribes but a retired judge and an attorney were acquitted of related charges in trials stemming from Operation Greylord, an investigation of court corruption in Chicago. So far, 90 judges, lawyers and other court employees have been indicted and 70 have been convicted, including 14 judges.    ---   The White House is still considering asking Congress to release $16.5 million in weapons to the Nicaraguan Contras, a spokesman said. But congressional leaders say approval is unlikely. Delivery of the gear, bought with U.S. aid and stockpiled in Honduras, was frozen when the Contras and the Sandinista government agreed to talks.    ---   A contraceptive vaccine has blocked fertility without fail in female and male guinea pigs, raising prospects that such an approach could work in people. The British journal Nature says the vaccine prevents fertilization, which might make it more acceptable than a vaccine already in human testing that halts embryo development.    ---   Acid rain researchers said that more than half of Europe's lakes and rivers are contaminated. In a report to a U.N. air-pollution conference, they said the damage may be even greater because their data came from the nations concerned. Fighting acid rain is particularly costly for countries that rely heavily on fossil fuels. </TEXT></DOC>