<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880225-0054 </DOCNO><HL> Dixie's Mood: Despite Its Progress, The South Is Largely Still a House Divided --- As 'Super Tuesday' Looms, Gadsden, Ala., Is Insecure Economically and Racially --- A New Confederate Flag Flap </HL><AUTHOR> Michel McQueen (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> GADSDEN, Ala.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Robert Echols loves the South.    &quot;The South is by far the best place in the world to live,&quot; says the 59-year-old white businessman, who proudly monitors the progress that he sees here, right down to who is building each big, new house in his tree-lined neighborhood. But when asked about the civil-rights marches of two decades ago that helped transform his Southern town, he says, &quot;I don't remember all of it -- it was so long ago.&quot;    J. Joseph Faulkner, just a year older and black, recalls every date and turn of the civil-rights struggle, including the pain of the cattle prods hitting his own flesh as police herded men and women to jail. He, too, loves the South but sometimes wonders why it seems that blacks still have so far to go. &quot;I'd have thought we would be further along by now,&quot; he says.    These crosscurrents of views about how far the South has come and where it is headed emerge again and again in this small industrial city in northeast Alabama. When the South flexes its political muscle in next month's &quot;Super Tuesday&quot; primaries, Southerners to a large extent will be voting their hopes for the future, shaped by their experiences of the past.    In many ways, this community seems like a house still divided against itself -- the New South struggling with the Old. It is a city where the local steel plant is bustling and where whites and blacks now govern, work and go to school together. Yet it is also a place haunted by insecurities about the economy and the children's future. And a quarter-century after the end of legal segregation, the races here still lead largely separate lives.    Those conflicts will be in the spotlight March 8 in 14 Southern and border-state primaries that were bunched together to try to strengthen moderate and conservative Democrats. Yet many whites are disappointed by a field that lacks a strong Southern conservative. And crossover voting in eight of the states could allow conservative Democrats to abandon their own primary, helping a GOP candidate.    Most striking is the racial split: Blacks, who constitute a fifth of the voting population in these states, have no interest in moderating the Democratic Party. Most of them are expected to vote for the Rev. Jesse Jackson, even if he can't win the nomination.    &quot;My feeling is, so what? We've lost many times before. We've gone a long time without getting anything,&quot; says Lawrence Presley, the only black member of the Etowah County Commission here. &quot;If he wins, great. If he doesn't, at least we've let the nation know that here's a guy we think can do the job.&quot;    The primaries also are designed to showcase the rise of the New South. A South that once fought to keep blacks from the ballot box has now elected nearly two-thirds of the nation's black officeholders, says the Joint Center for Political Studies. A region that once sent millions off to work in the steel mills and auto plants of the North has attracted many back home with its own jobs, including some in new high-technology industries.    But the spotlight, too, reveals persisting problems. The South is still the poorest region, with nearly 40% of the nation's poor. It spends 20% less per pupil on education than the rest of the country, and in 1985 only 69% of Southerners over age 25 had high-school diplomas, compared with 74% of adults nationwide.    Of the nine states with the worst infant-mortality rates, seven are in the South. And despite impressive gains, blacks say that they remain under-represented in public office and in private managerial jobs, and that racism still abounds.    The dichotomy is evident to a reporter during more than two weeks in Gadsden, a predominantly Democratic town. While no one community can sum up a whole region, Gadsden was suggested by Democratic pollster Peter Hart as representative of much of the South. This city of 48,000 is about 25% black; Etowah County, which includes Gadsden, has about 106,000 residents, of whom less than 15% are black. That approximates the 18% black population of the Super Tuesday Southern states, ranging from less than 12% in Florida and Texas to more than 30% in Mississippi.    In Gadsden, down-home warmth abounds. The clerks at Belk Hudson's department store seem to mean it when they say, &quot;Come back and see us,&quot; whether you buy something or not. And almost everybody, at city hall or at Rick's Gun Shop, displays traditional Southern courtesy. The races mingle in department stores and at downtown restaurants, where city employees all eat between noon and one.    But beneath the cordiality is a schism, largely along racial lines. Blacks and whites mostly live and socialize in separate worlds. Social worker Renita Harrell, 27, part of a popular gospel group with her twin sister, can't remember the last time she visited a white co-worker's home. And most churches are still so racially exclusive that congregants noticeably ignore a black visitor at an all-white church one Sunday, although the sermon touches on how Christians are united by their faith.    &quot;We educate together. And nobody would ask you to leave their church,&quot; says councilwoman Holley Arbery, who is white, but &quot;our community is segregated, there's no question about that.&quot;    Blacks have made political gains here. Two have been elected to the seven-member city council -- one in a district that is about 51% white. And two years ago, Mr. Presley became the first black elected to the seven-member county commission.    But despite the sizable black population, it wasn't until 1986 that blacks first won public office here, after a protracted lawsuit filed under the 1965 Voting Rights Act resulted in district elections. Blacks hold only about a half-dozen of the 300 or so managerial jobs at the steel plant. And a black city councilman found a Confederate flag hanging near his desk at the rubber plant one night recently after a newspaper story quoted him and other black leaders saying they consider the flag an emblem of slavery.    Although some integration has taken place, neighborhoods seem to change abruptly from all-black sections to all-white ones, and the most exclusive areas near the country club haven't any black residents. A nearly 15% drop in the city's population over the decade is attributed in large part to white flight to the overwhelmingly white areas of Etowah County surrounding the town.    Douglas Weems, a white city councilman who owns a sewing-supplies store, is left wondering about acquaintances &quot;who moved out -- sold their house -- because a black family moved in across the street.&quot; And that family, he says, shaking his head, &quot;was better educated, had a bigger house, a better house and a better source of income&quot; than the white family.    The split shows up on everyday issues. One Saturday morning, City Councilman Robert Avery stands at a lectern at the Carver Community Center and listens to his black constituents complain of inequalities: inadequate street lighting, poor police protection, limited busing for schoolchildren and no public transportation.    &quot;They have grants for buses,&quot; says one woman bitterly, &quot;The only problem we have is convincing these white folks to apply for it.&quot; Adds another mother: &quot;What we got to do is make these people see what people go through to get their children to school.&quot;    Nine days later and less than five miles away, City Councilmen Jim Armstrong and Lewis Fuller hear their white constituents' concerns. Most are about litter, overgrown grass in vacant lots and neighborhood dogs. After the meeting, a local judge stalks up to a visitor to set the record straight: &quot;I want you to know that this community's got the lowest crime rate you'll ever find,&quot; he says adamantly, &quot;This is one of the best places to raise a family there is.&quot;    The economy here revolves around the farming and heavy industry that dominate much of the South. A steel plant, now privately owned, dates to 1904. The Goodyear Tire andamp; Rubber Co. plant dates to 1929. A contract manufacturer makes everything from hair dryers to handguns. These three companies, the town's biggest employers, have a combined work force of more than 7,000.    Despite Alabama's &quot;right-to-work&quot; laws, which discourage unionism, and unlike most of the South, this is a heavily union area. Foreign cars are about as common here as pickup trucks on the streets of Manhattan.    But it is a boom-and-bust economy, where security seems elusive. At the height of the 1982 recession, the unemployment rate here soared to 20.5%. &quot;We had guys lose their jobs, lose their homes, marriages break up,&quot; recalls Gary Bone, the boyish-looking, 35-year-old head of the United Steelworkers here. Half of the shops lining Broad Street, the main thoroughfare, closed their doors or moved to a shopping mall.    Most of the stores on Broad Street have tenants again. About 2,000 are working at the steel plant, 500 more than two years ago. Unemployment in December was down to 7.8%, though, as in a majority of the Southern states, the rate is still above the national average. And though the economy seems strong again, worries persist.    &quot;The steel plant's been good to me, raised my family, supported my family,&quot; says Mr. Bone. But, he recalls, &quot;in 1981, the world seemed great, nothing's going to happen and, boom, the bottom fell out. So I think people know what can happen and remember that.&quot;    A concern, says Mayor David Nolen, is that the town relies heavily on just a few employers. &quot;Right now people feel pretty good, but when there's talk of one closing or reducing hours, the entire community dries up,&quot; he says. &quot;People are afraid they might go on short time, so they stop spending and merchants start hurting.&quot; He and other officials want to bring in new industries, especially smaller ones that won't dominate the work force.    &quot;I want to have a place where my grandchildren can stay and work when they grow up if that's what they desire,&quot; says Mayor Nolen. &quot;Diversification is one of my goals -- so there will be jobs for all people, those that have specialized fields, the professions.&quot;    Indeed, the future of the young is a major worry here. Currently, more than 85% of Etowah County's residents were born in Alabama, one of the highest percentages of &quot;native&quot; population in any county in the nation, says a recent study by the Population Reference Bureau in Washington, D.C.    But that could change. &quot;There's no good jobs except for Goodyear and the steel plant, and they're not hiring,&quot; says 22-year-old Brian Lanham as he and two friends order a round of Bud Light beer at the Rogue's lounge one morning. Mr. Lanham has been working in the stockroom of a grocery chain since he quit attending the local junior college here. Pushing back his flannel shirt and revealing a Larry Bird -- Boston Celtics T-shirt, he says he is contemplating moving to California to seek better opportunities.    Larry Sanders, a 37-year-old structural engineer, shopping with his wife, Janet, in the mall one day, compares the situation with the racial controversy over the Confederate flag. &quot;I know what it's like to feel oppressed,&quot; he says. &quot;Hell, I'm an engineer and I'd like to make a change from what I've been doing, but it seems like there's not so many choices.&quot;    State Sen. William Drinkard, a Democrat who has represented the area for 13 years, says, &quot;We've got a brain drain here. Most of the whites, and it seems all of the blacks, if they've got something on the ball, they go somewhere else. They want to go someplace where they can have an impact, where they can do some things.&quot;    A key, many parents and others say, is improving the lagging quality of education. &quot;There's no reason why we can't jump ahead and start moving forward at a tremendous pace,&quot; says Democratic state Rep. Joe M. Ford, pounding the desk in an office decorated with posters from Clemson University, where his brother, Dan, coaches football. &quot;But for us to break out, to get out of that redneck attitude we're in, we've got to have more money. Schools are the key to jobs.&quot;    Despite these pressing concerns, many people here -- black and white -- say that they wouldn't want to live anywhere but in the South and that they see hope for change.    &quot;We suffer from stereotypes; the redneck, Confederate battle flag-carrying element. You certainly have that element, but it's not the majority,&quot; says Councilman Fuller, who owns a medical-supplies store here.    William Cunningham, a black councilman who works at the rubber plant, agrees: &quot;I do a lot of traveling, but I think it's just as bad up there&quot; in the North. &quot;I think people have a distorted view of the South.&quot;    An incident at a Gadsden restaurant illustrates the changing mix of the Old South and the New: As Spencer Thomas, the president of the local NAACP chapter here, and his wife, Lela, finish Sunday dinner, a middle-aged white car dealer, J.D. Boozer, recognizes Dr. Thomas and walks up to defend public displays of the Confederate flag.    &quot;That flag means more than just against the black people,&quot; he says heatedly. But, after a brief discussion with the calm Dr. Thomas, his tone changes, and he says, &quot;I respect what you're doing for the community. I read your column in the paper and I enjoy it.&quot; And he leaves. </TEXT></DOC>