<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870218-0130 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> JAPAN EUROPMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   The current thrust of the Reagan administration's policy toward the dollar is based on a fundamental misdiagnosis of the current situation and a misunderstanding of the potential effect of government intervention in the foreign-exchange market. The administration appears to believe that the dollar is now at a sustainable level or at least that it would be if West Germany and Japan expanded their economies a bit faster.    The current talk about Group of Five meetings and target zones for the exchange rates also assumes that currency intervention and official jawboning could be effective in stopping the dollar's decline. And since the only thing that is actually likely to slow the dollar's erosion would be a substantial tightening of U.S. monetary policy, there is the implicit assumption that the U.S. economy would be better off with tighter money at home and more fiscal expansion abroad. In fact, each of these presumptions is wrong.    Although the dollar has declined sharply in the past two years, it still has significantly further to fall in order to bring U.S. imports and exports back into balance and to reduce our dependence on the inflow of foreign capital. Experts estimate that if the dollar stayed at its current level, the U.S. merchandise trade deficit would eventually shrink from its current rate of $170 billion a year to about $90 billion by 1989 but would then stop declining. The lower trade deficit would mean less U.S. dependence on inflows of foreign capital, but this would soon be outweighed by the ballooning interest on America's rapidly growing debts to the rest of the world. Within less than five years, financing the trade deficit plus the interest on U.S. debt to the rest of the world would require an annual capital inflow to the U.S. of more than $150 billion a year, even greater than it is today.    Foreign investors will simply be unwilling to go on devoting a larger and larger share of their portfolios to dollar securities now that U.S. bonds no longer offer substantially higher interest rates than foreign bonds. Indeed, inflation-adjusted real interest rates are now higher in West Germany and Japan than in the U.S. And portfolio investors looking at today's massive trade imbalances know that the future rises in the Japanese yen and the German mark will add to the ultimate return earned by investments in those securities rather than dollar securities.    The dollar's decline over the past two years reflects the response of private investors around the world to the changing rewards and risks of investing in different currencies. The dollar will continue to decline until it reaches a level at which the implied long-term trade deficit is small enough to be financed by foreign investors. It will take a further 20% fall of the dollar to about 120 yen and 1.50 marks to reach a level at which U.S. exports and imports are in balance. Even that would still leave the U.S. with a need for $60 billion of foreign capital a year to finance the interest and dividends on its overseas debts. If foreign investors are unwilling to provide that much new credit each year, the dollar will have to fall even further.    It is simply wrong to believe that faster growth abroad can be a substitute for a further major decline of the dollar. Even doubling the projected real growth rates in the rest of the industrial world for this year and next would cut the 1988 U.S. trade deficit by less than $20 billion.    It is also wrong to argue that the dollar's rapid fall will actually hurt U.S. exports by cutting economic activity abroad. Although the lower dollar does slow foreign economic growth, the feedback to American exports is trivial. A two percentage-point drop in Japan's growth means a cut of less than $4 billion in Japan's imports from the rest of the world. The effect of the falling dollar on the relative price of American goods dominates the impact on foreign incomes and expands U.S. exports to Japan, West Germany and other countries as well as shrinks foreign sales to the U.S.    Thoughtful business and government leaders in Japan and Europe acknowledge that the dollar must decline substantially from its current level, but many of them also wish that the decline could be stretched over the next several years in order to reduce the pain associated with shrinking their exports and restructuring their economies. That is not likely to be possible. Once a consensus develops among the world's financial investors that the dollar must decline by 20% or more from its current level during the next four or five years, that decline will happen much more rapidly.    A gradual 20% dollar decline in five years would mean a loss of 4% a year to holders of dollar bonds. Such a loss would outweigh the extra one or two percentage points that dollar bonds pay in higher interest rates compared with West German or Japanese bonds. If that five-year dollar decline were expected, investors would immediately sell those bonds in favor of West German or Japanese bonds and the dollar's value would drop more rapidly. Only when the dollar's expected future decline has been cut to no more than the interest-rate differential of one or two percentage points will investors be content to hold dollar bonds.    A new G-5 meeting and a public promise of coordinated intervention would not be able to reverse these powerful market forces. The historic record amply demonstrates the futility of exchange-market intervention. In 1983 an international group of central bankers convened by the International Monetary Fund reviewed three decades of experience and concluded that exchange-market intervention per se had no sustained effect on the movement of exchange rates. The past two months have seen more than $25 billion of unsuccessful intervention by West Germany, France and Japan, which failed to stop the strengthening of their currencies relative to the dollar or the realignment of currencies within the European Monetary System.    Some of the wishful thinking that finance ministers' incantations and foreign-exchange interventions can arrest the dollar's decline no doubt reflects the appearance of success at the September 1985 G-5 meeting at New York's Plaza Hotel. But although the press often credits that meeting with precipitating the dollar's decline, the meeting simply accelerated for about three days the decline of the dollar that had actually begun six months earlier. Indeed, the dollar's rate of decline in the six months before the Plaza meeting was every bit as rapid as its rate of decline in the year after the Plaza meeting.    Massive intervention would only cause the treasuries of the U.S. and the other key currency countries to lose money to the speculators who are prepared to bet that the dollar will continue to decline. The government of Japan has already spent more than $40 billion in buying dollars for yen since this time last year. The dollar has nevertheless depreciated rapidly, creating a multibillion-dollar loss for Japanese taxpayers. It would be a pity if the U.S. Treasury now agreed to waste American taxpayers' money in a futile attempt to stop the dollar's decline.    Although the dollar's decline could be slowed by a change of U.S. economic policy, it is not the policy change that is often advocated. A reduction in the U.S. budget deficit would put downward pressure on U.S. interest rates, reducing the attractiveness of the dollar. Similarly, the pressure on West Germany and Japan to increase their budget deficits could also be counterproductive, causing their interest rates to rise and pushing up the value of the mark and the yen.    The only U.S. policy change that would be expected to halt the dollar's decline would be a tightening of monetary policy and a hike in U.S. interest rates. That would be bad medicine for an economy in the fifth year of an expansion that is already anticipating the debilitating effects of a fall in investment induced by last year's tax reform, a slowdown in the growth of consumer spending and a reduction in government demand.    Indeed, the primary cause for optimism about the economy's ability to continue expanding for the next two years is the prospect that the dollar's fall will create a meaningful turnaround in the trade deficit. It would be doubly counterproductive to tighten money and raise the dollar's value, thereby hurting both domestic interest-sensitive industries and our trade balance.    Although a strong dollar and a large trade deficit do help to maintain the capital inflow that keeps real long-term interest rates from rising, it would make no sense to raise interest rates through a tight money policy in order to prevent a dollar decline from raising interest rates! The only way to combine continued economic expansion in the U.S. with lower interest rates is to enact policies that will reliably reduce future budget deficits.    Instead of flirting with currency intervention and contractionary U.S. monetary policy, it would be far better for the U.S. government and the governments of its major trading partners to accept the inevitability of a further near-term decline of the dollar and to try to educate the financial markets about what is likely to be a truly sustainable level of the dollar. When the dollar's adjustment has finally occurred, private businesses can begin planning their futures based on realistic and sustainable exchange-rate levels.    ---   Mr. Feldstein, past chairman of the president's Council of Economic Advisers, is a professor of economics at Harvard. </TEXT></DOC>