<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890822-0082 </DOCNO><DD> = 890822 </DD><AN> 890822-0082. </AN><HL> One-Man Show:@  Troubles Beset Utility@  After Its Chief Makes@  An Abrupt Departure@  ---@  Mr. Greve of Tucson Electric@  Left Directors in the Dark;@  The Dividend May Be Cut@  ---@  'Try to Know Thy Chairman'@  ----@  By Frederick Rose@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/22/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> TEP </CO><IN> CORPORATE PROFILE (PRO)BIOGRAPHY (BIO)UTILITIES (UTI)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><DATELINE> TUCSON, Ariz.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Now that 61-year-old Einar Greve has resigned under pressure from his $964,000-a-year job as head of Tucson Electric Power Co., the utility's directors are marveling at how little they knew of him.    They did know he was a dedicated engineer with an encyclopedic knowledge of electrical generation and transmission. But many of them didn't know where he lived. They knew little or nothing of his life outside the office. They weren't even sure he was married; he is, for the third time, to a 25-year-old former topless dancer.    Mr. Greve (pronounced Greeve) wasn't eager to enlighten them. &quot;To say that he was an introvert is an understatement,&quot; says Thomas C. Weir, a director who knew him for eight years and who has succeeded him as the company's chief executive.    None of this might have made much difference except for the Pandora's box that has opened at the medium-sized utility since Mr. Greve's departure as chairman and chief executive officer.    In June and early July, Mr. Greve sold more than $1 million of Tucson Electric stock, most of his holdings. &quot;It shocked me,&quot; says Mr. Weir. &quot;If I had false teeth I would have lost them.&quot; Directors began an inquiry. Mr. Greve quit July 17.    Now the directors must deal with problems that, they say, they didn't know existed. The company has had to issue a string of gloomy announcements: The Securities and Exchange Commission is investigating possible insider trading at Tucson Electric; losses loom in coming quarters; the dividend may be omitted, or cut sharply, at a directors' meeting today.    Not so long ago, securities analysts were praising Tucson Electric's management. &quot;Things have come unwound very quickly,&quot; says Alfred G. Mazzorana, a bond analyst at UBS Securities Inc. in New York. Tucson Electric, he says, had been &quot;one of the highfliers, one of the premier utilities.&quot;    Through his lawyer, Theodore Sonde, Mr. Greve declined to be interviewed for this article. Mr. Sonde says his client believes &quot;that the board was fully informed and that Mr. Greve can't recall any instance in which he withheld information from the board or in which he declined to provide information to it.&quot;    The Tucson Electric of today is for the most part the work of two men -- Mr. Greve and Theodore Welp, who ran the company from 1976 to 1985. They steered the once-sleepy local utility into regional wholesaling of electricity and a variety of non-utility investments.    Though the two worked closely for years, their skills, interests and characters were utterly different. The two clashed; but if it hadn't been for Mr. Welp, Mr. Greve might never have reached the top.    Mr. Welp came to Tucson Electric from Pacific Gas andamp; Electric, where he was treasurer. Now 55, he is a tall and powerful man with an explosive temper. At Tucson Electric, he publicly reprimanded his own executives between sessions of a regulatory hearing. He was a financial specialist with a knack for political hardball. He once tried to influence an Arizona Corporations Commission member with a labor-union background by threatening to build -- and eventually building -- a major plant with non-union labor. The threat was tape-recorded.    The introverted Mr. Greve came to Tucson Electric from Charles T. Main Inc., engineering consultants. He had emigrated from Norway in his early 20s. Small and sinewy, he was also remote and stubborn, only occasionally exhibiting a wry humor. He had been a lieutenant colonel in the Army Reserve; Tucson Electric's proxy statement this year announced that the annual meeting would begin at &quot;1430 hours.&quot;    Despite the two men's differences, they were &quot;a team,&quot; Mr. Welp testified not long ago in one of the many lawsuits that have sprung up around Tucson Electric's dealings.    Mr. Welp, as president and chief executive officer, put the utility on its feet financially in the late 1970s and early 1980s with his innovative financing of major construction. Mr. Greve, then executive vice president and the company's top power planner, oversaw operations.    For nearly a decade Mr. Greve had worked in Mr. Welp's shadow. Then, in 1984, Mr. Welp proposed an audacious change that involved his own resignation: Tucson Electric would spin off interests in its two newest generating plants to a subsidiary, Alamito Co. Its stock would be distributed to Tucson Electric shareholders. Mr. Welp would take charge of Alamito.    It was a break for Mr. Greve, although it didn't look like one for a while. Mr. Greve later said that Mr. Welp thought he was the wrong man for the top job at Tucson Electric, that Mr. Welp told him he wanted someone with a background in business rather than operations and engineering. &quot;I told him where he could stick it,&quot; Mr. Greve recalled later.    Still, the two together crafted an intricate power-supply contract with Tucson Electric that gave Alamito valuable parts of the parent's wholesale business.    At some point, Mr. Welp changed his mind about Mr. Greve and recommended him as his successor at Tucson Electric. The board went along without debate.    Mr. Welp then went to Alamito, which eventually was sold to Osceola Energy Inc., a closely held investment group, for $379.5 million. Mr. Welp stayed on at Alamito until recently. Now retired, he won't discuss why he changed his mind about Mr. Greve.    At Tucson Electric, what little the employees know of Mr. Greve's life they learned by observation. He had adopted Tucson's Western style, dressing informally in open shirt and cowboy boots. For a while he even chewed tobacco. Except for a slight lilt in his speech, his Norwegian accent had vanished. Employees knew he occasionally hunted, from the racks of elk antlers that appeared at his office; he carted them off in his Jeep. But he rarely if ever discussed his activities. &quot;He was just a very private person,&quot; says Roger Yohem, a public-relations official at the company.    Mr. Greve joined no clubs. He avoided involvement in charities, unlike other utility-company executives, who usually take part in community affairs. He seemed allergic to reporters. He didn't grant a formal interview in five years as chief executive.    Nor did Mr. Greve spare much time for customers. When a senior executive of the company's largest industrial customer asked for a meeting, a secretary insisted that &quot;Mr. Greve doesn't see customers.&quot; Only after some negotiation was a meeting arranged.    He often seemed just as distant to insiders. Joseph B. Wilcox, vice president of customer and corporate services, worked with Mr. Greve for a decade but says he never had lunch with him privately.    Mr. Weir for years had the vague impression that Mr. Greve was married to a teacher. It wasn't so.    Though Mr. Greve never talked about them, he had undergone some big changes at home. His first marriage, which lasted 22 years, had ended in divorce in 1980, five years before he became chief executive. Mr. Greve set up house with the younger of his two sons. Then, during the lunch hour one day, Mr. Greve married a woman who worked in Tucson Electric's customer-relations department. Afterward, he returned to the office for an afternoon's work.    That marriage lasted barely two months, and ended in divorce in 1983.    In 1985, Mr. Greve succeeded Mr. Welp. Tucson Electric seemed to be prospering. Profits and dividends had risen steadily from the mid-1970s and continued to rise through last year. But the financial statements had yet to reflect the utility's fundamental troubles. It had more generating capacity than it needed. The surplus threatened to grow to one-third the utility's total capacity by 1990, when a big coal-fired plant would come on line. Meanwhile the once-burgeoning business in wholesale power was crumbling.    To generate cash Tucson Electric, starting with Mr. Welp, had over the years resorted to such means as the sale and leaseback of generating plants, the sale of an option on a plant, and the marketing of a mining royalty contract. For all the short-term benefit, such expedients shrank future profitability -- and corporate flexibility. And Mr. Greve was investing much of the fresh cash in risky areas having nothing to do with utility operations.    Mr. Welp, the financial whiz, had steered Tucson Electric cash into preferred stock and small power projects. Mr. Greve, the engineer, plunged into common stocks, auto financing, venture capital, real estate and investments in thrift institutions. Mr. Greve mostly kept mum about these moves, leaving disclosure to the footnotes in corporate filings with the SEC. But by last Dec. 31 the investments had swollen to nearly 40% of the company's total assets.    For several years the non-utility investments added luster to the bottom line. In the past year or so, the company's diverse gambles began going sour. An auto-loan operation needed a big cash infusion and management change. Three thrift institutions in which Tucson Electric had invested fell on hard times. A major real-estate development project outside Phoenix died.    Mr. Greve proposed a way out: Tucson Electric agreed last year to merge with San Diego Gas andamp; Electric Co. in a stock swap valued at $1.45 billion. But the merger was called off. San Diego Gas later agreed to be acquired by SCE Corp., Rosemead, Calif.    Also last year, another Greve romance set tongues wagging in the utility industry. He appeared early last year at a major industry convention with a statuesque woman so striking that one executive says he rushed for a phone booth to call his company's chairman with the news. When the couple arrived late at a formal dinner, a brief but embarrassing silence ensued. In the largely white and conservative ranks of utility executives, the fact that Sheri Lynise Jackson is black caused at least as great a stir as the fact that she is 25 years old.    The gossip at Tucson Electric had it that Mr. Greve had visited a strip of topless Tucson bars where Ms. Jackson danced. Dancers at two of them remember Sheri Jackson as a pleasant entertainer whose new boyfriend gave her a Mercedes-Benz roadster -- although, according to state records, Mr. Greve owns the car, which he bought three days before Ms. Jackson's birthday last September.    The couple married last Dec. 31 in Las Vegas. Afterward, an employee asked about the marrige at a staff meeting. Mr. Greve confirmed the marriage and then moved swiftly to the next topic.    Through his lawyer, Mr. Greve declines to respond to questions about his private life, including those about Ms. Jackson.    Tucson Electric's outside directors remained in the dark about Mr. Greve's private life, although talk around the company and in the utility industry was widespread. &quot;I guess I'm not much of a gossip,&quot; says Kathryn N. Dusenberry, vice president of City Van andamp; Storage Co. in Tucson and a director of the utility since 1985.    Directors say there were important problems at Tucson Electric that they didn't understand. The company had avoided a major rate review by the Arizona Corporation Commission, its state regulator, for eight years. Now the commission was examining the utility's books in a review that is still in progress. In June, in a decision that would affect only part of the utility's rate structure, the commission provisionally granted it only $3.1 million of the $70 million it was seeking in special rate adjustments. The commission's main rate decision is expected in September.    Not until Mr. Weir began to poke into the company's problems, directors say, did they learn of their extent. A director since 1981, Mr. Weir was brought into the company last November to manage its troubled non-utility investments. Mr. Weir won't talk much about the troubles he discovered. But a person close to the situation says Mr. Weir went to Mr. Greve in June and, in several meetings, urged him to provide directors with more information.    Mr. Greve finally agreed. On June 27, at a regularly scheduled meeting, Tucson Electric's outside directors learned &quot;very troubling&quot; information, says outside director Peter D. Herder. &quot;It was the beginning of some enlightenment,&quot; adds Mr. Weir.    Directors won't say what they heard that day but suggest that the utility's overinvestment in generating resources, combined with regulators' apparently negative views, painted a bleak picture of future cash flow. Cutting or eliminating the dividend suddenly became a likely prospect.    The Greve management, it turned out, had ordered a report from Goldman Sachs, the company's investment bankers, but hadn't provided it to outside directors. They soon demanded it.    The board sought more information and scheduled a June 30 special meeting to review it.    Between those meetings, on June 28, Mr. Greve sold 24,000 shares of Tucson Electric stock at an average price of about $32.25 a share. On July 6, he sold an additional 8,000 shares for $32 each, keeping a relatively small holding of 4,400 shares. Yesterday, the shares closed at $23.50, near their 52-week low.    His lawyer, Mr. Sonde, says Mr. Greve's sales had nothing to do with his access to non-public information. The lawyer also says that Mr. Greve had customarily sold shares acquired by option in recent years, and the June and July sales were consistent with his pattern. However, SEC filings show that Mr. Greve's 1989 sales of stock were much larger than his sales in previous years. The records put his sales at 9,500 shares in 1988 and 15,000 shares in 1987, and these sales had still left him with a holding much larger than the 4,400 shares he kept after his sales this year. By July 10, mandatory insider trading reports filed with the Securities and Exchange Commission told investors what Mr. Weir had already been shocked to discover for himself. Outside directors formed a special committee, and after a brief investigation concluded on July 17 that Mr. Greve should be replaced. He resigned later that day.    A dozen shareholder suits have been filed around the country charging Mr. Greve and Tucson Electric with inside-trading violations and insufficient disclosure of negative information about the company.    But directors say they had little reason to probe earlier into the company's plight. Profits were high. &quot;Things were going so well that we got very comfortable,&quot; says Mr. Weir. Adds John P. Schaefer, an outside board member who now is chairman, no one wanted to infringe on Mr. Greve's authority and discretion. &quot;There is a fine line,&quot; he says, &quot;between oversight and interfering in management.&quot;    Under Messrs. Schaefer and Weir, Tucson Electric probably will shepherd its cash flow closely -- starting with today's anticipated dividend cut. It plans to improve community relations neglected under Mr. Greve and to warm its icy relations with regulators.    Much of the immediate future depends on the coming rate ruling. As to the past, there is a lesson, says Mr. Herder: &quot;Try to know thy chairman as well as possible.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>