<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881005-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   PINOCHET FACES a close contest in Chile's presidential plebiscite today.    After 15 years of authoritarian rule, the 72-year-old general has promised to govern as a democrat if voters extend his presidency for eight more years. Strong growth and relatively low inflation over the past four years favor the regime. But the results are expected to be close, and rumors are rife of a military provocation, blackout or curfew if voting seems to be going against the general. Pinochet took power in a 1973 military coup against the democratically elected regime of Marxist Allende. If he loses, he is supposed to call free elections by the end of 1989.    The Santiago government accused the U.S. of meddling after Washington expressed concern that the election might be canceled or nullified.    ---   Bentsen and Quayle polished their lines for tonight's 90-minute vice presidential debate in Omaha, Neb. Meanwhile, Bush proposed a foundation to encourage community service by young people, and Dukakis attacked Bush's &quot;record of failure&quot; on Japan trade, regulatory reform and fighting terrorism, drugs and banking problems.    ---   Reagan sought to damp speculation about why Indian-born U.S. resident Mithileshwar Singh was freed in Lebanon. He also ruled out negotiating with pro-Iranian groups holding nine Americans. In Damascus, before leaving for West Germany, Singh said that three Americans held with him were &quot;OK,&quot; but he declined to elaborate.    ---   Federal officials said that serious mishaps over 28 years at a government nuclear weapons plant in South Carolina were kept secret for national security reasons. But they said the situation is changing because of pressure from Congress and the Energy Department's new emphasis on safety. The plant produces plutonium and tritium.    ---   Vietnam will keep its promise to withdraw 50,000 soldiers from Cambodia by year end, officials said. Critics of Hanoi's occupation of Cambodia have faulted the pace of the pullout, but Vietnam's foreign minister told the Associated Press that the rainy season had slowed its efforts. Vietnam has pledged to fully withdraw by 1990.    ---   Amnesty International accused a record 135 nations of human rights abuses in its annual survey. The group, which won the 1977 Nobel Peace Prize, cited the U.S. for executing a man diagnosed as mentally retarded and for jailing a church worker who smuggled Salvadorans into the country.    ---   Three thousand Yugoslavs marched through Belgrade to renew protests over low pay but dispersed after Serbian Communist Party leader Milosevic promised to help. Milosevic's popularity has risen since he became party chief in Serbia, Yugoslavia's biggest republic, in 1986. He seeks to trim the autonomy of Serbia's two provinces.    ---   The Pentagon canceled the unveiling of its Stealth fighter at the last minute, forcing its spokesman to attempt to reimpose an official shroud of secrecy over the radar-evading plane. The U.S. reportedly began building Stealths in the mid-1970s and keeps more than 50 at a base in Nevada, but it has never actually confirmed their existence.    ---   Honduras asked the U.N. to set up a peace force to evacuate U.S.-backed Nicaraguan rebels and Salvadoran insurgents from its territory. In a speech to the General Assembly, Tegucigalpa's foreign minister also termed the U.S. a &quot;hegemonistic power.&quot; The plan would mainly affect the Contras. Honduras has been an important U.S. ally.    ---   Brazil's constitution will take effect today, capping 20 months of work. The document covers everything from maternity leave to racism to protecting the environment. Backers say it will open a democratic era in Brazil, which emerged from 21 years of military rule in 1985. But critics say it gives the armed forces too much power.    ---   Police arrested about 360 anti-abortion activists at three Atlanta clinics as a planned four-day &quot;siege of Atlanta&quot; got under way. Most sit-in protesters screamed or cried as they were carried off to jail buses. The protests were organized by Operation Rescue, a New York group that arrived in Atlanta for the Democratic Convention.    ---   The Census Bureau reported that the U.S. population grew to more than 245 million last year. As of Jan. 1, the nation had 245,110,000 people, up from 242,825,000 a year earlier. The agency cited continued strong immigration and a rise in natural growth.    ---   A Guatemalan diving bird has become extinct because of man-made and natural pressures, the World Wide Fund for Nature believes. But wildlife specialists say they have found about 1,000 Eastern Sarus cranes in Vietnam. That species was thought to have been wiped out by the Vietnam War.    ---   South Korea's president made his first major policy speech since taking office, but despite his offer of full partnership to the opposition-dominated Assembly, he drew a cold response. Roh promised to lead the drive for reunification of the peninsula, including meeting with North Korea's Kim Il Sung in Pyongyang. </TEXT></DOC>