<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871023-0149 </DOCNO><HL> Guinness-Affair Figures in U.S. RemainOutside Reach of British Investigators---By Paul HempStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROPFOOD andamp; BEVERAGE, HOUSEHOLD GOODS, SUPERMARKETS, TOBACCO (FAB)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><DATELINE> LONDON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Britain's probe of the Guinness PLC scandal has gathered speed lately, but investigators soon may hit a roadblock: Several major figures in the affair remain out of reach in the U.S.    Without the missing pieces, authorities can't complete the puzzle of what really happened during the brewer and distiller's controversial #2.53 billion ($4.17 billion) takeover last year of another United Kingdom concern, Distillers Co.    Officials at London Metropolitan Police, or Scotland Yard, say they are getting full cooperation from U.S. authorities. Even so, legal obstacles could block Britain's access to important witnesses.    Police say they want to question at least four people now in the U.S.: financier Ivan F. Boesky; U.K. stockbroker Anthony Parnes; Thomas Ward, a U.S. lawyer and former Guinness director; and Meshulam Riklis, chairman of New York-based Rapid-American Corp., a closely held retailer and apparel maker. &quot;In different ways, all of them are very important&quot; to the Guinness investigation, notes one high-ranking Scotland Yard official.    Scotland Yard and the U.K. Department of Trade and Industry are conducting separate probes -- one criminal and one civil -- into whether an illegal share-support scheme helped Guinness succeed in its mainly stock bid for Distillers. A 25% jump in Guinness's share price in the late stages of the bid drove up the offer's value above a competing bid by Argyll Group PLC.    Five prominent U.K. businessmen, including former Guinness Chairman Ernest Saunders, have been arrested for alleged offenses related to the Distillers bid. Four of the arrests have occurred in the past month. The charges primarily involve the purported arrangement, concealment or receipt of payments intended to cover losses incurred through the purchase of Guinness shares during or immediately after the bid.    U.K. investigators say they particularly would like to talk to Mr. Boesky. Last year, he agreed to pay $100 million to settle U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission civil insider-trading charges and later pleaded guilty to one felony count. He is awaiting sentencing in New York.    Mr. Boesky gave the SEC information, subsequently passed along to the British government, that triggered the Guinness inquiry last year. &quot;If it weren't for him, we wouldn't be here now,&quot; a second Scotland Yard official says. Both officials requested anonymity.    Mr. Boesky was an active buyer of Distillers shares during the Distillers bid. Weeks after the takeover battle, Guinness invested $100 million in a newly formed investment partnership created by Mr. Boesky. In March, Guinness sued Mr. Boesky for return of its investment.    Mr. Boesky's cooperation could open up new areas of possible illegality, U.K. investigators say. He also might be able to provide evidence about illegal share-support schemes employed in other recent British takeover battles.    However, the U.K. government can't force Mr. Boesky or other witnesses in the U.S. to cooperate as it can in Britain. Scotland Yard officials say they are negotiating with Mr. Boesky's lawyers to arrange a U.S. interview with him. Several of his lawyers declined to comment.    Mr. Boesky may lack an incentive to cooperate unless the British police can offer him immunity from prosecution on serious charges in London. And U.S. investigators likely won't be eager to help U.K. authorities arrange interviews with the financier while they still are quizzing him about U.S. insider-trading scandals.    Scotland Yard says it also seeks to question Mr. Ward, the Guinness ex-director. Several charges against Mr. Saunders accuse the former Guinness chairman of improperly authorizing a #5.2 million Guinness payment last year to Marketing andamp; Acquisition Consultants Ltd., a concern based in the English Channel island of Jersey. After legal proceedings in Jersey and Britain, Mr. Ward said he was the ultimate recipient of the money. He said the payment fairly compensated him for his consulting role during the Distillers bid.    Police investigators may have difficulty interviewing Mr. Ward as well. They say they haven't actively sought to question him yet, partly because he hasn't been available in the U.K. But authorities admit they won't be able to interview him in the U.S. unless he agrees.    The Department of Trade and Industry already tried to question Mr. Ward earlier this year. David Aufhauser, one of his U.S. lawyers, says protracted negotiations failed to settle the terms of the interview.    British police haven't charged or attempted to extradite Mr. Ward. If they tried to do so, his U.S. citizenship could hinder extradition attempts. And if Mr. Ward refused to return to the U.K. voluntarily, legal experts say, U.S. officials likely couldn't bring their own charges related to the U.K. probe.    As for Mr. Parnes, British authorities already face problems in extraditing the stockbroker, a British citizen. He was arrested Sept. 30 in Los Angeles for allegedly falsifying accounts related to the Distillers bid. Scotland Yard officials flew to the U.S. this week to prepare the extradition request. &quot;It's not unusual to have massive problems with extradition,&quot; says the high-ranking Scotland Yard investigator.    Police say they also hope to speak to Mr. Riklis, chairman of Rapid-American. Rapid-American purchased Guinness shares during the Distillers bid and held more than 5% of Guinness's shares during the bid's late stages, Guinness said last December after receiving a letter from Rapid-American lawyers. Under U.K. law, it is illegal for a buyer of more than 5% of a company's shares to fail to disclose that interest within five business days. The letter said Rapid-American exceeded the 5% limit inadvertently.    Mr. Riklis's office in New York said he was traveling and couldn't be reached for comment. </TEXT></DOC>