<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870717-0015 </DOCNO><HL> US Sprint Joint Venture Endures Some Growing Pains---Upstart Long-Distance CompanyWaits for Payoff of Rapid Expansion---By Janet GuyonStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MCIC T GTE UTTELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL) </IN><TEXT>   In retrospect, those who saw him at the party July 1 thought Charles M. Skibo looked rather glum. The usually ebullient president of US Sprint Communications Co. had bags under his eyes and he seemed very quiet, recalls one reveler.    Perhaps the executive had already heard the rumors.    Just a week after the party -- a US Sprint event thrown at artist Peter Max's New York loft -- Mr. Skibo was out, replaced as president of the long-distance joint venture by Robert Snedaker, the vice chairman and tough chief operating officer of one of US Sprint's parents, Kansas City, Mo.-based United Telecommunications Inc.    The ouster of Mr. Skibo is the most visible sign of growing pains at US Sprint, which aims to unseat MCI Communications Corp. as the No. 2 long-distance company. In the space of a year, the joint venture, whose other partner is conservative GTE Corp., based in Stamford, Conn., has added 2.7 million new customers, doubling the number of accounts. Through rain, sleet and snow, it has built more than 17,000 miles of a planned 23,000 mile state-of-the-art fiber optic phone network.    Its aggressive advertising and marketing techniques -- inspired by Mr. Skibo -- have put both giant American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. and MCI on the defensive. Some of the nation's biggest businesses, such as Sears, Roebuck andamp; Co., Georgia-Pacific Corp, and Singer Co., have switched big chunks of traffic to US Sprint.    The expenditure of $3 billion over three years for the fiber network and pre-tax quarterly losses of a quarter billion dollars easily make US Sprint the telephone industry's biggest, fastest start-up ever. Because ATandamp;T has been so successful maintaining its dominance of the long-distance market, the success or failure of US Sprint will speak volumes to Washington policymakers about the merit of the nation's grand experiment with competition in the phone business.    &quot;If US Sprint can't make it with an all-fiber network, nobody can,&quot; says Jack B. Grubman, a PaineWebber Inc. analyst bullish on US Sprint and its parents.    But the venture's success is by no means assured. Its impressive first year has been marred by a horrendous billing problem, and the company has, at most, three years to recruit large corporate customers to its still incomplete network. By then, ATandamp;T likely will have been largely deregulated and the Bell concerns will get another chance to win permission to enter the long-distance business.    To tighten its strong grip on corporate customers, ATandamp;T already has decided to put billions more into modernizing its network instead of building phone and computer equipment plants. US Sprint is pushing hard to finish its network by year end; last fall it even hired a horse named Buck to lay cable when it couldn't locate any machinery.    An equally pressing problem is correcting the billing situation. &quot;People tell me they love US Sprint,&quot; says one US Sprint executive who routinely gets calls from customers about bills. &quot;What they love most is they don't get a bill.&quot;    US Sprint's inability to execute and collect on bills cost Mr. Skibo his job; it also cost the company an estimated $76 million in the second quarter. Payments received aren't always posted to accounts, and, in some cases, paid-up customers are threatened with a cutoff in service or a negative credit report. US Sprint says between 10% and 15% of bills have been 20 to 30 days late and another 10% to 12% have been incorrect. Mr. Snedaker says billing problems will be fixed by November &quot;to the extent that Ivory soap is 99.44% pure.&quot;    Customer complaints about late and incorrect bills are headaches that no company trying to unseat ATandamp;T can afford. By the time US Sprint's network is completed, GTE and United will have spent some $6 billion on the venture, half of it in writeoffs for their old, obsolete networks. And US Sprint won't yet have turned a penny of profit. &quot;If a company can't collect its money, it can't make money and if it can't make money, there's always the possibility it won't stay in business,&quot; says Rick Thompson, telecommunications manager for US Sprint user Georgia-Pacific.    Besides dealing GTE and United Telecommunications a huge financial blow, a US Sprint failure would cause irreparable harm to the concept of competition in the long-distance phone industry.    &quot;We worry about US Sprint failing,&quot; says V. Orville Wright, who is acting as chief executive of MCI while that company's charismatic chairman, William G. McGowan, recovers from heart transplant surgery. &quot;It would re-raise questions about whether this is a competitive or monopoly industry.&quot; Corporate customers, already skittish about the financial health of ATandamp;T alternatives, would become even more hesitant to switch from ATandamp;T, he says.    For US Sprint, MCI, and other ATandamp;T alternatives, customer and volume growth is crucial to profitability. Corporate customers are essential because they spend much more on long-distance service than residential callers. The billions spent on building networks can only be recouped if enough calls are made to pay back capital and operating costs.    But once a break-even level of volume is reached, more and more of each incremental minute of revenue billed becomes profit. ATandamp;T, with about 125 billion minutes billed a year, achieved an efficient economy of scale long ago. US Sprint currently bills about 10 billion minutes a year; it needs about twice that for its network to reach peak efficiency, and analysts say the venture would likely turn profitable at about 15 billion minutes a year.    &quot;We think this can be an exceedingly attractive business if we can get the revenue,&quot; says William T. Esrey, president and chief executive of United Telecommunications. Given the amount of money spent, &quot;if we can't do that, we ought to be lined up against a wall and shot,&quot; he says.    While many ATandamp;T competitors have garnered some big business traffic, most telecommunications managers still buy more than 90% of their transmission services from ATandamp;T. Inertia is one reason. In addition, ATandamp;T's continual rollout of new services and joint marketing of phone equipment makes life simpler for companies that want only one vendor.    Other telecommunications managers say that while US Sprint may have great service in say, California, it may be lousy in Texas, where MCI's lines are more modern. Companies with locations outside major metropolitan areas say that, despite the ads about an all-digital, fiber network, US Sprint is never going to lay fiber directly to small, rural towns. Fiber, which can carry 16,000 simultaneous phone calls on two hair-thin glass strands, isn't efficient for areas with little or no long-distance traffic.    Nonetheless, US Sprint is giving MCI a run for the No. 2 spot. For the first time some companies are giving US Sprint a big chunk, and sometimes a majority, of their traffic. Meanwhile, some telecommunications managers sense that with Mr. McGowan laid up, MCI has somehow lost the marketing pizzazz that led it to take on ATandamp;T 20 years ago. Analysts say US Sprint will probably post revenue of $3 billion this year, only $1 billion less than MCI's.    &quot;Sprint has a shot at being No. 2,&quot; says Vincent DeGennaro, director of corporate telecommunications at Primerica Corp., which uses some US Sprint lines but still is a big ATandamp;T customer. &quot;They are very aggressive and pretty responsive and they are trying to build a good network.&quot;    While US Sprint has impressed customers and competitors with its aggressive network construction, it still faces an entrenched ATandamp;T, which has long, comfortable relationships with customers who often supply other goods and services to ATandamp;T.    Because of the importance of such relationships, Mr. Snedaker's relative lack of marketing experience may be offset by his strong reputation among telecommunications managers as a telephone man who knows his business. In addition, Mr. Snedaker hopes to maintain marketing momentum by keeping two of Mr. Skibo's loyalists, Ed Carter, senior vice president, marketing and sales, and Christopher E. Clouser, the senior vice president of corporate relations whose selective leaks to news media have kept US Sprint in the headlines.    Along with Mr. Skibo, both men have been important builders of US Sprint's high-technology, upstart image, created by ads, which, in mimicking the cola taste test ads, compare the clarity of sound on US Sprint to ATandamp;T. US Sprint says 85% of customers who take its &quot;Fiber Taste Test&quot; at shopping malls and offices choose US Sprint over ATandamp;T. With an annual ad budget of $120 million, US Sprint has built a customer awareness on par with ATandamp;T, says Mr. Skibo, who while declining to discuss his resignation still shows pride in the venture's accomplishments.    If US Sprint can continue to build traffic, its huge losses should shrink in the second half as the company puts more and more of the traffic on its own network. Costs to lease capacity from ATandamp;T, which run at $1 million a day, will drop largely by year end when 90% of traffic is on fiber. In addition, depreciation costs will drop by about $40 million a quarter beginning in the third quarter because US Sprint, as part of a total $350 million write-off, is taking a $260 million write-down in the second quarter to account for accelerated depreciation and lease costs.    But all this effort will be for naught, industry analysts say, if ATandamp;T is unleashed too soon from regulation. Although the Federal Communications Commission has already granted ATandamp;T considerable pricing latitude, competitors and some big customers fear that increased pricing flexibility would enable ATandamp;T to price its still upstart competitors out of business.    While MCI is betting ATandamp;T won't selectively price to keep its big business customers, US Sprint isn't so sure. John Hoffman, senior vice president, regulatory, points to a recent ATandamp;T filing to supply General Electric Co. with a private network. The filing, he says, doesn't provide enough information to determine whether ATandamp;T is providing services below cost. ATandamp;T contends US Sprint is just mad it lost the contract.    Ironically, GE itself is concerned about ATandamp;T's re-establishing a new, unregulated monopoly over the industry. &quot;There have to be safeguards built in any regulatory scheme to protect the competitors,&quot; says one GE official. GE, like US Sprint, supports the idea of price caps for residential customers, who have grown used to relatively inexpensive long-distance service, and price floors for business customers, to protect still struggling ATandamp;T competitors. The GE official says, &quot;Those of us who go back 25 years understand what it was like when there was no competition. We would hate to see that plowed under.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>