<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870626-0130 </DOCNO><HL> Treasury Trio Fixes on a New (and Old) 'M'---By David Gitlitz</HL><DD> 06/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED) </IN><TEXT>   Monetarist doctrine is rising phoenix-like at the Treasury Department. Undaunted by years of evidence of a breakdown in the relationship between money-supply growth and the economy, a group led by Assistant Secretary for Economic Policy Michael Darby is urging the Federal Reserve to control closely a monetary measure that purportedly hasn't been distorted by deposit deregulation and other events of the 1980s.    This sort of analysis has been out of favor the past few years, particularly among government officials. The idea that a slow, steady rate of money-supply growth would fuel sufficiently strong economic expansion without inflation seems to have been contradicted by events. To prevent recession, the Fed was forced to create dollars at a clip that any good monetarist would have thought highly inflationary.    In fact, not only has an inflationary boom yet to develop, but the ratio of nominal GNP to the money supply -- the relationship known as velocity -- actually declined at an average rate of 4% a year the past five years. That means that the growth rate of the economy in current dollars was slower than the rate of new dollar creation. This stunning reversal of the stable trend of roughly 3% annual velocity growth witnessed in the postwar years until the early 1980s took a lot of the steam out of the monetarist argument that a given rate of monetary growth will produce a predictable level of nominal GNP.    Adding insult to injury for the monetarist model, the Fed early this year declined even the pretense of setting a target range for growth of M1, the commonly accepted definition of money. The Fed hasn't paid much attention to M1 in recent years anyway. But combined with the bizarre behavior of velocity, the Fed's formal abandonment of M1 seemed certain to put the tool of monetary targeting on the shelf for the foreseeable future.    Enter Mr. Darby and his team. Over the past several months they've sought a rationale for the recent phenomena, and they think they have found it.    According to a study recently completed by Mr. Darby and Treasury associates Michael Marlow and Angelo Mascaro, the big problem with money has been its definition. With the advent of NOW accounts and deposit deregulation, the Fed in 1982 redefined M1 to include interest-bearing checking accounts in addition to currency and demand deposits. This, the study says, is where the Fed went wrong.    By including interest-getting deposits in M1, the Fed fundamentally altered the character of a monetary aggregate that was intended to track transactions in the economy, they maintain. The Fed's redefinition of the measure made it more savings than transactions oriented, the Treasury economists assert. This creates problems, since the purpose of the aggregate is to monitor spending, not saving.    What the Darby study finds is that the old M1 -- currency and demand deposits, which economists now call M1-A -- has continued to perform well (with one glaring exception) as an indicator of economic growth and inflation even as the new M1 has become unreliable. &quot;The superiority of M1-A shown in this paper . . . demonstrat{es} that M1-A minimizes the measurement error problem in selecting that monetary aggregate which is most useful for indicating the path of GNP and its real and inflation components,&quot; the Treasury report says.    Specifically, the study finds that while the velocity of new M1 has sharply deviated from trend and become negative the past few years, M1-A has remained relatively stable. When measured with a lag of two to four quarters between money growth and GNP, &quot;velocity becomes a smooth, trend-dominated series for M1-A but displays a break from its historical pattern&quot; for M1.    As an indicator of real growth, M1-A has also been superior, according to the Treasury study. The pattern of M1-A growth predicts the rapid recovery from the first quarter of 1982 through the first quarter of 1984, as well as the subsequent slowing of real growth starting in the second quarter of 1984.    As a predictor of inflation, the Darby paper claims that M1-A has proved to be very dependable, &quot;while M1 appears no longer useful.&quot; M1-A growth was consistent with the deceleration of inflation in 1981-82 and the relatively stable inflation rate since then, according to the study.    Mr. Darby was sufficiently emboldened by the results to declare at a congressional hearing this month that the Fed should be &quot;placing more, not less, emphasis on monetary control.&quot; A highly respected young monetary economist from UCLA, Mr. Darby through his participation lends the study credibility it might not otherwise enjoy. Indeed, &quot;When Michael Darby does something, it has to be taken seriously,&quot; said Paul Spindt, a senior economist in the Fed's elite special studies unit. Others at the central bank say that while it is premature to describe the Fed policy makers as employing an M1-A target, they are closely monitoring it.    This is probably a reflection of the sense at the Fed that in terms of monetary growth rates, the party is over. With concerns still strong over the weakness of the dollar and the heightened inflation fears of the financial markets, caution is the order of the day. Credit policy has been modestly tightened, and there will be no repeat of last year's 15% M1 bulge.    For now, the signals that M1-A is emitting seem to fit well with what the Fed wants to do anyway. With first-quarter nominal GNP growth of about 9% annualized and M1-A growing at 5.6%, M1-A velocity showed signs of returning to its historical trend line of just over 3% after a mysterious decline last year. That's enough to make a central banker sit up and take notice.    But while it may be tempting to identify one indicator that can be relied on as the optimal guidepost to monetary policy, there is good reason to be skeptical of M1A and the Treasury's work. For one thing, the study glosses over the anecdotal evidence that suggests a substantial percentage of NOW and other interest-bearing accounts, though excluded from M1-A, are used for transactions, not savings.    Corporations and businesses, however, cannot hold interest-bearing checking accounts and thus now constitute the bulk of M1-A deposit-holders. Mr. Darby seems untroubled by the fact the M1-A deposits are dominated by business accounts. He told a House banking subcommittee earlier this month that after all, business activity is the goal of economic policy. But even some of his monetarist allies are less sanguine. Rick Hafer, now on leave from the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis's staff, notes that a monetarist precept is that the amount of money held by the public will determine the pace of economic activity. But with so much of M1-A held by business, there is a good chance that growth of the aggregate is merely reflecting the pace of economic activity rather than determining it. Mr. Hafer says that such &quot;reverse causality&quot; would render M1-A &quot;spurious&quot; as a monetary target.    The Darby study also skates lightly over a substantial body of evidence suggesting that the public sharply increased its demand for money balances in response to the decline of inflation and interest rates in the early and mid-1980s. This increased demand allowed the Fed to accommodate much higher levels of monetary growth without overheating the economy, and directly led to the velocity declines of the past few years. But the Darby study says that the increased demand for M1 was attributable almost totally to the influence of interest-bearing accounts. The study offers little explanation for the fact that last year even M1-A, with no interest-bearing accounts, exhibited a growth of 10% and a sharp decline in velocity.    The Darby team promises to address these issues in further studies, but beyond the evidentiary glitches is the fundamental question of what role control of the monetary aggregate need play in development of monetary policy. Alongside the Darby boomlet is a groundswell of support for the kind of commodity-price standard described on these pages by Charles Kadlec on June 17.    At the Fed, Governor Wayne Angell favors such a system, and he has gotten the Fed staff to prepare an index that tracks commodity prices. His colleague on the board H. Robert Heller is advocating a similar system, while Fed Vice Chairman Manuel Johnson is known to view such market-price signals as a key guide to policy. Outside the Fed, recent converts to a commodity-priced view of monetary policy include Lawrence Kudlow, chief economist of Bear Stearns.    If it is the ultimate responsibility of monetary policy to maintain a sound currency, what better way than to ensure that the dollar remains stable in terms of purchasing power? Studies might usefully be directed to examining how, in such a system, monetary aggregates could assist in regulating the dollar's value given the undetermined lags between the Fed's conduct of open-market operations and the effect on prices.    It's possible M1-A can play an important role in this regard. Surely, locating some measure of the money supply that policy makers can have some confidence in wouldn't hurt. But if Mr. Darby and his cohorts are attempting to convince the economic community that they have found the magic ring for monetary targeting, they may find it doesn't do the trick.    ---   Mr. Gitlitz formerly wrote for Fed Fortnightly and Bondweek. </TEXT></DOC>