<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871026-0024 </DOCNO><HL> Never Again?Stocks' Plunge BringsCalls for the OverhaulOf Financial Markets---Changes Now Appear Likely;Dealer Capital Is an Issue,So Is the Role of Futures---World Coordination Is Urged---By Richard E. Rustin and Thomas E. RicksStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MER SHE AXP PWJ EFH FORGNSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)STOCK INDEXES (NDX)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   From Wall Street to Washington, shell-shocked participants in the market meltdown of 1987 are quickly coming to the belief that America's financial markets must be overhauled. Never again, they say, should markets -- or people -- be at the mercy of the kind of volatility that stunned the world last week.    The issues now being looked at include: the inadequate capital of some securities dealers, particularly New York Stock Exchange specialist firms; the lack of coordinated regulation among markets in the U.S. and abroad; the impact of highly leveraged options and futures contracts on equity trading; and the markets' vulnerability to brokers' and customers' computers, which last week poured tens of thousands of huge trades onto markets that weren't automated enough to execute them promptly, if at all.    The New York Stock Exchange chairman, John Phelan, is strongly advocating reform. &quot;You're dealing with world markets -- not only equities but currencies and debt,&quot; Mr. Phelan says. &quot;When all that comes tumbling down, you need an entirely different mechanism than you had five years ago. The markets today are a hybrid between an equities and commodities market that nobody knows about.&quot;    Many others share Mr. Phelan's concern. &quot;Clearly, the markets as we've known them for the past 50 years are never going to be the same anymore,&quot; says Arthur Levitt, the chairman of the American Stock Exchange. Adds Richard Ketchum, the Securities and Exchange Commission's chief market watcher: &quot;We've got to go back and challenge every assumption we've ever had.&quot;    Until last week, most Americans cared little about the structure of the financial markets. But then they learned that when a market's structure is strained, market prices move like quicksilver and values disappear into thin air.    As Peter A. Cohen, the chairman of Shearson Lehman Brothers Holding Inc., puts it: &quot;You don't have to be directly in the stock market to care. If you're in a pension fund, you care. If you or your kid goes to a university that's endowed with a stock portfolio, you care. If you're a doctor in an endowed hospital, you care.&quot;    So whether the market continues to calm down, as it did last Friday, or suffers new shock waves, one thing seems certain: Major changes are likely to be forced on the financial markets after last week's tumultuous price movements and tremendous volume.    Many hard questions are going to be asked about accepted practices, industry and government leaders say. Among them:    --Should the Big Board's 195-year-old system of assigning market-making responsibility in given stocks to a single member, or specialist, be changed to a competitive system, as in the over-the-counter market?    --Should over-the-counter market makers be required, as Big Board specialists are, to try to cool violent price moves?    --Should stock-linked options and futures be banned, or at least be subject to tougher margin rules and limits on daily price swings? If those products, many of which trade with computer assistance, continue to be acceptable to regulators, will markets have to beef up order-execution systems to meet huge volume?    New approaches will be considered, securities-industry leaders say. These include a regulatory federation that could include the SEC, the Commodity Futures Trading Commission, the Federal Reserve Board and the Treasury. Globally, thought will be given to formal ties between regulators in the principal trading countries such as the U.S., Britain and Japan.    Many of these issues will be thrashed out only after turf fights between markets, regulators and even nations, and their resolution will take time. But Washington is already beginning to address the problems. President Reagan has named investment banker Nicholas F. Brady, co-head of Dillon, Read andamp; Co. and a former appointed Republican senator from New Jersey, as chairman of a yet-to-be-completed three-member study panel that will report to him by the end of the year.    In Congress, several investigations and studies of the market crash will soon be under way. Senate Banking Committee Chairman William Proxmire, Democrat of Wisconsin, Friday asked the SEC to examine, among other things, the capital adequacy and last week's comparative performances of stock-exchange and over-the-counter market makers. And the latest buzzword on Capitol Hill is program trading, computer-spawned procedures that automatically spewed thousands of huge sell orders into the stock market last Monday, when the market plunged 508 points.    In the final analysis, say government and industry leaders, the extent of the change will be dictated by the extent of the damage to investors, financial institutions and the economy. Mr. Brady says he is keeping an open mind on the need for change.    &quot;The rapidity, magnitude and volume really were the things that were unusual,&quot; he says. &quot;But everybody thought this was the crash of 1929. It wasn't. If this were a cataclysm, you would have seen major investment-banking firms and brokerage houses going out of business. Nobody I've talked to in any position of responsibility has told me that this is likely to happen. I'm not predicting, but maybe we don't have to change anything.&quot;    In holding out this possibility, Mr. Brady appears to have little company. Many Wall Streeters, knowing that crises breed political intervention and that intervention breeds scapegoats, are calling for a broad study by a combination of regulators, industry people and academicians. Genuinely frightened, they say last week's events were a threshold to change akin to the financial panics that led to creation of the Fed in 1913 and the SEC in 1934. Some potential areas of change follow:    Market Making   Among the major topics of any study, industry and Washington people say, will be the market-making systems of the exchanges and the over-the-counter market. Last Monday's free fall hurt Big Board specialists, most of whom lacked adequate capital to fulfill their role of making orderly markets by buying when demand plummets and selling when demand shoots up. Exchange insiders indicate that specialist firms lost $1 billion last week, or one-third of their total capital.    The Big Board is trying to attract better-capitalized, publicly oriented firms as specialists. Last week Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. took over a failed specialist firm. And the Big Board's chairman, Mr. Phelan, says that &quot;five or six other major firms have expressed interest in taking over specialist units.&quot; These big firms, he says, include Shearson, Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., PaineWebber Group Inc. and E.F. Hutton Group Inc. &quot;We'll be glad to add banks&quot; as specialists, Mr. Phelan adds, if federal law is changed to allow it.    But some people question whether only one specialist per stock is enough nowadays. &quot;It's like me playing chess against a computer,&quot; says Stanley Sporkin, a former SEC enforcement director and now a federal judge in Washington.    With more than one specialist per stock -- and thus more capital -- the huge swings of last week could have been lessened, says Fred Carr, the head of First Executive Corp., an insurer based in Los Angeles. &quot;The public didn't have the ability to deal with those bulges,&quot; Mr. Carr says. &quot;A more gradual descent doesn't break confidence in our economic system,&quot; he says. &quot;We need to encourage more capital into Wall Street. That's the only way to protect the small investor.&quot;    Mr. Phelan acknowledges that the Big Board is going to have to think about competing specialists, but people in the industry say that this could cause a prickly political problem at the exchange. Says one prominent Wall Streeter: &quot;The specialist system has been a grab bag of the club. The club took care of its own.&quot;    Because the National Association of Securities Dealers doesn't require over-the-counter market makers to issue firm price quotations beyond 100 shares per trade, many of them were able to back away from those quotes last week when customers wanted to sell more shares than that. Moreover, asserts Mr. Phelan, &quot;a lot of them knocked their phones off the hook.&quot;    Joseph R. Hardiman, the NASD president, concedes that &quot;a number of firms didn't stand up&quot; to execute customers' sell orders, but he says that major firms did. Giving over-the-counter market makers responsibilities similar to Big Board specialists is &quot;something we will take a look at,&quot; Mr. Hardiman says. But he adds that &quot;the business pressure&quot; to maintain good relations with customers &quot;should be the driving force,&quot; not rules.    Products, Technology   The recent proliferation of highly leveraged ancillary products and computerized trading techniques, many industry and Washington people believe, was a major contributor to last week's market gyrations. Initially, these people say, there will be a debate about whether these products, such as stock-index futures and options, are necessary or dangerous. If the products and techniques survive, they predict, debate then will center on higher margin requirements -- increasing the percentage of cash that a trader has to put up and lowering the percentage of credit -- and on limits on daily price swings.    Stock-index futures, traded by institutions and other professionals in tandem with underlying stocks, hastened last week's price declines, some market officials say. Futures at times became useless as a hedging mechanism against stock price declines -- their principal reason for existence -- because, as panic set in, futures buyers fled the market and volume dried up. So some traders, unable to hedge adequately against losses by selling futures, were forced to sell their stockholdings.    Judge Sporkin calls such products &quot;barnacles attached to the basic market.&quot; Shearson's Mr. Cohen worries that &quot;the equity market is far too important to the financial health of the world to have such extraneous influences on it.&quot; And investment banker Lewis L. Glucksman, former head of Lehman Brothers Kuhn Loeb Inc., says he is uneasy about the vast risks spawned by the complexity of such products.    &quot;New instruments escalated the problem,&quot; Mr. Glucksman says. &quot;As a creator of some of them, I look back and found we went too far. When the creator doesn't understand what he's done, how can you expect the totality of the marketplace to understand it? I think we overdid it.&quot; He says of last week's frenzy:    &quot;I've been a successful investor for 35 years, and I was absolutely scared to death of movements I didn't understand. I never believed I'd live through anything like that. We've got to prevent this recent embolism from killing us.&quot;    Raising margin requirements would -- by reducing potential gains in a rising market and reducing potential losses in a falling one -- cool speculation in futures and options, some industry people argue. Says First Executive's Mr. Carr: &quot;We've made it cheaper to gamble than not to gamble. Raising margins will limit the market to valid, long-term speculators.&quot;    Options and futures exchanges defend their products as valid hedges. They oppose margin requirements that would be set by outside agencies, and they oppose daily price-fluctuation limits altogether.    Karsten Mahlmann, the chairman of the Chicago Board of Trade, says that &quot;we continuously match margins to volatility, but there's no margin that could have predicted a 500-point move in the Dow.&quot;    William Brodsky, the president of the Chicago Mercantile Exchange, says he is against price-swing limits because they run contrary to the principle of free markets. Officials of the Chicago Merc nonetheless felt obliged to impose such temporary limits Thursday night in response to unprecedented market volatility, and the Kansas City Board of Trade and the New York Futures Exchange have followed suit.    Operations   Computer-triggered trading by institutions exploded into staggeringly high volume that crippled stock-market processing abilities and forced the markets into three days of shorter hours, through tomorrow. The avalanche produced a backlog of orders, some of which were never filled. At times last week, the Big Board tape ran more than three hours late.    Industry leaders say there is a major systems problem to be addressed, one opposite to the back-office crush that paralyzed the markets almost 20 years ago. In those days, what cracked was the securities firms' primitive processing of paper after trades occurred; the exchanges' largely manual order-execution systems could handle anything thrown at them. Today the reverse is true, says the NASD's Mr. Hardiman, who explains:    &quot;The problem is now at the front end of the system: the inability of investors to get into the stock and futures markets last week. That was the choking point. How can we automate to {completely} eliminate manual handling? We spent a lot of time and dollars automating the back end. The challenge now is to automate the front end.&quot;    The problem also concerns Mr. Brady of the presidential study team. He says computer-assisted trading &quot;produced a magnification of a rush to judgment in the markets; it was like trying to make a phone call on Christmas Day -- all the circuits were busy.&quot;    &quot;I don't know if the markets are built to receive a unanimous conclusion by investors in one day,&quot; Mr. Brady says.    Mr. Hardiman says political problems would loom if customers could enter orders directly into the markets via computers: &quot;You'll run into resistance on that; a lot of economic interests are at stake. What then would be the the role of the broker, specialist and market maker?&quot;    The Global Market   Because last week's panic knew no market or national boundaries, many people are saying that greater coordination is needed among regulators, both within the U.S. and internationally. It may be politically impossible to unite all under one roof -- &quot;that could be the hardest thing man ever tried,&quot; says Mr. Brady -- but some formal coordination should be possible, Mr. Brady and others say.    The Big Board's Mr. Phelan is for a federation of financial markets linked to the financing capabilities of the Fed.    &quot;What would have happened if the stock market went down another 500 points?&quot; he asks. &quot;There's not enough money in the world from dealers to handle that. You'd need temporary capital from the Fed. That's the structural stuff we need to talk about. Plug in the lender of last resort. It's absolutely essential. The lender would have access to dealers in all systems -- not just equities. It would be a safety valve -- liquidity in times of stress. Then the rest of the system could work itself out.&quot;    The chairman of the Senate Securities Subcommittee, Donald Riegle Jr., Democrat of Michigan, last week called on the administration to establish an international securities regulatory commission. In a statement yesterday Sen. Riegle said, &quot;To avoid a similar global sell-off in the future, you've got to formalize the international operation, instead of doing it ad hoc with {Treasury Secretary James} Baker getting on the phone to a finance minister.&quot;    And the NASD's Mr. Hardiman says that &quot;you have to reach out to include major markets of the world&quot; to set minimum regulatory standards on corporate disclosure, trading, market surveillance and enforcement.    Whatever the outcome of the structural soul-searching, people in the business and government agree that a watershed has been reached. Says investment banker Glucksman:    &quot;Going back to business as usual is crazy, because it isn't business as usual anymore.&quot;    ---   Scott McMurray contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>