<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870729-0134 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   It is not surprising that only a small number of illegal aliens have applied for amnesty under the new immigration law.    The pain of separation from loved ones who do not meet the cutoff date, the anguish over whether they can adequately document their stay, the fear that this is just another trap to send them back, all collide with the yearning to come out of hiding.    Thirty-two years ago my father went through the same fear of being caught, of losing everything. He had hidden for a long time. Then the Immigration and Naturalization Service gave him the chance to become legal.    He took the chance, worked hard, and today his life is comfortable. But it has not been easy just because his status changed on paper. Without an education, he has also struggled at times to make ends meet and understand the economic and business forces at work in this country.    Born into extreme poverty in rural Mexico, my father completed only one year of school. Abandoned at a young age, he sometimes had to resort to stealing food to eat.    At the age of 14, he crossed the Rio Grande into Texas to work. He washed dishes, picked cotton and cleaned floors. He went to church and made friends. Most important, he began to teach himself English. He would listen to the radio, try to read the newspaper, and practiced writing with a rock on the sidewalk. He began to stake his claim. &quot;La Migra,&quot; the immigration police, picked him up the first time after he had spent a long, hot day picking radishes, and unceremoniously dumped him back into Mexico. Mexican police put him on a cattle train and he ended up hundreds of miles south, in Monterrey. He worked for two months to get the money to come back. And he crossed the river again.    Ten years later he was caught the second time. By then he had an American wife, a home and a good job.    He had never told anyone he was not legal. &quot;I was scared they would say, 'You're illegal, we don't want you working here.' I wasn't going to go back. There was no future for me in Mexico,&quot; he remembers.    But he is grateful that he was finally caught. &quot;It made me realize that I had to make things right,&quot; he says.    It was a different political climate then, and his story may seem simple to those who wait uncertainly in the wings today. But he, too, was given a chance to clear himself.    At a detention center in Brownsville, Texas, the INS took the time to listen to his story. His employer guaranteed his job in writing.    Based on his excellent record, the INS did not automatically ship him back, but gave him 60 days to get his Mexican papers in order and reenter the U.S. legally.    He, in turn, did not go back into hiding, and his life changed irrevocably. He says the biggest reward of his U.S. citizenship is that his five children have all been able to attend college, financed largely through federal financial aid.    One daughter, a Yale graduate, spent six years with the Peace Corps and is now going back to graduate school for her law and public policy degrees. A graduate of Northwestern, I have worked as a reporter for this and other newspapers. Another daughter, also a Northwestern graduate, works for the CBS affiliate in Austin. A fourth daughter attends the University of Texas on a full scholarship. My brother will begin Yale this fall.    While our first-generation success -- achieved despite our father's starting out in this country in such extreme poverty -- comes as a surprise to many, my brother and sisters and I know it is directly linked to our father finally making things right that day.    Upon receiving the 60-day reprieve, my parents drove all night to Monterrey where my father spent days getting his passport and other documents together. Armed with these and his employer's letter, he and my mother drove to the bridge linking Matamoros to the U.S.    He still remembers handing over his papers at the American checkpoint that day. An INS agent sifted through them, looked up, and said the two words that have made all the difference in his life, and subsequently, in mine:    &quot;You're in.&quot;    ---   Ms. Flores is writing a book based on her father's life. </TEXT></DOC>