<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861226-0052 </DOCNO><HL> New Airline Empire Will Test Lorenzo as a Manager---Texas Air Chairman, Better KnownAs Deal-Maker, Must Shift Gears---By Paulette ThomasStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/26/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TEX PEXP CAI LABORAIRLINES (AIR)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><DATELINE> HOUSTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Investors and passengers are waiting to see whether Frank Lorenzo will display the same ingenuity in managing the nation's largest airline company that he showed in building it.    The Texas Air Corp. chairman gained a reputation as an aggressive, entrepreneurial dealmaker as he transformed Texas International, a tiny, debt-ridden carrier, into a multi-airline holding company that flies to four continents. But his latest acquisitions promise to test a less practiced side of Mr. Lorenzo -- the manager -- at a time when the airline industry is at its most volatile.    Nearly everyone in the industry agrees that Texas Air's success -- or failure -- will depend on Mr. Lorenzo's skill in managing the new empire.    With acquisitions, bankruptcy-law proceedings and battles with unions, Mr. Lorenzo and a small circle of lieutenants have had little time to contemplate management theory in the last decade.    People Express Inc. will become Texas Air's latest acquisition if holders of the Newark, N.J., airline holding company approve the transaction Monday. That acquisition would increase Texas Air's number of employees to about 48,000 and its number of aircraft to 588. Texas Air's three other carriers are Continental Airlines, Eastern Airlines, and New York Air.    &quot;The organization is now too big for the top people to be involved in strategy and tactical things as well,&quot; said Harry Levinson of the Levinson Institute, a management consulting firm.    Industry analysts agree that the acquisition of Eastern created the biggest management challenge in Texas Air's history. Texas Air has said it will have to cut costs at Eastern to restore it to profitability -- chiefly by winning concessions from Eastern's militant labor unions. Eastern posted losses totaling $356.6 million over the past five years.    Mr. Lorenzo also must reverse the cattle-car reputation of People Express. And all the while, he must avoid the pitfalls of Texas Air's huge $4.5 billion debt, a tricky challenge should the economy falter.    For the nine months, Texas Air's net dropped 40% to $73.7 million, or $2.65 a share, on a 13% revenue gain to $1.66 billion. Separately, Eastern reported a nine-month loss of $136.7 million on revenue of $3.4 billion. Eastern was acquired by Texas Air in late November.    Mr. Lorenzo recognizes that the job of transforming the company's combination of carriers into a smooth-running airline will require growth beyond its current ranks of hard-charging managers. Thus, Mr. Lorenzo last month hired Thomas Plaskett from AMR Corp.'s American Airlines, where he was senior vice president, marketing, to take over as president of Continental. Mr. Plaskett, who was selected earlier this year by Fortune magazine as one of the 10 most desired corporate managers, represents a recruiting coup -- and new executive strength -- for Texas Air.    &quot;We are going to have to start thinking about management training and management development,&quot; Mr. Plaskett said.    Yet it's equally clear that Mr. Lorenzo doesn't want to abandon his managers' freewheeling style, which allowed them to react quickly to opportunities even while shackled by bankruptcy-law constraints and a labor strike. Continental operated under federal bankruptcy-court protection for three years until last Sept. 2.    In an interview earlier this year, Mr. Lorenzo belittled the &quot;organizational philosophy of management&quot; of an airline he wouldn't identify, citing the airline's military-style mandate that executives must reach their desks by a certain hour in the morning.    &quot;We are 180 degrees opposite,&quot; Mr. Lorenzo said. &quot;We are eclectic, and that's how we work. Even kiddingly we don't try&quot; to set down arbitrary rules. &quot;Some guys like to work at home in the morning. Some people I have to kick out of here at night,&quot; he said.    Mr. Lorenzo and his lieutenants are proving to be as formidable negotiating with Eastern's labor leaders as they were challenging Continental's unions three years ago. Earlier this week, a coalition of Eastern's pilots, machinists and flight attendants sent Mr. Lorenzo a telegram saying they wished to meet with him to discuss Eastern's plans for growth, but stipulated that they would not discuss the work contracts. Mr. Lorenzo, however, sent back a message saying he would not meet on those terms.    Obtaining concessions from the unions might allow Eastern to offer low-cost fares, as Continental has. Eastern's unionized work force is among the highest paid in the industry. Labor represents 30% of costs at Eastern, compared with 21% at Continental.    &quot;There is a lot of repair work in terms of relations with unions and making that participative effort going,&quot; says Louis Marckesano, airline analyst for Janney Montgomery Scott Inc. &quot;But the potential is so enormous -- they can set bottom on fares. I don't see anyone else producing the product at a lower cost than they.&quot;    Mr. Lorenzo's top-level management changes at Eastern suggest that he aims to whip Eastern into shape in much the same way he did Continental. Already, Mr. Lorenzo has installed in the executive suite at Eastern the same team of managers that turned around loss-plagued Continental.    &quot;They are down there to make a damage assessment, and to get it back in shape,&quot; says John Pincavage, airline analyst for PaineWebber Inc. &quot;If it doesn't work, they'll oversee the shift of assets from Eastern to Continental. It makes very good sense.&quot; Texas Air has said that Eastern and Continental will fly under their own names for the time being.    Eastern's upper ranks are occupied by such former Continental executives as Philip Bakes, president, John Adams, vice president of labor relations, Mickey Foret, chief financial officer, and Donald Breeding, vice president, flight operations. It was these men who helped steer Continental through its bankruptcy-law proceedings, an explosive labor strike, and the airline's rapid growth -- from 39 planes in June 1983 to the 206 aircraft in Mr. Plaskett's armada today.    The signs are apparent that the veterans of Continental's turnaround are trying to follow their old blueprint in the executive suite as well. More than three years ago, Mr. Lorenzo's lieutenants slashed the number of vice presidents at Continental to 19 from 53; in only the past five months, they have cut the number at Eastern to 16 from 47. Besides saving millions of dollars annually, the executive-suite retrenchment is intended to save invaluable decision-making time. &quot;When you have 50 corporate officers,&quot; a Texas Air official notes, &quot;making policy is very difficult.&quot;    Even after raiding other companies' talent and shuffling its own ranks, however, Texas Air -- by airline standards -- is thin in senior managers. One airline consultant estimates that for every five executives at American Airlines, Texas Air employs two. No executive flow chart exists. And Mr. Plaskett, new to Texas Air, hopes it stays that way. &quot;The challenge is to find a way to preserve the entrepreneurial spirit,&quot; he says.    Other big, top-heavy airlines are trying to do the same thing. Trans World Airlines, for example, has drastically reduced its planning force and eliminated layers of management under Carl Icahn, who controls the carrier. American Airlines, which once stationed a controller's office at each airport it served, now has a total of four controllers across the country.    But Texas Air's executives will have to redirect their energies to strategic questions and leave the day-to-day operations to their subordinates, experts say. Former executives of Texas Air wonder whether that is possible under the autocratic Mr. Lorenzo. &quot;He handles all the strategic issues, and that's what I didn't like,&quot; says one former executive.    That style has lead to a steady stream of senior executive turnovers, including Steven Wolf, who left for Republic Airlines, a unit of NWA Inc., and subsequently went to Tiger International; Gerald Gitner, who now runs an airplane-parts business; Robert Carney, who left to start a travel-service business; and Donald Burr, who left to found People Express. The former Texas Air officials all declined to comment.    &quot;That's a lot of turnover,&quot; says Raymond Neidl an analyst at McCarthy, Crisanti andamp; Maffei Inc. &quot;If you go back to business school 101, that's one of the things that could indicate a management problem.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>