<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870713-0093 </DOCNO><HL> Asia:South Koreans Moving to Pick Their Own President---By Claudia Rosett</HL><DD> 07/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> ICHON, South Korea  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A rice farmer, a pig farmer, four workers from a fish-processing factory, and four of their wives are seated cross-legged before a long low table piled with the spicy beef known as bulgogi and other Korean specialties. They are gathered at a little restaurant in this village an hour's drive south of Seoul for an afternoon of political conversation. These aren't people who normally sit around and talk with the press. They are shy at first. None wants his name in the newspaper or will identify the candidate for whom he'll vote. But they have no doubt about what is happening in their country. &quot;Now,&quot; says one of the fish workers, &quot;we can pick the president with our own hands.&quot;    The prospect, moreover, is as pleasing to this group as to any editorial writer in America. That is the principal impression of the afternoon's conversation, organized by The Wall Street Journal and translated by a student in agricultural economics. It provides an insight that is important to understanding what is happening on the streets, at the universities and in the political corridors back in Seoul. The tide of democracy is running strong and deep, and is being viewed with sophistication at all levels of Korean society.    It is not surprising to see these kinds of attitudes. Each family represented at this table has seen its quality of life improve rapidly in recent years. Each has a refrigerator, television set, and one or more electric fans. They do not yet have cars, but they have children in school and the prospects look good for further advancement. These people approach not only their family economies but current events with rationality. They voice a tolerant attitude toward both the students and the government. &quot;They're doing what they have to do,&quot; says the pig farmer. &quot;We're doing what we have to do.&quot;    To a striking degree this sense of sophistication voiced by the farmers and factory workers in Ichon is mirrored back in the capital by both a government and opposition struggling to find the right line of compromises on the road to democracy. It was only two weeks ago that the chairman of the ruling Democratic Justice Party, Roh Tae-Woo, stunned the world and quelled nationwide anti-government protests with his proposal for free and direct elections. That's not much time to start re-tooling a political system that has never yet made a peaceful transfer of power.    That things are moving along was apparent even in the handling Thursday of the rocks-and-tear-gas battle between students and police in downtown Seoul. This latest riot brought an ugly end to the funeral procession for a student named Lee Han-yol, who had died after being hit with fragments of a tear gas canister last month. Thursday's events may have looked at first like a severe setback after the euphoria that followed Mr. Roh's dramatic announcement and the equally dramatic speech of President Chun giving his blessing to direct elections. But the government's tactics were encouraging.    The drama began at dawn when Lee's casket was carried out of the Yonsei University hospital mortuary by student pallbearers. They were dressed in the mourning color, white, and carried large black sticks wrapped in tape to offer a better grip as clubs. The students spoiling for a fight found no one to fight with. Police stayed out of sight as tens of thousands assembled on the Yonsei campus. As the procession moved along several miles of streets toward city hall, the only authorities in view were unarmed traffic cops, who stood at intersections to divert cars from the wide boulevards lined with rows of spectators.    These were not people looking for violence. They were office workers, mothers and children. As they waited, they read newspapers, chatted, and smoked cigarettes. When the procession went by, with students chanting &quot;down with the military dictatorship,&quot; the spectators applauded. But from these people who formed the great bulk of the crowd there was no sign that a riot was in the making. It was only after the procession reached City Hall and small groups of students turned violent that the police finally moved in. Once the tear gas grenades began to go off, the crowd dispersed, leaving to confront the police only those few hundred students who had been looking for trouble to start with.    The day's events suggest that pressure for democracy continues to swell, that only a minority is bent on trouble, and that the government is making a distinction between the two, accommodating the former and controlling the latter. At the political level, moreover, President Chun is determined that he will not allow himself to become an issue but is rapidly distancing himself from the jockeying for power that is to come. His resignation Friday as president of the ruling party means he wants to give Mr. Roh room to maneuver.    In other ways, the government is moving quickly toward compromise. It granted an amnesty last week to 2,335 political dissidents, including one of the opposition leaders, Kim Dae-Jung, whose civil rights have now been fully restored. The government is also talking of possibly making amends for the Kwang-ju riots of 1980, in which at least 191 people were killed by army troops suppressing what threatened to be a serious uprising. While there are some in the military who oppose such a move, they appear willing -- at least so far -- to stand aside in the interests of closing that chapter and moving ahead with the democratic transition.    Some compromising is going to have to be done within the opposition, as well. The problem there is the possible clash of ambitions of the two Kims. Kim Dae-Jung is a more famous opposition figure but holds no major post in the opposition Reunification and Democracy Party. He almost won the presidency in 1971, but last November said he would forgo being a candidate if it would make it easier to wrest a free election from the government. Kim Young-Sam heads the RDP and, in at least the formal sense, remains its most logical candidate. Over the weekend, Kim Dae-Jung announced that he has agreed to join the RDP as a permanent adviser and hinted that he might yet be in the running. Both Kims are scheduled to give press conferences this week.    Meanwhile, a lot of serious constitutional work needs to be done. The main item is amendments to provide for direct elections, probably some time this fall. This process holds many pitfalls. Fights could break out over such questions as the age for voting and the meaning of local autonomy. These negotiations are taking place under a deadline, since President Chun has said he will step down in Feb. 25, 1988. The 1988 summer Olympic games, moreover, have become a national obsession. A lighted sign atop City Hall signals the number of days left before the games -- 432, as of today.    Here in our restaurant in Ichon, the Olympic games are cited by our luncheon companions as one of the two great national priorities, the other being the democratic transition. No one here expresses any doubt about South Korea's ability to follow through successfully on either. &quot;The history is short,&quot; the pig farmer asserts, &quot;but the culture is deep and rich.&quot;    ---   Miss Rosett is editorial page editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal. </TEXT></DOC>