<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870211-0093 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Sanctions Backfire</HL><DD> 02/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AFRICMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   Remember sanctions? The struggle over whether to impose economic sanctions on South Africa was one of the biggest U.S. foreign-policy stories of 1986. The sanctions issue eventually transcended politics and became a litmus test of moral correctness in U.S. public life. Most participants chose the morality of sanctions.    Congress, led by Sen. Richard Lugar (R., Ind.), voted for sanctions. U.S. college students built shantytowns to express solidarity with apartheid's victims and to force divestment of stocks in companies operating in South Africa. General Motors pulled out, as did Chase Manhattan, IBM and Coca-Cola. Yesterday, President Reagan's Advisory Committee on South Africa, a prestigious citizens' group co-chaired by former IBM Chairman Frank Cary, presented George Shultz with a report urging the U.S. to push other Western nations into joining the sanctions effort.    So clearly the advocates of sanctions were the foreign-policy victors. At least in the U.S. they were. What about in South Africa itself? That's another story.    A group of South African churchmen has just released the first significant report on the sanctions strategy. According to a special commission of the Southern African Catholic Bishops' Conference, sanctions have &quot;clearly had a totally counterproductive effect on government thinking . . . {and have} consolidated the government in its retreat from meaningful and, indeed, any reform.&quot; The report states that sanctions will mean suffering for many on the bottom of the economic ladder.    It paints a grim future for a post-sanctions South Africa: high inflation, increasing black unemployment and a danger that some companies that provide housing and education for black workers and their families may go bankrupt. Denis Hurley, the Catholic archbishop of Durban, believes that further sanctions in the form of divestment &quot;would precipitate conflicts that would go on for 20 years, and end in total devastation for the country.&quot;    Support for sanctions among South Africa's blacks was never as universally popular as the pro-sanctions lobby believed. Public-opinion surveys last July by Mark Orkin in association with the Cape Town-based Institute for Black Research found that one-quarter of blacks supported sanctions even if they meant the loss of many black jobs. But 48% were against sanctions if they entailed many job losses.    If sanctions have backfired, there is little moral justification for forcing black South Africans to continue to accept a scorched-earth policy designed on Constitution Avenue in Washington, D.C. What kind of policy, then, should Americans of good will pursue in South Africa?    The answer lies not in apocalyptic moralism but, as always, along the harder road of serious politics. In this respect, the most hopeful sign is that the government of President P.W. Botha may yet be forced into accepting the proposals of the Indaba, a committee of whites, blacks and Indians from Natal province and the black &quot;homeland&quot; of KwaZulu.    Last year, the Indaba devised a multiracial constitution for the two regions based on universal suffrage. This would give Natal, with a quarter of South Africa's population, a genuine black-majority government at the local level. Like the U.S. Constitution, the Indaba proposes the decentralization of political power, thus minimizing the chances of group conflict.    Stoffel Botha, the leader of the ruling National Party in Natal, rejected a draft of the Indaba report last year because he felt it didn't provide adequate protections for whites and other minorities. The final report was submitted to Pretoria only last month. Fearful of losing votes to right-wing parties, the government has delayed any final decision on the Indaba plan until after whites vote in a May 6 national election.    The fact remains, however, that the government is also coming under increasing pressure from whites who are disgusted with its failure to carry out promises of further reform. Among these is Denis Worrall, who resigned last month as South Africa's ambassador to Great Britain. He believes a multiracial Natal government could serve as a model for a national solution to the injustices of apartheid, and plans to run as a pro-Indaba candidate for Parliament against a top government minister. Should Mr. Worrall run well, it would be a clear signal to Mr. Botha that whites don't adamantly oppose a black-led government -- if basic liberties are clearly protected under a rule of law.    Those who argue in the U.S. that the African National Congress is the sole legitimate voice of South African blacks naturally oppose the political-reconstruction effort in Natal. It would probably mean that Chief Mangosuthu Buthelezi, leader of the Zulus, would be elected as chief minister of Natal. Though a longtime member of the ANC, Mr. Buthelezi never agreed with the ANC's use of terrorism against civilians and its support of sanctions. As a result, Mr. Buthelezi generally receives a tepid reception from many opinion makers when he visits the U.S., a signal to black South Africans that the Americans' commitment to the principle of political pluralism is tepid as well.    U.S. advocates of sanctions sold many well-intended people here a bill of goods. That policy is causing pain for South Africa's black population. It is time for corporations, college presidents, pension-fund administrators and maybe even a few public officials to recognize that there are many blacks who repudiate the ANC's tactics of terror and who are trying to build a new South Africa that rejects both apartheid and Marxism. Identifying these individuals, supporting their political efforts and protecting them from reprisals by both the government and black extremists are, unlike sanctions, hard choices worth making. </TEXT></DOC>