<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880706-0136 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): A Gulf Initiative </HL><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST </CO><G> EXE DEF </G><TEXT>   Capt. Will Rogers III had no choice in deciding to fire on an aircraft closing on his ship while engaged in combat. If there is a burden of guilt to bear, it should rest on the governments involved -- Iraq for starting a ghastly war; Iran for refusing to end it; and even to some extent the United States, which put Capt. Rogers's ship in harm's way more from hostility to Iran than from any calculations of its own interests.    It is tragic but not surprising that under these aimless circumstances an airliner traversing the Gulf would be shot down. The moment was most inopportune. Iraq has just regained practically all of the territory it seized from Iran. Iran was starting to show signs of, if not moderation, at least weariness. The loss of 290 civilian lives is likely now to both enrage the Iranians and embolden the Iraqis. The current path to settlement is the opposite -- calming the Iranians and restraining the Iraqis; the U.S. should be looking for some way to turn the tragedy to this purpose.    Let's briefly go back over some of the policy ground that brought us to this point.    In January 1979, the Carter administration helped depose the pro-U.S. shah of Iran. Whatever the merits of that policy, few disputed then or now that Iran itself remains one of the world's most geostrategically important nations. Historically it dominates the Gulf, and it stands between the Soviet Union and much geography which that country has coveted through its history.    In the event, the Ayatollah Khomeini came to power after the shah's fall. His November seizure of the U.S. Embassy and holding of 52 hostages ensured the enmity of the American people. The following year, Iraq attacked Iran and the Ayatollah retaliated on a grand scale, hoping to destroy the secular regime of Saddam Hussein. Then in 1984 the U.S. tilted toward Iraq by restoring diplomatic ties. It could be said then that there at least was reason to worry Iran would prevail and spread militancy throughout the region. Still, Iran remained geopolitically more important.    Then the Iran-Contra hearings erupted, revealing the U.S. had tried to open avenues of communication to Iran, a sensible move that devolved into flat-out ransom-paying for hostages. Public reaction to this melodrama nearly destroyed the administration and solidified the belief that no moderates existed in Iran.    And so the pro-Iraq tilt continued. July 1987 marked the U.S. reflagging of the Kuwaiti oil tankers and our large naval presence in the Gulf. The U.S. acted primarily because the Soviet government offered itself as Kuwait's protector. As a counterweight to the Soviet move, the U.S. response corresponded to our traditional policy goals in the region. The rest, however, was a departure and a mistake.    We arrived in the Gulf, publicly declaring our purpose there was to oppose Iran. On Iraq, an equally culpable nation, the U.S. was largely silent. In short, after seven neutral years, the U.S. had obviously tilted toward Iraq, a country that in any Realpolitik analysis must always fall behind Iran in terms of U.S. or Western interests. Why the imbalance?    We said then and continue to believe that this odd turn in U.S. policy owed to the prejudices of two former Bechtel executives, Secretary of State Shultz and former Defense Secretary Weinberger. Cap Weinberger was on TV at the time, giving vent to his personal anti-Iranian convictions.    Mr. Weinberger is gone now, and Secretary Shultz seems to be on a world farewell tour. Perhaps the shootdown presents an opportunity for less encumbered officials, such as National Security Adviser Colin Powell, to reassess.    What the world (and conceivably the combatants) want most in the Gulf is an end to the war. What the U.S. should want for the longer term is a businesslike relationship with Iran. Iran has &quot;moderates&quot; to the extent that some within the government understand that Iran's survival will require a functioning economy. If the U.S. sulks, the Ayatollah's successors will do business with the worldly fellow to the north, an unacceptable outcome no matter how many more summits occur this year.    In the aftermath of 290 deaths aboard Flight 655, the U.S. could make a gesture of both symbolic and political substance. It could offer to pull back its naval presence to a standoff position in the Indian Ocean for perhaps 20 days. The stated purpose of the pullback would be to permit Iran and Iraq to begin talking toward an armistice. Turkey and Algeria have good, recent track records of arbitrating Arab conflicts. If the gesture fails, the U.S. can return to its guardian's role.    The U.S. has an opportunity to act both for humanitarian reasons and to promote its own political interests. That, we think, is what a superpower is expected to do. </TEXT></DOC>