<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870831-0075 </DOCNO><HL> The Pope Will Face Issues Ranging From Israel to Indians</HL><DD> 08/31/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Here are the issues Pope John Paul II is expected to confront in major cities other than San Antonio during his U.S. tour.    MIAMI   SEPTEMBER 10-11   Catholics in archdiocese: 528,600    Percent of population: 18%   Issue: Jewish relations   The pope's June meeting with Austrian President Kurt Waldheim, who is accused of complicity in Nazi war crimes, nearly eliminated one item from the pope's U.S. agenda: a meeting with U.S. Jewish leaders in this heavily Jewish community.    &quot;The meeting with Waldheim profoundly offended the sensibilities of those whose memories of the Holocaust haven't dimmed,&quot; says Henry Siegman, the executive director of the American Jewish Congress. Some Jewish groups discussed boycotting the planned 40-minute papal meeting. But the pope took steps to defuse the crisis by issuing a letter decrying the Holocaust and inviting U.S. Jewish leaders to a pre-tour meeting at the Vatican tomorrow.    &quot;Barring a disaster&quot; at the Rome meeting, says Mr. Siegman, the talks in Miami will go forward. Protests at the meeting site are likely, though. And even if Jewish leaders aren't sanctioning any demonstrations, some are still talking tough. &quot;The only thing that will assuage us is if the pope explicitly repudiates Waldheim and recognizes the state of Israel,&quot; says Michael Lerner, the editor of the Jewish magazine Tikkun. (The Vatican doesn't have diplomatic relations with the Jewish state.)    Another ethnic group here is anything but adversarial. Haitian immigrants believe that a papal visit to their impoverished homeland in 1983 galvanized church leaders to take a hard stand against President-for-Life Jean-Claude Duvalier, hastening his downfall. The church here has embraced Haitians, even permitting the use of certain practices of voodoo art, such as drum-beating, during Masses. The pope's Mass here will be conducted in English, Spanish and the Haitain tongue of Creole.    And here as elsewhere, the church's stand on abortion will prompt demonstrations by groups on both sides of the issue.    -- MARTHA BRANNIGAN   COLUMBIA, S.C.   SEPTEMBER 10-11   Catholics in diocese: 72,000   Percent of population: 2%   Issue: Ecumenism   Catholicism is a marginal denomination in this region. The area is dominated by conservative Baptists, who have traditionally been hostile toward the church of Rome. &quot;Not too many years ago they actually thought that the reason Catholic women wore veils was because they had horns,&quot; says Elaine Roberson, a member of St. Joseph's Church, the state's biggest parish.    Thus this is a fitting place for the pope to pursue his interest in ecumenism, or the promotion of cooperation by different Christian churches. He will meet with 27 leaders of non-Catholic churches at the home of James Holderman, the president of the University of South Carolina. Already, papers on ecumenism are being prepared by the non-Catholic leaders and the Vatican; if a consensus is obtained on the USC campus, a joint communique will be issued. &quot;How many people are turned off just because they see Christians fighting with one another?&quot; asks Monsignor Thomas Duffy of St. Joseph's. &quot;Not just disagreeing, but being disagreeable.&quot;    Ostracism and job discrimination against Catholics have faded here, but they have hardly disappeared. After the visit was announced, a fundamentalist Baptist started a campaign to erect billboards characterizing the pontiff as the anti-Christ; to almost everyone's relief, the effort fizzled.    Catholics and non-Catholics here do generally agree on social issues. They worked together last year to pass legislation that prevents public secondary schools from distributing condoms to combat the spread of AIDS. And even many Catholic women believe that women shouldn't be ordained.    -- TIMOTHY K. SMITH   NEW ORLEANS   SEPTEMBER 11-13   Catholics in archdiocese: 535,000    Percent of population: 37%   Issues: Black Catholics, education    The pope will address 2,000 blacks in this Catholic stronghold of Cajuns, Creoles and blacks. Black Catholics are particularly eager to hear his views on why so few of them have entered the church's hierarchy.    There are fewer than 300 black priests and only 11 black bishops in the U.S. Catholic Church. Only one such bishop, the Most Rev. John Howze of nearby Biloxi, Miss., heads a diocese. In a delicately phrased, 4 1/2-minute statement, Bishop Howze will outline resolutions by a Black Catholic Conference calling for greater consideration of blacks for future diocese openings. &quot;I'm saying it as diplomatically as I can without embarrassing the Holy Father,&quot; the bishop says.    Before the civil rights movement, &quot;Catholics were not excluded from the stain of racism,&quot; says the Rev. Curtis Guillory, a vica to black Catholics in New Orleans. Even today, he says, &quot;many blacks see the Catholic Church as a white church,&quot; with white leadership and a white liturgy. But in small ways, there is progress. More than 30 churches in this area, for example, regularly include gospel music in Masses.    The pope's agenda here also includes Catholic schools, whose local enrollment totals 94,300. The declining number of Catholic priests, nuns and brothers has caused parochial schools everywhere to hire paid lay teachers, and the schools face severe budget problems. Nationally, average Catholic-school tuition rose 12% in the 1985-86 school year alone.    Social problems, too, have hit parochial schools. The National Catholic Educational Association will show the pontiff a video that will include such teen problems as pregnancy, suicide, AIDS and anorexia. An association spokeswoman says that although the pope will doubtless reaffirm traditional teachings on family life, educators will demonstrate that &quot;we deal with reality.&quot;    --BRIDGET O'BRIAN and CARRIE DOLAN    PHOENIX   SEPTEMBER 14-15   Catholics in diocese: 464,890   Percent of population: 22%   Issue: Native Americans   Native Americans, 19% of whom are Catholic, bitterly oppose the possible sainting of Father Junipero Serra. The 18th-century friar founded most of the West's big Spanish missions, but Indians believe that he badly mistreated their ancestors. The Vatican may have averted open confrontation here by postponing a plan to expedite Father Serra's beatification, a process that brings a person closer to sainthood. Beatification could occur as soon as this fall, though, after the third of three Vatican boards confirms a miracle that the friar is said to have performed.    In promoting the papal tour, U.S. church leaders have been emphasizing John Paul II's decision in 1980 to beatify Lily of the Mohawks, the orphaned daughter of a 17th-century Mohawk chief who broke tribal custom by vowing virginity and pledging herself as a spouse of Jesus. They also point to the pope's nomination of Mother Katharine Drexel, the founder of the Sisters for the Blessed Sacrament for Indians and Colored People, as a candidate for beatification.    LOS ANGELES   SEPTEMBER 15-17   Catholics in archdiocese: 2,650,000    Percent of population: 29%   Issue: Sanctuary   The pontiff's agenda here includes addressing representatives of the mass-communications industry, whom he has accused of &quot;complacent and insistent repetition of evil.&quot; But he has also chosen the nation's largest Catholic diocese to deliver a message on &quot;ethnic and cultural diversity.&quot;    The nation's biggest Latino Catholic population is here, and the city has two Catholic churches that have declared themselves illegal-immigrant &quot;sanctuaries.&quot; The church leaders involved recognize that giving sanctuary requires using civil disobedience, but they yearn for the pope's endorsement. Says the Rev. Michael Kennedy, whose Our Lady Queen of Angels has harbored 500 illegals since 1985: &quot;Jesus was crucified for what he said.&quot;    Jewish leaders here, like those in other areas, hope that the pope will renounce his acceptance of Austria's Mr. Waldheim. Diocese officials have invited 100 Jewish leaders (along with Hindu, Moslem and Buddhist representatives) to an interfaith gathering with the pope. But a spokeswoman for the Jewish Defense League derides the gathering as a &quot;spectacle of hypocrisy&quot; and denounces Jews who plan to attend as &quot;vacillating.&quot;    The local chapter of Dignity, a gay Catholic organization, plans to display a banner in Polish to greet the papal motorcade, but it has little hope of gaining the pope's blessing. Lisa Bohm, a local Dignity officer, tells of dreaming recently that she told the pope &quot;about my experience of being lesbian and Catholic, and how the two could coexist.&quot; Says Ms. Bohm: &quot;He listened politely, and then he excommunicated me.&quot;    -- NANCY JEFFREY   SAN FRANCISCO   SEPTEMBER 17-18   Catholics in archdiocese: 375,000    Percent of population: 24%   Issues: Homosexuality, farmworkers    On the eve of the papal visit, many gay and heterosexual Catholics have been shocked and saddened to learn that AIDS has stricken a popular priest, the Rev. Robert Arpin. Father Arpin declines to be interviewed, saying simply that he is &quot;feeling very tired.&quot;    An October 1986 pastoral letter by John Paul II denouncing homosexuals as &quot;intrinsically disordered&quot; has spurred plans for gay protests during the visit. Papal-tour coordinators had planned for the pope to visit an AIDS hospice in the largely gay Castro district, but the plan was dropped as risky and offensive to homosexuals. &quot;The Castro is my country,&quot; says John Wahl, an attorney helping to coordinate anti-pope demonstrations. &quot;I don't feel disposed to welcome an enemy leader in my country.&quot; Instead, 50 AIDS patients have been invited to attend a papal Mass at Mission Dolores.    Dignity, the gay Catholic group, plans a prayer vigil for the pope's &quot;safety and enlightenment&quot; that will last throughout his 17-hour visit to San Francisco. The Sisters of Perpetual Indulgence, a group of gay men who dress in nuns' habits for Halloween and Gay Freedom Day, is already holding demonstrations urging the pope to stay away altogether. But the group's founder -- he calls himself Sister Boom Boom -- isn't happy about the protests. His aim, he says, was &quot;never, never, never&quot; to be harshly anti-Catholic. &quot;The group's gotten ugly and disparate,&quot; he says. &quot;The original fun is gone.&quot;    Although many view the pope as an arch-conservative, a stop in Monterey, just down the coast, will illuminate his liberal side. His appearance there will involve agricultural issues, which he addressed in a 1981 encyclical, &quot;Laborem Exercens,&quot; or &quot;On Human Work.&quot; The encyclical decried the &quot;dehumanizing living conditions&quot; and &quot;unremitting and sometimes exhausting physical effort&quot; of farmworkers. &quot;Capital,&quot; the pontiff asserted, &quot;should be at the service of labor, and not labor at the service of capital.&quot;    -- MARILYN CHASE   DETROIT   SEPTEMBER 18-19   Catholics in archdiocese: 1,466,000    Percent of population: 35%   Issue: Social justice   The racial barriers dividing inner-city Detroit from its suburbs are also evident in the Catholic Church -- and in attitudes toward the papal visit. Grand downtown churches that once served Irish, Polish or Italian parishes of 2,000 families or more now serve one-tenth as many families, many of them black. Archbishop Edmund Szoka has a committee studying whether to close inner-city churches and schools that can't support themselves or continue subsidies from suburban churches.    &quot;We have two churches,&quot; says the Rev. William Cunningham of Madonna Church. &quot;One black, one white. One rich, one poor. One fairly well-attended, and a church in the city of Detroit struggling to be a witness to other things, such as problems of poverty and injustice.&quot; That means, he adds, that the problems of today are &quot;not at all dissimilar to the problems of early Catholic immigrants.&quot;    Gladys Gates, a black Catholic, recalls a priest in a Polish parish passing her by three times as she waited to receive communion; she hopes the pope's visit will lead to &quot;more unity in the church.&quot;    But so far, division is most visible. The pope is scheduled to speak at Hart Plaza in the downtown business district, celebrate Mass at Pontiac's Silverdome and make an appearance in the Polish enclave of Hamtramck. Some black Catholics believe that the itinerary goes around them and question whether more than $1 million should be spent on a celebration that will precede and follow the pope's sermon on the poor.    &quot;Drop what you spend for that in the poor box,&quot; says Bernice Brown, a black parishioner, &quot;and let a family eat.&quot;    -- JOSEPH B. WHITE   (See related story: &quot;Latin Masses: The Church John Paul Will See in America Is Ever More Hispanic --- At His San Antonio Stop, He Will Find Faith Robust and Immigration an Issue --- T-Shirts and Souvenir Masks&quot; -- WSJ Aug. 31, 1987) </TEXT></DOC>