<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880930-0032 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE SHUTTLE ROCKETED into orbit, returning the U.S. to manned space flight.    NASA launched the space shuttle Discovery and its five-man crew at 11:37 a.m. EDT, ending a 32-month absence from space caused by the explosion of the shuttle Challenger. The liftoff, watched by as many as one million people at Cape Canaveral, was 98 minutes late because of delays caused by poor weather conditions, but space agency officials said the blastoff was problem-free. Six hours into the four-day mission, the crew placed a $100 million communications satellite into orbit. The astronauts will also test modifications to the spaceship.    The U.S. and 11 allies signed an agreement to build a $23 billion permanently manned space station designed to serve as a stepping stone for the human exploration of the solar system.    ---   The Kremlin announced the Supreme Soviet will meet tomorrow. The Soviet parliament is expected to endorse any decisions reached at a special session of the Communist Party Central Committee today. Soviet sources said the meetings underscore Gorbachev's urgency about solving political and economic problems.    ---   The Nobel Peace Prize was awarded to U.N. peacekeeping forces around the world. The Nobel committee in Oslo said the nearly 10,000 soldiers from more than 30 countries &quot;contributed to reducing tensions.&quot; U.N. Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar will accept the award in Norway Dec. 10.    ---   Dukakis denounced the Reagan administration's environmental record. Campaigning in New Jersey, he also defended his own efforts to end pollution in Boston Harbor, saying he had to fight Bush and the administration &quot;every inch of the way.&quot; In the Midwest, Republican Bush scoffed at the Democrat's claim of being tough on crime.    ---   The GAO said the Navy tested its multibillion dollar Aegis air defense system under unrealistically favorable conditions and classified poor results. But favorable data was employed to speed development of the radar system, which was used on the Vincennes, the ship that mistakenly downed an Iranian airliner.    ---   Students in Seoul battled police in what was seen as the worst street clash since the Olympics began Sept. 17. The fighting led to increased security at the Games. Meanwhile, South Korea's President Roh sought to defuse criticism of the U.S. sparked by the behavior of some American athletes and NBC-TV's coverage of the Games.    ---   South Africa, Angola and Cuba ended a round of peace talks without an agreement or a date to meet again. But sources said the discussions, which involve Namibian independence and peace in Angola, have made progress. Apparently the three nations are focusing on a U.S. proposal that would get Cuban troops out of Angola in two years.    ---   Scientists reported they have developed a method to identify more easily and accurately potential cancer-causing compounds produced when foods are overcooked. Using monoclonal antibodies, researchers in California said they can measure ten such compounds, a step in determining possible problems for humans.    ---   Burmese troops fired on hundreds of looters in three separate incidents, killing 18 people, Rangoon Radio said. The military regime, which seized power Sept. 18, formed a new central executive committee. It also said some government employees had returned from a pro-democracy strike. The claim couldn't be verified.    ---   Iran moved toward improved ties with three nations following its truce in the Persian Gulf. Kuwait reopened its embassy in Tehran, and Cyprus and Iran said they will establish full diplomatic ties. In Geneva, Britain and Iran ended three days of talks ahead of a ministerial meeting today in New York to normalize diplomatic relations.    ---   Nicaraguan troops fired at Honduran military aircraft that violated Nicaraguan airspace, the Sandinista newspaper Barricada said. It accused Honduras of increasing tension between the two nations. Managua television said Contra rebels were gathering for a possible military offensive. Honduran and U.S. officials denied the charges.    ---   A lone gunman hijacked a Brazilian jet with 105 people aboard, killing the co-pilot and injuring three crew members, officials said. The state-owned airliner, en route to Rio de Janeiro from Porto Velho, landed in Goiania, where police killed the hijacker.    ---   Wellcome PLC of Britain offered $5 million so medically indigent Americans can continue to receive its AIDS drug AZT free, but only if Congress spends $10 million to extend a program for low-income AIDS patients that ends today. The Senate later approved a six-month, $15 million extension of the program.    ---   Died: Charles Addams, 76, cartoonist, in New York City. </TEXT></DOC>