<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880405-0004 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO>  </SO><TEXT>   MECHAM WAS CONVICTED by Arizona's Senate and removed from office.    Voting 21-9, the chamber found the governor guilty of &quot;high crimes, misdemeanors and malfeasance in office.&quot; Mecham was convicted of attempting to thwart a deaththreat inquiry. The state senators, voting 264, also found the first-term Republican guilty of misusing $80,000 in public funds. Acting Gov. Mofford automatically suceeded him. A motion to bar the 63-year-old Mecham from ever holding state office failed to win the required two-thirds majority.    Mecham is the first U.S. governor to be removed from office in 59 years and is only the seventh head of a U.S. state to be ousted by impeachment.    ---   NORIEGA APPEALED to Jackson to mediate a U.S.-Panama dispute.    The military leader, in a letter released by Jackson's campaign staff, urged the Democratic candidate help end U.S. interference in Panama, where a drive to oust Noriega is under way. The appeal was in response to a message sent by Jackson offering &quot;to do whatever I can to help alleviate the suffering.&quot; Jackson said his offer was meant to &quot;facilitate&quot; Noriega's &quot;exit.&quot; U.S. aides and rival candidates faulted Jackson for his contacts with Noriega.    Hundreds of shops reopened in Panama, ending a two-week strike that failed to oust Noriega. About 1,300 U.S. troops are to arrive in Panama today.    ---   ISRAELI TROOPS KILLED an Arab during a protest of Shultz's peace mission.    As the U.S. secretary of state held negotiations with Israeli leaders in Jerusalem, Palestinians staged a general strike to underscore Arab demands to be represented by the PLO in any Mideast peace talks. Almost all shops were closed in the Israeli-occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip and in East Jerusalem. Sporadic clashes were reported, and officials said one Palestinian was killed in Hebron. Eight other Arabs were wounded throughout the territories.    Shultz discussed plans for limited Palestinian self-rule during talks with Israeli leaders. He is to travel to Jordan today to meet with King Hussein.    ---   The Soviets have begun preparations for the withdrawal of about 115,000 Red Army troops from Afghanistan, although a date for the pullout hasn't been set and peace talks in Geneva are at an impasse, U.S. officials said. In Kabul, Shevardnadze held a second day of talks with Afghan leader Najibullah about Moscow's planned withdrawal.    ---   The Reagan administration scuttled Meese's plan to designate a Justice Department deputy as the new head of the criminal division, department sources said. It couldn't be immediately determined why James Knapp, currently a deputy assistant attorney general in the department's tax division, was removed from consideration.    Meese is facing an ethics investigation by the Justice Department's Office of Professional Responsibility, the Associated Press reported. The process could result in a recommendation that the attorney general be dismissed. The office is examining whether Meese's involvement with his friend E. Robert Wallach constitutes unethical behavior.    ---   Dukakis and Jackson mounted last-minute campaign efforts in Colorado, where 45 national convention delegates were at stake in the state's Democratic precinct caucuses. On the Republican side, 36 delegates were to be chosen for the GOP convention. Bush was expected to capture most of them.    ---   The Supreme Court let stand $3,050,000 damage award against CBS and a Chicago anchorman for libeling Brown andamp; Williamson in a 1981 TV broadcast that said the firm had a strategy to attract young people to Viceroy cigarettes. In a separate case, the court refused to let a St. Louis airport ban all demonstrations.    ---   A Chinese official said the Dalai Lama could live in Tibet if he returned from exile. The religious and civil leader of Tibet before the 1950 Chinese Communist takeover fled to India in 1959. Previously, China said the Dalai Lama would be permitted to visit Tibet, but would have to live in Beijing.    ---   South Korean prosecutors are studying allegations that the government of former President Chun Doo Hwan forced the dismemberment of a business group because it didn't give enough money to projects tied to Chun and his family. The investigation was disclosed after a suit was filed by the founder of Kukje-ICC.    ---   Iran's warplanes bombarded Iraqi oil centers in response to attacks on its major refineries. Baghdad accused Tehran of using chemical weapons in a ground offensive in northern Iraq. In New York, U.N. Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar prepared to meet this week with Iranian and Iraqi envoys in an effort to arrange a Persian Gulf truce.    ---   Philippine troops searched vehicles and blocked escape routes during a nationwide hunt for the leader of last August's coup attempt. Col. Gregorio Honasan escaped from a Manila prison ship Saturday. Separately, the U.S. and the Philippines are to open talks today on the future of American military installations in the Philippines.    ---   A high-ranking Sikh priest said India's government must negotiate with Sikh extremists in an effort to end violence in Punjab. More than 60 people have died in the state in the first three days of this month, and more than 500 have been killed this year. Prime Minister Gandhi is widely expected to declare a state of emergency.    ---   A judge in India ordered Union Carbide Corp. to pay $192 million in interim relief for victims of the 1984 Bhopal poison-gas leak. The company said the ruling would &quot;only result in additional litigation,&quot; and that the move &quot;won't serve the real needs&quot; of the victims.    ---   Kansas defeated Oklahoma, 83-79, to win the National Collegiate Athletic Association basketball championship. </TEXT></DOC>