<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870918-0028 </DOCNO><HL> U.S., Soviets Reach Tentative PactOn Intermediate-Range Weapons---Progress Also Is ReportedTo Limit Nuclear Tests,Longer-Range Systems---By Frederick Kempe and Robert S. GreenbergerStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST GOVMTNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Secretary of State George Shultz and Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze reached an agreement in principle on eliminating intermediate-range nuclear weapons, and made unexpected progress toward limiting nuclear testing and reducing long-range nuclear weapons as well.    A senior U.S. official familiar with the negotiations said &quot;technical details&quot; still have to be worked out on an intermediate-range missile accord. But, he said: &quot;The major decisions negotiators need to go back and hammer out the details have been arrived at.&quot;    The progress in the talks was great enough that President Reagan held an unexpected 35-minute meeting with the two officials last night. The White House said it expected to make an announcement this morning.    U.S. officials had expected the negotiators to focus, during their three days of talks here this week, on wrapping up an agreement on intermediate-range weapons -- those with ranges between 300 miles and 3,000 miles. The two sides have been near accord on that issue for some time. An agreement would clear the way for a summit meeting between President Reagan and Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev in Washington later this year or early next year.    Earlier yesterday, State Department spokesman Charles Redman and Soviet spokesman Genady Gerasimov announced, at a rare and amicable joint news conference, that the two sides had decided to begin full-scale negotiations before Dec. 1 on reducing and verifying nuclear tests.    They said the ultimate aim of the talks would be to end nuclear testing altogether, but the initial emphasis would be on developing measures for verifying compliance with two existing nuclear-test-limitation treaties.    Officials said that the two sides intend to explode devices on each other's territory as verification experiments.    &quot;It (the nuclear test agreement) is a much better agreement than we've talked about in the past,&quot; said Kenneth Adelman, the chief U.S. negotiator for the nuclear-test talks. He said the U.S. succeeded in playing down the long-term goal of a comprehensive test ban, which the Soviets have sought but the Reagan administration has resisted. Instead, he said, the agreement emphasizes, as a first step toward banning nuclear tests, developing means to verify compliance with past agreements and reducing nuclear arms.    An accord on intermediate weapons has appeared likely since last month, when West Germany said it was willing to dismantle 72 Pershing missiles that it controls. The two superpowers already had said they were willing to eliminate all their intermediate missiles.    Officials said the tentative intermediate-range accord and the surprising headway on nuclear testing -- and, to a lesser extent, on intercontinental arms-underlines a Soviet desire to achieve as much progress toward arms control as possible during President Reagan's time in office.    &quot;They want to move on the whole spectrum of things,&quot; said a senior U.S. official.    A Soviet official this week said that Moscow believes a future president, particularly a Democrat, would have far more trouble getting an arms-control agreement ratified than the relatively hard-line Mr. Reagan.    Officials thus far haven't spoken publicly about the progress in more critical strategic arms talks, which had been stalemated for months. On official involved in the talks said progress in that area was one of the key reasons Messrs. Shultz and Shevardnadze canceled scheduled news conferences and afternoon meetings on Capitol Hill and extended their talks yesterday.    A U.S. official said the Soviets arrived in Washington this week with somewhat greater latitude than they've shown in the past to negotiate strategic arms matters. He said they appeared somewhat more flexible toward a U.S. demand that a strategic arms accord include &quot;sub-limits&quot; for bombers and missiles, which would ensure that large numbers of the heaviest Soviet missiles would be eliminated.    This official wouldn't comment on whether the Soviets had shown movement on their demands that strategic arms talks be accompanied by restrictions on President Reagan's space defense program, or Strategic Defense Initiative.    U.S. officials believe that the Soviets, besides wishing to conclude arms agreements with a conservative president, are exploring ways in the current talks to impede the space defense program. One said the Soviets may be showing flexibility on strategic arms in order to encourage Congress to oppose the administration's efforts to reinterpret the Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty of 1972 broadly enough to allow further SDI development.    The Senate yesterday approved an amendment designed to force the administration to stick to a more restrictive interpretation of the treaty.    Soviet leader Gorbachev said Wednesday that a U.S.-Soviet treaty eliminating medium and shorter range missiles should be achieved by the end of this year and could lead to another accord in early 1988 to reduce strategic weapons. &quot;An accord on this matter could become a reality as early as the first half of next year,&quot; he said in an article in Pravda.    U.S. officials in the past have been eager to explore such possibilities. Mr. Shultz has long believed that doing away with a large number of the Soviets' heavy intercontinental missiles would be a far greater contribution to arms control than the more limited negotiations to eliminate intermediate nuclear forces from Europe.    At the Reykjavik summit last year, the U.S. and the Soviet Union reached agreement in principle on a 50% reduction by 1991 in strategic offensive forces. The Soviets have linked the reduction to agreement on Star Wars and to the beginning of negotiations on a comprehensive ban on nuclear testing. Yesterday's announcement appeared to meet the second of those two conditions.    But substantial differences on strategic arms remain. The U.S. has opposed setting one common limit on ballistic missile launchers and bomber weapons, as proposed by the Soviets. That would put the U.S. at a disadvantage, as it would allow the Soviets to keep the bulk of their newest missiles, which could most easily penetrate U.S. defenses, while allowing them to remove weapons that are less of a threat. </TEXT></DOC>