<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880620-0114 </DOCNO><HL> SDI: A Lasting Legacy? </HL><AUTHOR> J.D. Crouch </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><IN> ARO NUK </IN><G> EXE DEF CNG </G><TEXT>   It would be difficult to find many Americans who, after watching President Reagan's now famous strategic defense initiative speech of March 23, 1983, thought he was initiating something other than the creation of anti-missile defenses for the U.S. Reflecting on five years of the Reagan administration's SDI policy, it is now clear that nothing could be farther from the truth.    A crucial test of a president's determination to see his policies succeed is how he prepares them for his inevitable passing from the political scene. In the case of SDI, the legacy is so uncertain it is doubtful that the program -- which former Undersecretary of Defense Fred Ikle called the &quot;very core&quot; of the administration's strategic policy -- will endure much beyond February 1989, no matter who wins the election in November.    Consider the following difficulties:   --SDI has never had the enthusiastic support of military leaders -- not because they deny its military and strategic necessity, but because it competes for resources in tighter and tighter budgets. More important, strategic defenses would so alter our military strategy that traditional career patterns within the armed services would be challenged, just as the airplane and aircraft carrier forever altered the Navy earlier in this century.    Instead of assigning the strategic defense mission to a dedicated operational command -- no command in the entire armed forces yet has the mission to defend us from Soviet nuclear missiles -- and thereby forcing the armed services to compete over deployment dollars for anti-missile weapons, the administration set SDI apart from the uniformed Pentagon by creating the Strategic Defense Initiative Office. SDIO is a civilian organization run through the Office of the Secretary of Defense. It has no base or constituency in the armed services; indeed, its creation was lauded by the military because its pro-research, anti-procurement orientation virtually ensured that no anti-missile system would ever eat from that part of the Pentagon pie devoted to traditional tasks.    --SDI is so enmeshed in the arms-control process that it is almost inconceivable that a Start deal -- which the president is said to want badly -- will be signed without some limitation on it. The administration started down this slippery slope in March 1986 by acceding to the Soviets' demand that &quot;space weapons&quot; (read SDI) be included on the arms-control agenda before they would return to the table.    If the SDI program is the &quot;very core&quot; of the administration's strategic policy, it would follow that it must be protected from the arms-control process at all costs. Instead, this embrace of arms control as good for the SDI program has meant that all SDI decisions -- even those pertaining to military and strategic matters, such as testing promising technologies -- must be vetted through the State Department and the Arms Control and Disarmament Agency. These institutions, whose world views are anathema to SDI, view the program's primary purpose as a bargaining chip for another arms agreement with the Soviets. Maybe what SDI has been all along is, in the words of Bud McFarlane, former national security adviser, the &quot;greatest sting operation in history.&quot;    --There has been no commitment to deployment of SDI by President Reagan. Such a commitment would establish a challenge for the nation's scientists, its military and political leaders, and the people themselves. Consider where we would have been in July 1969 if President Kennedy had some eight years earlier declared in a speech that the country was going to see if it might one day perchance find itself with the capability to go the moon. Would the Eagle have landed? Or would the naysayers, who were as plentiful on that question in 1961 as they are on SDI today, have so muddled the issue that the program would have been diverted to nothing more than pure research?    Lack of a clear deployment commitment is having a negative effect on Capitol Hill in three ways. First, it increases the justification for congressional meddling in the program. Ironically, many of the positive changes in the program have come about as a result of constructive criticism of SDI from Capitol Hill. Most of the meddling, though, has been purposefully destructive, but difficult to prevent because of the unclear and intangible objectives of the program.    Second, it is impossible to sustain major increases in research budgets as defense dollars get tight. It is difficult to convince even pro-defense congressmen that they should postpone cutting metal for real weapon systems in favor of SDI when they have no reason to believe that the program will ever create a real system.    Third, the lack of a commitment to deployment has allowed SDI to become all things to all people. Virtually everyone in Congress supports SDI. The anti-SDI crowd can easily feign support for the program at home while fighting to the death for cuts in the research in Washington. After all, the only difference between Sen. Malcolm Wallop (R., Wyo.) and Rep. Ronald Dellums (D., Calif.) on SDI is how much money to devote to research!    A solid commitment to deployment would force the opponents out of this comfortable position and make them justify their &quot;defense is bad&quot; position before the American people. The current situation is the worst of all worlds: Endless support for a research program cannot be sustained and, in losing votes on cutting the research budget, it is not possible to capitalize on the political fruits of defeat.    --Finally, the administration has not faced the facts about the ABM Treaty. It does not serve our security interests. It is being heavily violated by the Soviets. And the deal implicit in the 1972 SALT I bargain -- that the U.S. will limit its defenses if the Soviet Union will limit its offenses -- has never been honored by the Russians. Indeed, even if there is a 50% reduction in Soviet strategic nuclear weapons, the Soviets would still have three times as many warheads as they did when the ABM Treaty was signed.    The official administration policy is paradoxically &quot;to restore the integrity of the ABM Treaty.&quot; The treaty states clearly that neither nation will &quot;deploy ABM systems for a defense of the territory of its country.&quot; Doesn't that sound awfully like what the SDI program is supposed to do? How can we pursue SDI and restore the integrity of the ABM Treaty at the same time? The answer is, we can't.    President Reagan's embrace of the ABM Treaty could easily saddle the nation with that document for 15 more years. This means not only that no anti-missile defenses will be deployed, but that the research program he created will die the slow death of congressional strangulation, as did the ABM programs of the 1970s. What the president needed to do was launch a strong frontal attack against the idea behind the treaty: that defenselessness provides more security than defense.    If the above is a pessimistic picture, it is also an agenda for making SDI a national issue in this campaign. There is nothing inevitable about the demise of the SDI program. But if America is to be defended, the keepers of the flame must be willing to push the program far beyond where it has come in the past five years.    ---   Mr. Crouch is national-security assistant to Sen. Malcolm Wallop. The article is adapted from remarks at the Philadelphia Society earlier this month. A related editorial appears nearby. {See &quot;REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Reagan's SDI Legacy&quot; -- WSJ June 20, 1988}</TEXT></DOC>