<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890821-0093 </DOCNO><DD> = 890821 </DD><AN> 890821-0093. </AN><HL> Taking Charge:@  No Longer an Outsider,@  Solidarity Must Face@  Poland's Economic Ills@  ---@  Food Shortages, Debt Burden@  Call for Painful Reforms@  That Could Stir Unrest@  ---@  The Communists' New Role@  ----@  By Philip Revzin and Barry Newman@  Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/21/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><DATELINE> GDANSK, Poland  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Leaders of Solidarity, the trade union that suddenly finds itself the Polish government, came home to Gdansk from Warsaw yesterday to do what they have always done during nine years of struggle.    They prayed.    In Solidarity's home church, St. Brygida, a packed Sunday Mass applauded through tears as parish priest Henryk Jankowski introduced Solidarity leader Lech Walesa and Poland's prime minister-designate, Tadeusz Mazowiecki.    &quot;Gdansk will pray for you, Poland will pray for you,&quot; intoned Father Jankowski to a congregation of workers from the Lenin Shipyards, Solidarity's birthplace, and other Poles from all over. &quot;Gdansk won't let you down. Poland won't let you down,&quot; the priest continued.    Solidarity will need all those prayers and all that support. Having achieved the highly unlikely, being asked to form the East bloc's first non-Communist government in more than four decades, Solidarity must now attempt the nearly impossible.    The nine-year-old labor union, outlawed until just four months ago, has to quickly clean up an economic basket case of a country without being able to control the police, the army or the huge bureaucracy, all of which remain with the politically discredited but still powerful Communist Party, according to the deal that brought Solidarity to power.    The entire East bloc, and in particular the Soviet Union, is watching anxiously to see if Poland can make the painful shift to a market-dominated economy without setting off massive unrest. Successful reforms in Poland will do wonders for Moscow's resolve to attempt the same, while a disaster in Warsaw could set the Soviet's back years. The avoidance of a popular uprising in Poland will put the Soviets at ease politically as well, reinforcing Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev's promise in July not to intervene in the affairs of East European countries as long as they remain nominally socialist and in the Warsaw Pact.    But Solidarity's task is daunting indeed. To cure Poland's 100% annual inflation rate, deal with its mammoth $39 billion foreign debt, and above all try to get more food in the shops fast, Solidarity will probably have to resort to the kind of economic belt-tightening programs that labor unions -- including Solidarity -- traditionally oppose. Food prices will rise yet again -- bread and meat prices go up today -- in an effort to persuade farmers to produce more. Solidarity will tell its people to pay and wait until bountiful production brings down prices. &quot;Our policy cannot be soft,&quot; says Warsaw Solidarity chief Zbigniew Bujak.    Solidarity knows it won't get much time, even from its own supporters. And all the while they must keep an eye on the Soviet Union to the east, insuring stability at home to ward off a possible Russian intervention, while cajoling Western banks and governments to aid their fledgling democracy.    The enormity of it all led Solidarity to resist until last week joining a coalition government, changing its mind only when allowed to name the prime minister and dole out most of the other cabinet portfolios. But even now a sizable minority within the union thinks taking over is a mistake. By staying in opposition, this group thinks, Solidarity could have walked away with the next legislative elections in four years and would have been in a much stronger position to sweep away the Communist Party apparatus.    But Mr. Walesa, who declined the premiership, preferring to remain Solidarity's guiding light outside the government, decided that Solidarity would lose more political face by turning its back on a nation in crisis. His call for a broad coalition, his offer of the defense and interior ministries to the Communists, and his carefully stressed statements that Poland would remain in the Warsaw Pact, led to a swift and peaceful transfer of power with nary a tank revving up in Warsaw or Moscow. The speed of the change has left most Poles gasping in disbelief.    &quot;I was in tears when I saw Walesa and Mazowiecki,&quot; sobs a young blond mother named Janina, shepherding four young blond daughters in the St. Brygida churchyard. &quot;We have our prime minister now. It's amazing.&quot; When asked if things will get better, she says, &quot;I hope so, because they are so bad.&quot;    Not so, replies Leszek Bednarscuk, who is standing nearby. &quot;Things are wonderful. We have our prime minister. The people will support him.&quot;    But not all of them. Yesterday, in the churchyard, Mr. Walesa had to silence a gang of young hecklers who shouted, &quot;We want bread, not a prime minister,&quot; a reference to chronic food shortages. &quot;If you know how to make bread, come forward,&quot; an emotional Mr. Walesa told them. &quot;Poland must be built. Bread must be baked. Change requires effort.&quot;    Poland's whole post-war history is stacked against it. Every crisis of mass discontent over the past 40 years has been ignited by an increase in food prices. Solidarity was born in the aftermath of food-price rises in 1980, and it rode the food-price rises of early 1988 back into prominence over 18 months of strikes and desperate negotiations to avoid strikes.    The country's enormous overspending on food subsidies forced the departing government on Aug. 1 into increases in the price of food that outstripped those that went before. While the increases were agreed upon in talks between Solidarity and the authorities and are supposedly cushioned by increased wages, they couldn't pose a greater challenge as Solidarity comes into government.    The big question now for Solidarity is where to start.    Among other problems, Solidarity itself is divided between free-market economic liberals and those who favor hefty protection for workers. Mr. Walesa himself retreats into generalities and faith when asked how he'll cure the economy. &quot;We will lead the society, but the society itself must solve the problems,&quot; he says.    &quot;It won't be easy,&quot; says Walesa lieutenant Bronislaw Geremek. &quot;We need a good economic plan,&quot; he says during a break in yesterday's all-day Solidarity meeting in Gdansk. Do you have one? he is asked. He laughs, walks away, comes back and says: &quot;That's a question that can't be answered today.&quot;    Solidarity will have many more meetings here before it can assemble a government and cobble together a program. The union, which has drawn in academics and journalists but has no experienced government members, was clearly more comfortable opposing than proposing.    In recent days, Solidarity economists have produced assorted economic plans, ranging from Thatcherist liberalism to Mitterrandian social democracy. One plan, proposed by Solidarity journalist and economist Aleksander Paszynski, calls for the immediate cutting of subsidies to state industries, a renegotiation of Poland's economic deals with Comecon -- the Soviet bloc's version of Western Europe's common market -- a moratorium on $10 billion of Poland's foreign debt, and an immediate devaluation of the zloty. While Mr. Paszynski recognizes the pain this all would cause, he insists that &quot;the impatience of the people can only be met by getting started.&quot;    Solidarity's immediate problems include a government rife with corruption and inertia among the million or so Communist Party loyalists who run most factories and ministries. Recent moves to spur private industry have shown results but haven't made a dent in food shortages. Until wages are no longer indexed to price increases, inflation will continue to gallop. Some Solidarity members favor slashing military spending and firing half the party hacks. Others worry that this will lead to violence that Poland can't afford.    Another problem is just how readily the Communist Party will adapt to its sharply reduced role. Saturday evening, at a turbulent session of the party hierarchy, president Wojciech Jaruzelski finally told his apparatchiks that they must give up their long-held monopoly on power.    The party's weakness had become all too clear. Its candidates lost heavily in elections that were slanted in their favor, and it lost control of the lower house of Parliament despite being the biggest party.    Gen. Jaruzelski himself was elected president in July by just one vote. His hand-picked choice for prime minister, former Interior Minister Czeslaw Kiszcak, tried and failed to form a government when two small parties in Parliament, the Peasant Party and the Democrats, revolted after 40 years of submission. It is the support of these two small parties that gives Solidarity the votes it needs in Parliament to form the new government.    The Polish Communist Party's reaction to its new status up to now doesn't bode well. Its new leader, Mieczyslaw Rakowski, has furiously condemned the formation of a Solidarity government as a &quot;counterrevolutionary coup d'etat&quot; and declared the beginning of a new &quot;struggle for power.&quot;    Reuters news agency reported yesterday that the party's Central Committee is already demanding a larger role in the new government. &quot;The Communist Party's representation in the new government must correspond to its political and state potential,&quot; Reuters quoted a Central Committee resolution as saying. &quot;Otherwise, we will not be able to assume co-responsibility for the course of developments.&quot; The resolution also criticized the two smaller parties that joined forces with Solidarity last week, Reuters reported.    While all this may be political posturing in part, Solidarity will surely face stubborn resistance if it attempts to dismantle the &quot;nomenklatura&quot; system, or bureaucracy, throughout Polish society. As long as the nomenklatura persists, the implementation of economic reform will continue to be painful and ineffective. Combined with the strong possibility of strikes for higher pay, the result could be a debilitating conflict.    Just 16 months ago, Poland's riot police smashed the strikes that launched Solidarity's return to prominence. As they prepare today to run the government, one question must weigh on Solidarity's leaders: If civil strife breaks out in a Poland under non-Communist rule, what will the Communist-controlled riot police do then?    Another uncertainty is how the new Solidarity government will get along with Gen. Jaruzelski, who as president has the right to veto legislation, dissolve Parliament and call elections. He will remain commander-in-chief of the armed forces, with the power to declare martial law. This makes him still Poland's uncontested political boss.    Solidarity's choice of nominee for prime minister, Mr. Mazowiecki, is itself a sign of the union's reticence to take control. He is a Roman Catholic intellectual, an editor who has preferred to stay out of the spotlight. He has spent much of the past 30 years in and out of jail opposing the establishment, and more recently, whispering in the background while Mr. Walesa fired up a crowd.    The 62-year-old Mr. Mazowiecki (whose full name is pronounced TAH-day-OOSH mah-zoh-VYET-skee) gave his first television interview sitting in the leafy garden of a nunnery that houses blind children. Tieless, his jacket thrown over his shoulders, he explained that the peacefulness of the nunnery and the quiet determination of the blind children give him inspiration. However Solidarity decides to start, it is banking on a long-enough political honeymoon to enable it to suck in foreign aid while it reforms the moribund economy. So far, the West has promised only $240 million in aid, including $119 from the U.S., in a program being coordinated by the European Community. But the West wants to see genuine reform of the economic system and the establishment of a market economy, before it delivers even that.    Can Solidarity deliver enough, fast enough, to keep Poland together? The two outside countries most interested are both reacting cautiously. The Bush administration has called the developments here encouraging, but isn't rushing to pump in more cash just yet, and is warning the Soviet union not to butt in. Sen. Alan Cranston of California, who is in Poland with three other Democratic senators, says he doesn't think the Russians will interfere. What is the difference between 1989 and 1981, when Gen. Jaruzelski declared martial law under Soviet pressure? Sen. Cranston answers in one word: &quot;Gorbachev.&quot;    Officially, the Russians called Solidarity's reaffirmation of Poland's membership in the Warsaw Pact &quot;sensible&quot; and said Poland's political problems are her own to settle. So far, most Poles and most Western analysts believe them, figuring the Russians have enough of their own problems. Many Poles, in fact, think Mr. Gorbachev wants Solidarity to succeed in order to strike fear into his own moribund party rank and file. Others, who remember 1981, fear that if Polish pluralism infects the neighboring Baltic republics of the Soviet Union too quickly, the Russians could well intervene.    But such concerns are far from the minds of the joyous crowds greeting their returning heroes in Gdansk. &quot;Our prime minister,&quot; they chant over and over, as if convincing themselves it is true. Mr. Mazowiecki, addressing the multitudes from Father Jankowski's front porch after Mass, asks himself and the crowds, &quot;How can I make everyone happy?&quot; His answer, &quot;We must all do it together. I just have to believe that we can do it.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>