<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880208-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   NORIEGA CALLED U.S. drug charges against him false and &quot;foolhardy.&quot;    Panama's military chief asked the country's attorney general to investigate the accusations, made public in two federal indictments released Friday in Florida. Meanwhile, a U.S. campaign to help force Noriega's resignation has entered a critical stage. A Reagan aide said the indictments and Panama's economic difficulties resulting from a cutoff of U.S. aid are heightening pressure on Noriega.    The indictments handed up in Miami and Tampa charge that Noriega has been selling his assistance to drug traffickers for millions of dollars.    ---   ISRAELI TROOPS KILLED three Palestinian demonstrators in the West Bank.    As widespread protests continued throughout the Israeli-occupied territories and in Jerusalem, the soldiers also wounded at least 25 other Arabs in the village of Beit Ummar. Jerusalem Mayor Teddy Kollek declared that &quot;coexistence between Jews and Arabs has collapsed.&quot; The U.N. said the fatalities brought to 48 the number of Palestinians killed since the wave of anti-Israeli unrest began in the occupied areas Dec. 8.    U.S. envoy Murphy met with Syrian leaders to discuss a new Mideast peace plan, but reportedly failed to win approval for the initiative.    ---   CANDIDATES PREPARED for today's presidential caucuses in Iowa.    The candidates made a last-ditch bid for support in each of the state's 2,487 precincts. The caucuses are the first test for Democrats and an important early battle for the Republicans. The Democrats focused on criticizing the U.S. policy in Central America. On the GOP side, Bush distanced himself from charges of &quot;cronyism&quot; and &quot;mean-spiritedness&quot; that his campaign has been leveling at chief rival Dole.    Of the 13 Democrats and Republicans, 11 candidates campaigned across Iowa. Gore and Haig concentrated efforts on future primary contests.    ---   Leslie Manigat was inaugurated as Haiti's 45th head of state. The new president, a political scientist and former exile, pledged to improve living conditions in the Caribbean nation and urged political adversaries to cooperate with the government. Manigat was elected Jan. 17. Opposition leaders called the balloting fraudulent.    ---   Kohl appeared to back away from a NATO commitment to modernize the short-range nuclear weapons that will remain in Europe after a U.S.-Soviet treaty eliminating midrange missiles is ratified. The West German chancellor said upgrading the arms should be linked to new superpower talks on cutting their numbers.    ---   Kim Young Sam resigned as president of South Korea's leading opposition party to help unify political forces for parliamentary elections expected in April. Kim finished second to governing party candidate Roh Tae Woo in presidential elections in December, and had split 55% of the vote with rival opposition leader Kim Dae Jung.    ---   South Africa's Botha unveiled a package of economic changes, including the planned privatization of various state-owned monopolies in the transportation, post and utilities sectors. In a speech opening a session of parliament in Cape Town, Botha devoted only a few sentences to the country's unsettled political situation.    ---   Arizona Gov. Evan Mecham said he would be cleared of the &quot;flimsy charges&quot; that led to his impeachment Friday by the state's House of Representatives. The Republican is accused of concealing a $350,000 campaign loan. The state Senate is to begin Mecham's trial later this month. The secretary of state was named acting governor.    ---   Iraqi warplanes defied Iranian air defenses and attacked Iran's main oil terminal in the Persian Gulf, the first such strike in more than three months. Iranian gunboats, meanwhile, attacked a U.S.-owned tanker flying the Liberian flag near the Strait of Hormuz. Casualties weren't reported.    ---   The official Soviet news media praised Bolshevik leader Nikolai Bukharin's resistance to the 1938 case that led to his conviction and execution, saying his confessions were gained by coercion. Bukharin offered a moderate alternative to Stalin's economic policies that some say may be a model for Gorbachev's restructuring drive.    ---   Violence flared in the Philippines, following the arrests last week of about 20 communist rebel leaders. Gunmen killed a police sergeant in Cebu City and a deputy police chief in Luzon. In the northern province of Cagayan, rebels gunned down four people. The insurgents also threatened attacks against U.S. troops at Clark Air Base.    ---   Floods and mud slides have killed as many as 130 people in Brazil, including about 100 in the old summer capital of Petropolis, civil-defense officials said. At least 6,000 people have been left homeless in the flooding, caused by torrential rains.    ---   A Catholic Church leader blamed a Salvadoran army unit for the death-squad killings of three peasants found slain last week. All of the bodies showed signs of torture. At least 10 other bodies had been found recently in the same location. </TEXT></DOC>