<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870826-0042 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Stock-Index Prices Hit Highs as DollarRecovers and Bond Futures Also Climb---By Robert L. RoseStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)STOCK INDEXES (NDX)PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS)PETROLEUM (PET)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><TEXT>   Encouraged by a firmer dollar and rising bond futures prices, stock-index futures investors went on a buying spree, sending prices to life-of-contract highs.    &quot;Everybody was a buyer,&quot; said J.R. Fredericks, an analyst at E. David Stephens Commodity Corp. in Chicago and a trader in the stock-index futures pit at the Chicago Mercantile Exchange.    Brokerage firms and independent traders alike showed a strong appetite for index futures, analysts and traders said. And even a late bout of profit-taking didn't curb the bulls, as losses were quickly recouped in the final minutes.    Futures on Standard andamp; Poor's 500-stock index for September settlement rose 3.1 to a record 338.4.    The Sandamp;P index itself and the Dow Jones Industrial Average also raced to records in the cash market. Prices were boosted early in the session by trading programs designed to take advantage of a strong premium of futures prices over stock prices themselves. The programs called for selling the relatively expensive stock-index futures and buying the comparatively cheaper stocks that make up the stock indexes.    Helping prices rise were comments by Clayton Yeutter, the U.S. trade representative, who said in a television interview he doesn't favor further declines in the dollar to help reduce the U.S. trade deficit.    However, indications from Japanese officials that they intend to support the dollar were an even bigger factor in restoring some confidence in the U.S. unit and sparking gains in the stock and bond futures markets alike, said William E. Byers, director of futures research at Bear Stearns andamp; Co. in New York.    At the Chicago Board of Trade, Treasury bond futures for September settlement rose 17/32 to 89 23/32. Futures on shorter-term instruments, such as Eurodollars and Treasury bills, made smaller advances.    The underperformance of the shorter-term end of the market could indicate short-term interest rates are going higher, Mr. Fredericks said.    However, while he said such a move could make stocks and stock-index futures susceptible to a correction, others say the bulls remain in command.    &quot;The outlook is for further gains,&quot; said Steve Chronowitz, director of futures research at Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co. in New York. In addition to favorable technical factors, the market should benefit from continued improvement in corporate earnings, Mr. Chronowitz said.    In other futures markets yesterday:    COFFEE: Futures prices rose sharply. The rises were particularly steep in the near-term September and December contracts, for which there are no daily limits on price movements. Analysts were divided about whether the rally was just technically based or was triggered by optimism that export quotas would be reinstated when the International Coffee Organization meets next month in London. Coffee for September delivery at the Coffee, Sugar andamp; Cocoa Exchange in New York rose 6.9 cents a pound to $1.114, and December was up 5.47 cents at $1.1437. Buying actually began late Monday, when roasters came into the market, an analyst said. &quot;Speculators came in behind them and pushed the market higher,&quot; said Sandra Kaul, an analyst at Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. in New York. The demand carried over into yesterday's session, as traders bought contracts to protect profits or prevent further losses on contracts they sold earlier, Miss Kaul said. While optimism about reimposition of quotas has been increasing, comments favoring the move have come only from producing nations, who would benefit from the action, she said.    PRECIOUS METALS: Futures prices retreated amid selling stimulated by news that South African mine officials and union representatives met for the first time since the miners strike began Aug. 9. &quot;There's no question that the situation turned around dramatically,&quot; said William O'Neill, research director at Elders Futures Inc. in New York. &quot;On Monday it looked very bleak, as bad as it could get,&quot; Mr. O'Neill said, &quot;but now there is optimism&quot; that the strike may be settled. Officials of the South African Chamber of Mines and of the National Union of Mineworkers met for four hours in discussions that were described by a Chamber of Mines official as &quot;fruitful and cordial.&quot; A union official said there was agreement on some secondary issues, although there was no resolution of the dispute about wages. The dollar's recovery also was a factor in the fall in prices, said John Norris, director of precious metals trading at Citibank in New York. &quot;A lot of traders were encouraged to take profits by the developments,&quot; Mr. Norris said.    ENERGY: Crude oil futures prices ended just slightly higher after retreating from early advances. Heating oil and gasoline futures prices also rose. An analyst cited a news service report that the president of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries -- Nigeria's oil minister, Rilwanu Lukman -- said he called for OPEC's pricing and quota committees to meet in Vienna to try to stem reported above-quota production. Mr. Lukman also was said to have denied a report Monday by a respected oil industry journal that OPEC output for this month is expected to reach 19.7 million barrels a day, or 3.1 million more than the cartel's total quota of 16.6 million barrels a day. At worst, Mr. Lukman was reported to have said, OPEC was producing one million to 1.2 million barrels a day over the quota. Although Mr. Lukman's denial of the report supported prices in London, then New York, the analyst said, the advances couldn't be sustained. Contributing to the decline, the analyst said, was a report that Iranian leader Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini said Iran wouldn't seek a confrontation with the U.S. unless provoked. &quot;That seems to be in line with Iran's recent actions and its need to use the Persian Gulf,&quot; the analyst said.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: The price of soybean oil futures rose amid speculation that India, the world's largest importer of vegetable oil, is stepping up its purchases of soybean oil in the cash market and is negotiating to import U.S. soybean oil under the federal export enhancement program. An Agriculture Department official wouldn't comment about whether the department is in talks with India. It is widely believed that India needs to boost its imports to compensate for its drought-damaged peanut crop. The lack of monsoon rains is spurring the Agriculture Department to consider raising its estimate of India's import needs for the season ending September 1988, to 1.5 million metric tons. A metric ton is equal to 1.1 U.S. short tons, or 2,204.6 pounds. </TEXT></DOC>