<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880705-0136 </DOCNO><HL> Business World: Thrifts Groan Under a Heavier FSLIC Burden </HL><AUTHOR> George Melloan </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT </CO><IN> BNK FIN </IN><TEXT>   Theo H. Pitt Jr. runs Pioneer Savings Bank in Rocky Mount, N.C., and also, as chairman of the U.S. League of Savings Institutions (USL), speaks for his industry. USL chairmen try to be upbeat so as to maintain public confidence in thrifts to the extent possible. But Mr. Pitt thinks it is time to talk about fundamental changes in the insurance system that has protected thrift depositors for the past 54 years.    &quot;One thing we're beginning to understand as an industry is that the whole deposit insurance system has to be looked at,&quot; he says. &quot;It was never intended to be an insurance fund. It was clearly a confidence fund, structured so that it would prevent financial panic, which it has done. We need to change it. Don't ask me what or how. I just know it has to be changed not only for us but for the banking system as well.&quot;    The reason, of course, is the cost to the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp. (FSLIC) and Federal Home Loan Bank Board (FHLBB) of cleaning up the Texas savings-and-loan mess. Of the $3.8 billion aggregate loss by the industry in the first quarter, Mr. Pitt notes, $3.7 billion was accounted for by a mere 50 institutions in Texas and surrounding states.    Mr. Pitt's Pioneer Savings in Rocky Mount had to pay out $1 million of its $4 million earnings last year in insurance premiums. &quot;That's 25% of my earnings and, frankly, I don't like it a bit. The healthy institutions are tired of paying the bill for something they didn't create. We are upset that the federal deposit insurance system and its underlying supervisory authority didn't get in and stop these problems and get these crooks out of business and get these wild operators in some cases who weren't crooks but who were just free, crazy, wild-riding, steer-roping cowboys in Texas and California.&quot;    Texas is indeed the most dramatic and scandalous example of Sandamp;L managers plowing money into dubious projects, often with less than an arms-length relationship with developers and totally unrealistic estimates of the potential income streams of the commercial and residential buildings they were financing. But the problem doesn't stop at the Texas border. A General Accounting Office study classifies 435 institutions nationwide as barely solvent and estimates a price tag of $26 billion to $36 billion to reorganize or liquidate sick thrifts. A respected consultant to the industry, Bert Ely, thinks the cost could go as high as $64 billion.    In short, a lot more money may be needed. The bailout bill enacted last August by Congress, called the Competitive Equality Banking Act (CEBA) for reasons not entirely clear, estimated FSLIC's potential insurance loss at only $21.8 billion, well below the GAO and Ely estimates. And yet Congress was hard put to find even this much. It finally fell back on that old government solution to all problems, borrowing. CEBA calls for FSLIC to borrow $10.8 billion, with the bonds to be retired with future insurance premiums.    The law specifies that these would not be obligations of the U.S. government. That might relieve the minds of taxpayers, but it also raises questions about how investors will respond to bonds backed only by the income stream of an industry that, on the whole, doesn't have much of an income stream. And lest taxpayers become too sanguine about their future exposure, they should keep in mind that Jim Wright, a very dear friend of the Texas Sandamp;L industry, is speaker of the House, and FSLIC, whatever its present source of funds, is a government agency and hence has at least the implied backing of the U.S. government.    How to reform the deposit insurance system has been getting a lot of discussion lately, both in the savings-and-loan and banking industries. Mr. Ely favors risk-based deposit insurance premiums, questioning the logic of a system where &quot;drunk drivers&quot; pay the same insurance premium as their &quot;sober brethren.&quot; Mr. Pitt thinks that idea, or perhaps higher capital requirements for institutions that are undertaking excessive risks, are worth considering as possible solutions. He notes, for example, that the automobile insurance business operates that way; a driver whose record looks bad pays more.    But Lowell L. Bryan, a former banker and now senior partner of management consultants McKinsey andamp; Co., is dubious about risk-based premiums. The problem, he thinks, is that it is very difficult to find out how much risk Sandamp;L and bank managers are taking until they actually get into trouble. Then it is too late to raise their premiums. One of the central problems of regulating financial institutions lies in the difficulty examiners have in finding out what problems there might be with an institution's investments. When even the managers sometimes don't understand what could go wrong, it is asking a lot of an examiner to assess risk on the basis of a short visit.    Some assessment is made by specialists who rate the certificates of deposit issued by institutions and the market itself takes a hand by establishing how much interest an institution's CDs have to pay to attract investors. While some sort of risk-based premium system would no doubt be preferable to the present system, Mr. Bryan has a point.    He wants a far more radical solution. In a new book based on a McKinsey study, titled &quot;Breaking Up the Bank&quot; (Dow Jones-Irwin, 209 pages), Mr. Bryan recommends that insured depositories be separated from credit risk-taking. They should be restricted to risk-free instruments, such as Treasury securities. This becomes more feasible, he says, as financial intermediaries turn increasingly to securitized forms of credit.    In other words, bankers would continue functioning as they do now but would no longer have the safety net they now have in the form of deposit insurance provided through a government agency. Yet savers would have an insured depository available to them. This radical step, he believes, would introduce greater sobriety to the industry and guarantee a more efficient market allocation of resources.    Of course, politicians and their constituents who run banks and Sandamp;Ls all across the land will make the ultimate judgments on such matters. The temptation, as always, will be to improvise. One current thought is to merge FSLIC with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. (FDIC), which insures bank deposits and currently is in sounder condition than FSLIC. But banks are no more enamored of that idea than healthy Sandamp;Ls are of bailing out all those Texas cowboys.    One thing is certain. It is now becoming apparent to Mr. Pitt and his USL members that last year's CEBA bill didn't really solve their problems. They are beginning to wish they had been less concerned about the image of their industry that would have been created if they had yelled louder about their condition.    As things stand now, they fear the industry is reaching the limits of its ability to insure deposits. &quot;You can't put any more burdens on the healthy part of the industry or you will bring the whole system down,&quot; says Mr. Pitt.    Some theorists will propose re-regulation, but very few serious people think that the financial-services genie that has now emerged can be put back into the bottle, even if that were a desirable course. The longer the matter is studied, the better Mr. Bryan's radical solution looks. </TEXT></DOC>