<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880506-0114 </DOCNO><HL> Why Melinda S. Gets Ads for Panty Hose, Melinda F., Porsches --- What She Buys Gets Her Stereotyped by the People Who Rent Mailing Lists </HL><AUTHOR> Melinda Grenier Guiles (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   I've been saving my junk mail for four years to write this story.    No, it doesn't take up a whole room of my house, and no, I'm not crazy. My purpose was simple: I wanted to know how all those strangers were getting my name.    My names, actually. To figure out who was selling me to whom, I started using slightly different aliases for each new subscription and catalog order I placed. I'm now up to more than two dozen variations. Each &quot;nom de post&quot; has attracted a distinctly different pile of mail -- telling evidence of how the mail-order world stereotypes people by what they buy.    Melinda F., who subscribed to Fortune, is showered with &quot;wellness&quot; letters (to ease corporate stress?), offers of unsecured loans, gold MasterCards, investment guides and invitations to test-drive a turbo-charged Porsche.    No one begs Melinda S., reader of Savvy -- a magazine &quot;For the Successful Woman,&quot; to take a spin in a Porsche. She is urged to save on &quot;slightly imperfect panty hose! Prices guaranteed for 30 days!&quot; She is encouraged to take classes to develop &quot;power communication skills&quot; and &quot;a more appealing professional image.&quot;    Then there's Melinda O., who subscribed to Organic Gardening. She gets predictable offers of back-yard tillers but also a cheery -- and very premature -- come-on from the American Association of Retired Persons.    My popularity in the postal pipeline isn't surprising. I'm &quot;mail responsive&quot; -- a trait shared by just one in three consumers. I'm perceived to be upscale -- my subscriptions and purchases indicate I have some discretionary income. My ZIP code is demographically acceptable.    All of which has earned me a place on several dozen of the more than 100,000 existing mail-order lists. Some are relatively simple membership rosters or customer rolls. Others are sophisticated data bases &quot;enhanced&quot; with information supplied by the Census Bureau and other government agencies and psychographic details (hobbies, family needs) gleaned from subscriptions or purchases.    Using computers, experience and their own hunches, brokers and compilers can create a list for almost any conceivable use. A Michigan group starting a telemarketing school, for example, asked Detroit-area broker Hal L. Burnett for a list of &quot;fat women.&quot; He says the trade school &quot;figured large ladies have trouble getting jobs.&quot; After some thought, he recommended that the client appeal to mail-order buyers of L'eggs Queensize panty hose.    Such targeting is the stock in trade of companies that don't want to waste money trying to sell to the uninterested. In search of well-heeled outdoor-boot buyers? Hugo Dunhill Mailing Lists Inc. in New York offers 48,526 of them, along with 99,337 female sales representatives earning high commissions.    Investors? Aetna National List Co., Des Plaines, Ill., knows of 3,918,000, including 48,000 &quot;millionaires who have taken risks&quot; and 986 &quot;Arabs, in their native lands, who gamble and invest (mostly at home).&quot;    Such names don't come cheap, however. Renting a list for just one use -- few lists are sold outright -- can range from about $40 per thousand names to more than $150, depending on specificity and quality. &quot;If you want my list, you can request recent buyers, frequent buyers, highend buyers, low-price buyers, female buyers by dress size, male buyers by ZIP code,&quot; says S. Roger Horchow, the chairman of the Horchow Collection and its coveted catalog list, which starts at $90 a thousand and doesn't include me. &quot;But each breakdown costs extra.&quot;    To make sure list renters don't cheat and use names more than once, companies will seed their lists with bogus monikers (For instance: &quot;My dog's name at my mother's address,&quot; says Mr. Horchow). But the money to be made from sharing one's list is a major incentive for companies to make names and addresses available, even to competitors. &quot;In lean years, we have made as much money renting our list as selling goods,&quot; Mr. Horchow says.    Some companies share selectively, however. Publishers Clearing House won't rent names of people who have ordered magazine subscriptions, because it doesn't want to &quot;dilute their importance,&quot; says David C. Sayer, the company's director of advertising. It does offer names of those who merely enter its sweepstakes -- a list of people who &quot;at least open mail and read it,&quot; he says. They are also interested in getting rich quick; such people are known in the trade as &quot;opportunity seekers.&quot;    Most mail-order companies and publications that rent customer lists will remove names on request. (The Wall Street Journal recently resumed offering its subscriber list after a hiatus of about eight years, partly because computers now make it easier to expunge names of subscribers who don't want extra mail.)    The Direct Marketing Association in New York also has a service that helps consumers get themselves removed from lists. (I recently requested such exile for 13 of my names.) However, most people who write in actually want to be added to mailing lists, a service the association abandoned because the volume of requests was too great, says spokeswoman Karen A. Generelli. &quot;Now, I tell people the best way to get their name on lists is to buy something.&quot;    That's how most of my alter egos hit the circuit. Melinda R. joined Book-of-the-Month Club's Cooking and Crafts Club and got quilt templates, fliers for doll-making kits and free cake-baking instructions from other clubs. Melinda M., who subscribed to Ms., was solicited by the National Organization for Women, the American Civil Liberties Union and Planned Parenthood.    Melinda A., a Metropolitan Museum of Art catalog buyer, gets a few art brochures and solicitations from charities. Melinda B., member of Book-of-the-Month Club's Quality Paperback Book Club, is inundated with magazine offers, long pitches from liberal causes and a mailing from Gevalia coffee, &quot;A Swedish Obsession.&quot; Some strong coffee might keep her awake through all her paperback reading.    Each Melinda has her own characteristics, based on what she buys. Organic Gardening's Melinda O., if she's typical, is an older lady, 55-ish, with a household income of about $34,000. Fortune's Melinda F. is rather more successful, with household income exceeding $118,000.    Savvy's Melinda S. has less than half Melinda F.'s income and, at 37, is six years younger. She gets mail for up-and-comers. Melinda F.'s mail is for someone who has already made it.    The segmentation obviously fails sometimes, as it has with me. This Melinda can't really afford a Porsche. And she should have been screened out of the senior-citizen list the AARP rented from Organic Gardening.    The experience of Stuart Grigg, a friend of mine who owns a small Detroit printing company, shows the extent to which one can be mistakenly pigeonholed by a single purchase. A slick wine paraphernalia catalog recently appeared unbidden in his mailbox, the cover depicting a damp but dazzling couple in a hot tub who are about to try some Chardonnay.    Knowing of my interest in mailing lists, he brought the catalog to me. Where did the company get his name? David S. Nelson, a senior vice president of list broker Walter Karl Inc. in Armonk, N.Y., wouldn't say directly. &quot;Two types of lists are good for them,&quot; he said. &quot;Wine lovers and people who have too much money and fall prey to their impulses.&quot;    In this vein, he fed me a series of hints. Does Stuart belong to a wine club? Subscribe to any gourmet-food, art or auction magazines? Buy electronic items from Sharper Image -- a purveyor of expensive gadgets? Purchase steaks by mail or merchandise from the catalogs found in airplane seat pockets? Drive a Ferrari or a Rolls?    Armed with these clues, I quizzed Stuart. No, he hasn't subscribed to effete magazines, succumbed to airline catalog blandishments, bought meat by mail or owned anything like a Ferrari. He does, however, confess to having ordered an answering machine from Sharper Image. &quot;But I wasn't falling prey to my impulses,&quot; he insists. &quot;I really needed it.&quot;    As for Melinda, A through Z, has she now been cured of conspicuous consumption, her penchant for mail order and her fascination with how her name travels through the direct-mail marketplace? Has writing this gotten it all out of her system? Well, no. Celinda just signed up for a cross-stitch magazine, and Zelinda sent away for a booklet on Zen. Can't wait to see what flotsam that brings in. </TEXT></DOC>