<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880819-0100 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas: Mexico's Acrimonious TV Network Loses Its Sting </HL><AUTHOR> Adolfo Aguilar Zinser </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><IN> TEL </IN><TEXT>   Amid the controversy surrounding the recent Mexican election, one casualty that has to be counted is the traditional power base of the private television monopoly, Televisa. Executives at Televisa threw their support squarely behind the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party's (PRI) candidate, Carlos Salinas de Gortari, in a vain attempt to demonstrate the network's ability to mold minds and deliver the votes of its largely urban viewers. The result has been a public outcry against Televisa's partisanship, accompanied by an unprecedented showing for opposition center-left candidate Cuauhtemoc Cardenas. The experience has raised doubts about the previously unquestioned power of the Latin mass media to manipulate the opinions of their growing audience.    Televisa, the only non-government television broadcaster of the country, whose corporate interests extend to cable-TV, video, radio, cinema and publishing businesses, contends that its election coverage was fair. Each candidate received air time in proportion to the percentage of the vote gained in previous elections, according to a televised defense by network anchorman Jacobo Zavludovsky.    Public statements made by co-owners Emilio Azcarraga, son of the founder of the network and its controlling force, and Miguel Aleman, son of a former president of Mexico and currently the chief executive of the network, only exacerbate charges of Televisa's partiality. These two proudly claim that their corporation is a PRI institution, down to the least of its employees.    Even admitting Televisa's principle of coverage, the focus on PRI was disproportionate. Until the final weeks of the Mexican campaign, PRI dominated the screen, with secondary coverage of the opposition, favoring the relatively unimportant extreme-left candidate Rosario Ibarra and the extreme-right Gumersindo Magana. Businessman Manuel Clouthier, candidate of the center-right National Action Party (PAN) -- until this election the PRI's strongest opposition party -- was expected to be the beneficiary of the PRI's flagging popularity. But the evening news virtually ignored this angle. This, despite the fact that many had thought that Mr. Clouthier's business allies wielded no little influence with the Televisa ownership. Moreover, the outstanding phenomenon of this election was the surge of popular support for Mr. Cardenas, a former governor of the state of Michoacan who broke with the PRI in 1987. Televisa's policy seemed designed to exclude this new political star.    For months, viewers saw images of the two main opposition leaders -- but only their images. The candidates were shown only briefly and without an audio track while Televisa commentators trivialized or distorted their campaigns. The two men were shown only amid sparse groups, never surrounded by the huge crowds that often turned out.    Although viewers from all political affiliations mounted a boycott against Televisa's newscasts, the network made no effort to appease its critics. Worse, in the days prior to the election, Televisa suddenly cast the most unflattering limelight it could devise on Messrs. Cardenas and Clouthier. It switched from an &quot;out of sight, out of mind&quot; strategy to one of frontal attack.    The network adopted a more belligerent strategy when it came to the realization in the final weeks of the campaign that Mr. Cardenas's nationalistic and anti-big-business message was far more popular than the confident PRI estimates suggested. And his popularity was burgeoning precisely among the urban strata, over which Televisa boasted control. The network's propaganda move was then to cast the PRI in the role of the only moderate party. Mr. Cardenas was portrayed as a dangerous pro-communist. This left the garb of a fascist for Mr. Clouthier.    As the election neared, Televisa's coverage became frantic. On July 3, the network's own &quot;60 Minutes,&quot; produced by Juan Ruiz Healy, featured the two challengers. In one segment the camera panned the many photographs covering the walls of Mr. Cardenas's office. The frame stopped on three: those of Fidel Castro, Chilean Marxist Salvador Allende and Mr. Cardenas's staunchly nationalist father, Lazaro, who is shown saluting Nikita Khrushchev. Mr. Clouthier was juxtaposed with the image of Benito Mussolini. Interviews with the men ended in midsentence, blatantly distorting their statements. On election night, after three opposition candidates stormed the interior minister's office complaining of electoral fraud, Televisa's anchor dismissed their claims and angrily called them Marxist/right-wing conspirators. Prompted by an opposition appeal the Mexican Federal Election Commission has filed a formal denunciation of the network with the Mexican attorney general.    Why would Televisa risk its independence and prestige in the eyes of its viewers with such unabashedly partisan coverage? To answer this question, one has to keep in mind that Televisa's representatives, despite their dependence on a protected market and their strong ties to the PRI, consider themselves businessmen and their enterprise a private concern. Like many other large Mexican enterprises, Televisa fears only one thing more than an open, competitive market: nationalization.    Beginning with the administration of Luis Echeverria (1970-1976) and continuing through the term of Jose Lopez Portillo (1976-1982), business leaders viewed the economic policies of the government as hostile to their investments. However, in this election, old grievances were left behind as many established businesspeople endorsed the PRI candidate, whom they saw as a staunch follower of current President Miguel de la Madrid's privatization policies. Televisa, which has long feared state expropriation, was also eager to demonstrate to the waning PRI that no party bureaucracy or government propaganda instrument was better equipped than the privately run network to shape and deliver to them the urban vote.    With 20 million viewers in Mexico and many more through its syndicated counterparts in the U.S. and Latin America, Televisa is the most profitable transnational business venture of Mexican ownership and the premier media instrument. Network executives think their mission is to &quot;modernize&quot; the mentality of the Mexican and Latin American urban masses -- even beyond the national boundaries. But Televisa's dreams have been shattered. First, it failed to grab U.S. Spanish-speaking audiences. After a series of bad business deals, legal battles and unexpected competition, Televisa was forced recently to sell its U.S. branch, Univision, to the American-owned Hallmark. Now, in its attempt to rescue the PRI, Televisa has to live with outright rejection by its viewers.    This is bound to have lasting effects. The attitude of the voters has shaken the foundations of television and the media in Mexico. The behavior of the Mexican audience has given the lie to media claims of control over ideas and opinions. Mexicans have denounced Televisa's simplistic attempts at manipulation and have shown that they will think for themselves.    ---   Mr. Aguilar Zinser, a columnist for the Mexican daily Excelsior, is currently a senior associate of the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace in Washington. </TEXT></DOC>