<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880725-0099 </DOCNO><HL> Back in Business: Weaker Dollar Saves Many Small Concerns From Imminent Death --- They View Competitive Edge As the Last Opportunity For Long-Term Survival --- Joe Six-Pack Watches the Yen </HL><AUTHOR> Ralph E. Winter and Gregory Stricharchuk (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> MON IND </IN><TEXT>   Call it the Return of the Zombies. Around the country, from Seventh Avenue to the Rust Belt, small, dying manufacturing operations are springing back to life.    Take Seattle Steel Corp. In August 1986, about 18 months after being sold to private investors, it closed -- unable even to pay for its raw materials. Today, the 84-year-old mill is open again, making bars, plates and other construction steel -- and providing 630 jobs. It might even see some modernization.    Or consider Smart Parts Inc., a New York women's apparel maker. A year ago, cheap imports were killing sales, debt was in the millions, and angry creditors were constantly phoning. &quot;It looked like it was over,&quot; recalls owner Jeffrey Kramer. Now, buyers crowd the Smart Parts showroom and the ringing phone just signals more orders for pants and skirts.    The mysterious force that revived these once-doomed companies -- and many others like them -- is the almighty dollar. Or more accurately, the not-so-mighty dollar.    It's no surprise, of course, to find rich and famous corporations doing well as the weakened greenback pumps up exports, slows imports and lengthens the already-extended economic expansion. But for many lesser-known businesses, the weaker dollar has been more than a help; it has become the difference between life and death -- the catalyst making their last-ditch cost cutting and reorganizations work.    Such firms typify the nation's marginal capacity-manufacturers that for one reason or another are hanging on at the edge of competitiveness. Booming imports, diminished export demand and lean, restructured rivals had just about squeezed them out. Now there is economic room for them again, at least temporarily.    &quot;The lower value of the dollar has improved export opportunities for many companies, and generally strengthened the U.S. manufacturing economy,&quot; says Theodore H. Tung, senior vice president and economist for National City Bank of Cleveland. &quot;That combination has helped revive ailing companies.&quot;    Admittedly, some may stagger along only to die in the next downturn or with a reversal in currency values. But none plan to go quietly; they hope to use this grace period to assure long-term survival. To do that, explains Mr. Tung, the economist, they &quot;have to innovate, improve productivity, streamline and generally improve their own competitiveness.&quot;    Those facing the problem agree. &quot;If we don't continue to improve, we would be a fatality&quot; in the face of any significant strengthening of the dollar, concedes John R. Powers, president of Seattle Steel. His survival list includes restructuring debt and upgrading equipment.    Recently, the dollar has moved up modestly. But it is still down about 40% from a 1985 peak, measured against the currencies of major U.S. trading partners. So the economic tonic energizing many once-sickly firms should keep flowing.    Exports, less expensive overseas, jumped 30% in the first five months of this year. Imports, more expensive in America, aren't yet falling, but the gain has eased to 11%. That's far below past increases and indicates a substantial amount of business returning to U.S. firms from abroad.    As a result, American manufacturing facilities are cooking. Last month, U.S. industry operated at 83.1% of capacity. That's the highest rate in eight years and enough to make some economists fret about inflationary overheating. But as the healthiest or most efficient facilities approach their limits, that also creates opportunities for those living in their shadow.    When about 150 employees bought Newnam Manufacturing Inc., a Kendallville, Ind., foundry, last March, it was about to close. But now, &quot;the decline in the value of the dollar has reduced casting imports,&quot; says David M. Bash, president. At the same time, he notes, &quot;a number of foundries have gone out of business.&quot;    The combination, he figures, almost insures a steady flow of business for a while. Long term, he says Newnam will live or die on its efforts to stress quality.    If the dollar helped Newnam elude the undertaker, it literally resurrected Ironton Iron Inc., a gritty 90-year-old foundry hard by the banks of the Ohio River. Amcast Industrial Corp., sick of heavy losses, closed it in 1984 when workers refused labor contract concessions. More than two years later, the employees bought it, cut their own pay and reopened.    They cleared away debris, mowed down weeds, and slapped on the first fresh paint in two decades. Now, they keep a wary eye on the dollar. &quot;I watch the news more and more,&quot; says 50-year-old Stanley Dale Patterson. &quot;It's the key to the future of the plant, and my own future.&quot;    Progress has been slow but steady. So far, only about 175 people are at work finishing parts for other companies, but the firm expects to be soon casting parts as well. It also has a shot at business General Motors Corp. and Ford Motor Co. are expected to repatriate starting next year.    &quot;I think we're back for good,&quot; says Mr. Patterson. Intermet Corp. seems of like opinion. The Atlanta-based company lent Ironton Iron $500,000 and has an option to buy it.    By contrast, Smart Parts, the New York apparel maker, has turned around at a breakneck pace. When Limited Inc., the specialty retailer, sponsored a trade fair for domestic suppliers last September, Smart Parts' owner Mr. Kramer dismissed Limited's patriotic sloganeering. &quot;We all knew that it was the (weakening) of the dollar that brought us there,&quot; he says. His prices now are at least 10% less than competitors' in Korea and Hong Kong.    &quot;We're seeing a lot of buyers we haven't seen in years,&quot; says account executive Donna Klein. Now, the company's contractors in Chinatown, Brooklyn and Queens and in the South &quot;are running at capacity seven days a week,&quot; Mr. Kramer says, and he is searching for more.    Sales, which plummeted to $8 million last year from nearly $35 million in 1984, are expected to hit $12 million this year and more than $20 million in 1989.    Less than a year ago, Mr. Kramer was importing about 60% of his line to survive and bracing for the end. Had Smart Parts gone under, he and his family would have lost, among other things, their five-bedroom house, pledged as collateral.    Most born-again companies are like Smart Parts, rescued because the weakened dollar forces up prices of competing imports. But the new owners of Geneva Steel in Provo, Utah, are discovering the joy of exports as well. They bought and reopened last September a USX Corp. plant that had been idle 13 months.    Right away, says Joseph A. Cannon, president, they were bombarded with inquiries from places like the Soviet Union, China and Japan: &quot;When are you going to start exporting?&quot; Initially, the clever rejoinder was, &quot;We export to the Midwest.&quot; But then Geneva Steel reconsidered, and it will begin shipping this month and next 80,000 tons of steel to Japan.    &quot;I doubt whether we'd be producing as much without the weaker dollar,&quot; says Mr. Cannon. The plant's 2,000 workers know that, too. &quot;Joe Six-Pack Steelworker follows the yen and dollar very closely,&quot; he says.    Joe isn't the only one. &quot;It's exciting to see this company rising out of the ashes,&quot; says Russell D. Hutton, a 38-year-old electrical engineer and systems designer with tiny CYBO Systems Inc. The Indianapolis company was formed last fall after Ransburg Corp. decided to pull the plug on its loss-ridden industrial robot business.    Two entrepreneurs acquired a line of Ransburg's welding robots. They were counting on the dollar right from the start, but the focus was neither imports nor exports. Their bet was that a weakened dollar would rejuvenate big manufacturers of heavy equipment, like Caterpillar Inc., in U.S. and world markets. They would then be more likely to buy something like a 22-foot-tall, $1 million welding robot.    &quot;I wasn't seriously interested in (the robot line) until I visited Caterpillar and found a dramatic change in their desire and ability to buy automated equipment,&quot; says Ronald C. Reeve, one partner. Caterpillar now is CYBO's main customer.    For CYBO's 18 employees, the rescue of the operation has made a huge difference. Mr. Hutton, the system designer, is preparing to replace his Chevrolet that has 114,000 miles on it. John Bower, a technician, just bought a larger home, and Thomas F. Smith, operations manager, replaced his battered seven-year-old Mercury with a new Dodge.    Still, few of the reborn are relaxing. &quot;If the dollar keeps strengthening, that could reverse competitiveness of some companies,&quot; warns Lawrence Chimerine, chairman of Wharton Econometric Forecast Associates in Bala Cynwyd, Pa. He also notes improving productivity in other countries. Mr. Cannon of Geneva Steel says the recent small rise in the dollar already can be felt somewhat at his company.    That's why people like John Powers at Seattle Steel are scrambling. &quot;We have completely reorganized the whole mill,&quot; he says. &quot;We don't do anything the same way we did two years ago.&quot; Mr. Powers hopes to restructure its debt &quot;to make it even more viable&quot; and to borrow enough more to upgrade equipment by the end of next year. &quot;Something will happen,&quot; he says.    A lot already has. In the last six months, Mr. Powers says, the plant has enjoyed a break-even cash flow. When he took over on Aug. 25, 1986, it had a negative cash flow of $18 million. Two days later it shut down. Nervous suppliers halted deliveries on credit, and the mill simply ran out of materials.    He persuaded the firm's 20 bankers not to close the mill permanently, then negotiated with vendors for critical supplies of limestone needed to make steel. It has been a &quot;steady, difficult climb&quot; since. He lists an &quot;excellent work force&quot; that merely needed a morale boost. He claims that in the last six months, productivity in one of the plant's shops rose more than 30%. And he cites 20 management changes.    The company currently can price steel head-to-head with U.S. competitors, which means it gets a chance at business that the dollar is bringing home from abroad. Typical new orders are for reinforced steel rods used in construction, a low margin product previously supplied primarily by Korea and Japan.    But a huge task remains. &quot;Very little money&quot; has been spent on new equipment since 1957, Mr. Powers says. David T. Conlan, a union representative, agrees. &quot;It's like trying to resurrect a dinosaur. The rolling mill is over 30 years old, the other mill is older than that.&quot;    Fortunately, the current owner, C.E.M. andamp; Associates, a Bellevue, Wash., insurance and development business, has made one major improvement. It installed a continuous steel casting machine that by one estimate cut costs by about $40 a ton from when Bethlehem Steel Corp. owned the place.    Spending like that is a big deal to an outfit that not long ago was just about history. Ask Mr. Cannon, the president of Geneva Steel, which may soon spend between $60 million and $100 million on similar equipment. &quot;We're bottom feeders,&quot; he reminds an interviewer. </TEXT></DOC>