<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870512-0017 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 05/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   McFARLANE INDICATED that Reagan may have helped in obtaining Contra aid.    In testimony before House and Senate panels investigating the Iran-Contra affair, the former national security adviser described private White House talks in 1985 between the president and Saudi King Fahd that closely coincided with a Saudi decision to significantly increase donations to the Nicaraguan rebels. McFarlane also said that Lt. Col. North told him last November that documents regarding the Iran-Contra affair had to be destroyed after the operation was disclosed.    Reagan ordered his staff to help the Contras when Congress banned U.S. aid, but didn't direct that any laws be broken, McFarlane testified.    ---   MEESE ASKED an independent counsel to study his involvement with Wedtech.    The court-appointed prosecutor promptly expanded his existing investigation of the defense contractor's dealings with government officials to include the attorney general. Independent counsel James McKay's move is likely to ensnarl Meese in a lengthy inquiry into his network of personal and political friends. The probe already includes former White House aide Lyn Nofziger's activities on behalf of the New York-based company.    A White House spokesman said that Meese was &quot;doing a fine job&quot; as attorney general, and that there wasn't any &quot;necessity for a change.&quot;    ---   KLAUS BARBIE WENT on trial in Lyon, France, on charges of Nazi war crimes.    The 73-year-old Barbie, who as a Nazi Gestapo chief was known as the &quot;Butcher of Lyon,&quot; identified himself in court as Klaus Altmann, a Bolivian businessman. He is charged with crimes against humanity, including the torture and deportation of Jews and French resistance fighters during World War II. The trial, delayed repeatedly since Barbie was extradited to France from La Paz in 1983, is expected to last two months.    The maximum penalty that the German-born Barbie would face if convicted is life imprisonment. France outlawed the death penalty in 1981.    ---   Thatcher called a general election for June 11, one year early. The announcement by the British prime minister, who is seeking an unprecedented third consecutive term, followed a meeting with Queen Elizabeth II, who is to dissolve Parliament next week. Thatcher, a Tory, is favored to win.    ---   Election aides in the Philippines said early unofficial returns from congressional balloting, the first such elections since 1972, showed President Aquino's candidates in the lead for nearly all Senate seats. Opposition leaders contended fraud in the slow vote count. At least 15 people were reported killed in scattered poll-related violence.    ---   West Germany's foreign minister met with Reagan and administration officials to discuss U.S.-Soviet arms-control proposals. Genscher said that while a unified Western response to the latest Soviet plan &quot;is possible,&quot; a decision hadn't been reached. He added, however, that a superpower arms pact was &quot;within close reach.&quot;    ---   Israel's cabinet held a formal debate over a Mideast peace conference, ending the four-hour session in a deadlock. An official said a compromise was &quot;highly unlikely&quot; on Foreign Minister Peres's plan for an international forum. Prime Minister Shamir opposes Israel's participation in such a meeting, preferring direct Arab-Israeli talks.    ---   A NASA investigating board said Air Force weathermen had made &quot;a bad call&quot; in allowing the launch of a $78 million Atlas-Centaur rocket and its $83 million cargo during unfavorable weather in March. The spacecraft was destroyed after being struck by lightning. The panel also said that NASA officials had &quot;missed&quot; the call.    ---   Federal health officials recommended against mandatory AIDS antibody testing and suggested increased voluntary examinations instead. A report by the Centers for Disease Control also called for new federal and state laws to prevent the unauthorized disclosure of the results of AIDS tests.    ---   India's government suspended the moderate Sikh administration in Punjab state because of a recent surge in violence by Sikh separatist. New Delhi imposed direct federal rule for six months.    ---   Reagan's Mideast envoy warned Tehran that Washington was prepared to &quot;do what is necessary&quot; to secure free navigation for U.S. ships in the Persian Gulf. Assistant Secretary of State Murphy's remarks, made in Baghdad, came hours after Iran reportedly attacked a merchant vessel in the gulf, the third such attack by Tehran in eight days.    ---   Pre-trial proceedings ended for a former Marine embassy guard accused of espionage, clearing the way for a final ruling on whether he will face a court-martial. At the close of the hearings in Washington, Sgt. Clayton Lonetree's attorneys said a second Marine in the sex-spy scandal had recanted a statement incriminating Lonetree.    ---   Olympic organizers agreed by acclamation to admit professional tennis players to the 1988 Games in Seoul. The decision by the International Olympic Committee, meeting in Istanbul, would dispose of the nominal amateur code enforced since 1896, and allow such players as Boris Becker and Martina Navratilova to compete in South Korea.    ---   A fire raged out of control in northern China. Thousands of Beijing's troops sought to contain the blaze that swept through three towns, killing 142 people and leaving more than 50,000 others homeless, the official Xinhua news agency reported. </TEXT></DOC>