<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870309-0090 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ALBN ATE GP IRF HIA M SMCH SDW TRIFINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK) </IN><DATELINE> ALLIED BANCSHARES INC.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Moody's Investors Service Inc. reduced ratings on about $50 million of debt of this Houston-based bank holding company. The rating concern cited the company's weak operating environment, asset quality and profitability. Moody's said it expects Allied's nonperforming loans to remain high, primarily because of its exposure in the energy and real estate industries. Allied's senior debt rating was lowered to Ba-3 from Baa-2. The rating on long-term deposits of its lead bank, Allied Bank of Texas, Houston, was lowered to Ba-1 from Baa-2, and the company's commerical paper and short-term deposits were downgraded to Not Prime from Prime-2. Allied officials couldn't be reached for comment.    ---   ATLANTIC CITY ELECTRIC CO. -- Standard andamp; Poor's Corp. said it lowered ratings on debt and preferred of this Atlantic City, N.J.-based utility. Ratings on its senior debt were lowered to single-A-plus from double-A-minus, on subordinated debt to single-A from single-A-plus, on preferred to single-A from double-A-minus and on commercial paper to A-1 from A-1-plus. Sandamp;P said the company has about $500 million of long-term debt and $66 million of preferred outstanding. Sandamp;P said the previous ratings &quot;anticipated significant improvement&quot; in the company's financial condition. However, Sandamp;P said, recent rate actions by regulators won't yield enough revenue to sustain the previous ratings.    ---   GEORGIA-PACIFIC CORP. -- Sandamp;P raised ratings on senior debt of this Atlanta-based forest products concern to single-A-minus from triple-B-plus and on its preferred to triple-B-plus from triple-B. It also raised the preliminary rating on the company's shelf-registered debt to single-A-minus from triple-B-plus. About $1.1 billion of securities is affected. The rating concern said the action reflects a strong outlook in the company's markets and effects of its cost-cutting and capital spending programs and a stronger balance sheet. A Georgia-Pacific spokesman called the upgrades &quot;a positive reflection&quot; of the company's performance and the strength of its markets.    ---   INTERNATIONAL RECTIFIER INC. -- Sandamp;P lowered its rating to triple-C from single-B-minus on the company's $58 million of convertible debentures due 2010. The rating concern said it expects the El Segundo, Calif.-based semiconductor maker to have &quot;restricted financial flexibility through at least the intermediate term&quot; because of high leverage and reduced access to capital. Completion of a new factory could help profitability, Sandamp;P said, but the company's ability to reduce debt and interest expense through cash from operations and to finance growth in its current businesses is &quot;very limited.&quot; The company said it expects to have a positive cash flow from operations and to be able to reduce debt and said it is considering selling and leasing back the new plant.    ---   HOLIDAY CORP. -- Sandamp;P lowered ratings on $900 million of senior notes of this hotel and casino concern's Holiday Inns Inc. unit. The notes, due 1994, were lowered by the rating concern to single-B from single-B-plus. Sandamp;P cited a change in the terms of the issue, under which the notes now aren't secured, as they were initially. Sandamp;P said that because of Holiday's large amount of debt, taken on in connection with its $2.6 billion recapitalization, it was making a distinction in ratings between the company's secured and unsecured debt. In Memphis, Tenn., Holiday officials couldn't be reached for comment.    ---   MCORP -- Moody's said it reduced this Dallas bank holding company's senior debt to Ba-3 from Baa-2, its subordinated debt to single-B-1 from Baa-3, and its preferred stock to single-B-2 from Ba-1. The company's rating for commercial paper also was lowered, to Not Prime from Prime-3. The rating of the company's principal bank, MBank Dallas, for long-term deposits was downgraded to Ba-1 from Baa-2, and for short-term deposits to Not Prime from Prime-2. The rating of MBank Houston for long-term deposits was lowered to Ba-2 from Baa-3, and for short-term deposits to Not Prime from Prime-3. According to Moody's, $489 million of debt is affected. Moody's said MCorp's &quot;loan loss allowance is not adequate to deal with the weaknesses exhibited by the company's asset quality.&quot; Moody's added that &quot;the rating changes recognize the effect that the company's difficult operating environment will have on its asset quality, core earnings and equity base. . . . MCorp said, &quot;We are disappointed. We believe these actions reflect concern about the continuing economic weakness in our primary markets. However, we believe that the ratings did not give sufficent weight to the substantial build-up in liquidity levels of both the parent company and member banks.    ---   SERVICE MERCHANDISE CO. -- Moody's placed the senior subordinated notes of this Nashville, Tenn., catalog-showroom operator under review for a possible downgrade. The notes are currently rated Ba-2. About $300 million of debt is affected. The rating concern said the company's 1986 operating results weren't as good as anticipated, adding that it would explore the company's future prospects and also the impact of its recent acquisitions. Service recently announced a $46.9 million net loss for 1986 on sales of $2.53 billion. Company officials couldn't be reached for comment.    ---   SOUTHDOWN INC. -- Sandamp;P said it lowered Houston-based Southdown's $50 million sinking fund debentures to double-B-plus from triple-B. The issue is removed from CreditWatch, where it was placed Feb. 5. The rating concern said the downgrading reflects higher debt levels from Southdown's debt-financed buyback of $89 million of its common stock. Sandamp;P also attributed the rating change to the cement producer and energy concern's diminished earnings outlook because of weakness in Southdown's key energy and Southwestern cement markets. For the year ended Dec. 31, Southdown posted a net loss of $13.1 million on revenue of $339.2 million. The loss included a charge from a $29.7 million write-down on oil and gas properties. A Southdown spokesman said the company was disappointed by the rating.    ---   TRIANGLE INDUSTRIES INC. -- Sandamp;P affirmed ratings for the company's stock and debt and also removed the company and a subsidiary from CreditWatch. Sandamp;P said it affirmed a single-B-minus rating for Triangle's subordinated debt and preferred stock. Triangle, based in New Brunswick, N.J., has interests in wire, vending machines and packaging. Sandamp;P also affirmed a single-B-minus rating for the subordinated debt and a single-B-plus rating for the senior debt of National Can Co., a Triangle subsidiary. About $255 million of securities are affected, Sandamp;P said. The issues were also removed from CreditWatch, where they were placed in May 1986 because of plans by Avery Inc., a Triangle-controlled entity, to acquire Uniroyal Inc.'s chemical operations, Sandamp;P said. Sandamp;P said the affirmation recognized Triangle's increased equity base of about $450 million at year's end compared with about $102 million a year ago. </TEXT></DOC>