<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861219-0183 </DOCNO><HL> How Long Can Growth Keep Going On?---By Alfred L. Malabre Jr.</HL><DD> 12/19/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO) </IN><TEXT>   As the economy begins rolling through a fifth straight year of recession-free growth, it's heartening to note that most barometers of economic weather ahead signal further expansion. Yet, a strange uneasiness surrounds this encouraging outlook.    Why?   It's not simply the usual doom and gloom that has accompanied every business-cycle expansion in recent memory. And there's more involved than the understandable uncertainty generated by the recent tax overhaul.    Today's uneasiness, I submit, reflects a deepening sense that the economy, in its present debt-ridden state, simply must not be allowed to slip into another recession -- and yet, of course, recessions, like death and taxes, sooner or later are certain.    A glance at the country's economic history makes this clear. Analysts at the nonprofit National Bureau of Economic Research in Cambridge, Mass., have tracked the ups and downs of the business cycle back to 1854 and found that the economy since then has experienced 30 cyclical down-phases -- recessions or worse -- and an equal number of up-phases or expansions. Indeed, this is how the economy has grown over the decades -- expansion-recession, expansion-recession -- with the up-phases longer and stronger as a rule than the down-phases.    It would be overly optimistic, to say the least, to presume that this up-down pattern, which traces back through more than a century of business-cycle history, no longer applies. That mistake was made during the record-long 1961-69 expansion when Washington officials convinced themselves that policy fine-tuning had rendered the economy recession-proof. They went so far as to change the name of a monthly government statistical publication from Business Cycle Developments to Business Conditions Digest.    In large part, this stubborn pattern of cyclical growth derives from human nature. A letter a few years ago from Russell M. Fowler, a reader from Lyons, N.Y., spells this out as well as any economics text. &quot;Maybe the reason the business cycle endures,&quot; he wrote, &quot;is . . . when things are going good, some human reactions occur: overconfidence, complacency, poor workmanship, greed, overexpansion, mistakes; all bad and leading to a downturn. Then when things are going bad, there is a tendency to shape up and turn things around. Maybe that's all there is to it.&quot;    A further problem for policy makers who would guide the economy along an indefinite recession-free course is the economy's increasing dependence on decisions made abroad, beyond Washington's purview. No longer can the Federal Reserve, for instance, plan monetary policy with little or no regard for what may be hatching, say, at the Bundesbank. No longer can U.S. business planners blithely set their courses -- expand or belt-tighten -- without careful attention to what may be afoot, say, in Tokyo or even Seoul.    Against such a background, common sense dictates that at some point a new recession assuredly will set in. And the distressing part is that this time, unless much changes, the cyclical down-phase could prove exceedingly difficult to fight.    A major recession-fighting weapon through the relatively prosperous post-World War II era has of course been the assortment of built-in stabilizers -- unemployment relief and the like -- that serve to prop up incomes in recessions. It's no coincidence, with rising federal relief outlays as well as declining tax revenues as incomes erode, that the U.S. budget tends to fall sharply out of balance in recessions.    Nor is it coincidental that the budget balance normally improves sharply as an expansion goes along, with diminishing need for stabilizers and rising revenues as incomes climb. If the budget is in deficit when an expansion starts, as invariably has happened in recent decades, the deficit will normally narrow or disappear as the expansion continues.    But not so now. The federal shortfall in the budgetary fiscal year recently ended was actually greater than when the expansion began. This is unprecedented and raises difficult questions in the event of a new recession. Over the course of every recession in the past 20 years -- four in all -- the federal red ink has always at least doubled. But none of these recessions began with anything approaching a $200 billion-plus budget deficit.    Would fighting a new slump now usher in deficits of $400 billion-plus? If that were to happen, as experience teaches it would, how might the economy in general fare? What might be the impact on financial markets, with the Treasury presumably having to raise sums that would dwarf even today's Brobdingnagian amounts?    The questions multiply, but there are no easy answers, except to say that recession-fighting grows vastly dicier.    A second major recession-fighting weapon in the postwar era has involved the money supply. Invariably, the monetary authorities have spurred money-supply growth as recessions have deepened. The speedup has typically been from relatively modest rates of monetary increase to rapid ones. Over the course of the 1981-82 recession, for instance, the monthly increases rose from less than 0.3% near the recession's onset to over 1% around the recessionary nadir, just before the economy finally began responding to stimulus.    In recent months, this monetary growth rate, at close to 1.5%, has exceeded even the levels reached late in the last recession. This is extraordinary for a time of sustained expansion and, again, troubling questions arise.    If such high rates of money-supply increase generate only sluggish expansion now, as is the situation, how stimulative would the money-supply weapon be if a new recession struck? Would fighting it require monetary growth far higher even than of late? In such circumstances, how might the economy in general, and the financial markets in particular, behave?    Again, there are no easy answers. Let us hope, at least, that the questions will remain hypothetical. The economic barometers suggest that this will be the case. Still, as one surveys the policy-making scene -- from the budget-cutting automaton of Gramm-Rudman to a tax overhaul that may well serve to depress business in coming months -- it's hard to stifle an uneasiness about the outlook.    ---   Mr. Malabre is a Journal news editor. </TEXT></DOC>