<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871113-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 11/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   CARLUCCI TOLD Congress he would consider reducing U.S. military forces.    Reagan's nominee for secretary of defense, testifying before the Senate Armed Services panel, also said he would weigh scrapping a few weapons systems because of budget cuts. Carlucci's comments were in sharp contrast to those of Weinberger, who had continued planning for a continuous buildup and criticized Congress for refusing to provide the funds to support it. Carlucci, who is national security adviser, also conceded that the Pentagon's spending plans &quot;are much higher than the Congress seems likely to approve.&quot;    Carlucci was nominated following last week's resignation by Weinberger, who cited his wife's poor health. Weinberger held the post for seven years.    ---   OBANDO ARRIVED in Washington for talks on a Sandinista-Contra truce.    The Nicaraguan cardinal, who has agreed to mediate a settlement in Nicaragua's civil war, said he would &quot;begin sounding out the two sides&quot; to determine whether a cease-fire could be reached between the U.S.-backed rebels and the Sandinista government. The Roman Catholic archbishop of Managua is head of the National Reconciliation Commission named under a five-nation Central American peace plan.    Ortega, after meeting with House Speaker Wright, said he would make public today a &quot;concrete proposal&quot; for achieving a cease-fire in Nicaragua.    ---   Supreme Court nominee Kennedy began making courtesy calls to senators as Biden and Thurmond said a decision on a start of confirmation hearings would be made next week. While Kennedy's legal philosophy on business isn't well known in Congress, some decisions have received mixed results before the high court.    ---   Gorbachev accused the former head of Moscow's Communist Party, Boris Yeltsin, of placing &quot;personal ambitions above the interests of the party&quot; and of blaming others &quot;for his own major shortcomings,&quot; Tass reported. Yeltsin was dismissed Wednesday.    ---   The Senate voted 63-30 to accelerate the search for the nation's first high-level nuclear-waste dump and increased the chances that Nevada would be the first site considered. The measure, which faces opposition in the House, would provide $100 million a year to the state that hosts an underground storage site.    ---   A Salvadoran military judge ordered the release of three suspects charged in the 1985 slaying of six Americans, including four Marine guards at the U.S. Embassy in San Salvador. The judge ruled that the three men, said to be leftist guerrillas, should be freed under an amnesty program enacted as part of a Central American peace plan.    ---   Iran responded to this week's Arab summit call for a cease-fire by vowing the war with Iraq would continue until Baghdad is defeated. Tehran denounced the summit, saying the decisions were &quot;dictated by the U.S.&quot; Iraq said its warplanes hit two more tankers off Iran. In all, Iraq has reported strikes on seven ships since Monday.    ---   A U.S. judge in Baltimore dismissed mail fraud and racketeering convictions of former Maryland Gov. Mandel. The judge cited the Supreme Court's recent interpretation of the statutes. Mandel was convicted in 1977 of helping five associates obtain an extended season at a thoroughbred race track they secretly owned in return for gifts.    ---   The White House said the schedule for next month's Reagan-Gorbachev summit in Washington is almost complete. Nevertheless, Western diplomats said a problem on verification had arisen in negotiations to conclude the U.S.-Soviet treaty banning intermediate-range missiles, possibly threatening the planned superpower meeting.    ---   Reagan met with Afghan guerrilla leaders and said Soviet occupation of Afghanistan impedes improved U.S. relations with the Kremlin. Meanwhile, former Soviet Maj. Gen. Yevgeni Nozhim told a symposium in The Hague that Moscow is ready for U.N.-sponsored peace talks on Afghanistan.    ---   Kim Dae Jung was nominated by a new party to run for South Korea's presidency. Kim criticized President Chun and said the country will never have democracy until the military becomes neutral. Three others, including dissident Kim Young Sam and the ruling party's Roh Tae Woo, already are campaigning for next month's election.    ---   A Los Angeles hospital launched a program to test about 700 children for the AIDS virus. Cedars-Sinai Medical Center is seeking to contact the parents of premature babies who received transfusions between 1980 and 1985, the years before the blood supply was screened for the AIDS virus.    ---   A mine exploded under a bus in northern Sri Lanka, killing at least 25 Tamils, said military officials, who blamed Tamil rebels for the blast. An official said the government believed that the bomb was meant for Indian troops. Parliament, meanwhile, voted to grant the Tamil minority limited autonomy in one-third of the country.    ---   Protesters clashed with police during anti-government riots in Bangladesh's strike-bound capital. At least five people, including two police officers, were killed. Police said about 60 people were injured and about 30 arrested in demonstrations in Dhaka following Wednesday's house arrests of two opposition leaders.    ---   Angolan rebel leader Savimbi claimed a major victory over troops backed by Soviets and Cubans. He credited U.S. aid. Contrary to reports in Pretoria, Savimbi said South African troops didn't fight in the battle in southeast Angola last month. There wasn't any independent confirmation.    ---   The Ugandan army killed at least 100 members of the rebel Holy Spirit Movement when it attacked a group crossing the Lumbuka River about 90 miles east of Kampala, military officials said. The army has carried out an offensive against the rebels, who are loyal to a fugitive voodoo priestess. </TEXT></DOC>