<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880316-0076 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- The Gallery: A Cezanne Treasure </HL><AUTHOR> Jack Flam </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> New York  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A little more than half a century ago, the Kunstmuseum in Basel bought 152 sheets of Cezanne drawings, most of which had been taken from the artist's sketchbooks. Although the whole lot cost only about $10,000 then, it was nonetheless a pretty bold purchase. Cezanne's reputation as a great artist was still more or less limited to the cognoscenti, and during that period of economic and political upheaval, the future of the art market also was uncertain.    A selection of 114 sheets from these sketchbooks, which constitute one of the world's finest collections of Cezanne drawings, is now on view at the Museum of Modern Art in &quot;A Cezanne Treasure: The Basel Sketchbooks.&quot; This low-key and relatively modest exhibition is one of the most beautiful and moving shows we have seen in New York this season -- in the same class as the Morgan Library's recent &quot;Raphael and His Circle.&quot;    The drawings span most of Cezanne's career and treat all the major themes of his art: landscapes, still lifes, portraits, figure compositions, and studies of older paintings and sculptures. Because they are mostly sketchbook studies, they have a wonderful intimacy and informality. Images on the same page sometimes overlap or are oriented in different directions, and some of the pictures are overlaid by scribbled notes.    In some such cases, there seems to be no particular relationship between the diverse images, as in the sheet that combines a study of a woman's head with a standing nude and a shopping list. In others, however, there seems to be a clear relationship between what at first appear to be unrelated images. One of the most striking of these is the sheet that combines an interior with a chair and a sculpture of an &quot;echorche,&quot; or flayed man. The two images are set together in such a way that the sculpted man seems quite literally to be crying out into the indifferent emptiness of the room. The effect is at once startling and moving.    Though Cezanne sometimes handled his notebooks in a random fashion, the drawings themselves are carefully worked and deeply considered. Almost all of them are done in pencil, an intimate and limited medium, but also a very incisive one. Although a number of these drawings have been reproduced before, seeing them at first hand makes you realize how muffled even the best reproductions make them appear.    A close look at this show also will convince you that at least two of the widely held cliches about Cezanne simply are not true. First, although he had as fine and pure a sense of form as any artist who ever lived, his concerns obviously were not &quot;purely formal.&quot; As one might expect from a man who had an excellent classical education and started out as a poet, he treated a wide range of narrative and literary themes, especially in his earlier work. A number of sheets are filled with elaborately complex figure compositions, some of which have specific literary references, ranging from the classics to Flaubert.    Second, although Cezanne declared himself to be the &quot;primitive&quot; of a new kind of art, his technique was anything but awkward or crude. In fact one of the most impressive aspects of this show is the sheer technical mastery of sheet after sheet, the astonishing gracefulness of the hand that guides and controls the intense feeling evident in virtually all the drawings.    These drawings give us a wonderful chance to see the artist's mind and eye at work. Cezanne was an artist who drew both from his imagination and from the world around him, and his reveries and perceptions fed each other. His studies of individual figures and landscapes no doubt provided the raw material for his imaginary compositions. But his imagination in turn seems to have provided the emotional energy that guided and sustained his probing analysis of the natural world. As we move from the early to the later works, we witness one of the most stunning personal transformations in the whole history of art, as Cezanne learns to sublimate the tumultuous erotic impulses of his youth in order to create some of the most probingly metaphysical art ever produced by anyone.    Also surprising and impressive are the numerous studies of earlier art, especially those of Renaissance and baroque sculptures. Cezanne used the Louvre as a kind of visual encyclopedia where he could study the poses and formal inventions of the past, and even the faces of the illustrious dead. There are portraits here of at least three Roman emperors (after antique marbles), Cardinal Richelieu (after Bernini), Beatrice of Aragon (after a Florentine bust) and Charles VIII (after Pollaiuolo), among others.    Cezanne also copied parts of paintings, one of his favorites being Rubens's elaborate &quot;Apotheosis of Henri IV&quot; series. What is particularly interesting about his copies is the way he used them to find structures in past art that somehow paralleled what he was seeking within himself or in nature. The Rubens pictures, for example, provided him not only with specific poses but also with an example of controlled sensuality.    The Louvre, in fact, seems to have served Cezanne as a kind of extension of nature; for in his own mind, one suspects, art and nature were not easily separable. Thus at the same time that he probed earlier art for what it could teach him, he also bent it to his own will and imposed his own idiosyncratic structural system on it. In the end, the inner and outer worlds seem to have become truly one and the same for him.    The exhibition, which is sponsored by Knoll International Holdings Inc., will be up until June 5. It is accompanied by a very handsome catalog, which contains fine reproductions of the drawings and an illuminating essay by art historian Lawrence Gowing. </TEXT></DOC>