<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880922-0014 </DOCNO><HL> Two Hunts File for Personal Bankruptcy In an Effort to Thwart Legal Challenges </HL><AUTHOR> Leonard M. Apcar and Ann Hagedorn (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM TAXES </CO><IN> PCS CMD BCY </IN><G> JUS IRS </G><TEXT>   Two of the Hunt brothers of Dallas, facing legal actions stemming from their alleged attempt to corner the world silver market several years ago, are once again throwing themselves at the mercy of the bankruptcy court.    Yesterday in federal court in Dallas, N. Bunker and W. Herbert Hunt filed personal bankruptcy petitions under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code, seeking protection from creditors and lawsuits while they work out a plan to pay their considerable debt. The third brother, Lamar, didn't file for personal bankruptcy because he played a lesser role in the silver speculation, a family spokesman said.    The Hunts acknowledged in a statement late yesterday that their primary motivation is to erect legal roadblocks to thwart mounting claims against them by the federal government and investors hurt in the silver market several years ago. Under federal bankruptcy rules, a filing for bankruptcy-law protection automatically halts all legal actions against the petitioner.    The Hunts are fighting efforts to force them to post a $225 million appeal bond growing out of a jury award exceeding $130 million against them in New York last month. The brothers said that to raise the funds to post the bond would require a &quot;fire sale of assets in an economy already extremely depressed.&quot; The Hunts said the huge bond would also have prevented them from paying some of their business and personal bills.    Bankruptcy experts said the Hunt brothers' petitions represented the largest personal bankruptcy filings in Texas and perhaps the nation. The action also is notable for its resemblance to the celebrated Texaco Inc. bankruptcy petition, in which the oil company filed for protection from creditors to stay execution of an $11 billion legal judgment to Pennzoil Co.    The Hunts aren't as cash-rich as Texaco was when it filed last year. But they are believed to be solvent and possessed with the ability to raise cash. Based on recent court documents, the net worth of the Hunt brothers' family trusts is estimated at about $1 billion, down from at least $5 billion in 1980.    The Hunt brothers' petitions, beyond sheer size, are impressive more for what they didn't disclose about their personal assets than for what they did reveal. Neither brother gave a detailed valuation of his assets, which consist almost entirely of real estate holdings, or their liabilities. But Bunker Hunt's filing said he owes his 20 largest creditors nearly $37 million; Herbert Hunt's top 20 creditors are owed $45 million, including $6.8 million due to his brother, Bunker. Both brothers listed a $36.5 million promissory note due to Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co. for which they are jointly and individually liable.    Leading creditors for both brothers include the Internal Revenue Service and Minpeco S.A., a Peruvian government-owned mineral concern that won the $130 million jury award for the Hunts' alleged conspiring to corner the silver market in 1979-80. Both filings list the claim as disputed and value it at a mere $1.    The bankruptcy actions are the latest in a seemingly endless nightmare that has befallen the high-flying brothers in recent years following the decline in oil prices and other commodities. Ever since, the Hunt brothers' vast corporate empire has been mired in legal fights and bankruptcy proceedings.    Both brothers face a widening array of legal problems since the federal jury in New York sided with Minpeco last month. Minpeco, like thousands of other investors in the silver futures market, had short positions in the commodity while the Hunts and several of their associates, according to the jury, were conspiring to bid up the price of silver. Speculators holding a short position in silver futures would stand to gain on prices declines, or lose out when prices rise.    In addition, both Bunker and Herbert are disputing federal tax claims growing out of the silver speculation. For Bunker and his wife alone the tax claims total roughly $350 million.    Ironically, the new filings come just as separate Chapter 11 bankruptcy proceedings for their individual trusts and flagship oil company are on the verge of coming to an end later this month. Those proceedings won't be disturbed by yesterday's action, lawyers for the creditors said.    The jury award was also against brother Lamar, Mahmoud Fustok, a prominent racehorse owner and brother-in-law of the Saudi Arabian crown prince, and a Bermuda trading concern that was owned by Bunker and Herbert Hunt and two Arab sheiks.    Judge Morris E. Lasker in federal court in New York is expected to rule on the bond issue in the next two weeks. But with yesterday's bankruptcy-law filings, any responsibility for a bond would rest with the alleged co-conspirators -- Lamar, Mr. Fustok, and the Bermudan trading concern, International Metals Investment Co. According to court filings, International Metals has $500 in assets. The Hunts have been vigorously opposing the posting of the bond and have sought a new trial.    The bankruptcy-law filings also put up a significant roadblock, at least temporarily, to two large class-action suits against the Hunt brothers on behalf of 17,000 silver investors claiming a total of nearly $500 million in damages. There also are numerous individual suits against the Hunts claiming silver losses during the wild market gyrations.    In order for any legal action to proceed against Bunker and Herbert Hunt, Minpeco, the class-action plaintiffs and other plaintiffs would have to seek a ruling from a bankruptcy court in Dallas to lift the so-called automatic stay.    The bankruptcy filings weren't a surprise to Minpeco's lawyers and they said it won't significantly change their strategy in the case. &quot;We feel comfortable that we can collect&quot; from the brothers, said Thomas Gorman of the Washington, D.C., firm of Cole, Corette andamp; Abrutyn. Mr. Gorman said he expects that the $130 million award would be given priority status as creditors in the bankruptcy case. Whatever the Hunt strategy in yesterday's action, Mr. Gorman said, &quot;it could be a delay tactic.&quot; He added, &quot;This is a fraud judgment which cannot be discharged.&quot;    Yesterday's bankruptcy filings aren't expected to have any impact on two separate bankruptcy proceedings involving Hunt-held Placid Oil Co., an independent energy producer that has been in Chapter 11 bankruptcy-law proceedings for more than two years. Placid is on the verge of emerging from the proceedings; court hearings to confirm a plan jointly proposed by it and its creditors are expected to begin in Dallas on Monday.    Last Friday, a federal bankruptcy judge approved a reorganization plan for the trusts of the three Hunt brothers, Bunker, Herbert and Lamar. Both the Placid and trust bankruptcy filings occurred in 1986 after Placid and a sister company, Penrod Drilling Co., defaulted on a total of $1.5 billion in bank debt after oil prices fell. Placid and Herbert's trust sought bankruptcy court protection in 1986 to avoid bank foreclosure proceedings. The other two trusts filed Chapter 11 petitions last year.    (Revised WSJ Sept. 23, 1988)</TEXT></DOC>