<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870720-0047 </DOCNO><HL> Shultz Tells Investigators of Reagan FuryOn Hearing of Plan to Free Iran Terrorists---By David RogersStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MDEST GOVMTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Secretary of State George Shultz has told congressional investigators that President Reagan was infuriated when informed of a White House-backed offer to help formulate a plan to assist Iran in freeing 17 convicted terrorists imprisoned in Kuwait.    Mr. Shultz's account appears to conflict with testimony last week by former National Security Adviser John Poindexter that Mr. Reagan personally endorsed the offer, as part of a nine-point program on which Rear Adm. Poindexter had briefed him. Mr. Shultz, who learned of the proposal only after the admiral had left the White House, has said the president was shocked to hear of the concession made to Iran, according to sources familiar with the secretary's account.    The two accounts raise questions about how much detail was provided to the president when he was briefed by Adm. Poindexter last fall. More broadly, they add to concern in Congress about how sensitive policy options were presented to Mr. Reagan by a small National Security Council staff anxious to continue its secret contacts with Iran.    The 17 Iran-backed Shiite terrorists were convicted in connection with a series of bombings in December 1983 that targeted U.S. and French embassies in Kuwait and killed at least seven people.    The nine-point program supported by the NSC staff was put forward by businessman Albert Hakim in meetings with Iranian representatives in Europe, and the understanding was that Mr. Hakim and his partner, retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord, were to develop a plan to assist in freeing the prisoners.    In his testimony before the congressional panel, Adm. Poindexter sought to draw a distinction between the U.S. government and Gen. Secord, but acknowledged that the officer was then handling the weapon sales to Iran at the request of the Central Intelligence Agency and NSC.    Mr. Shultz is expected to testify before the joint congressional committees this week. Investigators, who have interviewed the secretary privately, are focusing also on the extensive record provided in notes taken by Mr. Shultz's special assistant Charles Hill, a veteran in Mideast affairs, during significant events in 1985 and 1986.    The notes already have proved to be important in establishing what the Reagan administration knew of a shipment of Hawk anti-aircraft missiles sent to Iran in November 1985. A year later, Mr. Hill was present during private discussions between Mr. Shultz and Attorney General Edwin Meese the day after Mr. Meese had been authorized by the president to begin an inquiry into the scandal brewing last fall.    The meeting, last Nov. 22, followed a week in which the State Department's legal adviser, Abraham Sofaer, had sought to draw the attorney general's attention to false testimony prepared at the White House to disguise the U.S. role in the November 1985 arms sale.    Mr. Sofaer ultimately succeeded, but Mr. Meese's staff appears to have initially deflected the warnings and only responded after the legal adviser reached Assistant Attorney General Charles Cooper and told him that a written record of the 1985 arms shipment existed in Mr. Hill's notes from the prior year.    Mr. Meese, who isn't now expected to testify until next week, faces significant criticism for his handling of the early investigation. Adm. Poindexter and former NSC aide Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North both have testified to destroying classified documents after learning of the inquiry, and there appears to have been little pressure from the Justice Department to preserve all the records of the operation.    The lack of those records leaves major gaps now in the congressional investigation and makes it more difficult to reach a final judgment as to what the president knew of the diversion of Iran arms sales profits to Nicaraguan insurgents. Adm. Poindexter has testified that he never discussed the use of any of the profits for covert activities with Mr. Reagan, but public opinion polls show continued skepticism about the naval officer's account.    The former security adviser will undergo continued questioning today, but his testimony -- together with Col. North's sometimes emotional appearances earlier -- already poses conflicts for the White House.    Pressure is growing from conservatives for Mr. Reagan to consider pardoning the two men. And, as much as the president welcomes swelling public support for U.S. aid to the Contras that has followed recent testimony, his current advisers are unhappy with Adm. Poindexter's repeated assertions last week that Mr. Reagan would have approved the diversion.    The high emotions of the past two weeks have taken their toll, too, on the investigative committees. There is acute awareness that mistakes were made in the approach used in questioning Col. North. Adm. Poindexter's frequent memory lapses only underscore the frustration of investigators left looking for missing facts.    Among remaining witnesses are cabinet members, including Mr. Shultz, and former White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan, but there is pressure in the House to expand the list to add CIA personnel or such conservative activists as Washington publicist Richard Miller, who assisted Col. North in moving money abroad.    Intelligence sources say no final decision has been made yet by CIA Director William Webster regarding disciplinary action in the agency, but several officers have been hurt by their roles in the Iran-Contra operation. Col. North's testimony indicates that the former head of the CIA's Central America task force knew more about covert aid to the Contras than he has admitted.    Both Duane Clarridge, the former head of the CIA's European Division, and Clair George, deputy director for operations, were drawn into the November 1985 shipment of Hawk missiles to Tehran.    Mr. Clarridge, a friend and ally of Col. North's, has long been a source of controversy, and so many conflicts appeared in his account to the committees that a CIA attorney was permitted to come in and listen for himself.    Mr. George holds a more senior position and has a greater following at the agency, but according to one investigative source, he was listed with Mr. Clarridge as one of the addressees of a crucial 1985 cable sent from the CIA station in Portugal regarding the 1985 Hawk shipment.    Cables before and after the message are accounted for, but that cable is missing from files at CIA headquarters, and investigators believe it may have been destroyed to cover up what the CIA then knew of the arms-for-hostage deal. </TEXT></DOC>