<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870601-0107 </DOCNO><HL> Coal Saga:Mine-Safety AgencyDisbands Sleuth SquadDespite Its Big Success---Investigators in Virginia HadA Record for Convictions;A Burger King Approach?---Looking up a Shotgun Barrel---By Bryan BurroughStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)LABOR DEPARTMENT (LBR) </IN><DATELINE> NORTON, Va.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   This remote southwest corner of Virginia, with its brooding hills, rumbling coal trucks and thick morning fogs, is known as the land of the Lonesome Pine.    During their days together as federal coal sleuths, Clarence &quot;Al&quot; Goode and his team sometimes felt like lonesome pines themselves, trying to function in a forest of bureaucratic apathy and corruption.    Between 1979 and 1985, Mr. Goode and his four investigators were responsible for 24 of the 34 convictions obtained nationwide by the federal Mine Safety and Health Administration, the Labor Department arm that regulates U.S. mines. Operating in one of the agency's smallest districts, they exposed operators of unsafe and illegal coal mines, safety-document forgers and corrupt MSHA officials. Eventually, their jobs proved perilous. They were threatened in late-night phone calls, beset by mysterious fires and, in one case, shot at by a sniper.    They should have received medals, their supporters claim. Instead, they were disbanded and their leader -- Mr. Goode -- was transferred to a desk job at the agency's Arlington, Va., headquarters.    What follows is the story of the team's demise. Ronald Shell, the acting safety director of MSHA (pronounced EM-shuh), denies that the squad was broken up intentionally and maintains that the transfers of Mr. Goode and another investigator were promotions to critical agency positions. But an internal memo from Kenneth Howard, the MSHA director for Virginia, says that the group was &quot;reorganized&quot; because of &quot;a perception that many investigations are conducted for the sole purpose of attacking certain individuals and not to improve Mine Safety andamp; Health&quot; and because mine inspections and investigations &quot;are being conducted as if they were efforts pursued by two different agencies with totally separate purposes in mind.&quot;    Since the team's dissolution less than two years ago, criminal investigations in the region have fallen sharply. &quot;Al Goode was Matt Dillon, and now Dodge City is hurting without him,&quot; says Jerry O. Talton, a Springfield, Va., lawyer and a former deputy commissioner of the Virginia Department of Worker's Compensation.    The breakup of MSHA's top investigative team illustrates what some critics at the agency call a Burger King approach toward regulation: allowing coal companies to &quot;have it their way.&quot; The pro-industry approach, they charge, is typical of the Reagan administration and has led to lax safety enforcement and fatal accidents. The Labor Department's inspector general has started an investigation of these and other allegations, including the demise of Mr. Goode's squad.    The Goode team's troubles came to a climax while David Zegeer, a former Kentucky coal operator, headed MSHA. He retired earlier this year, but by the end of his four-year term, MSHA's biggest weapon -- its power to seek criminal indictments against unsafe coal operators -- was all but stilled. Last year MSHA referred just five cases to the Justice Department for possible prosecution, down from 11 in 1985 and 15 in 1984.    A 1985 memo from Mr. Zegeer to another agency administrator symbolized what many in the agency considered his pro-industry bent. In the memo, he criticized officials who had sought the indictment of big Peabody Coal Co. in a miner's death at an Illinois mine. He termed Peabody's action &quot;strictly a judgment call&quot; and said he hoped that the official was preparing procedures &quot;which will preclude situations like this in the future.&quot; (A judge, nonetheless, fined Peabody Coal $50,000 in the case after the company had pleaded guilty.)    Mr. Goode, a cantankerous 53-year-old chain smoker, looked at the industry differently from Mr. Zegeer. Born in a Kentucky coal camp, he had been a miner and then, for seven years, a coal-mine inspector. In 1977 he became one of the &quot;special investigators&quot; that Congress authorized that year to conduct criminal investigations.    Virginia, where he was assigned, had the highest miner death rates in the nation at the time. Dangerous &quot;wildcat&quot; mines -- illegal because they had never been registered or inspected -- dotted the hills. Federal mine inspectors were often intimidated by mine operators. One pair were nearly run off a mountain road by an owner angered over safety citations. Another operator followed inspectors deep into his mine, loudly banging a two-by-four against the walls behind them.    &quot;There had been one criminal conviction in Virginia coal fields in 10 years before Al Goode came,&quot; says Mr. Talton. &quot;MSHA had set up a series of roadblocks that prevented anyone from going to the U.S. attorney.&quot;    Mr. Goode's troubles emerged as cases mounted and, in an unusual move for the agency, he began seeking criminal indictments against violators. He says he suddenly found his superiors balking and his investigations bogging down in red tape.    At first Mr. Goode threatened to quit. But at the same time, the United Mine Workers union, alarmed at the rising death rate, was mounting a major media campaign about mine safety. A short time later, federal officials hired more investigators and Mr. Goode became one of the few MSHA investigators endowed with the power to bypass his superiors and seek indictments directly from a U.S. attorney. (That power was later rescinded under Mr. Zegeer.)    During the years they were free of most bureaucratic restraints, Mr. Goode and his four investigators amassed a record of convictions unparalleled at the agency: two coal operators for falsifying training and other safety records; one for dangerously improper use of mining explosives; and another for disregard of safety laws that led to a miner's death in a roof fall. They eventually helped convict seven owners of wildcat mines where 15-year-old boys worked in unventilated tunnels with poor roof supports, and they gained a precedent-setting conviction of a coal broker for buying coal mined illegally.    &quot;Starting from zero, they created, as a result of all the convictions they obtained, a real deterrent effect for violators,&quot; says Tom King, an assistant U.S. attorney in Roanoke, Va.    But a violent backlash against the squad soon developed. The first trouble came in 1980. Driving along a cliff-top road, Mr. Goode recalls, he glanced to his left and found himself looking into the barrel of a shotgun protruding from a passing pickup truck. He fell to the seat, slamming the brake pedal so hard it nearly bent and stopping the car two feet short of the edge of the cliff. The truck drove on. A short while later at his home, he says, he dived behind his car as bullets kicked up dust all around him. &quot;They were just trying to scare me,&quot; he says.    Soon afterward, a mysterious fire was doused just short of Mr. Goode's home after it had destroyed 12 acres of his apple orchards. Several spent road flares were found in the ashes.    The incidents occurred after Mr. Goode had helped indict powerful Clinchfield Coal Co., a unit of Pittston Co., based in Greenwich, Conn., and several of its officials on 92 counts of breaking mine-safety regulations. The indictments were highly controversial in the area, and no one has suggested that the company was to blame for Mr. Goode's problems.    Mr. Goode tried to ignore the danger, but he says that another investigator seemed to lose interest in his job after his house trailer went up in flames. Eventually, team members were given police radios and unmarked cars. The investigators had little doubt who was behind the campaign; they say that an FBI wiretap had recorded associates of coal operators making death threats against Mr. Goode and two other team members. &quot;I'd have guys tell me straight to my face that they could have me killed for $1,000,&quot; recalls investigator Dorsey Owens.    The squad's problems continued after it unearthed corruption in MSHA's ranks. The investigators had never had much respect for some of the office's mine inspectors and their superiors; in 1983, at the height of the investigators' success, inspectors in the Virginia office were issuing the lowest percentage of serious violations of any MSHA office in the nation, according to internal MSHA documents.    When Mr. Owens passed on an agency trainee's tip that an MSHA inspector had ownership interests in several mines he was inspecting, Mr. Goode took the information to Raymond Ross, then MSHA's district manager for Virginia. Mr. Goode says that a short time later Mr. Ross said &quot;he'd talked to {the inspector}, who said there was nothing to it,&quot; Mr. Goode recalls. &quot;{He said} I should forget it.&quot; Mr. Ross, who later helped force the inspector out of the agency, denies having such a conversation, saying that he vigorously pursued the allegations.    After an investigation by Mr. Goode, the inspector was convicted in federal court of misusing his position. Later, during an inspection of subpoenaed coal-company financial records, team members came across $500 checks made out to another inspector. That man, who had left the agency before the checks were discovered, pleaded guilty and was sentenced to three years in prison.    By 1983 the breach between the investigators and their superiors had widened. A major factor was the team's inquiry into a death at a mine that used virtually no ventilation or roof-control equipment. Somehow, the investigators say, that fact had eluded four MSHA inspectors who had visited the mine several weeks before the accident and two others who were there the day before. &quot;Right away {MSHA officials} complained we were investigating the inspectors,&quot; says Mr. Owens. &quot;But we couldn't ignore {the inspectors' visits}.&quot; (An MSHA spokeswoman declines comment on the incident, citing continuing investigations by MSHA's internal-investigations unit and the Labor Department's inspector general.)    At about the same time, the indictment of Jack McManus, an MSHA manager in Richlands, Va., further polarized MSHA's office here. After a tip from Mr. Goode, Mr. McManus was charged with improperly influencing mine inspectors and sending them to perform repairs for coal operators. Several MSHA inspectors testified against Mr. McManus before a grand jury in Roanoke, but when the case came to trial in the summer of 1982, he was acquitted by a jury and kept his job.    After these incidents, many mine inspectors stopped talking to the investigators. The smallest disagreements with superiors erupted into major shouting matches, at times verging on fistfights. Mr. Goode emerged from MSHA's office to find tobacco juice spattered all over his car and broken Coke bottles wedged under the wheels. His wife received anonymous calls that her husband was seeing other women. Thumbtacks were taped upright in the investigators' chairs. A letter tacked to an MSHA bulletin board read: &quot;The heart of Hitler lives on in special investigations.&quot;    Suddenly, the investigators seemed to become the agency's target. One, Dewey Rife, was accused of extorting a $5,000 bribe from a coal operator, a charge that was dismissed after he passed a lie-detector test and his accuser, the coal operator, refused to take one. Another, Allen Howell, was investigated (and subsequently cleared) by MSHA's internal-affairs unit for sharing photographs of an accident site with a union safety official.    &quot;I just couldn't comprehend the harassment,&quot; Mr. Goode says. &quot;Here we were with the best record by far of any investigative team in the country, and we were fighting for our lives.&quot;    An MSHA spokeswoman confirms that Mr. Goode and his team were investigated, but she denies that they were harassed.    By 1984, after two years of internecine warfare, team members knew that they might soon be disbanded. Mr. Goode had secretly driven to MSHA's Arlington headquarters to seek an arbiter for the dispute, but, he says, a top agency official merely referred his complaints to his superiors in Norton, which only aggravated the problem.    Again a dispute involving Mr. McManus brought matters to a head. On Sept. 7, 1984, a two-page letter arrived in Mr. Zegeer's Arlington office. The letter, from a man who indicated he might be engaged in illegal mining, complained that Mr. Goode's group had &quot;swarmed&quot; onto his land, cutting a chain across a road. &quot;The smart aleck investigators put red tags all over our property and threatened me if i hauled any coal off my own property,&quot; it read.    But when the miner was confronted by Mr. Howell and a sheriff's deputy, he denied writing the letter. The investigators' suspicions intensified when they asked the miner for a handwriting sample. &quot;He couldn't write,&quot; recalls Mr. Howell. &quot;He could barely sign his name.&quot;    An analysis of the letter by a state crime lab in Virginia confirmed that the miner hadn't written it. But, noted a lab analyst, the letter had been written on a kind of paper often used by government officials. After a whirlwind investigation by the FBI and the U.S. attorney's office, Mr. McManus admitted he was the author.    In an interview, Mr. McManus said he wrote the letter as a favor for the illiterate miner, a contention the miner denies. Whatever the case, Mr. McManus was eventually transferred to an MSHA office in West Virginia, from which he retired a year later.    In November 1984, the five investigators were summoned to the office of Mr. Howard, the new manager for Virginia, and told they were being split up. Mr. Goode was relieved of his supervisor's status; two of the investigators were to report to Mr. McManus, then still in Virginia and still under FBI investigation, and two to another manager.    The breakup has embittered Mr. Goode. For nearly two years, he has been sitting behind a desk in Arlington as a &quot;mine safety specialist,&quot; perusing accident cases. &quot;I don't do nothing but shuffle papers,&quot; he says. &quot;I'm a fish out of water.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>