<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871130-0039 </DOCNO><HL> Afghan Rebels Are Rewriting History---By William McGurn</HL><DD> 11/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> KHOST, Afghanistan  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Nighttime in the hills outside this city could fool you, between breathing the clean mountain air and sleeping under a blanket of stars that twinkle just as the nursery rhymes say. But soon there is the hum of a dozen or so Soviet bombers rubbing up against the sky, and for six or seven agonizing minutes the protective darkness is ripped away by a cluster of &quot;fishing flares&quot; that floats down to illuminate the landscape in search of targets. Flashes of anti-aircraft fire answer back from the hilltops adjoining this Afghan resistance base; the ground shakes as bombs hit; and with each hit, tremors of fear shoot through a reporter's stomach. &quot;They go now,&quot; says a resistance fighter, shrugging upward.    For the moment, that is. Only a year ago such an attack might have proved deadly. But the delivery to the Afghan resistance of U.S. Stingers -- shoulder-fired, heat-seeking anti-aircraft missiles -- has forced Soviet pilots afraid of being shot down to forsake accuracy for altitude. So attacks like this one usually leave the resistance unscathed, and a reporter traveling inside the country with a band of its mujahedeen, or freedom fighters, finds them optimistic.    This is partly because of their ever-increasing prowess on the battlefield, partly because of diplomatic victories such as the record U.N. repudiation earlier this month of the Soviet occupation. But mostly it is because they sense that Soviet overtures about a pullout mean the Kremlin has finally realized a truth as hard and unyielding as the Afghan countryside: that the mujahedeen cannot be crushed militarily. What happens in Afghanistan over the next year may therefore be the most significant chapter in the history of Soviet expansionism since Yalta.    &quot;The world thinks the Russians cannot be conquered,&quot; says Wazir Khan, the 30-year-old commander for this area, absently fingering a grenade while a cup of green tea is placed on the blanket before him. &quot;But we have been fighting them eight years and we know the Russians are nothing. They only have more modern weapons.&quot;    This isn't mere backwoods bravado. Since that December 1979 day when thousands of Soviet troops crossed into this country, bombardment has become a regular feature of the Afghan landscape, sometimes two, three or four times a day. In areas like this, where the government holds the city, the shelling from the air is often interspersed with artillery fire from the Soviet posts. Over eight years the human costs of this occupation have been staggering, even by the totalitarian standards of our century: 1.5 million Afghans killed, 5.5 million refugees in Pakistan and Iran, two million more displaced inside, not to mention the hundreds of Afghan children killed or maimed by Soviet bombs disguised as toys.    Just as insistent as the Soviet campaign, however, has been the dogged resistance of the mujahedeen. In the early days of the war these fighters went up against the U.S.S.R. with little more than rusty Lee-Enfields and a handful of Kalashnikovs, but today they are inflicting heavy damage with the help of sophisticated weaponry. Here the delivery of the Stingers -- published reports say 200 in September 1986, 600 this summer -- has proved decisive. Until this year, although they controlled only about 20% of the land, the Soviets' unchallenged air power enabled them to bomb Afghan villages and mujahedeen bases with near impunity.    But the Stingers have evened up the odds. Not only have they brought down hundreds of Soviet aircraft and forced the remaining planes to fly at altitudes too high for accurate bombing, they have virtually halted the vicious Soviet helicopter assaults. If the mujahedeen are given the next upgrade -- mine-clearing equipment and long-range artillery -- they might be able to pry away permanently some of the heavily fortified Soviet outposts. Although observers do not go so far as to predict a military victory over the Soviets, there is a consensus that the mujahedeen themselves cannot be defeated.    Unfortunately, just as the mujahedeen are gaining an edge on the battlefield they are being undermined by misperceptions about Islam drawn from America's unpleasant experience with Iranian and Lebanese Shiites, compounded by the Stingers found with Iranian forces in the Persian Gulf. The Western fear arises essentially from a confusion over vocabulary: Words such as &quot;fundamentalist,&quot; &quot;Islamic republic&quot; and &quot;jihad&quot; (holy war) mean something very different on the lips of Afghan Sunnis than on those of Lebanese and Iranian Shiites. Indeed, only about 10% of Afghanistan is Shiite, and the majority Sunnis see Ayatollah Khomeini more as a traditional Persian imperialist than a man of God. &quot;It is politics that has made Khomeini what he is, not Islam,&quot; says the editor of Afghan News, Muhammed Es'Haq.    That the bearded mujahedeen conjure up images of Ali Baba and the Forty Thieves also doesn't help Afghan P.R. Yet anyone who spends any time with these men soon realizes that despite their wild looks and undoubted devotion to Islam the mujahedeen are neither tribal fanatics nor religious zealots. Most are like Wazir Khan, simple village men who have become commanders and fighters solely because a foreign power has come in and threatened their way of life. Ironically, it is the Soviet occupation that is forging an Afghan national identity. As the French sociologist Olivier Roy noted in his book &quot;Islam and the Afghan Resistance,&quot; &quot;to anyone who knew the old Afghanistan where . . . everything had to be bought and paid for,&quot; the new solidarity is a &quot;striking phenomenon.&quot;    No less striking is that the Soviet invasion may have cost Moscow the Third World. Just recently, for example, the annual U.N. resolution demanding the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan passed the General Assembly with a record 123 votes. The Nov. 10 vote was especially significant because for the first time the Soviets had mounted a massive diplomatic counteroffensive, trying to shift the focus of the resolution from their occupation of Afghanistan to so-called outside interference, i.e. U.S. support for the mujahedeen. But the effort flopped, and the condemnation by Third World nations of their Soviet uncle stands out against the muted criticism that greeted Soviet ruthlessness in Eastern Europe not so long ago.    &quot;It's not something vague,&quot; says Masood Khalili, spokesman for Jamiat-e-Islami, one of seven resistance parties. &quot;The Russians are in Afghanistan and we want them out.&quot;    In the U.S., too, the baldness of the Afghan issue has made for easy bedfellows. Unlike trouble spots in, say, Latin America, Africa or Asia, the Afghan struggle against a foreign imperial power has none of the complications of a civil war. Nor do any of the cliches leveled against the South Vietnamese during the American involvement in Southeast Asia apply here. The mujahedeen are fighting their war themselves, they have the unqualified support of the Afghan people, and they have confounded all the recurring predictions of their impending defeat.    To be sure, the Afghans are not without their problems. There's undoubtedly some corruption. There's occasional talk that resistance members have been entangled with the dope trafficking endemic to the region. There are not enough weapons, and not enough of what aid is supplied -- humanitarian as well as military -- makes it to those who need it. There is the further complication of Pakistan, which supports the mujahedeen but presents its own logistical and political obstacles.    But these are all problems of war, particularly a nasty, protracted guerrilla war. They are not problems of the Afghan resistance, which is now, with the election of Younus Khalis for an 18-month term as chairman of the seven-party Islamic Alliance of Afghan Mujahedeen, making its first tentative moves toward a government-in-exile. It was in his capacity as chairman that Mr. Khalis traveled to New York for the U.N. vote and later met with President Reagan.    There is even more unity on the field. Early last month, for example, six of the party forces cooperated in a joint guerrilla attack in the Kunar Valley along a 50-mile front, and the mujahedeen here displayed 100 BM-12 rockets that another party gave them when their own ammunition stock ran out. More telling, back in June and July almost 1,000 mujahedeen commanders representing all the parties came from the far corners of Afghanistan to Ghor, smack dab in the middle of the country, to discuss strategy against the enemy. Although not all these people agree on what kind of Afghanistan ought to emerge after the war, they can be no less unified than the 13 fractious colonies (many of whose leaders were smugglers and slaveholders) that opposed England in 1776.    To characterize the mujahedeen by their inevitable shortcomings is therefore to overlook their incomparable achievements. Certainly this is not a mistake repeated in Moscow -- or, just as important, in Eastern Europe, where groups such as Solidarity have been taking heart from the brave and determined resistance of the Afghans. For despite the talk about the death of Marxism, history has thus far been pretty much on the side of the Soviets, at least in terms of its steady march of territory and the viability of the Brezhnev Doctrine.    That is now being challenged here. As the world's leading scholar on this country, Louis Dupree, said almost 20 years ago, &quot;If you want to kill the Soviet Union, get it to try to eat Afghanistan.&quot; The people who are posing this challenge, moreover, are not fanatics, not well trained, not even, for the most part, educated. They are simply ornery mountain folk who have not cottoned to a foreign power that has seized their land, killed their people and attacked their faith, and for the past eight years they have threaded their way through the dusty brown hills, singly and in groups, to resist. Not having read about the inevitable forces of history, they may now be rewriting it.    ---   Mr. McGurn is deputy editorial page editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal. </TEXT></DOC>