<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880719-0083 </DOCNO><HL> Sports: Sparring at Olympic Boxing Trials </HL><AUTHOR> Frederick C. Klein </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> Las Vegas, Nev.  </DATELINE><TEXT>    They picked the U.S. Olympic boxing team here over the weekend in a &quot;box-off,&quot; and there were some pretty good scraps. To wit:   --The team's coach was fired for allegedly choking a U.S. boxing federation official some weeks ago, and there was some public politicking over who would succeed him until his top assistant, Syracuse tavern-keeper Tom Coulter, was chosen.    --Three of the 24 fighters scheduled to appear were sent home for testing positive for marijuana or cocaine, and had to be hastily replaced.    --Sugar Ray Leonard showed up to claim that the team wasn't in great shape.    Oh, yeah, there were some pretty good bouts inside the ropes, too, and some close ones. In fact, of the weekend's 15 frays, only one was stopped before its three-round conclusion, and just two of the 14 decisions were unanimous, although a bunch of others should have been.    That last point was singled out by Coulter -- a reasonable-sounding fellow who has traveled in ring circles for almost four decades -- as maybe the most edifying aspect of the fest. &quot;The lesson here, as elsewhere, is that you can't leave a fight in the hands of the officials,&quot; he smiled. &quot;If a fighter comes back to his corner asking 'Who won?' he's in trouble.&quot;    Twelve young men finally did win, one for each weight class, as usual, under a format that must have been devised by a committee of camels. Each winner of the sport's Olympic Trials tournament, held the week before in Concord, Calif., had to show up at the hall in back of Caesars Palace here to defend his hard-won berth against a &quot;worthy challenger&quot; picked by the federation. If the challenger won on Saturday, he and the erstwhile champ went at it again on Sunday. That meant some kids went nine tough rounds in eight days, more than Michael Spinks has had to fight in two years to gross $18.5 million.    The system resulted in the dethroning of three Trials winners, and one of those two-bout contests showed more heat than the 120-degree thermometer readings outside. Kelcie Banks of Chicago, a reigning world's champion at 125 pounds, had been upset in a 3-2 decision in the semifinals of the Trials by Ed Hopson, a 17-year-old whirling dervish from St. Louis, but was picked by the powers that be for another shot. To the loud displeasure of the audience of displaced handle-pullers, Banks edged Hopson by a 3-2 vote of the five judges on Saturday, and repeated the performance on Sunday.    Banks is a tall, 23-year-old lefty who countered the 5-foot-4 Hopson's lunges with a surgical right jab, a potent weapon in a form in which all clean blows count the same. He was further aided on Sunday by a one-point penalty against his rough-housing foe for hitting with an open glove, one of Hopson's many transgressions that drew the referee's attention.    Nonetheless, Roger Bloodworth, Hopson's coach, afterward declared that the &quot;word around the hotel&quot; the night before the bout was that Banks would win any decision, and his charge opined that he would have been better off enjoying his summer back home in St. Louis.    My view is that Banks won fair and square, and the real wonder was that two judges found for Hopson on each day. The young man would have been on firmer ground questioning the point of the sport's Olympic Trials if a higher court lurked behind.    Banks is a stylish veteran and surely rates a strong medal chance in Seoul, especially if the champion Cubans stay home the way they say they will. So will Kenneth Gould, a rat-a-tat-tat body puncher from Rockford, Ill., who captured a world crown in 1986 in Reno at age 19 but had to stage something of a comeback to win here after losing some international matches this year and last.    The U.S. team's best medal hope may well be 106-pounder Michael Carbajal. The 20-year-old Arizonan is a little guy with a big guy's outlook, preferring to hold his ground and punch off intruders. His bout on Saturday against James Harris of Washington, who was summoned late to fill in for one of the hapless lads who had flunked the well-advertised pre-fight drug test, was stopped when Harris was disqualified for holding in round three. But Carbajal had been swatting Harris at will before that, and his superiority was clear.    Carbajal distinguished himself last December as the only American winner in a dual meet with the Cubans in Cuba. After Banks, Gould and Carbajal, U.S. medal prospects grow murkier. Army man Ray Mercer, at 201 pounds, drew notice for punching power from Richie Giachetti, Larry Holmes's manager, who was present to scout talent. Further, Mercer managed to last three rounds and get one of three judges' votes in an early-year go with Cuba's fearsome Felix Savon. He is, however, 27 years old and has been boxing seriously just four years.    &quot;One cold day I was supposed to go on bivouac, and a trainer asked me to spar with his heavyweight,&quot; Mercer said, recalling his introduction to the sport. &quot;I got busted up pretty good, but it was better than bivouac.&quot;    Todd Foster, at 139 pounds, is hard-nosed, and that's a good thing because that organ gets hit a lot. The same goes for light-heavyweight Andrew Maynard, who beat Trials winner Al Cole twice here to reverse a loss to Cole in the Trials quarterfinals.    Our superheavyweight will be Riddick Bowe, the third man to reverse a Trials setback with two box-off triumphs. The tall, lackadaisical Brooklynite displayed a decent left jab, which was one more weapon than his foe, Robert Salters, possessed. How two judges voted for Salters in each fight was beyond me.    When it was over, Coulter pledged, refreshingly, to run an open camp -- open to the press as well as to boxers' individual coaches -- and deliver a &quot;mellow, relaxed&quot; team. But he made no further promises beyond saying his boys would be fit for Seoul. &quot;I've been around too long to predict what international judges will do,&quot; he said. Wise fella. </TEXT></DOC>