<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880623-0013 </DOCNO><HL> Japan Isn't Ready For Illegal Aliens, But It Has 100,000 --- They Do the Dirty Work, But They Also Threaten The Nation's Self-Image </HL><AUTHOR> Kathryn Graven (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN LABOR </CO><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Joseph from Ghana came to Japan to work three months ago because, he says, &quot;I heard that Japan is an economic miracle.&quot;    Nine hours a day, six days a week, the 27-year-old packs fresh clams into plasticfoam containers in a small factory in a Tokyo suburb. He earns 6,000 yen a day ($48), which is about what the average worker makes in a month back home.    Joseph's employer didn't bother to ask to see a visa. He knew what he would find. Joseph is working here illegally. So are perhaps 100,000 others, who toil in Japan's small factories, restaurants, bars and construction sites. The number of such workers is small compared with Japan's population -- roughly 122 million people -- but it has soared as Japan has become a nation of high wages, labor shortages and a strong currency.    A major national debate swirls about these illegal aliens. &quot;The national system isn't prepared yet for this huge change,&quot; says Tetsuo Yamazaki, counselor of the immigration bureau of the Justice Ministry.    The controversy predictably pits organized labor against business. Unions fear that foreigners will take jobs from Japanese, and businesses are looking to cheaper foreign labor to cut costs and improve competitiveness. But the debate also strikes an emotional chord, for it threatens Japan's sense of itself. Japanese seem to agree that they must &quot;internationalize,&quot; but most people also worry that if too many foreigners come here to live, they will destroy Japan's cultural homogeneity and social harmony.    The issue takes on greater urgency as more people realize that Japan needs foreign workers whether it wants them or not. In some industries, notably construction, Japan already depends on them. A 1986 survey by the Japan Labor Institute concluded that the services and construction industries faced a labor shortage of about 7%, a shortfall that illegal foreign workers help relieve. But Japan has no legal guest-worker program.    Policy makers here are looking at the experiences of other countries for guidance. They reject the American &quot;melting pot&quot; model. Nor does anyone want to repeat France's experience with Arab workers who went to stay, in numbers large enough to affect the culture and cause political upheaval. A West German journalist's book about his country's permanent subclass of Turkish workers is required reading among Japanese bureaucrats these days.    Having read the cautionary tales, Japan is seeking its own approach. The bureaucracy is considering a plan that would, in practice, favor Westerners and discriminate against Southeast Asians and people from the Third World. The idea is to encourage three- to five-year stays by foreigners who have skills that Japan needs: doctors, nurses, engineers, computer software programmers and language instructors. At the same time, efforts already are being stepped up to keep out unskilled workers, including itinerant clam packers, who are seen as a potential drain on society.    &quot;The Japanese are polite on the outside, but they also have an ugly side,&quot; says one foreign-ministry official. &quot;This issue really shows the ugly side.&quot;    Beyond the notion that they might cause social problems, unskilled workers touch a nerve in Japan that Western industrialized countries largely ignored when they enlisted foreigners to do their dirty work. Many Japanese, particularly older people, fear that the new wealth of the country is eroding the value placed on hard work, discipline, company loyalty and proud labor. To rely on foreigners to wash dishes, sweep streets and collect garbage would suggest that the society is slipping.    &quot;The fact that young people don't like hard work and dirty jobs reflects that they are the spoiled children of a new generation,&quot; says Rokuro Ishikawa, the chairman of the Japan Chamber of Commerce and Industry.    Meanwhile, it's the job of immigration officers at Tokyo's Narita International Airport to man the ramparts. Officers say that Saturday, when fully booked flights arrive from Manila, Bangkok and New Delhi (major jumping-off points for laborers in search of work), is the worst day of the week.    On the alert for job seekers posing as tourists, an immigration officer spots Mohammad Salauddin, a Bangladeshi wearing a crisp white shirt and blue pin-striped suit and carrying an imitation Dunhill attache case. The officer pulls him aside for questioning.    In a stark interrogation room, the 40-year-old Bangladeshi, who says he runs an ironwork business in Dhaka, tells the officer he is here to see the sights. &quot;I want to see Tokyo Tower and Mount Fuji,&quot; he says. As evidence of his intentions, he produces $700 in traveler's checks and $382 in cash, $82 more than the $1,000 that authorities say travelers need to bring along for a week to 10 days in Japan. (Japan has reciprocal agreements with Pakistan and Bangladesh that allow tourists to enter without visas. Americans, on the other hand, must have visas if they plan to spend more than 72 hours here.)    The officer isn't convinced that Mr. Salauddin is a tourist. He holds the bills up to the light to see whether they are counterfeit, and he grills the Bangladeshi on where he plans to stay. &quot;At the YMCA,&quot; replies Mr. Salauddin. &quot;Seven days at the YMCA. I want to see Japan.&quot;    But when Mr. Salauddin can't come up with an address or phone number for the Y, or an itinerary, guidebook or names of Japanese contacts, he is refused entry. A few hours later, he and 10 other men from Bangladesh who had come in on the same flight are on their way back to Manila. &quot;From Bangladesh to Bangkok to Manila to Tokyo cost me more than $1,200,&quot; Mr. Salauddin says angrily. &quot;Who is going to pay?&quot;    The answer: Mr. Salauddin.    Mohamed Aleu Fahen also doesn't make it past immigration control. The quiet, 22-year-old student from a small village in southeastern Bangladesh looks at the floor and nods when an officer asks whether he truly is a tourist. Reluctantly, he opens his tattered briefcase to pull out a map of Tokyo -- his last shred of evidence that he is here to see the sights. The immigration man notes how light Mr. Fahen travels: a few neatly pressed shirts, a towel, a handkerchief, a tube of hand cream.    The contents of his bag could well mean Mr. Fahen is here for a brief visit. But that isn't how the officer construes it. His judgment: The young man is a poor student who can scarcely afford a Japanese vacation and thus must be here to seek work. In the lounge where deportees wait for their departing flights, Mr. Fahen quietly vents his frustration at being expelled: &quot;Japanese come to Bangladesh, no problem. Why do they send me back? Why?&quot;    For years, authorities didn't seem to mind that Thai and Filipino women came to work in Japan's sleazy nightclubs. The new arrivals they care about are males they see as threatening the local labor market. Last year, violations of Japan's Immigration Control Law increased 33.6% from the previous year, to 14,129. Most of the alleged violators were deported.    Still, the effort is beginning to seem futile. &quot;Inspectors are under so much pressure to get everyone through immigration (quickly), we can't spend too much time on one person. We can't possibly catch everyone,&quot; says Yasutoshi Hirogane, the deputy chief of general affairs at the Narita Immigration Bureau.    Joseph from Ghana managed to slip through the dragnet. And about two weeks after he arrived, he got the job packing clams in Chiba prefecture, east of Tokyo, which has become a haven for illegal foreign workers.    He lives close to the factory with two other men from Ghana, Moses, 35, and Joe, 30. Their tiny Japanese-style apartment costs them 50,000 yen a month. They have a small cooking area and a toilet, but no shower. At the end of the day they, like many Japanese, go to the local public bath.    Joseph has held jobs in Cairo and Amsterdam. Moses and Joe were in Syria until six months ago when jobs there dried up. Now they both shell and steam seafood. As soon as possible, Moses plans to send money back to his wife and four children through a bank in Togo. Despite Japanese fears that foreign workers will want to stay permanently, these three men claim not to see Japan as their last stop. Says Moses: &quot;Two years in Japan is long enough. I want to go back to Ghana and start my own business.&quot;    Although Joseph knows just a few words of Japanese and his employer speaks broken English, the arrangement seems to work smoothly. At times it is almost familial. &quot;He works hard and does whatever I ask him to do,&quot; says the boss, who refuses to give his name. The employer's wife chimes in that at first she had been nervous about what the neighbors might think about a Ghanaian worker. Now, however, she worries about Joseph as if he were her son: &quot;He wants to send money to his old parents. But what will he live on? What if he gets sick?&quot;    Joseph's boss says he took on a foreign worker because he couldn't find anyone else willing to do the job. &quot;Japanese don't want to do this kind of work anymore. They won't work on holidays. But I still have clams to deliver,&quot; he says.    Owners of small businesses across Japan have similar problems. Many say foreign workers are their only hope of staying afloat. To them, the government's wish to shut out unskilled workers is blatantly pro-big business. Big companies can cut costs by moving production to places where labor is cheaper -- Taiwan, Singapore, Thailand, the Philippines. But small businesses are stuck paying higher Japanese wages. &quot;If small businesses can't hire foreign workers, they will go out of business,&quot; says Yoshihisa Kawano, the president of KSP, a small printing company in Tokyo.    Mr. Ishikawa of the chamber of commerce argues, however, that the solution to the labor shortage is to use technological innovations -- robotics, say -- rather than import workers. He, like many other Japanese, is worried about the social problems that will arise if Japan comes to rely on foreigners to do menial jobs. Language differences are a problem, and Japanese fret about intermarriage, about educating children of unskilled workers who can't afford international schools. People fear a surge in crime. Stories about fights among Pakistanis, Bangladeshis and Filipinos make headlines and leave the impression that these people are violent and dangerous.    Finally, there's the welfare problem. Not all workers are as lucky as Joseph. Some get sick or injured and lose their jobs. Others, who turned their life savings over to brokers in order to get here, discover that promises of money, meals and lodging were bogus. Fear of deportation prevents them from going to the police for help. There are unconfirmed reports of workers starving to death here.    One person trying to do something is the Rev. Hidetoshi Watanabe, a 55-year-old minister with the United Church of Christ. He has spent the past year in the filthy, urine- and alcohol-drenched streets of a day laborers' community near the port city of Yokohama. Foreign workers join unemployed Japanese here when the dream of earning a piece of Japan's economic miracle turns bad. &quot;This is the bottom of the bottom,&quot; says Mr. Watanabe.    Appalled by the way Japanese society often turns a blind eye to such people, Mr. Watanabe started a volunteer network to fight human-rights abuses. And he enlisted the day-laborer union to mediate wage disputes between the foreign workers and the Yakuza, Japan's organized-crime syndicate, which controls the day-labor market in construction.    Some policy makers contend that if Japan wants to avoid the social costs, it will have to pay higher wages to induce more Japanese workers to do menial jobs that foreign workers take on. The labor ministry argues, rather obliquely, that Japan should increase aid to developing nations, toward relieving the need unskilled people have to seek jobs in Japan. Others want to shift the penalties from the illegal worker to the employer who hires him.    To Mr. Watanabe, the bureaucrats and their remedies are divorced from reality. &quot;The government is debating whether to open the door or not,&quot; he says. &quot;But the door is already broken.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>