<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880405-0110 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Democracy's Dominoes </HL><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><G> EXE CNG </G><TEXT>   Last week Panama's General Manuel Noriega broke a 10-day opposition-led general strike. On Sunday, as if to demonstrate their continued hold on power, a few of Mr. Noriega's men tried to force a car carrying the U.S. ambassador off the road in Panama City. Maybe if the U.S. had supported the Contras, our opposition to Mr. Noriega would now look more credible both to him and to his domestic opponents, and he might take the next plane to Spain. Only two years ago the U.S. helped grease the skids under Haiti's Baby Doc Duvalier, but now the U.S. can barely protect its ambassador in Panama.    Of course, we are constantly told, the U.S. cannot be the &quot;world's policeman.&quot; But short of that glib abdication, the U.S. does have an interest in seeing democracy and free markets expand in the world. Though such hyperactive opponents of U.S. intervention as Senator John Kerry seem to have discovered an exception in Panama, now the Pentagon is reportedly cautious. We can sympathize with the military's concern, since who knows if these fair-weather interventionists will hedge or even withdraw their approval at the first sign of difficulty, as they have in the past? Democracy in Panama, and elsewhere, is in any event likely to be the victim of our failure of will.    By now, everyone knows the 1980s have seen a remarkable rise of democracy around the world. Brazil, Argentina, Peru, Guatemala and Honduras have all entered democratic ranks in Latin America, while in Asia, South Korea, the Philippines, Taiwan and even Pakistan have taken long strides away from military or strongman rule. The citizens of these countries deserve most of the credit. But the Reagan administration also played a role by renewing U.S. confidence and economic vitality in a way that also renewed America's global influence. As Reagan policy has collapsed in its final years, however, so has America's ability to promote democracy even in our own hemisphere. The Ortegas and Noriegas can follow Congressional votes, too.    This happened once before, we recall, in the 1960s and '70s. The U.S. failure in Vietnam surely strengthened the hand of democracy's critics in Asia, as the rulers of Singapore never cease to remind us. Ferdinand Marcos has implied that he declared martial law in Manila in 1972 because of American preoccupation with Vietnam. In Korea, Park Chung Hee justified his repressive surge in the mid-1970s as a response to the post-Vietnam Nixon Doctrine that threw into doubt the U.S. commitment to defend Korea. Later, Korea's Chun Doo Hwan undertook a military coup after President Carter had promised to withdraw U.S. troops from the peninsula. Fidel Castro's ability to defy the U.S. in Cuba probably encouraged a decade or more of military coups in Latin America.    The lesson many Latin Americans will now take from Congress's sellout of the Contras is that they cannot afford democracy. To protect themselves they must again move to the autocratic right. El Salvador's voters gave an indication of this sentiment last month when they repudiated the American-backed Christian Democrats and gave a landslide victory to the Arena Party that urged a tougher stand against the Communists. At least this was still an exercise in democracy, but if military coups topple Latin America's new democracies in the coming months and years, we won't be surprised. We also won't be surprised if all those who voted to pull the plug on the Contras piously refuse to admit responsibility for their role in toppling democracy's dominoes.    America's military establishment will also bear some responsibility, to be sure. Still traumatized by Vietnam, our generals seem to want a national referendum held before they'll agree to commit troops to defend American interests. The desire to avoid another Beirut is understandable, and we hope that any State Department plans for intervening in Panama call for decisive action. The White House also has contribued to the indecision, agreeing to send U.S. reinforcements to defend Americans in Panama one day, then ruling out the use of force to topple General Noriega the next. No wonder Panama's opposition gave up its general strike.    Yet if America cannot muster the will to defeat someone like General Noriega, when will it ever? Here is a drug lord and autocrat about whom even Senators Jesse Helms and John Kerry can agree. Here is a country with both an important strategic interest -- the Panama Canal -- and American citizens to protect. Here is a leader who accepted money from the CIA even as he was collecting intelligence for the Soviets. Here is a man despised by all of his citizens save his military cronies and the pro-Castro left.    Mr. Noriega, though, seems to sense and understand democracy's loss of will. In an interview with journalist Lally Weymouth last week, he raised the specter of Vietnam and said, &quot;American mothers are going to see their sons fighting in a nation without necessity.&quot; The question is whether America's leaders can find the nerve to show Mr. Noriega that the world's most powerful democracy will act to protect its interests. </TEXT></DOC>