<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880330-0010 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   TWO MEESE AIDES QUIT in a bid to pressure the attorney general to resign.    The departures of Arnold Burns, deputy attorney general, and William Weld, who oversaw all federal criminal matters, leave a void in the Justice Department's leadership and illustrate Meese's increasing political isolation. They didn't cite their reasons for resigning. But sources said the two officials felt that the department's work was at a standstill because of Meese's continuing legal problems. Four assistants to Burns and Weld also quit.    Aides to the attorney general reiterated that Meese hasn't any intention of leaving his post and that he doesn't expect to face any criminal charges.    ---   DUKAKIS DEFEATED Jackson in Connecticut, and Bush won the GOP primary.    With nearly complete returns, the Massachusetts governor had 58% to Jackson's 28%. Gore was a distant third with 8% of the vote. Dukakis won 36 of Connecticut's Democratic delegates, and Jackson won 16. While the victory wasn't unexpected, it was considered important for Dukakis, who is in a tight race with Jackson. On the Republican side, Bush won the Connecticut contest and moved almost uncontested toward the GOP nomination.    Dole bowed out of the GOP race. The Kansas senator, whose campaign stumbled after he won the Iowa caucuses, vowed to work for Bush's election.    ---   House leaders agreed on a legislative package that would supply the Contras with nonlethal aid for the next six months. The full House is expected to vote on the plan as early as today. In Nicaragua, Sandinista and Contra officials ended two days of talks on implementing a peace pact, and agreed to meet next week.    ---   A White House spokesman expressed outrage at the Panamanian military's crackdown Monday on opposition leaders and the detention of several U.S. journalists. He warned that &quot;there are limits to our patience.&quot; Panama's envoy to Washington, an ally of ousted President Delvalle, suggested a U.S.-led military raid to oust Noriega.    The U.S. was criticized by 22 Latin American and Caribbean nations for imposing economic sanctions against Panama. They called the curbs coercive. In a statement, the countries also said they would consider a Panamanian request for aid. Meanwhile, Roman Catholic bishops in Panama urged Noriega to relinquish power.    ---   Afghan leader Najibullah offered to implement rebel proposals for a coalition government to oversee a withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan if the Moslem guerrillas end their war against the Soviet-backed government. Also in Kabul, a bomb planted in a jeep exploded, killing four Soviet advisers and another person.    ---   Israel's army isolated the West Bank and Gaza Strip as part of an unprecedented clampdown on the occupied lands, but violence erupted between the patrolling soldiers and Palestinians. At least eight Arabs were wounded. Foreign relief workers were barred from the areas as thousands of police enforced curfews and closed Arab shops.    ---   The House Armed Services panel decided to stick by the $299.5 billion defense budget hammered out last year, but voted to cut the proposed budget for Reagan's space-based antimissile system to $3.7 billion in fiscal 1989. It also voted to raise funding for the Midgetman missile to $500 million from a proposed $200 million.    ---   The Soviet newspaper Izvestia reported that residents of the Azerbaijan city of Stepanakert again boycotted work to protest Moscow's refusal to transfer control of a disputed region to Armenia. The report said &quot;enterprises are at a standstill&quot; because of the strike, reportedly begun last week.    ---   Evangelist Jimmy Swaggart was barred from the pulpit for at least a year. The Assemblies of God, acting on allegations that Swaggart had hired a prostitute, also ordered that he refrain from appearing on his television program during the period.    ---   A gunman in Paris killed the African National Congress's representative for France. Police said the slaying appeared to be &quot;the work of a professional.&quot; The ANC claimed that South Africa was behind the killing. Pretoria denied the accusation.    ---   A former Conrail engineer was sentenced by a court in Maryland to the maximum term of five years in prison and fined $1,000 for causing 16 deaths in a January 1987 collision with an Amtrak passenger train. Rick L. Gates had pleaded guilty last month to manslaughter and admitted to smoking marijuana while driving a locomotive.    ---   Two dozen Kurds were flown to four European countries -- Austria, Switzerland, West Germany and Britain -- for treatment of burns caused by reported Iraqi poison gas attacks that killed 5,000. In the gulf, Iran fired two missiles at an Iraqi border city in retaliation for air strikes by Baghdad.    ---   An international clinical trial found that heart attack victims treated with the blood clot dissolver streptokinase and aspirin had a 40% lower death rate than patients receiving conventional treatment. The trial involved 17,000 patients rushed to hospitals with heart attacks.    ---   The Senate met in a closed-door session called by conservatives who claim the Soviet Union has more intermediate-range nuclear missiles than Moscow has declared. All such missiles are to be banned as part of a superpower pact. Supporters of the treaty, signed by Reagan and Gorbachev, said the allegations already had been refuted.    ---   Authorities in North Carolina said an Indian judicial candidate was slain by a youth who blamed him for a romantic problem, rather than for political reasons. One suspect has been jailed, another committed suicide, they said. Julian Pierce, a Lumbee Indian running for Superior Court judge in Robeson County, was killed Saturday. </TEXT></DOC>