<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880512-0151 </DOCNO><HL> Bounty Hunt: 'Stealth' Eludes Radar, But Not the Scrutiny Of Litigious Mr. Hafif --- He and Clients Stand to Share In Millions if They Show Northrop Bilked the U.S. --- Private Eye's White Porsche </HL><AUTHOR> Eileen White Read (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> NOC </CO><IN> ARO NUK </IN><G> DEF JUS CNG </G><DATELINE> CLAREMONT, Calif.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Let wimps chase ambulances. It's the MX missile and the huge, scary, mystery-draped Stealth bomber that set lawyer Herbert Hafif's litigious adrenals aquiver.    Mr. Hafif (pronounced Half) has made a specialty of hounding Northrop Corp., maker of MX guidance equipment and prime contractor for the Stealth bomber, the ultrasecret plane designed to elude radar. A 59-year-old personal-injury lawyer in Claremont, Mr. Hafif is becoming more than a thorn in Northrop's side. He is dangling the prospect of huge rewards to employees who successfully sue Northrop for cheating Uncle Sam through false contract claims, using an updated Civil War-era law that encourages just this sort of employee feedback.    Mr. Hafif himself says he is mainly interested in doing right by the taxpayers. The millions of dollars in contingency fees his 14-member law firm stands to gain is only the means to that lofty end. &quot;I hope we make a lot of money on this so others will pursue defense contractors,&quot; he says. &quot;We will open the floodgates.&quot;    His false-claim suits and more than two dozen filed by other lawyers on aerospace workers' behalf seek billions from defense contractors. Thanks to Mr. Hafif's publicity-seeking, the litigation is attracting a great deal of attention -- unwelcome even to some critics of Pentagon waste. They charge he puts headlines first and legal strategy second.    In any case, Mr. Hafif's idea of public service is causing Northrop no end of grief. Stealth work alone accounted for nearly half its $6 billion of revenue last year. As prime contractor, Northrop stands to receive much of the Stealth program's total budget of $46 billion.    But earlier this year, after a secret inquiry, the House Armed Services Committee cut $100 million from next year's Stealth development budget and commissioned a team of auditors to dig through its books. To defend itself, Northrop has hired a former Justice Department official who led the government's defense-contract fraud efforts.    The Stealth suit, brought by Mr. Hafif in federal court in Los Angeles, alleges false billing of at least $400 million. Northrop employees and former employees, whom Mr. Hafif fondly calls his &quot;allegators,&quot; would collect as much 30% of any damages awarded the government, depending on the degree of Northrop's culpability. Of the employees' cut Mr. Hafif's firm probably would take about a third -- its usual contingency fee.    Mr. Hafif contends that work on the Stealth bomber has been so shoddy the plane may never fly, and the project should be abandoned. As for the quality of Northrop's MX guidance equipment, he has asserted in newspaper and television interviews that the nuclear-tipped missile is &quot;as likely to land in Chicago as in Moscow.&quot;    The assault undermines Northrop's carefully cultivated corporate image as an aerospace maverick, more concerned than its rivals with keeping costs low and quality high. It was especially painful for Chairman Thomas V. Jones to appear on CBS's &quot;60 Minutes&quot; last year to answer the MX allegations. He nervously conceded that management made mistakes and that some employees falsely certified they had witnessed technical tests -- charges that were getting wide currency because of Mr. Hafif.    Northrop declines to comment on the Stealth suit, citing an Air Force order imposing extraordinary secrecy on the project. Unofficially, a company official cracks that Mr. Hafif's suits are &quot;full of Hafiftruths.&quot;    The irony is that the False Claims Act Mr. Hafif uses was designed to keep contractor fraud investigations secret to avoid tipping off targets. Such cases are sealed when filed, and no public record is kept until the government concludes its own investigation.    No law bars Mr. Hafif from exploiting the media, however. After he filed an MX suit last year, Air Force officials asked him to turn over 80 boxes supposedly filled with missile parts that Northrop employees had brought to him. The company allegedly had overstocked the parts at government expense and secretly discarded them in a dumpster. Mr. Hafif's response to the Air Force: &quot;You have to subpoena them.&quot; To do so, he explains, &quot;they gotta have a grand jury. And if they have a grand jury, they will want to hear our witnesses.&quot;    A grand jury was impaneled. Television crews, tipped by the Hafif team, videotaped Hafif associate Robert Kilborne and boxes of the purported MX parts arriving at the Los Angeles federal courthouse in an armored car -- rented by Mr. Hafif's firm. On local news broadcasts, Mr. Hafif appeared sitting behind a desk stacked with parts. The publicity, says Mr. Hafif, helped persuade two congressional committees to hold hearings on the MX issue, and &quot;60 Minutes&quot; producers to air Northrop's dirty laundry nationally.    The Stealth case was a tougher challenge. Despite the Air Force's recent release of a rather vague drawing of the bomber, nearly all information about it has a &quot;special access&quot; classification that makes it even more secret than top secret. Employees can be prosecuted just for admitting they work on it. To prepare the suit, a Hafif client compiled a file of internal Northrop documents on alleged financial irregularities. When he quit Northrop for another job, however, he found he couldn't legally take the file with him.    So Mr. Hafif got inventive. He called the Air Force's criminal investigations branch to report that the documents had been hidden in a Northrop office. To keep the Air Force from shrouding the matter in secrecy, he told the story to a congressional committee's staffers, and made his four &quot;allegators&quot; available to the media. The result: Military investigators retrieved the file from the company and made its contents part of their continuing investigation.    One of those who dislike the publicity-seeking is Sen. Charles Grassley, an Iowa Republican and specialist in defense spending. He calls the False Claims Act &quot;one of the best possible deterrents against fraud,&quot; and says cases brought under it are usually pursued the way the law envisioned -- quietly. &quot;The absence of publicity is meant to protect all parties involved,&quot; Sen. Grassley says. &quot;Thankfully, the Hafif cases have been the sole exception.&quot;    Mr. Hafif replies that if he hadn't taken the publicity about the Stealth case, the Defense Department would have squelched it on national-security grounds. &quot;That whole bureaucracy of fools in the Pentagon,&quot; he says, would &quot;just give us a lot of secrecy crap to get through.&quot;    Slip-ups by the Hafif team have bothered other critics. The Stealth complaint alleges a corporate drama in which internal auditors uncovered a whopping $400 million in overcharges. Then, it says, top Northrop managers confiscated the audit and ordered all the evidence shredded. What the complaint neglects to say is that the story is second- or third-hand. None of the four plaintiffs worked for or even saw the mysterious audit. A person close to the company suggests there was such an audit, but he says it showed $400,000 in overcharges, not $400 million.    The Hafif firm is being threatened with a legal malpractice suit by a former client in an MX case, Michael A. Hyatt. A federal judge in Los Angeles had dismissed Mr. Hyatt's complaint against Northrop for a technical flaw that would have been irrelevant had the Hafif firm waited only three weeks before filing, until President Reagan signed into law the revised False Claims Act. Mr. Hyatt says that &quot;I would have been entitled to 15% to 25% of $3 million,&quot; the amount sought from Northrop in an MX suit by the Justice Department.    Mr. Kilborne, the Hafif associate who worked on the case, says he &quot;couldn't possibly have known&quot; that the House and Senate had just approved the revisions. But Los Angeles lawyer John R. Phillips wonders how he could have missed news of the revision, which made the front page of the Los Angeles Times. &quot;A thorough attorney would extend his research to look at pending legislation,&quot; says Mr. Phillips, whose nonprofit Center for Law in the Public Interest acts as an informal clearing house for false-claims cases.    Mr. Hafif, born in Philadelphia of Lebanese descent, seems too busy to concern himself with such quibbles. Thirty years of garden-variety torts have earned him a net worth of $50 million. Among his firm's recent cases are class actions against two Southern California crematories for allegedly tossing their finished product into dumpsters. In a notable departure from the ordinary three years ago, Mr. Hafif won a highly publicized jury verdict for clients who sued to convert a promissory note into a 20% interest in ComputerLand Corp. He stands to earn as much as $70 million if an appeals court upholds the award.    Northrop first attracted his attention a dozen years ago when his firm represented plaintiffs in a dispute over a troublesome commercial computer system that a nowdefunct Northrop subsidiary had marketed. Northrop settled for an undisclosed sum.    At this stage, Mr. Hafif is financing the litigation against Northrop out of his own pocket. Without the cooperation of Northrop employees it could go nowhere, so a major expense has been the hiring of a private investigator, Jason Rowe, to get them on board. Mr. Rowe's white Porsche has become a familiar after-hours sight in Palmdale and Pico Rivera, industrial towns where Northrop has Stealth plants, as the investigator goes knocking on doors to recruit potential witnesses.    A reporter is permitted to tag along on several cold calls on condition that employees not be identified. At one house Mr. Rowe visits in the desert twilight he finds a Northrop engineer, relaxing in jeans. The engineer, trying to quiet his barking dogs, looks flabbergasted and wary as he shakes Mr. Rowe's outstretched hand. In these parts, some Northrop employees never mention Stealth by that name or its official moniker, the B-2 Advanced Technology Bomber; they call it the &quot;article.&quot; After Mr. Rowe explains that he isn't interested in gathering secrets from Northrop -- a concern he describes as &quot;a public company with shareholders, working on government contracts paid for by the taxpayers&quot; -- the Northrop man relaxes and invites him in.    For an hour, the engineer tells tales of kickbacks and orders to &quot;mischarge&quot; the U.S. As he takes Mr. Rowe's business card and bids him goodbye, he says: &quot;I've worked on the Space Shuttle, the Apollo and the Saturn. I've never seen an operation like this.&quot; At another house, a former Northrop electronics engineer describes other problems: &quot;When I worked on the B1 bomber {for Rockwell International Corp.} there were Air Force auditors around all the time, and they did random checks to make sure you were doing what you are supposed to be doing. At Northrop, I never saw any auditors. It's like the Air Force just gave them a blank check.&quot;    Hafif investigators say they strictly adhere to state law barring solicitation of clients, what is known as barratry or, more colloquially, &quot;capping.&quot; The law does permit interviewing in search of witnesses -- and there's nothing to prevent witnesses from becoming plaintiffs. A few of the 50 or so Northrop employees or former employees interviewed have done so, the law firm says.    &quot;There's an undertone of frustration within that company that you can feel,&quot; says Mr. Rowe, ending an evening of cold-calling by chugging a few beers with aerospace workers at Palmdale's Schooner's Saloon.    The publicity drawn by Mr. Hafif's suits has encouraged many Northrop employees to call him, he says. Investigators like Mr. Rowe follow up the calls. Mr. Hafif, meanwhile, relaxes in his Claremont mansion, which he designed, and ponders his next offensive. &quot;I'm only interested in a little fame where it's useful,&quot; he says. </TEXT></DOC>