<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870327-0041 </DOCNO><HL> Reagan's Top Advisers Recommend Steep TariffsOn Some Japanese Consumer Electronics Products---Charges of as Much as 100%Would Be RetaliationFor Trade-Pact Failure---By Art PineStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN NIPNY HITELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)COMPUTERS (EDP)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   President Reagan's top advisers recommended that the U.S. impose steep tariffs on a spate of Japanese consumer electronics products in retaliation for Tokyo's failure to live up to the semiconductor trade accord between the two countries.    U.S. officials said the tariffs -- some as high as 100% -- would be applied to some small black-and-white and color television sets, laser-printers, disk drives and a full range of personal computers. All contain semiconductors as component parts.    The tariffs, which would be designed to make the Japanese imports prohibitively expensive for Americans, would be aimed at a list of products made by a handful of Japanese companies -- including NEC Corp., Hitachi Ltd., Fujitsu Ltd., Oki Corp. and Toshiba Corp. Those firms have been found by the Reagan administration to be &quot;dumping&quot; microchips in third-country markets.    At the same time, the list of products appears to be carefully crafted to avoid hitting U.S. consumers very hard. Indeed, the advisers refrained from targeting hi-fi stereo equipment, videocassette recorders, microwave ovens and other popular consumer items. And the tariffs wouldn't affect American chip users at all.    The recommended retaliation, described as a &quot;consensus opinion&quot; of the cabinet-level Economic Policy Council, would take effect in two weeks if approved by President Reagan. Mr. Reagan was traveling in Missouri yesterday and didn't attend the cabinet council meeting. U.S. officials said there's still a faint chance that Mr. Reagan may defer action to help Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone, who is in political trouble at home, but it's more likely that he will approve the proposed retaliation -- possibly as early as today.    The sanctions, which would mark the first time that the Reagan administration has formally retaliated against Japan on a trade issue, are intended to send a strong signal to Tokyo that the U.S. has run out of patience and won't tolerate predatory pricing by Japanese companies.    The U.S. recommendation was expected to draw strong protests from Japan, where trade tensions are mounting daily as a result of U.S. pressures to drive down the value of the dollar and make Japanese goods less competitive abroad.    A spokesman for Japan's Ministry of International Trade and Industry said the ministry hadn't received any notification of the U.S. proposal. But he said: &quot;We have done the things necessary. We have made a lot of effort. We are doing our best.&quot; The spokesman also said, &quot;It isn't productive to discuss possible countermeasures.&quot;    Both U.S. and Japanese officials, however, expressed doubt that the new U.S. tariffs in themselves would spark a trade war between the two countries. If imposed, the tariffs could be relatively temporary. Earlier this year, Washington followed similar procedures in imposing tariffs on European wine and cheese imports in retaliation for new Common Market tariffs on U.S. agricultural exports. The two sides later worked out a settlement, and the retaliatory tariffs were withdrawn.    Nevertheless, the tariffs pose a serious threat to Japan by opening the door to further protection of consumer markets, which are much larger than the world-wide semiconductor market. Some trade experts think the Japanese have little choice but to accede to U.S. demands. Indeed, the Japanese have already imposed drastic cuts in chip production and are considered likely to take further steps designed to obtain quick recision of the sanctions, if they are imposed.    As it did in the European case, the U.S. still could abandon the proposed tariffs if Japan acts decisively to stop its firms from dumping, which is selling goods below cost of production or fair market value at home. So far, however, there has been no indication that Tokyo will meet the U.S. demands.    Under the bilateral trade accord that the two countries signed last July, Japanese chip makers were supposed to stop predatory pricing both in the U.S. and in third-country markets. Japan also promised to grant U.S. microchip manufacturers a larger share of its own market for semiconductors.    Since then, U.S. microchip makers have complained that Japanese producers still are dumping in foreign countries. Tokyo admits that Japanese chip makers have been dumping in foreign markets, but says it has been unable to stop the practice. To defuse these complaints, Japan's trade ministry this week ordered manufacturers to trim their production of microchips next quarter, but U.S. officials say that won't provide relief anytime soon.    U.S. officials decided on a strategy of imposing tariffs on consumer electronics products that use microchips -- rather than trying to limit imports of semiconductors. U.S. officials say restricting imports of semiconductors themselves would hurt U.S. manufacturers who use imported microchips in making their products.    By punishing imports of electronics products made by the same Japanese firms that manufacture the semiconductors, the U.S. can convey its displeasure without hurting domestic manufacturers. Furthermore, the list of tariffs appears to be aimed at markets in which U.S. manufacturers compete successfully. U.S. companies, for example, dominate markets for personal computers and disk drives.    U.S. officials won't hammer out final details of the tariffs for another two weeks. First, the administration will present its list of potential targets for tariffs and allow affected parties in the U.S. to comment on their likely impact. The initial list contains products with U.S. annual sales of about $800 million; that figure likely will be pared back to items with about $200 million in annual sales.    Yesterday's action didn't deal with a second charge by U.S. chip makers -- that Japan isn't living up to promises in the semiconductor accord to allow U.S. companies a larger share of its own home market. U.S. policy makers are expected to take that question up in about two weeks.    The council also decided to postpone, at least for a few weeks, any decision on how to respond to the continuing refusal of the Japanese government to buy U.S.-made supercomputers. Washington already has protested that situation to the Japanese and has won a promise from Mr. Nakasone to liberalize government procurement practices. So far, however, U.S. firms still are having difficulties making any sales.    The supercomputer dispute was elevated to the Economic Policy Council ahead of schedule after a senior Japanese trade official told a high-ranking U.S. delegation to Tokyo last month that despite the new procurement rules, U.S. firms were likely to have difficulty winning government bids. The Japanese official said U.S. companies are much smaller than Japanese firms and thus don't have the cost-cutting capability. U.S. officials interpreted those comments as a breach of faith.    The administration has been weighing four options to deal with the supercomputer dispute: barring Japan from selling its products to the U.S. government; allowing another two months for additional negotiations with Tokyo; launching unfair trade-practices proceedings that eventually could lead to some retaliation; or allowing the issue to pass. U.S. officials reportedly are divided over the issue.    Yesterday's decision to retaliate over the semiconductor issue drew immediate protests from several of the Japanese companies cited. Mike F. Hamper, senior vice president, marketing, for Oki's U.S. unit, said his company &quot;is really in a quandary because we don't import any of the products&quot; on the list. &quot;The laser-printers we sell in this country are made in New Jersey,&quot; he said.    A spokesman for Hitachi's U.S. unit declined to comment until the company had a chance to review the tariffs, but noted that &quot;we are surprised that they would propose these products.&quot; Executives of NEC and Fujitsu also declined to comment.    Top executives at Intel Corp., National Semiconductor Corp. and other leading U.S. semiconductor manufacturers declined to comment on the proposed tariffs until they are published.    Despite the protests from Japan, presidential approval of the cabinet recommendation almost certainly would win plaudits from Congress, which increasingly has been demanding that the administration retaliate against Japan on trade.    ---   Brenton R. Schlender in San Francisco and Damon Darlin in Tokyo contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>