<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871106-0076 </DOCNO><HL> Washington Wire:A Special Weekly Report FromThe Wall Street Journal'sCapital Bureau---Compiled by Ronald G. Shafer</HL><DD> 11/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST JAPAN GOVMT LATAM GMECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SUPREME COURT (SUP) </IN><TEXT>   ECONOMIC GROWTH could force the Fed to reassess its easy-money policy.    If growth continues and unemployment remains low, Chairman Greenspan may favor a return to tighter policies to guard against inflation. That would clash with the views of Fed members such as Seger and Heller. And it would cause conflict with the Reagan administration, which backs easy money to prevent a recession. Vice Chairman Johnson, who has close ties to Treasury's Baker, could prove pivotal.    The next fight may be over whether to cut the discount rate. Fed member Angell claims the Fed's easy-money stance is only temporary. &quot;That may be his view,&quot; a top administration official snaps, &quot;but I don't think that represents the majority over there.&quot; Some critics contend the Fed's response to the stock-market crash was an overreaction that will increase inflation.    Any notion that the Fed can use easy credit to head off a recession is an &quot;empty dream,&quot; argues Senate Banking Chairman Proxmire.    SOVIET ZEAL about the summit stirs U.S. concerns of overoptimism.    The Russians drop tantalizing hints of possible breakthroughs when Gorbachev visits Washington next month. Kremlin officials indicate he might extend his scheduled three-day stay if progress is being made. The Soviets also offer surprisingly rosy predictions about prospects for a Reagan trip to Russia next spring to sign a strategic-arms pact.    But U.S. officials doubt such a complex treaty can be negotiated so quickly. Some worry that Gorbachev, by raising expectations, seeks to stampede the administration into concessions. Conservatives fear that the Soviet efforts will accelerate congressional efforts to cut the Star Wars budget and force a restrictive interpretation of the 1972 ABM treaty.    GINSBURG FACES tough scrutiny as more details about him emerge.    Revelations that he smoked marijuana in the past add to uncertainty even among some conservatives about where he stands on social issues. Some Democrats hint there will be other disclosures that could even derail his nomination. Biden sees no outpouring of support so far. Questions remain about Ginsburg's views and limited court experience.    Conservatives, silenced by the White House for much of the Bork fight, have been trying to mobilize for Ginsburg. A newspaper ad-campaign slams groups that may oppose him. The effort also targets 20 senators. Southern Democrats, who voted en masse against Bork, take heat back home. &quot;They'd like to find a way to vote for this guy,&quot; says an aide to one senator.    Ginsburg is smoother than Bork was in private chats with senators, one Reagan aide says: &quot;He goes in and talks about the Redskins.&quot;    DUMPING ON DOLE: Dole faces double-barreled protests Monday when he announces his presidential candidacy. A demonstration against his support of Contra aid is slated in his hometown of Russell, Kan. And a series of TV spots will be aired in Iowa questioning his position on South Africa.    DROPPING THE BALL: The Kemp machine suffers an embarrassing setback in Buffalo. Ed Rutkowski, a Kemp protege and once his favorite pass receiver on the Buffalo Bills, loses a bid for re-election as Erie County executive. A Democrat wins for the first time since the office was created nearly three decades ago.    FED CANDIDATE: William Eagleson, retired chairman of Mellon Bank Corp. in Pittsburgh, is interviewed by administration officials for the empty seat on the Federal Reserve Board. He is one of several candidates for the post, which has been vacant since Henry Wallich retired last December.    YENS FOR BONDS: U.S. regulators look to the Japanese to help shore up the sagging federal insurance fund for troubled savings-and-loan associations. Federal Home Loan Bank Board Chairman Wall plans a trip soon to Japan to promote bonds being sold to raise money for the fund.    PEACE-PLAN PRESSURES on Central American leaders build up.    Nicaragua faces unsettling choices, Reaganites note approvingly. &quot;The more we look at the plan, the better we like it,&quot; confides a top U.S. official. But U.S. allies feel heat, too. In El Salvador, the possible return of leftist politicians because of the pact could increase competition for Duarte's party.    Guatemala's army grows nervous over its civilian president's efforts to negotiate with leftist guerrillas. Mexico pressures Honduras to adhere to the peace pact by closing Contra camps. Costa Rica's Arias, the plan's author who opposes U.S. military aid to the Contras, must keep a tough line toward Nicaraguan compliance to maintain credibility.    Reaganites fear that delays in the plan's compliance dates will push a congressional vote on Contra aid further into the 1988 election year.    MINOR MEMOS: A Democratic Senate aide proposes this slogan: &quot;Put Douglas Ginsburg on the Supreme Court. It will be good for his resume.&quot; . . . The Democratic Congressional Campaign Committee seeks to sell 50 silver belt buckles etched with Gary Hart's signature -- the price: $2,000 each. . . . GM's plans to close a Framingham, Mass., auto plant throw a monkey wrench into a Dukakis campaign-brochure boast about how he once saved the plant. </TEXT></DOC>