<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870203-0131 </DOCNO><HL> Foreign Insight:French Communists Are Split by a DriveBy the Old Guard Against the Moderates---By E.S. BrowningStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP </IN><DATELINE> PARIS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   These should be happy days for France's Communists.    Strikes by rail workers, electrical workers and subway drivers crippled France last month. Urged on by France's largest labor confederation, the Communist-controlled Confederation Generale de Travail, or CGT, other public employees may follow. The strikes have damaged conservative Prime Minister Jacques Chirac's political future.    But there is little joy at Communist Party headquarters, a sprawling concrete fortress in a northern Paris working-class district. The Communists are hardly in a position to take advantage of the government's discomfort: After a shattering setback in last year's parliamentary election, the party is waging an internal witch hunt. Although the party has faced internal strife before, this episode may become the bloodiest in its 67-year history.    The struggle here is the opposite of that faced by Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev, who is promoting openness and trying to toss out the Communist Party's old guard. In France, it is the old guard -- usually blamed for the party's meteoric decline -- that is evicting the reformers. The result is likely to be a shrinking Communist Party that appeals increasingly to older, backward-looking voters.    That could devastate the party. Already, in the 1986 parliamentary election, the Communist vote fell below 10%, the worst showing since 1932. As recently as 1973, the Communists were pulling in more than 21% of the vote, regularly outpolling the Socialists.    Just a few years ago, the Communists still talked about playing a growing role in French government. Today, while the party retains influence through its strong labor organization and its control of a number of local governments, it is more and more a marginal band of spoilers. The CGT still can throw monkey wrenches into government labor policies, but the possibility that the party can become a significant national force seems to grow increasingly remote every week.    The reasons for the decline can be seen in the painful struggle within the party. In late January, two of the party's top officials -- one who helped build CGT at the auto maker Regie Nationale des Usines Renault and the other a resistance hero who was a minister in the recent Socialist-Communist government -- resigned their Central Committee seats. Press leaks about the Central Committee meeting told of an emotional scene, with old friends accusing one another of betraying a cause to which all have devoted their lives.    The reformers, who like to call themselves &quot;renovators,&quot; complain that rank-and-file members are being alienated by unbending, centrally determined policies. The party, they warn, is out of step with society. But hard-liners are frightened of the renovators, whom they accuse of creating rebel networks within the party and of planning to run deviationist candidates in future elections. The hard-liners have taken to calling the renovators &quot;liquidators.&quot;    Underneath all the jargon is a problem threatening the party's soul. The French party flirted with Italian-style Eurocommunism a decade ago but quickly abandoned it. In recent years, both the party and the CGT have lost members -- often the most thoughtful ones -- by the busload. With moderates being forced out of ruling councils, more grass-roots defections are likely.    Independent political studies show that Communist losses are especially heavy among young city dwellers, essential to party growth and historically among the party's strongest supporters. A growing percentage of the remaining party supporters are aging, conservative and rural, perhaps retired or unemployed, probably afraid of the future.    Seen in that light, the renovators aren't just complaining about heavy-handed party policy. They are warning of the party's demise.    France's Socialist president, Francois Mitterrand, claims credit for putting the Communists in this fix, by allying with them as he built his party into France's largest political group. Political scientists trace the decline back 20 years, linking it to the increasing sophistication and wealth of France's population.    It's too soon to declare the Communists dead. They have shifted policy suddenly in the past; a new shift aligning the party with Mr. Gorbachev's Soviet reforms could improve the Communist image here. With French unemployment above 10% of the labor force, there is plenty of dissatisfaction in the countryside. Despite the CGT's relative decline, it remains France's dominant labor confederation, strong in such government agencies as the electric power company and possibly even gaining strength in problem-plagued traditional industries.    But right now, good news is scarce for the Communists. The magazine le Nouvel Observateur last month polled voters on possible future French presidents. On a list of 18, the Communist candidate finished dead last, after the far-right National Front leader Jean-Marie le Pen and even farther behind the actor Yves Montand. </TEXT></DOC>