<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870218-0007 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 02/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   GATES SAID the CIA avoided knowledge of the supply network for the Contras.    The acting CIA director, nominated by Reagan to succeed former chief Casey, also told the Senate Intelligence Committee that the agency hasn't &quot;the faintest idea&quot; of how much money has gone to Nicaragua's antigovernment rebels from sources outside the U.S. government. Gates said he hadn't informed Congress last year about the diversion to the Contras of proceeds from arms sales to Iran because he had only &quot;flimsy&quot; evidence.    A decision on Gates's confirmation as CIA chief isn't expected until a White House commission issues its report on the Iran-Contra affair late this month.    ---   THE U.S. HAS DECIDED to lift economic curbs on Poland by month's end.    Administration officials said a proposal by Secretary of State Shultz to rescind remaining economic sanctions has been approved by Reagan and could be announced as early as this week. The proposal would lift curbs that prohibit government-guaranteed credits to Warsaw and deny favored-nation trade status to Poland. The move by the White House followed a recent &quot;action-forcing&quot; visit to Poland by Deputy Secretary of State John Whitehead.    The U.S. imposed economic sanctions in 1981 after Poland declared martial law to halt the Solidarity trade union's campaign for workers' rights.    ---   The Reagan administration told Congress that it is moving toward a decision on whether to deploy technology related to the space-based antimissile project, and defended its research as &quot;fully consistent&quot; with the 1972 ABM treaty. The administration also disclosed that recent underground nuclear tests were part of the project.    The White House denied that it had proposed to Moscow adoption of a broader interpretation of the ABM treaty that would permit testing of space weapons. Gorbachev said Monday that such a proposal had been made during arms talks in Geneva.    ---   The Soviet Union announced that two more dissidents -- Anatoly Koryagin and Alexander Ogorodnikov -- have been ordered released from prison. A Foreign Ministry spokesman also said that Jewish activist Iosif Begun would &quot;most likely&quot; be freed soon. The Kremlin recently has released about 150 political prisoners.    ---   Shiite Moslem militiamen battled an alliance of Druse and communist gunmen for control of mainly Moslem western Beirut. Lebanese police said at least 24 people were killed and 125 wounded in the fighting. Meanwhile, Amal leader Nabih Berri said his militia would lift its four-month siege of Palestinian refugee camps in Beirut.    The pro-Iran Hezbollah group denied an allegation by Druse militia leader Walid Jumblatt that it was holding Anglican envoy Terry Waite or others hostage in Lebanon. Waite disappeared Jan. 20 in Beirut.    ---   Israeli Prime Minister Shamir met with Secretary of State Shultz and agreed on the need for direct Arab-Israeli peace talks, but Shamir reiterated his opposition to an international forum on Mideast peace. Shamir is to meet today with Reagan, and is expected to discuss Israel's role in the Iran-Contra affair with two congressional committees.    ---   Two passenger trains crashed in a suburb of Sao Paulo, Brazil, and police said at least 41 people were killed and more than 155 injured. The death toll was expected to rise. A Brazilian railway company said the crash was caused by a faulty switch.    ---   Transportation officials announced a program to identify and prosecute pilots who fail to declare drug or alcohol-related convictions on their medical certificate applications. The Transportation Department program will involve more than 700,000 commercial and private pilots certified by the FAA.    ---   The American Bar Association voted to oppose limits on damage awards for pain and suffering in personal-injury lawsuits, but said punitive damages should be used more sparingly. The proposals were among a series of positions the ABA adopted on possible changes in the system of liability suits in state courts.    ---   Ireland voted in a general election prompted by record debt and unemployment. Turnout was heavy in the balloting for 166 seats in Parliament. Prime Minister Garrett FitzGerald was trailing rival Charles Haughey in pre-election polls. The counting of votes was to begin today.    ---   Vietnam dismissed 12 government ministers, including Gen. Van Tien Dung, who planned the final offensive against South Vietnam in 1975, the official Voice of Vietnam radio said. The dismissals were viewed as an effort to bring specialists into the government who can revive Hanoi's economy.    ---   The Justice Department urged the U.S. Sentencing Commission to reimpose the death penalty for certain federal crimes, such as murder, the assassination of the president, espionage and treason. The department's stance came at a hearing called by the panel, which plans to issue its criminal-sentencing guidelines in April.    ---   Pentagon officials said James H. Webb, a Vietnam veteran who has spent the past three years as assistant defense secretary for reserve affairs, has been chosen to succeed John Lehman as Navy secretary. Lehman formally submitted his resignation to Reagan at the White House. </TEXT></DOC>