<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880929-0085 </DOCNO><HL> Sinking Ship: Nicaragua Faces Chaos As Many Professionals Leave Country or Jobs --- Even Ex-Sandinistas Desert; Main Gripes Are Low Pay, Layoffs, Political Firings --- But Most Youths Stay Loyal </HL><AUTHOR> Michael Allen (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><DATELINE> MIAMI  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The veteran official of Nicaragua's Justice Ministry was best known in the country for successfully prosecuting downed American flier Eugene Hasenfus for &quot;counterrevolutionary activities&quot; in 1986.    But last November the prosecutor, Roger Iben Villavicencio, stunned his colleagues by becoming a counterrevolutionary himself: He fled to Miami and denounced the leftist Sandinistas for allegedly sentencing hundreds of political detainees soon after signing a regional peace accord. &quot;I realize now that the Sandinistas know only the language of the machine gun,&quot; the 54-year-old lawyer says, as he grapples with an English menu in a fast-food restaurant here.    Mr. Villavicencio isn't alone. Even as the threat from the U.S.-backed Contras fades, the Sandinistas are facing a potentially greater menace from within their own ranks: desertions. Like passengers fleeing a sinking ship, the Managua regime's civil servants, party officials and doctors are abandoning the revolution in droves -- and accelerating Nicaragua's descent into economic and political chaos.    &quot;It's an incredibly grave situation,&quot; says Virgilio Godoy, the leader of the opposition Independent Liberal Party, and himself a former labor minister, in his Managua office. &quot;This brain drain is the worst kind of decapitalization the country has suffered.&quot;    &quot;It has gone beyond the size of a brain drain,&quot; says Charles Stansifer, an expert on Central American history at the University of Kansas. &quot;What I think we're seeing is the disintegration of a country. I think Nicaragua is disappearing before our eyes.&quot;    The deserters range from men such as Felix Solano, a former Sandinista guerrilla who concluded that the abuse of power has converted the revolution into &quot;a humid, stinking cheese,&quot; to a former vice president of the central bank who flew here recently in hopes of bigger paychecks. All appear to share one conviction: War or no war, there is no future in Nicaragua.    &quot;It's going to take 15 to 20 years of hard struggle to reconstruct Nicaragua, even without the war,&quot; says Pedro Espinoza, who quit his job in July as the director of planning at the state mining institute. &quot;And I don't have the luxury of waiting that long.&quot;    The government's biggest problem is retaining the accountants, engineers and doctors that form the nucleus of state-owned enterprises. Most were educated before the Sandinistas took over, and their loyalties to the revolution are tenuous in the best of circumstances. And circumstances are terrible now, with a harsh fiscal-austerity program leaving thousands of government workers on the street and holding wage increases far below the inflation rate. Faced with entry-level salaries as low as $25 a month -- and shortages of such mundane goods as toilet paper -- professionals have little incentive to stay.    &quot;If you're an engineer, it's better to get out and run an air-conditioner repair company -- or fix kettles,&quot; a European diplomat says.    Mr. Espinoza's last few months at the mining institute illustrate the gravity of the Sandinistas' plight. The 32-year-old accountant, who says he sympathizes with many of the revolution's original goals, survived a personnel cutback in May that slashed the central office staff to 60 from 160. But it quickly became apparent that those who remained faced an impossible job. Fuel shortages and broken vehicles kept anybody from traveling to the mines to gather statistics, so Mr. Espinoza and his colleagues made up the numbers. Investment has been practically cut off.    In June, the administrative director and the director of organization fled the country. Mr. Espinoza began working 12-hour days. But he, too, finally threw in the towel when he discovered that his salary, though high by Nicaraguan standards, was enough to feed his family only for one week in a month. Now, he is an accountant in a Miami broom factory.    Other professionals have found it difficult to adjust to the post-revolutionary work environment. When Jose Antonio Arguello decided to put his M.B.A. to work as general manager of a newly nationalized meatpacking plant, he enjoyed the respect of top party officials and such perks as a chauffeur-driven car. But when he chastised the head of the plant's union for neglecting his job in the warehouse, Mr. Arguello was transferred to another job -- under a cloud of union members' accusations that he was a Contra. &quot;The employees believed the comandantes when they said the revolution was for the workers,&quot; says Mr. Arguello, who now lives here. &quot;They thought they didn't have to work anymore.&quot;    Lilliam Arguello, a 29-year-old psychologist, left her job as the director of the national program for wounded soldiers after a seemingly trivial dispute with subordinates. On a work visit to a small town, she elected to spend the night at the home of a friend's father rather than sleep on the floor, commune-style, with her colleagues. She says her associates branded her &quot;classist and arrogant&quot; in a letter to her boss, who reprimanded her. She now works as a clerk in a Miami dress shop.    Sandinista officials typically play down the desertion problem, often by disparaging the importance of those who leave. &quot;These are small accidents,&quot; says Carlos Tunnermann, the recently expelled Nicaraguan ambassador to Washington, adding that &quot;the revolutionary process doesn't depend on individuals.&quot;    Nonetheless, the government often finds it hard to admit to the loss of former comrades. Cesar Estrada Sequeira, the artistic director of the official Sandinista radio station, was one of the best-known voices on the Nicaraguan air waves -- until he deserted in June, fed up with penurious wages and the party's decision to cut back his jazz programs. Mr. Estrada moved to Ronald Reagan Avenue here and filed for political asylum. But back in Managua, Radio Sandino still plays his recorded voice, and nearly two months after his desertion, a visitor was told that he was merely &quot;on vacation.&quot;    And the defection last fall of Maj. Roger Miranda, the top aide to Defense Minister Humberto Ortega, sent shock waves throughout the government. Mr. Miranda, at age 34 a veteran revolutionary, slipped into the U.S. Embassy in Mexico City clutching dozens of top-secret documents, including plans for a Soviet-financed military buildup and the numbers of Swiss bank accounts allegedly kept by senior Sandinista officials for personal use.    He detailed these charges in a series of Washington news conferences, explaining that he deserted out of disgust with the corruption and privilege in high government circles. U.S. officials later disclosed that the U.S. government, as though tempting future deserters, paid him $800,000.    Sandinista authorities reacted by tightening internal security, according to sources close to the Interior Ministry. A document purporting to be a secret ministry report and subsequently circulated among diplomats warned that four Sandinista ambassadors in Latin America were &quot;petite bourgeoisie who at any moment, in the heat of a crisis, will look for refuge in exile.&quot; It recommended their immediate removal.    Although Sandinista officials say the document was faked by the Contras, two of the ambassadors have since received new foreign postings. And Norman Miranda, a mid-ranking Foreign Ministry representative who defected in November in Geneva, contends that it is genuine. &quot;There is an atmosphere of distrust throughout the ministry,&quot; says Mr. Miranda, who now gives French lessons here. &quot;Nobody knows who will be the next to go.&quot;    Last month, they found out, when front-page headlines in Managua's opposition newspaper announced the defection of Carlos Bendana, the No. 2 man in the Nicaraguan Embassy in Bonn.    Not all the defectors leave Nicaragua. One of the more politically damaging desertions occurred earlier this year when Comandante Moises Hassan said he was resigning from the party to set up an engineering-consulting business in his Managua home. Mr. Hassan, who holds a Ph.D. in physics from North Carolina State University, had once been one of the Sandinistas' brightest stars, serving on the first revolutionary junta and as Managua's popular mayor.    He quit, as he explains it, out of frustration at the economic chaos generated by the top leadership, and he now offers vocal criticism from the left of the local political scene. &quot;I laugh when I hear that this is a repressive, Stalinist state, when in fact what we have is tremendous anarchy,&quot; he says, sipping water in his airy parlor.    Mr. Hassan's departure provided a peek into the ideological turmoil shaking the Sandinista Front. Some of the turmoil stemmed from the decision by the party's nine-man governing junta earlier this year to convene peace talks with Contra leaders -- something they had sworn never to do. The decision angered many rank-and-file supporters and may have deepened longstanding rifts between hard-liners and pragmatists, diplomats say.    But beyond that is a growing sense in some sectors that the party has become too centralized to respond to Nicaragua's rapidly changing economic and political environment. Marvin Ortega, a free-thinking leftist political scientist, resigned from an Agriculture Ministry think tank because Sandinista militants pressured him to become more active in the party. Now, as the director of an independent social-studies institute, he recently helped conduct Nicaragua's first public-opinion survey since the 1979 revolution -- a survey showing that most Nicaraguans now don't identify with any political party.    &quot;The Front has become a 'yes sir' party,&quot; he complains. &quot;If you agree with them, you're a great friend. If not, you're a member of the CIA.&quot;    Oscar Rene Vargas, once a senior economic adviser to the national directorate, agrees that dissent inside the party has been steadily curtailed. &quot;There are too many people who think it's enough to yell 'Long live the Front' or 'National Directorate, order me' -- it's a cancer,&quot; says Mr. Vargas, who holds a Ph.D. in economics from the University of Geneva. His wife, Daisy Zamora, a well-known revolutionary poet, has also quit government and now dedicates herself to compiling an anthology of female poets.    Some analysts fear that the desertions may signal a leftward swerve in the Sandinista movement. Robert Pastor, once the chief Latin America specialist on President Carter's National Security Council, says the phenomenon &quot;leaves a tighter, more compact revolutionary cadre -- and a more polarized society.&quot; Worries one Costa Rican diplomat, &quot;We may be at the gates of a severe radicalization of the revolutionary process.&quot;    Sandinista authorities argue that their main protection against the tide of desertions is the country's huge population of youths, who largely remain loyal to the party. Since the 1979 takeover, the government claims to have trained some 13,400 new professionals, more than replacing the 10,000 that have left.    But many consider the training inadequate. Alfredo Cesar, a former president of the central bank and now a high Contra leader, thinks that it will take &quot;10 to 15 years&quot; for the Sandinistas to replenish the lost professionals. He notes that only eight of the 30 top administrators who served at the bank with him remain.    Nicaragua's medical corps has sustained the biggest losses. According to a nongovernment professional association in Managua, some 60% of the doctors in the country at the time of the revolution have left. And many who remain are thinking of getting out.    Jose Luis Lindo, a 45-year-old gynecologist at the state-run Beltran Morales Hospital in Managua, says he earns &quot;just enough to pay for gasoline to and from work,&quot; plus what he can earn in his private consultancy. In the past nine months, a dozen of the hospital's 33 gynecologists have emigrated, and Dr. Lindo says he is thinking of doing the same. &quot;I hope things get better soon, because if they don't there isn't going to be anybody left but the nine comandantes,&quot; he says. </TEXT></DOC>