<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870310-0126 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS:Paul Klee at MOMA: A Show Worth the Wait---By Jack Flam</HL><DD> 03/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> New York  </DATELINE><TEXT>   By 1979 Paul Klee's standing had so diminished that the Museum of Modern Art couldn't find corporate sponsorship for a planned centenary exhibition of his work. In the age of the blockbuster, there seemed to be little place for a man whose whole life had been dedicated to the modest and the intricate.    Now, seven years later, and thanks in good measure to the National Endowment for the Arts, a large retrospective Klee exhibition has been mounted here at MOMA (up until May 5), and it makes one wonder how anyone could have treated Klee with indifference. The retrospective, with its 300 works, is not only one of the most ambitious but also one of the most intensely absorbing exhibitions of recent years. It offers intellectual stimulation, emotional excitement and sheer delight, but most of all it makes us reconsider the virtue of humility with renewed respect.    Paul Klee was nothing if not humble, in a profound and almost religious way. Absorbed in metaphysics, in technical experimentation, in pictorial speculation, he worked on a modest scale and in modest circumstances, year in and year out, quite simply producing some of the most intelligent and moving pictures of our century. At a time when some of the most innovative pictorial experimentation in history was being done, Klee was one of the most inventive artists around. He explored a vast range of styles and modes, ranging from fairly descriptive figuration to extreme abstraction. A professor in Germany for many years (first at the Bauhaus, later at the Dusseldorf Academy) his art was sometimes pedagogical, but never academic. Great theorist that he was, he never let theory outstrip performance.    This exhibition makes clearer than any other Klee show I have seen the continuity that underlay so much diversity, and the degree to which Klee's lifework may be seen as a kind of ongoing autobiographical enterprise, even as a kind of pictorial diary.    Despite the abstract languages that he employs, one is constantly aware of the sharp observation of everyday life that lies behind his pictures. They are by turns witty and tragic, topical and metaphysical, impressively worldly and endearingly naive. In &quot;Window Display for Lingerie&quot; (1922), we are treated to a tongue-in-cheek array of little mannequins that gently spoofs the erotic overtones of the commercial display. In &quot;Analysis of Diverse Perversities&quot; (1922), the multiplicity of eros is channeled through an amusing series of Rube Goldbergish machines. In the famous &quot;Cat and Bird&quot; (1928), a bird inscribed in a cat's brain is an emblem for the ferocity of hunger and love.    One of the miracles of Klee's art is that he was able to raise the everyday to such a highly abstract and metaphysical level without losing a sense of the concrete and the particular. This is true even in the late abstractions, such as the amazing ultramarine and cobalt &quot;Blue Night&quot; of 1937. In &quot;Death and Fire&quot; of 1940, Klee translated his sense of his own impending doom (he was dying of scleroderma) into a stark and moving image dominated by a skull that stares out at us like death itself -- one of the greediest-looking deaths in all of painting.    Treating small themes or large, Klee was able to sustain an impressive sense of one-on-one dialogue with the viewer; or rather, we feel as if we are overhearing a kind of monologue. This distinctive intimacy is the result not only of his pictures' small size but also of their intricately worked surfaces. His pictures insist that you come close to them and that you look at them carefully, slowly and in detail.    Klee's technique was complex and unorthodox. He did not confine himself to applying oil paint to canvas with a brush but worked with a number of different materials -- inks, watercolors, gouache, tempera, oil -- on a variety of surfaces -- burlap, muslin, cardboard, pasteboard and plaster. And he combined these materials in unusual and surprising ways, frequently rubbing or sponging on his washes and scraping and scratching his incisive lines into the richly built up surfaces.    He also frequently combined diverse sign systems in the same picture. In Klee's fanciful world, letters, numbers and arrows can cohabit with figures, mountains, trees or stars. In &quot;Stricken Place&quot; (1922), the large black arrow that descends from the sky functions both as a force of nature and as a judgment passed on the town below. In &quot;The Bavarian Don Giovanni&quot; (1919), the great lover climbs a ladder into an abstract window-filled landscape inscribed with woman's names.    Klee's apparently simple imagery is often quite complex. In the &quot;Vocal Fabric of the Singer Rosa Silber&quot; (1922), for example, the stencil-like letters of the five vowels float across the richly textured surface like the sounds of so many disembodied musical notes. The picture's clothlike texture suggests not only the soprano's handkerchief, in which the sounds of her voice seem to have been magically caught, but also wittily alludes to the miraculously retentive properties of St. Veronica's veil. And it is virtually impossible to look at this picture without silently sounding out the letters for yourself.    It was this marriage of technique and imagery, and this fluidity in dealing with signs, that allowed Klee to move so easily from the figurative to the abstract. Because the subjects of his pictures seem to have developed in part from his technique, he could let his pictures follow their own logic, largely free of stylistic prescriptions. As a result, many of his apparently abstract works have compellingly vivid &quot;subjects.&quot; &quot;Blossoming&quot; of 1934, for example, is a seemingly abstract composition of irregular little squares of color -- sometimes referred to as Klee's &quot;Magic Squares.&quot; But after you look at the picture for a while you become aware of how the colors systematically brighten, and how the rhythmic pulses insistently increase as they approach the center of the picture, metaphorically evoking the natural process described in the title. It is also instructive to see an earlier working of the same theme, &quot;Absraction with Reference to a Flowering Tree&quot; of 1925, placed next to &quot;Blossoming,&quot; even though the juxtaposition interrupts the generally chronological organization of the show. For the smaller early painting provides not only a variation on the compositional scheme of the later one, but also provides us with the tangible instance on which the later metaphysical image was based.    This exhibition, composed as it is of a large number of small works, cannot have been an easy one either to select or to hang, and curator Carolyn Lanchner deserves our gratitude for having done both so well. One does, however, wish there were some places to sit, especially in a show that demands so much sustained concentration. I also can't help wishing that the handsomely illustrated catalog were less ponderously historical and told us more about individual works.    The exhibition goes next to the Cleveland Museum of Art, from June 24 to Aug. 16, and to the Kunstmuseum in Bern, Switzerland, from Sept. 25, 1987 to Jan. 3, 1988. </TEXT></DOC>