<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870709-0092 </DOCNO><HL> Fallen Star:How Whiz-Kid ChiefOf ZZZZ Best Had,And Lost, It All---Once Hailed as Boy Wonder,Founder Barry MinkowStands Accused of Fraud---The Lament of a Shareholder---By Daniel AkstStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ZBSTBANKRUPTCIES (BCY) </IN><DATELINE> RESEDA, Calif.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Wealthy entrepreneurs can point to all kinds of secrets for success. Young Barry J. Minkow's secret allegedly was fraud.    By the time Mr. Minkow turned 21 years old last March, the tiny carpet-cleaning business he started at 15 had grown into a public company with a peak market valuation exceeding $211 million, giving the flamboyant young entrepreneur a paper fortune of around $109 million.    The subject of adoring publicity in a society as obsessed with success as he was, Mr. Minkow (rhymes with ginkgo) talked of building his ZZZZ Best Co. into the General Motors of carpet cleaning -- and then running for president of the U.S. He was the subject of countless flattering articles and appeared on the &quot;Oprah Winfrey&quot; show. He bought a Ferrari, acquired an expensive home in nearby Woodland Hills, Calif., and generally spent money as if there was no tomorrow.    There wasn't. Mr. Minkow's company was an elaborate construction of lies and deceit, kept afloat by sheer audacity. While much of the press was busy with his apotheosis, Mr. Minkow was taking advice from a former convict and obtaining financing from a reputed mobster. His company was submitting phony credit-card charges, and his second in command owned a flower shop that did likewise. And ZZZZ Best stock was soaring on press releases touting millions of dollars in contracts, now allegedly bogus.    The company and its whiz-kid former chairman are now at the center of wide-ranging investigations by the Securities and Exchange Commission and other law-enforcement agencies; those agencies include the Los Angeles Police Department, which said yesterday it suspects ZZZZ Best may have been used for laundering organized-crime narcotics money.    The police-department investigation is ironic in light of Mr. Minkow's almost fanatical crusading against drug abuse. He made small contributions to drug-treatment programs, required drug tests of his workers and adopted the motto, &quot;My act's clean, how's yours?&quot;    In a civil suit filed in state court in Los Angeles, the company accuses Mr. Minkow of fraudulently removing more than $3 million from ZZZZ Best bank accounts last month alone. The suit also says the company, under Mr. Minkow's stewardship, paid out more than $18 million to perform nonexistent &quot;insurance restoration&quot; work (restoring building interiors damaged by water or fire).    Attempts to reach Mr. Minkow for comment have been unsuccessful; but his lawyer, Arthur Barens, says, &quot;I categorically deny that Mr. Minkow was involved in or aware of any wrongdoing or fraud.&quot;    Mr. Minkow, citing health reasons, resigned his posts at the company last Thursday, and ZZZZ Best (usually called simply &quot;Z Best&quot;) filed yesterday for protection under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code.    (Bruce Andersen, the company's interim president, says ZZZZ Best still has most of its offices open; he says there were 21 before last week.)    Despite the Chapter 11 filing, ZZZZ Best seems to have little remaining for the bankruptcy system to protect. The company says it suffered &quot;misappropriation of significant assets&quot; that are needed to run the business.    &quot;The company is going to evaporate shortly,&quot; says one investigator. &quot;It's going to vaporize.&quot;    ZZZZ Best stock has already plummeted from a high of $18.375 a share three months ago to close at $1.0625 a share, up 12 1/2 cents, yesterday in over-the-counter trading. Volume in the past two weeks has been enormous. On Monday alone, nearly 5.3 million of the company's 11.5 million outstanding shares changed hands.    While ZZZZ Best started out cleaning carpets, federal authorities now suspect that laundering money may have taken precedence lately. &quot;There are tons and tons of cashier's checks and checks cashed for paper money&quot; that figure in the investigation, says a member of one law-enforcement agency.    The SEC is also investigating the possibility of phony receivables, bogus financial results, organized-crime connections, and various securities-law violations by the company and its present and former executives. The agency reportedly wants an independent trustee put in charge of the company.    Investors are flabbergasted. One lost $7 million on ZZZZ Best. Another, Leonard Weinstein from Miami, complains that he recently bought 500 shares of ZZZZ Best at $8.25 and 500 warrants at $5. He says he is considering joining a class-action suit against the company (ZZZZ Best is already faced with at least two). He adds: &quot;I'd probably want to commit suicide if I was a big shareholder.&quot;    Yet another shareholder, explaining his gullibility, says the irregularities at ZZZZ Best are so far beyond run-of-the-mill finagling that he couldn't have dreamed they were possible.    However extraordinary, the rise and fall of Barry Minkow had its roots in the ordinary -- in Main Street rather than on Wall Street. In a 1985 interview, Mr. Minkow said his career began at the age of 10, when he carried water at a carpet-cleaning business managed by his mother. Later, he worked Saturdays and summers cleaning carpets, drapes and upholstery.    At 15, he started his own business in the Minkow family garage in this working-class section of Los Angeles's sun-baked San Fernando Valley. Mr. Minkow said his family made him pay $150-a-month rent for the building, but his father, Robert Minkow, insists rent was charged only after the business started to thrive. Barry Minkow subsequently maintained, bitterly, that his parents initially discouraged his venture. His father denies that. Mr. Minkow's mother, Carol, couldn't be reached for comment.    Still in high school and too young to drive, Barry Minkow hired a crew to clean carpets while he sat in class fretting over each week's payroll. He boasted that despite the carpet-cleaning industry's bait-and-switch reputation, he insisted on high business ethics.    Mr. Minkow, who hasn't much formal education beyond high school, was particularly proud that his parents became his employees. He made his mother senior vice president. He made his father a salesman.    He made himself over. Formerly a skinny, hyperactive youth who was bullied in military school, he built himself up with weights. On the job, he worked punishing hours with single-minded dedication. &quot;I'm obsessed,&quot; he acknowledged in the earlier interview.    The hard work paid off. In the 1985 interview, Mr. Minkow said the business took in $1.3 million in 1984. By contrast, for the first quarter ended July 31, 1986, ZZZZ Best reported earnings of $896,000 on sales of $5.4 million. The number of ZZZZ Best outlets was expanding as well.    &quot;The bullies couldn't kick sand in his face anymore,&quot; says one former ZZZZ Best executive. &quot;Now he could kick sand in theirs.&quot;    Scott Dear, ZZZZ Best's controller for five months last year, says Mr. Minkow could be a tyrant in the workplace. &quot;My way or the highway&quot; was a favorite Minkow expression, and around the office he insisted that he be called Mr. Minkow.    According to Mr. Dear, Mr. Minkow was so intense that he regularly chewed pens into crushed and twisted twigs. &quot;Barry's incredibly aggressive, real hardnosed,&quot; Mr. Dear says. But he adds: &quot;He really knew his business. He really knew carpet cleaning.&quot;    Outsiders were also impressed. In February of this year, the Association of Collegiate Entrepreneurs and the Young Entrepreneurs' Organization placed Mr. Minkow on their list of the 100 top young entrepreneurs in America. Mr. Minkow even won a commendation from Los Angeles Mayor Tom Bradley, who said the young executive had &quot;set a fine entrepreneurial example of obtaining the status of a millionaire at the age of 18.&quot;    But the company's impressive growth wasn't nearly fast enough for the impatient Mr. Minkow, and that's where Jack M. Catain Jr. came in. Mr. Catain, who died this past February, was a mobster and loan shark whose attorney says had offices in the same building as ZZZZ Best.    Around June 1985, &quot;in desperate need of financial assistance&quot; for ZZZZ Best, Mr. Minkow borrowed money from Mr. Catain at interest rates of 2% to 5% a week, Mr. Minkow said in a sworn court declaration; the declaration was in response to a civil suit brought by Mr. Catain in state court in Los Angeles, claiming Mr. Catain wasn't paid all he was due. Mr. Minkow's lawyer later said his client paid Mr. Catain several hundred thousand dollars, and that all debts to Mr. Catain were paid.    Mr. Minkow's declaration also said he agreed to share with Mr. Catain any profits from jobs the latter helped finance. Mr. Catain said his share was to be 50%.    But Mr. Catain's role went further, according to his former lawyer, James A. Twitty, who says Mr. Catain also helped &quot;organize&quot; the company.    In the past, Mr. Catain had frequently run afoul of law-enforcement authorities, who suspected him of extortion and trading stolen goods. The Federal Bureau of Investigation also looked into charges that a company Mr. Catain headed, Rusco Industries Inc., an American Stock Exchange-listed maker of aluminum building products, was a front for laundering organized-crime money. Mr. Catain resigned as Rusco's chairman and chief executive in 1980 as part of the settlement of an SEC suit charging him with undisclosed insider transactions. Mr. Catain was convicted last Nov. 7 on counterfeiting charges but died prior to sentencing.    Mr. Minkow's lawyers have said he didn't know of Mr. Catain's mob ties; but in court papers, Mr. Minkow says he continued dealing with Mr. Catain even after he learned that Mr. Catain was under indictment.    ZZZZ Best went public in January 1986 by acquiring Morningstar Investments Inc., a Utah shell corporation, in exchange for stock. Last December, ZZZZ Best had a public offering of one million units consisting of three shares of common stock and one warrant each.    But the company disclosed in its offering statement that the nature of its business had changed. Rather than carpet cleaning, 86% of revenue was coming from insurance-restoration activities.    The offering statement also showed enormous debt, some $6.2 million short-term and $933,000 long-term, compared with $3.1 million in shareholders' equity. Because Mr. Catain had sued the company and its chairman, Mr. Catain's dealings with ZZZZ Best were also disclosed.    Nevertheless, the offering sold out, bringing in about $13 million, and ZZZZ Best was off and running. In a telephone interview in May, Mr. Minkow said the company had about 1,300 employees at locations throughout California as well as in Arizona and Nevada.    Somewhere along the line -- it isn't clear where -- Mr. Minkow also hooked up with a former convict and securities specialist named Maurice Rind.    &quot;Rind was more or less touted as a finance expert,&quot; says Mr. Dear, the former controller. &quot;He was around the office once or twice a week.&quot;    A knowledgeable member of a law-enforcement agency says Mr. Rind was also a large ZZZZ Best shareholder through one of his companies, B andamp; M Investments Inc.    Mr. Rind, who couldn't be reached for comment, was sentenced in 1976 to 18 months in prison and fined $10,000 for conspiracy to violate federal securities laws, mail fraud, interstate transportation of forged securities and other violations.    Records filed with the California secretary of state's office indicate that Mr. Minkow is also the agent for a similarly named company, B andamp; M Insurance Services Inc., whose owner and president is Robert Victor, according to ZZZZ Best SEC filings.    Police say Mr. Victor is also known as Robert Viggiano, 51, from Brooklyn.    Joseph Valiquette, a spokesman for the Federal Bureau of Investigation in New York, says that Mr. Viggiano was indicted in December 1968 by a federal grand jury in Brooklyn on a charge of extortionate credit transactions in an alleged loan-sharking scheme, but the charges were dismissed in January 1972.    In 1973, Robert Viggiano got five years' probation after pleading guilty to attempted grand larceny in connection with the 1968 theft of $750,000 in jewels from the Long Island Diamond andamp; Jewelry Exchange in Garden City, N.Y.    Also arrested in that robbery was the late Joseph Colombo Sr., described by law-enforcement authorities as the head of one of New York's Mafia families. Charges of conspiracy and grand larceny against Mr. Colombo Sr. in connection with the jewelry robbery were dismissed in February 1975.    In 1985, according to a registration statement filed with the SEC, Messrs. Minkow and Victor signed joint-venture agreements for B andamp; M Insurance to finance two separate restoration jobs, including one for $2.3 million in an eight-story building in Arroyo Grande, Calif.    But local officials say Arroyo Grande is a town of 13,000 souls, five traffic lights -- and no buildings over three stories. Mr. Victor couldn't be reached for comment.    ZZZZ Best also claimed in an SEC filing that it had a $7 million refurbishing contract in Sacramento, Calif. But city and county officials there haven't issued permits for any such job and find the whole idea inconceivable.    &quot;Sacramento was false-first, last and always,&quot; says ZZZZ Best Vice President Mark Morze. Mr. Morze has also been sued by the company, which claims that missing corporate funds went to Marbil Management Co.; Marbil, the suit says, was the &quot;alter ego&quot; of Mr. Morze.    Mr. Morze insists he doesn't own Marbil but won't comment further, pending consultation with his attorney.    ZZZZ Best also claimed a $2.8 million restoration job in San Diego awarded by a unit of Travelers Corp., based in Hartford, Conn. But David L. Tengberg, the claims manager for the area, says that &quot;Travelers has nothing to do&quot; with any such job.    As recently as May 18, ZZZZ Best claimed it won a $13.8 million restoration job in Dallas. But &quot;there hasn't been any kind of job like that in Dallas,&quot; says Kurt Blackmon, president of Blackmon-Mooring Steamatic Catastrophe Inc., a 40-year-old restoration concern in Fort Worth, Texas. &quot;We monitor that day and night. That's our business.&quot;    Most of the apparently phony ZZZZ Best insurance jobs came through Interstate Appraisal Services, based in Van Nuys, Calif. Interstate is owned and run by Thomas Padgett, who used to work for Travelers as an auto-damage appraiser, according to Mr. Tengberg.    The California Department of Insurance says neither Mr. Padgett nor his company is a licensed insurance adjuster, although it isn't clear whether either did work requiring a license. Both Interstate and Mr. Padgett are also defendants in the fraud lawsuit filed in state court in Los Angeles by ZZZZ Best against Mr. Minkow.    The suit charges Interstate, Marbil, and Messrs. Padgett, Minkow and Morze with breach of fiduciary duty, fraud and conversion, contending that the company suffered damages exceeding $25 million, including $18 million that the company claims it paid Marbil.    Last week, a man identifying himself on the phone as Mr. Padgett vowed to prove to a reporter that the refurbishing contracts were legitimate but never showed up for an appointment and hasn't been reachable since. Yesterday, Los Angeles Police Chief Daryl F. Gates alleged that the refurbishing contracts were fake, and were instead a vehicle for laundering illegal narcotics profits.    ZZZZ Best's hard assets also are apparently questionable. The SEC is reportedly looking into whether a group of secondhand generators the company said it bought last year for $1.1 million and 435,000 shares is worth anywhere near that.    According to the company's SEC filings, the generators were purchased from Generator Corp., a Cayman Islands entity that couldn't be located for comment.    Mr. Minkow's empire began collapsing May 22, when the Los Angeles Times reported that ZZZZ Best used customers' credit-card numbers to run up at least $72,000 in inflated charges.    Mr. Minkow said the scam, which occurred in 1984 and 1985, was the fault of unscrupulous former subcontractors who were caught and fired. Yet the company said in its public-offering statement that &quot;the company hires no subcontractors for any of its residential or commercial carpet cleaning jobs.&quot;    In early 1986, the same thing happened again, this time for at least $91,000, at Floral Fantasies, a Canoga Park, Calif., flower shop then owned by Charles B. Arrington III. Mr. Arrington, 27, is ZZZZ Best's chief operating officer.    Mr. Minkow, who made restitution in both cases, blamed the flower-shop charges on a prior owner, but city tax records show that Mr. Arrington bought the shop before the bogus bills were processed. Neither Mr. Arrington nor the store's current owners, listed in city tax records as Robert Victor and Rosalie Victor, could be reached for comment.    ZZZZ Best's public offering last December had been handled by Rooney Pace Inc., a unit of New York-based Rooney Pace Group Inc., at the equivalent of $4 a share; the price later more than quadrupled on a positive earnings report. The Rooney Pace unit went out of business in January after a series of problems unrelated to ZZZZ Best.    The stock had been touted by another brokerage house, Ladenburg, Thalmann andamp; Co., based in New York. Just last week, Robert Grossmann, a securities analyst in the firm's Los Angeles office, was quoted in Business Week magazine as saying, &quot;Barry Minkow is a great manager.&quot;    Mr. Grossmann now says that &quot;a lot of us wish we hadn't said a lot of things.&quot; Still, he recalls Mr. Minkow's charisma. Recently, he says, &quot;At the Century Plaza Hotel, Barry had a big show . . . and he was magical, he was mesmerizing. He won everybody over.&quot;    Ladenburg Chairman Ronald B. Koenig was among those who suffered losses on ZZZZ Best Stock. The company's shares, which had closed at $15.375 May 21, fell $3.50 on the first trading day after the Los Angeles Times article.    ZZZZ Best was soon beset by hordes of short-sellers, who sell borrowed shares with the hope of rebuying them at a lower price if the stock falls as they expect. On June 15, the stock was short more than 1.5 million shares, out of about 5.5 million shares in public hands. The rest of ZZZZ Best's roughly 11.5 million shares are controlled by Mr. Minkow and are for the most part restricted.    Six days after the credit-card fraud was disclosed, Mr. Minkow buoyed ZZZZ Best stock by announcing that the company would report that earnings for the year ended April 30 had exceeded $5 million, or 50 cents a share, on revenue of more than $50 million. That would be a huge increase from the prior year, when ZZZZ Best reported earnings of $900,000, or 12 cents a share, on revenue of $4.8 million. But law-enforcement and company sources say the higher figures probably are inflated.    On June 2, Ernst andamp; Whinney quit as the company's independent auditors. ZZZZ Best says the resignation wasn't over accounting differences, but Ernst andamp; Whinney won't comment. The company hired Price Waterhouse andamp; Co., which also declines comment.    Those who know Mr. Minkow call him dynamic, smart and utterly single-minded. He is also extremely persuasive, having gained the trust of many savvy investors and institutions.    These include the two major accounting firms; the investment banker, Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.; and the prestigious law firm of Hughes Hubbard andamp; Reed, based in New York.    ZZZZ Best's offering statements and SEC filings were handled by Mark R. Moskowitz in Hughes Hubbard's Los Angeles office. Mr. Moskowitz couldn't be reached, and the firm says it isn't appropriate to comment since it remains ZZZZ Best's counsel.    Drexel executives also declined comment. Earlier this year, Drexel agreed to raise $25 million in debt financing for ZZZZ Best to complete a pivotal acquisition, that of Flagship Cleaning Services Inc., a unit of London-based Northern Foods PLC, which holds a home-cleaning license from Sears, Roebuck andamp; Co. But Drexel backed out late last month, and the acquisition appears doomed.    The ZZZZ Best corporate headquarters in Reseda, a two-story cement-block structure, has been locked for days and has a uniformed guard posted outside. The blinds are drawn, and the phones are constantly ringing. A frustrated receptionist says at one point, &quot;I'm just going to leave this on hold.&quot;    On Monday a few employees pounded at the door demanding to be paid.    ZZZZ Best directors, meanwhile, are trying frantically to sort out the mess left by Mr. Minkow's departure, and they are discovering that major contracts aren't the only things that appear to be ghostly at the company. One company director says nervously that nobody can find the insurance policy that is supposed to protect directors and officers from personal liability. </TEXT></DOC>