<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870529-0108 </DOCNO><HL> Silicon Successor?Computer ScientistsEye New Raw MaterialsFor Semiconductors---Gallium Arsenide Is DifficultTo Work With, but ItOffers Speed Advantage---Quest for 'Ballistic Electrons'---By Jerry E. BishopStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> IBM T CYRELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE)COMPUTERS (EDP) </IN><TEXT>   If it wasn't quite a case for yelling &quot;Eureka,&quot; it was close.    Mordehai Heiblum was waiting in the audience of a scientific conference to report on an esoteric experiment. As he reviewed the graphs he would flash on the screen, he suddenly realized they indicated a phenomenon physicists had been seeking for years.    He and colleagues at International Business Machines Corp. had shot a stream of high-velocity electrons into a thin gray film of a compound called gallium arsenide. Ordinarily, such electrons slow down as they ricochet off atoms. But the graphs suggested that nearly a third of these electrons had zipped through the film unimpeded, five times faster than normal.    For physicists, the implications were clear. If electronic signals could be made to race untouched through this material and if it could be used in place of silicon to make transistors, the calculating power of computers might be raised enormously.    It was Mr. Heiblum's turn at the lectern -- at a conference at Cornell University in July 1985 -- and he wasn't about to stick his neck out. &quot;I mentioned it, but I didn't have enough data&quot; for bold claims, he says. &quot;But when I got back here to the lab, I was rushing around showing the graphs to everyone.&quot;    By no coincidence, scientists at American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co.'s Bell Telephone Laboratories and at Fujitsu Ltd. were also busily firing electrons into slivers of gallium arsenide. And they, too, were seeing the rare phenomenon of electrons that whizzed through much faster than normal. Thus, American and Japanese scientists rounded a turn in their race to develop a new semiconductor, one that might open the way to a whole range of new electronic gadgetry from hand-held computers to devices for the &quot;Star Wars&quot; defense program.    Semiconductors are the bricks and mortar of the transistors and similar devices that make up solid-state electronics. They are solid materials that can be made to alternately block or conduct a flow of electrons. The rapid on and off switching of electronic signals by semiconductors is the language of computers, and the faster an array of semiconductor devices can switch on and off, the more computations a computer can make per second. So anything that can speed up the electronic signals will increase computers' power.    At present, the major -- in fact, almost the only -- semiconductor material used is silicon, one of the most plentiful elements on earth. Thousands of microscopic silicon devices, capable of switching on and off billions of times a second, are jammed onto tiny microchips for computers, radars, telephone equipment and hundreds of other electronic machines.    Gallium arsenide, a compound of the elements gallium and arsenic, has been known for years to be a semiconductor, and one that is in a key way superior to silicon: Even without the phenomenon observed by Mr. Heiblum, it conducts electrons five times faster. It is more expensive, though, and harder to fabricate. Moreover, steady improvement in the performance of silicon devices has obviated the need to develop another semiconductor material. So gallium arsenide has sat on the back shelf.    But this situation is changing rapidly. Electronics engineers, though they expect to wring improvements out of silicon for years to come, see its limits. To meet the demand for high-capacity communications and ever-faster computers, they say, gallium arsenide will have to be brought out of the laboratory into the factory.    The recent experiments with it suggest a new way to increase the calculating speed of computers. Until now, engineers have made semiconductor devices ever thinner and tinier and have packed them ever closer, thus shortening the distance the electronic signals had to travel. What they haven't been able to do is speed up the electrons.    When electrons shoot into the atomic latticework of a semiconductor, they run into trouble, for several reasons. The semiconductor's atoms aren't perfectly aligned, they are in constant motion, and there are atoms of impurities lying about. The electrons quickly begin ricocheting off the atomic obstacles, losing energy and slowing down.    In silicon, the average electron will travel only about 100 Angstroms, or 0.000,004 inch, before it sideswipes some atomic obstacle and slows down. It will travel another 100 Angstroms, on the average, before hitting its second obstacle and losing more energy. The 100 Angstroms is called the &quot;mean free path.&quot;    A basic appeal of gallium arsenide is that in it, the mean free path is 1,000 Angstroms. The average electron can travel 10 times farther in gallium arsenide than in silicon before glancing off an atomic obstacle. Losing less energy, the electrons zip through gallium arsenide five times faster.    But now experiments like Mr. Heiblum's indicate it may be possible to raise the velocity of electrons another fivefold, making gallium arsenide 25 times faster than silicon.    About eight years ago two scientists, Michael Shur at the University of Minnesota and Lester Eastman of Cornell, theorized that if a semiconductor could be made thinner than its mean free path, it might be possible to get electrons to shoot through without hitting any atomic obstacles at all. Such electrons, whizzing along like bullets, were dubbed ballistic electrons.    Physicists, particularly those in the U.S. and Japan, immediately began experiments to test the idea. Laying down a layer of silicon 100 Angstroms thick seemed impractical, but with gallium arsenide the layer wouldn't have to be nearly so thin.    At IBM's Watson Research Center, Mr. Heiblum began to learn a technique, originally developed at Bell Laboratories, of depositing layers of gallium arsenide atom by atom. By 1984 he and fellow IBM scientists had begun experiments with these ultra-thin layers, which they cooled to 77 degrees above absolute zero to dampen the atomic vibrations.    In their first device, the gallium arsenide was 1,000 Angstroms thick, the mean free path. However, &quot;we didn't see ballistic transport, so we immediately went to 300 Angstroms,&quot; Mr. Heiblum says. &quot;When we first saw the result {with the thinner layer}, I didn't comprehend it. But as I was sitting in the audience at the conference at Cornell, I suddenly realized we had seen ballistic transport.&quot;    In those early experiments, only about 30% of the electrons passed through unimpeded, too few to be of use. But both IBM and Bell Laboratories researchers say they now are getting more than 75% to go through thin gallium arsenide layers ballistically. About 90% might be enough, but engineers are shooting for 99%.    Even if they achieve that, to make a device practical they would have to learn how to create the ultra-thin layers on a production line and how to &quot;wire&quot; the tiny gallium arsenide semiconductors together on a microchip. &quot;We're now at the hard part -- getting ballistic devices up to the point where our friends in development will be willing to invest money in them,&quot; says Robert C. Dynes, the director of chemical physics research at Bell Laboratories.    Whether or not the researchers are able to exploit ballistic electrons, gallium arsenide's future is growing brighter. Its inherent fivefold speed advantage is one reason. Another is its ability to handle both electronic and light signals, offering a possible way to tap the vast information-carrying potential of light. Of special interest to weapons builders, it is more resistant than silicon to radiation. Research is growing on both sides of the Pacific.    So far, gallium arsenide has made one showing in the computer field. The much-hailed Cray-3 supercomputer, being assembled by Cray Research Inc. in Minneapolis for 1989 delivery, has components made of the compound. Cray rates the new machine 10 times better in performance than the Cray-2, which uses silicon semiconductors and until now has been rated the world's most powerful computer. The devices used in the Cray-3 are practically custom-made, however, and aren't amenable to the mass production that computer makers like IBM and Fujitsu require.    The effort to develop manufacturable gallium arsenide devices is rapidly turning into a race between the Americans and the Japanese. The Japanese have begun a $100 million, seven-year gallium arsenide program, involving government, university and industrial laboratories. Sometime next year, Fujitsu expects to have ready for use in supercomputers an experimental device, a so-called high-electron-mobility transistor.    The Japanese program has many U.S. scientists deeply worried. &quot;Unless current trends are reversed, Japan will become the dominant source for high-performance compound {gallium arsenide} semiconductor devices,&quot; warns a recent study by the National Research Council, the governmental advisory arm of the National Academy of Sciences.    &quot;This could happen if we don't watch our step,&quot; agrees Bernard Murphy, the head of compound semiconductor development at Bell Laboratories. &quot;Right now, I'd say we're even-steven.&quot;    The ATandamp;T unit claims to have scored one coup already. It recently began pilotline production of gallium arsenide devices that regenerate and strengthen light-wave communications as they speed through optical-fiber cables. The devices can handle 1.7 billion bits of data per second, four to five times more than those currently used. &quot;By next year we'll have a full-blown production line&quot; for them, Mr. Murphy says.    Although the Japanese haven't yet produced comparable technology, &quot;one always has to respect formidable competitors like Fujitsu, Hitachi and NEC,&quot; Mr. Murphy cautions. &quot;But we're going to beat them anyway.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>