<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881108-0005 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO>  </SO><TEXT>   BUSH AND DUKAKIS SOUGHT last-minute support ahead of today's election.    The Republican nominee, in his last day on the campaign trail, expressed confidence that he would &quot;finish strong&quot; in the presidential balloting. Completing a final swing across America, Bush again promised a gentler nation and harshly criticized his Democratic rival. Dukakis, campaigning virtually around-the-clock in the hope of an upset, criss-crossed the country in an effort to gain the backing of Midwest and Pacific Coast states. Despite opinion polls showing Bush in the lead, the Democratic candidate vowed to spring a stunning &quot;November surprise.&quot;    Reagan returned to his home state of California on the last campaign trip of his presidency and made a sentimental plea for voters to support Bush.    ---   Sakharov warned that Gorbachev's political restructuring of the Soviet Union faces a domestic backlash that could endanger world peace. The Soviet human-rights activist, on his first trip to the West, also told a news conference in Boston that political prisoners still languish in labor camps as new laws have increased police powers.    ---   China's official radio reported that more than 600 people were killed in a powerful earthquake Sunday just inside the country's mountainous southern border. The temblor registered 7.6 on the Richter scale, and was followed by 34 aftershocks. Roads to the affected area were impassable, and authorities ordered an airlift of relief supplies.    ---   Polish workers rallied in two cities to protest the government's planned closing Dec. 1 of Gdansk's Lenin shipyard, where the Solidarity union was formed in 1980. The demonstrations in Warsaw and in Piekary Slaskie came as Poland's official press criticized Solidarity founder Walesa for threatening strikes to save the big shipyard.    ---   The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether defendants in drug and racketeering cases, whose tainted money and property may be seized if they are convicted, must be allowed to retain funds for lawyers. The justices will review cases stemming from prosecutions of drug dealers in New York and Virginia.    ---   U.S. immigration officials reported light turnout as the government's amnesty program for illegal immigrants entered its second phase. Under the plan, about 1.8 million nonagricultural amnesty recipients are eligible to apply for permanent residency, which permits travel outside the U.S. and eventually allows them to seek citizenship.    ---   New York City launched a controversial test program in an attempt to stem the spread of AIDS, giving drug addicts new hypodermic needles in exchange for their used ones. The $240,000 project is believed to be the first of its kind in the U.S., though similar programs have operated in Europe.    ---   Police in Washington arrested more than 370 people, including pediatrician and social activist Benjamin Spock, during a series of demonstrations on Capitol Hill to call attention to the plight of the homeless. About 2,000 people participated in the protests.    ---   A police official in Haiti said poisoning was suspected in the death of retired Col. Jean-Claude Paul, the army chief who was dismissed in September after a coup led by military officers. The 49-year-old Paul, who was indicted in Miami on drug charges last March, died Sunday after eating soup in his home in a suburb of Port-au-Prince.    ---   North Korea unveiled a plan for reunifying the Korean peninsula, calling for a phased withdrawal of U.S. forces from South Korea. The communique also proposes arms reductions by both North and South Korea and an easing of political and military confrontations between the two nations.    ---   The African National Congress said reports reaching the group in Zambia from South Africa suggested that black nationalist Nelson Mandela could be released next week. Pretoria denied the rumor. In Cape Town, Winnie Mandela paid a hospital visit to her husband, who is being treated for tuberculosis. He was jailed for life in 1962.    ---   Maldives authorities questioned about 100 people suspected of sympathizing with or participating in last week's attempt to overthrow the Indian Ocean archipelago's government. Officials in Male, the capital, said at least 14 people were killed and about 40 wounded during Thursday's coup attempt, which was led by Sri Lankan mercenaries.    ---   A woman in southern Lebanon attempted to assassinate the commander of the Israeli-backed army in Israel's self-declared security zone in the region. Israeli TV said the general sustained only a minor injury in the shooting. In the occupied West Bank, an Arab killed an Israeli soldier, and a Jewish farmer shot the assailant to death.    ---   The leader of the Afghan rebels traveled to Washington in an effort to gain U.S. support for a new government in Kabul that would bar Communist participation. The guerrilla-alliance chief, who is to meet tomorrow with Reagan and Shultz, also is expected to appeal for humanitarian aid. </TEXT></DOC>