<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870608-0068 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><DATELINE> FORT WORTH, Texas  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Once, in the 1920s, social worker Edna Gladney had to advertise in newspapers here to find a couple to adopt a baby girl at the Texas Children's Home and Aid Society.    Today, many couples who want to adopt are likely to take out ads themselves -- appealing directly to pregnant women and bypassing adoption agencies such as Mrs. Gladney's, now known as the Edna Gladney Center.    Such so-called independent adoptions have surpassed private agency adoptions in recent years as the most common for couples seeking infants. Although the agencies criticize these loosely regulated independent placements, they increasingly are turning to many of the same procedures that have made independent adoptions popular.    Independent adoptions, legal in all but a handful of states, are thriving because of their appeal to pregnant women who want to deal directly with adopting couples -- and because they offer the couples a speedier and less restrictive process. In independent adoptions, couples generally pay between $6,000 and $12,000 -- about as much as an agency adoption -- for attorney's fees, the mother's medical bills, and in some cases the mother's living expenses during pregnancy and even longer. Unexpected medical expenses, however, can push the total cost much higher.    Moreover, the independent route allows adoption applicants to get around the agencies' strict age, marriage and medical requirements. Many lawyers who arrange independent adoptions boast that they can find an infant for any couple who comes to them -- often within a few months, compared with as long as two to three years for most agency adoptions.    Some private agencies in recent years have tried to strike a balance between the traditional procedures and the demand for a less restricted process. Now, even the most conservative agencies are finding that they must begin to meet the demand for a more open approach.    If the private agencies &quot;don't stand up and compete, the end is inevitable,&quot; says William F. Pierce, president of the National Committee for Adoption, an agency association.    The 96-year-old Children's Home Society of California began arranging open adoptions about five years ago. Since then, the Los Angeles-based social-services agency has increasingly liberalized its policies to allow the couple and mother more freedom to meet and exchange information. Now, for example, if both parties wish, they can make plans to stay in touch as the child grows up.    &quot;What we have learned is that when the parties are willing to meet, we don't have to build in that kind of control&quot; that agencies have traditionally provided in the selection process, says Raymond E. Cheroske, director of professional services for the agency.    Vista Del Mar Child-Care Services in Los Angeles also has experimented with variations of the traditional agency approach. For the past two years, the service has offered what it calls &quot;identified&quot; placements. In such adoptions, a couple who passes the initial screening is encouraged to place ads and write letters in search of a pregnant woman who plans to put her infant up for adoption -- just as the search is conducted in most independent adoptions. Once the couple finds a candidate, the woman is counseled by the agency, and arrangements are made to pay medical expenses as well as living costs if needed.    &quot;When families go to an agency they often feel helpless,&quot; says Eli Lefferman, Vista Del Mar's community-services director. &quot;What should have been a simple biological process is in the hands of strangers.&quot; Allowing parents to seek out the child &quot;really gives them a sense of empowerment,&quot; he says.    Even Gladney, one of the country's oldest and more traditional agencies, has sought to make the couples and mothers more involved in the adoption process.    Couples on the agency's waiting list, for example, now are asked to do volunteer work at the center so that they can meet and get to know the young women who are putting their children up for adoption. Also, the mother can ask that her child's adoptive parents have certain qualities, such as belonging to a particular religion, having musical or athletic interests, or living in the country; these requests are considered in selecting the adoptive parents.    Meanwhile, some new agencies that have cropped up in many cities are taking the less-restrictive approach from the very start. Generally they were begun by lawyers who had been go-betweens for independent adoptions. These agencies offer enough counseling and screening to meet state and local requirements, but are more lenient than older agencies on the adoptive parents' ages, reproductive ability, and marriage status.    Other new agencies are taking a more aggressive stance in seeking out infants. Philadelphia-based Golden Cradle, for example, advertises on billboards and buses to draw pregnant women who might consider adoption. The six-year-old agency spends $160,000 on advertising annually.    Still, private agencies are divided on just how open or speedy the adoption process should be. Keeping to their traditional tenets, most are reluctant to relax their screening of potential parents, for example. The agencies say a lengthy selection process protects the child.    &quot;I don't think everyone is meant to parent or to adopt,&quot; says Jane Hotchkiss, adoption coordinator for Catholic Charities of Richmond Inc. in Virginia. &quot;You want to do the very best for the child.&quot;    Agencies also are quick to criticize independent adoptions, citing instances of &quot;baby brokering&quot; and the use of coercive tactics to pressure mothers into giving up their infants.    Gladney, which celebrates its centennial this year, continues to reject open adoptions and to guarantee anonymity for mothers and adoptive parents. Despite the wait and the scrutiny, some couples are won over by the conservative approach.    David and Stancy Parker of Fort Worth, who had to wait nearly a year and a half before adopting a two-month-old boy, say the alternatives to an agency like Gladney were too risky. To the Parkers, confidentiality was more desirable than a more open selection process. In an open adoption, there are &quot;more chances that the birth mother could come back to claim the baby,&quot; says Mrs. Parker. &quot;We wanted a safe, reputable agency that we knew could stand behind us.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>