<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880421-0175 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor: American Racial Tensions </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   The great timeliness of the recent reassessments of the 20-year-old Kerner Commission Report (editorial, March 28; page one, Feb. 26) is heightened by the tensions that currently riddle American race relations. Two decades have elapsed, yet we remain mired in the same basic contradictions pinpointed by the commission.    Race as a factor in American life came under national scrutiny then as dozens of urban black communities, pushed beyond the limits of human endurance, convinced the nation that without economic and social justice there could be no peace. Today, while the list of black grievances remains remarkably unchanged, race relations are being called to the fore not by riotous black city streets, but by mounting evidence of racist violence.    Bias-motivated violence has been a regular feature of the strong and steady current of racism that courses through our society, so that the recent wave of attacks against minority people presents no new trend. What these hate crimes do suggest, however, is that as a society our race attitudes are fluid, and respond to the posture of government and the severity of legal sanctions imposed to protect individual civil rights. The Kerner Commission recognized this variance and warned that racism's &quot;underlying forces will continue to gain momentum.&quot; Among the report's credits is its contribution to establishing a political atmosphere in which healthy race relations had a place on the agenda of government.    With the passage of time, government has ceased to be moved by the demanding issues of race, and, as a society, our attitudes have again hardened to notions of tolerance and equality.    The re-emergence today of the same issues considered 20 years ago by the commission is itself a compelling measure of our lack of progress. For instance, hundreds of recent complaints by black and Latino New Yorkers evidence a need to review law-enforcement practices in the minority community. We have not been able to affect the fact that young black men (ages 15 to 24) have an unemployment rate more than 2.5 times that of their white compatriots. Opportunities for black and Latino people remain at a crisis state, and are further diminished by the social dynamics of today's racism. Daily they are barred from commercial establishments, taxi cabs, residential property and, most importantly, jobs.    The statistics comparing the health of black and white women indicate a yawning gulf in access to health care. In New York City, which has more medical facilities than any other city in the world, black infants die at a rate that more than doubles that of whites. The black maternal mortality rate is estimated at nearly five times the rate for whites.    Racism imposes itself upon American society in heavy layers, the peeling-back of which requires a varied and deliberate response. We need biting legal protections against bias-related violence. We need a permanent state office with the credibility to prosecute sensitive race-bias cases effectively. Healthier race attitudes must be cultivated by ensuring that all of New York's children are exposed to classroom and public leadership that reflects our diverse community. The time has come for New York state to establish a commission to assess race issues, focusing on both the rash of violence against minority people and on economic polarization.    Foremost among our needs is the personal involvement of leadership at every level of government to put race back on the public agenda. For it is in sustaining the commitment to racial justice that we in government have failed most.    David N. Dinkins   Manhattan Borough President   New York</TEXT></DOC>