<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870518-0045 </DOCNO><HL> TV Evangelists Are Poised for a Shakeout---Falwell Starts 'Emergency' PTL Fund-Raising---By Ed BeanStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL) </IN><TEXT>   The debt-ridden PTL empire needs $7 million by the end of the month and as much as $25 million in the next 90 days to survive, says its new leader, the Rev. Jerry Falwell. He's admonishing viewers to regard his plea for &quot;emergency&quot; funds as a referendum to voice support, with a personal check as the ballot.    Over the next couple of years, such referendums will decide the fate of not just PTL, but all of the television ministries. Even before the titillating adultery scandal surrounding Jim and Tammy Bakker and the recent discovery of $92 million missing from the books of their South Carolina religious empire, the world of big-time TV evangelists was poised for a shakeout. TV preachers, who have made a $1 billion business of saving viewers' souls, now are embroiled in a fiercely competitive and sophisticated campaign to save their own pulpits.    &quot;There's competition in the marketplace . . . and X number of dollars available to support these ministries,&quot; says Mr. Falwell. He predicts that the purely economic pressure of staying on the air probably will cull the top 10 TV preachers down to a mere three or four within the next five years. The likely survivors: Jimmy Swaggart, the most popular of the TV preachers; Mr. Falwell; Robert Schuller; and Pat Robertson. Others, says Mr. Swaggart, will &quot;come and go.&quot;    Clearly, those four are the leaders of their respective niches in the electronic religious marketplace.    Mr. Swaggart, like the defrocked Mr. Bakker, is a minister of the Assembly of God, and his Pentecostal and charismatic theology is the most conservative of the big TV preachers. He is an old-fashioned, revival-style preacher who sings, cries and occasionally speaks in tongues while reaching worshippers in 145 countries. He packs stadiums the way Billy Graham does. His ministry and Bible College together are the largest private employer in Baton Rouge, La.    Mr. Schuller is a Reformed Church in America minister whose &quot;theology of self-esteem&quot; is articulated in books such as the &quot;Be-Happy Attitudes.&quot; He's written 28 books; three have made the New York Times best-seller list. His &quot;Hour of Power&quot; is broadcast each Sunday from the &quot;Crystal Cathedral,&quot; an $18 million edifice in Garden Grove, Calif., with 10,000 windows, a 14,000-pipe organ, 2,900 indoor seats and a drive-in sanctuary. He's No. 2 behind Mr. Swaggart in the latest Arbitron ratings.    Mr. Robertson, a Southern Baptist minister and presidential candidate, hosts a TV talk show. He incorporated the Christian Broadcasting Network in 1960, and his CBN University in Virginia Beach offers graduate studies and a law degree with a Christian perspective. Mr. Robertson often uses his talk show to interpret political issues according to his understanding of Christianity.    Mr. Falwell, founder of the Moral Majority, broadcasts the &quot;Old Time Gospel Hour&quot; on Sunday from a Southern Baptist church in Lynchburg, Va., that includes one-third of the city's residents as members. His Liberty University has about 5,000 students; he wants 50,000. He says he'll never run for public office, but he has become a point man for conservative politics and controls a mailing list of 7.5 million homes sympathetic to conservative causes.    Yet despite their well-entrenched positions, even these leaders are feeling financial pressure, in part as a result of the PTL scandal.    Mr. Falwell says his donations over the past few weeks are down $2 million, or about 20%, and he is sending computer-generated messages to his direct-mail flock, pleading for a financial &quot;vote of confidence.&quot; Mr. Swaggart's letters to his followers indicate he's down $8 million over the past few months; he fell $1.7 million short of meeting his $12 million of expenses in April.    Mr. Robertson has said on the air that the Bakker scandal has cost him $10 million in donations.    But even without the Bakkers, the evangelists were being swallowed by their own success. At large independent TV stations, the demand by hundreds of local religious programs and a few dozen national shows for air time has far outstripped the supply in recent years. In Atlanta, Jim Kitchell, WTBS vice president, operations, says that if a religious broadcaster drops off the air, the &quot;superstation&quot; could find a replacement the same afternoon.    Mr. Kitchell won't say what WTBS time costs, but others say an hour on Sunday morning can run as high as $40,000. Media buyers say Sunday morning prices in most major markets have doubled and even quadrupled in the past two years as religious broadcasters have bid against one another for air time.    &quot;In the top 10 markets, everybody wants in,&quot; says Kerry Smith, a Dallas media buyer who specializes in religious accounts. &quot;If the ministry can't pay the price, they say, 'See you later. Another will.'&quot;    The predictable result of this is that it takes ever-increasing millions to stay on the air -- and more air time to raise the millions. Meanwhile, the pool of viewers that contributes most freely is temporarily shrinking. Richard Gaylord Briley, a fundraising consultant who has worked for many TV preachers, calls the narrowing donor base a &quot;demographic Grand Canyon&quot; created by the decline that occurred in the nation's birth rate between the advent of the Great Depression and the end of World War II.    That demographic shortfall will reverse itself when the generation of baby boomers turns 50, but Mr. Briley isn't so sure that they'll respond as well to the kind of authoritarian moral leadership many of the current TV evangelists espouse. Many people born before 1930, says Mr. Briley, were subjected to two world wars, a depression and devastating diseases. &quot;Life was a lottery, and they were acted on by forces beyond their control. They respond well to an authority figure . . . who represents God.&quot;    To address these problems, the ministries are stepping up their marketing efforts. Most national TV ministers already employ talented marketers and the latest technology in their fund-raising campaigns. Computer data banks tabulate multiples -- how much donations exceed expenses in a TV market. Focus groups are used to fine-tune shows for viewer appeal. &quot;We test programs the same way major advertisers test commercials,&quot; says Paul Virts, a communications researcher on Mr. Robertson's Christian Broadcasting Network staff.    Mr. Virts oversees projects ranging from viewership measurements to the 10 questions people most want to ask God (Top question: Why is there suffering?). The latter survey led to the production of a special that attracted 25 million viewers over two nights. Before it went on the air, Mr. Virts says he showed it to focus groups and then brought it back to the studio for refinement.    Mr. Robertson was the first to discover that satellite technology made it unnecessary for his network to buy local TV stations or some expensive slots on independent stations. His network, available in 33 million homes and the largest of the religious cable networks, also was the first to heavily lace its schedule with secular reruns like &quot;Gunsmoke&quot; and Groucho Marx's talk show that would help pay the bills.    Mr. Robertson's network is a source of considerable financial strength. When he launched it, cable systems across the country had more open channels than they knew what to do with and gave away time to CBN just for the asking. The Bakkers had a similar advantage in starting PTL.    But lucrative home shopping networks have changed that, and now channels are at a premium. &quot;As far as a new 24-hour delivery religious network is concerned, it's virtually a closed door,&quot; says Larry Gerbrandt, a media analyst with Paul Kagan Associates in Los Angeles.    Mr. Swaggart agrees. Although he boasts the biggest audience, Mr. Swaggart doesn't have a cable network; he buys time on other networks and independent stations. He recently turned down a chance to buy a small cable network.    But Mr. Falwell still sees opportunities for another network. Last year, he bought the one Mr. Swaggart passed up. It currently reaches 1.5 million homes; his goal is five million homes by year-end. And now he controls the PTL network, which reaches 15 million households.    Mr. Falwell acknowledges that cable operators aren't in the market for another religious network, but that's where his mailing list of 7.5 million comes into play. &quot;We'll tell a cable operator, we have X thousand households in your market and 30% subscribe to your cable service. We'll make the maximum effort to bring that number up if you'll give us a channel. It will boil down to pure economics,&quot; he says.    Mr. Falwell certainly hopes the economics will be favorable. Last spring, he had to lay off 225 employees at his Lynchburg headquarters; in December, he had to cancel an issue of his 650,000 circulation Liberty Report newspaper. He needs both students and money to continue to build his Liberty University.    Although Mr. Falwell says he doesn't foresee a long-term stint as head of the PTL empire, he has moved quickly to take advantage of the availability of air time. In his brief time at the helm, he has begun a weekday show on the network, his first foray into daily broadcasting, and analyzed the PTL mailing list.    Although much has been made of Mr. Falwell's antipathy toward Mr. Bakker's charismatic beliefs and a potential backlash by PTL viewers, Mr. Falwell says that only 21% of PTL's contributors are charismatics. About 15% are Baptists like Mr. Falwell. For the most part, he doesn't think the viewers of TV ministries are concerned with nuances of doctrine. &quot;They've learned to eat the fish and spit out the bones when they watch us,&quot; he says. </TEXT></DOC>