<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880609-0046 </DOCNO><HL> Hangar Anger: Mechanic's Woes Show How Safety Became A Big Issue for Eastern --- Mr. Hudak Went by Book; From Boss Came Pressure To Help 'Move the Meat' --- Pizza Treats, Firing Threats </HL><AUTHOR> Thomas Petzinger Jr. (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TEX LABOR </CO><IN> AIR </IN><G> TRN CNG </G><DATELINE> ATLANTA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Larry Warren, one of Eastern Airlines's most valued maintenance foremen here, is obsessed with on-time departures. &quot;Move the meat!&quot; he commands his mechanics.    But just after dawn on April 27, before the day's first onslaught of passengers, Mr. Warren learned that no meat would be moving on Aircraft 934, a DC-9 scheduled to depart for Orlando. A mechanic had found a broken floor panel in the first-class cabin. Mr. Warren rushed to the airplane to see 45-year-old Joseph Hudak crouched over the broken section, a screwdriver in his hand. The foreman blew his stack.    &quot;Of all the airplanes we're working, this is the only one that had a chance in hell of making a 7 a.m. takeoff, and you shot the son of a bitch down!&quot; the foreman bellowed. Using even stronger expletives, Mr. Warren threatened to fire Mr. Hudak if he ever again showed up for work &quot;one minute late.&quot; Then Mr. Warren, who doesn't dispute this account of the incident, stalked from the plane.    The dumbfounded Mr. Hudak didn't realize that his anxiety had only begun. Aircraft 934, he discovered, eventually took off with an improper repair made by someone else and approved by the foreman. And to his shock, Mr. Hudak found that someone had tampered with his original entry in the plane's maintenance logbook.    Before long, Mr. Hudak would get slapped with a 10-day suspension without pay for &quot;writing up&quot; brake hoses that management said needed no repair. Although Mr. Hudak is an apathetic union member, the International Association of Machinists would soon seek to confer martyrdom on him. Until yesterday, when Eastern reversed his suspension, he feared for his job. &quot;His morale is so low he's not worth talking to sometimes,&quot; says his 21-year-old son, Joey.    The story of Aircraft 934 involves no deaths, no injuries, no &quot;crash and burn&quot; maintenance problems, no interference by top-level management. Nevertheless, it has prompted separate investigations by the Federal Aviation Administration; the office of U.S. Rep. Newt Gingrich of Georgia, the ranking Republican on the House Aviation Subcommittee; and an internal-affairs team at Eastern. &quot;It's a tangled mess,&quot; says Edward F. Upton, vice president of maintenance and engineering.    How could the failure of a floor panel arouse such controversy? Last week, after a six-week investigation of Eastern's &quot;fitness&quot; as an airline, the Department of Transportation provided one explanation.    &quot;War&quot; has erupted between Eastern's workers and managers and poses the only real threat to the safety of the airline's operations, the department said. In a confrontation cascading through the courts and Congress, Eastern, a subsidiary of Texas Air Corp., is fighting to slash wages. Its unions are moving to discredit management by the most aggressive means possible. Mr. Hudak's experience offers vivid evidence that the &quot;unprecedented level&quot; of labor-management strife found by federal investigators has reached all the way down to Eastern's flight lines and maintenance hangars.    The hostilities touch even the FAA. An agency investigator refused Mr. Hudak's request to walk roughly 100 yards to inspect the broken floor panel -- even though the FAA was conducting a plane-by-plane inspection of Eastern's fleet at the time as part of the &quot;fitness&quot; probe. &quot;I don't want to get involved in a labor-management dispute,&quot; the inspector angrily explained to Mr. Hudak.    The controversy around Aircraft 934 opens a window into the world of aircraft maintenance, a delicate system of limits, ranges and tolerances often measured in thousandths of an inch -- all as passengers clamor to get off the ground. At Eastern's hub here, foremen regularly admonish machinists against &quot;writing up&quot; maintenance problems without first getting management approval. Eastern has long permitted managers to &quot;sign off&quot; on repairs; most major airlines require rank-and-file mechanics to swear to the adequacy of repairs and the airworthiness of any plane.    Eastern has already moved to correct many out-of-date maintenance and management procedures, and is planning to improve others. On Tuesday, for the first time in many years, not one of the company's 1,500 flights was canceled for a mechanical problem. To keep improving, &quot;We have to make sure our employees have more confidence in our system,&quot; Mr. Upton says.    But on the midnight shift that morning in April, Eastern's labor battles were the furthest thing from Mr. Hudak's mind. For 27 years he had been working in or around airplanes -- as an Air Force flight engineer, as a test-flight mechanic at Lockheed Corp. and in his nine years at Eastern. Along the way he graduated from Georgia State University, worked two years as an eighth-grade math teacher and developed a passion for riding -- and compulsively tinkering with -- dirt bikes.    Aircraft 934 had been out of service for a few days for sheet-metal repairs to the fuselage. Other maintenance also was scheduled. After helping a co-worker inspect rudder-control pedals, Mr. Hudak stepped from the cramped, tool-scattered cockpit into the first-class section. Walking past seat 2C, his foot sank -- three-quarters of an inch.    He immediately imagined a passenger in high heels losing her step and suing the airline. Worse, he thought, the failure of the section could involve a larger problem. The panel, only about 32-thousandths of an inch thick, is stiffened from the underside by five &quot;hat channels,&quot; hollow structures running fore to aft. These channels, in turn, rest on joist-like structural beams running sideways under the cabin, creating a lattice-like floor support.    Perhaps the underlying joists had failed, he thought. Or, more likely, a hat channel had crumbled, possibly dropping pieces of aluminum to fray control cables strung like heavy-duty piano wire through the length of the floor. Pulling back the carpet, Mr. Hudak noticed that the panel had ruptured at the aft end. A 3 1/2-inch crack ran through a screw hole on the corroded left side.    Mr. Hudak was instructed to rob the panel from another aircraft and install it on 934 before the midnight shift had ended. He had continued working through his break when the hard-nosed Mr. Warren appeared. At 44, Mr. Warren is an Eastern lifer who worked his way into a white collar on pure wrenchmanship. His &quot;move the meat&quot; obsession paid off handsomely; in barely a year, he has been instrumental in cutting Eastern's delay and cancellation rate here from an inordinate 7.5% to a respectable 3.5%. According to a draft report by the internal team investigating Aircraft 934 (a portion of which Mr. Upton read aloud to a reporter), Mr. Warren's motivation techniques range from pillorying to springing for the pizza. &quot;Mr. Warren is either very compassionate or very heavyhanded,&quot; the investigators found.    Boarding the delayed aircraft, Mr. Warren wasn't in his compassion mode. As he later put it, &quot;I am quick-tempered when somebody jeopardizes my flights.&quot; His outburst, and the threat of dismissal, stunned Mr. Hudak, who replied that never in his career had he tried to sabotage a flight schedule. When he was a flight engineer in Vietnam, he would later explain, &quot;there were times I was so scared I couldn't breathe, but I never grounded the mission.&quot;    During the confrontation in first-class, the foreman also complained about his own job stress, according to the mechanic's account. &quot;I don't have the people to work these . . . airplanes,&quot; the foreman allegedly said. To meet the day's flight schedules, he barked, he even had to recall a worker on disciplinary layoff, according to Mr. Hudak's account.    Personnel shortages are the source of worsening complaints among mechanics here, who claim that their colleagues are abandoning Eastern by the dozens because of strife and other problems. Eastern says that overall, its shops and ramps are more than adequately staffed and that the mechanics are merely nostalgic for the featherbedding past, when, according to Mr. Warren, they whiled away their shifts watching Rocky and Bullwinkle cartoons on television.    Mr. Hudak had assumed he would remove the entire panel, &quot;hat channels&quot; and all. But he soon discovered that his superiors had a lesser repair in mind. A piece of sheet metal was prepared for installation over the broken section of floor until the plane came out of service for a scheduled maintenace overhaul. It was a temporary and perfectly safe repair for a &quot;spongy&quot; floor, Eastern says, that is used throughout the industry.    Mr. Hudak didn't consider the floor merely &quot;spongy,&quot; however. As he later explained, he was passionately convinced that &quot;that floor had failed.&quot; Thus, Mr. Hudak ended the midnight shift refusing to tack down the sheet metal over the broken panel; his federal mechanics' license, after all, makes him personally liable for any improper repair, which he considered this to be.    In fact, the repair made in his absence didn't follow Eastern procedures. Eastern had just established a new, more thorough form of temporary repair. The reason, according to a company official, was that FAA inspectors were crawling all over Eastern's fleet, and some dissident flight attendants &quot;took the opportunity to be a little cutesy,&quot; going out of their way to record spongy floors.    The new method of temporarily fixing them involved installing an overlay of sheet metal with screws and liquid adhesives. The panel on Aircraft 934, however, was temporarily repaired by the older and faster method, using rivets and tape. &quot;We did not do a proper repair in Atlanta,&quot; says Eastern's Mr. Upton.    Foreman Warren personally &quot;signed off&quot; Aircraft 934 that morning, but his description of the temporary repair was incomplete, at the least. Instead of noting that a sheet of metal had been installed beneath the first-class carpet, his logbook entry simply read, &quot;secured rivets as required.&quot; Mr. Warren says he must have inadvertently omitted some words from the entry.    Later that morning, the episode still gnawed at Mr. Hudak. He is a man obsessed with process and rules, things held in high regard in hangars. He irritates family members by demanding to read the owner's manual before a new appliance comes out of the box. &quot;My father doesn't believe in taking something beyond its application,&quot; Joey Hudak says. Over the years, Mr. Hudak has received written accolades from Eastern; one commended his &quot;character and professionalism.&quot;    Eastern later came to question whether Mr. Hudak was all that committed to the system. Based on the findings of the company's investigators, Mr. Upton calls him &quot;good enough to keep, but not the first person you call in a jam,&quot; one prone to stray beyond his assignment. And, says Mr. Upton, he has &quot;an attendance problem.&quot;    Although he denies a problem, Mr. Hudak couldn't help worrying about his attendance after hearing the foreman's stern warning against coming in late. After its acquisition by Texas Air in 1986, Eastern adopted a policy allowing workers just five &quot;occurrences&quot; of tardiness or absence for any reason (including each day of illness) in an 18-month period. The sixth occurrence causes dismissal.    Although the policy seems harsh, many exceptions are made. A mechanic here had a heart attack a few months ago but got charged only one &quot;occurrence,&quot; Mr. Warren says. If the employee should break his leg on the job after returning to work, Mr. Warren says, that, too, would count as only one &quot;occurrence.&quot;    For his part, Mr. Hudak already had reached his fifth &quot;occurrence&quot; within 18 months, including one day of illness and his arrival at work exactly a minute late. (The company claims that his foreman had also let another &quot;occurrence&quot; slide by.) Mr. Upton theorizes that Mr. Hudak made an incident of Aircraft 934 and told his story to this newspaper to protect himself from getting fired for absenteeism. (In fact, The Wall Street Journal sought out Mr. Hudak, rather than the other way around, nearly a month after the controversy began.)    For whatever reason, Mr. Hudak decided to make an issue of Aircraft 934. With the help of a union shop steward, he called an FAA hot line for employee reporting of aircraft problems -- anonymously, if they choose. Mr. Hudak gave his name. He placed a second call to Washington the following day.    Mr. Warren had reasons of his own to worry -- about Aircraft 934. A day or so after the initial incident, another aircraft experienced a similar problem, and he learned that the company had specified a new and improved temporary repair. Also, he had sidestepped calling Eastern headquarters in Miami to obtain a &quot;deferred item&quot; -- a number, entered into a computer, signifying that the engineers are aware of a temporary repair.    Then, too, an FAA inspector had begun asking questions about Aircraft 934, says Jack Barker, an FAA official here.    Mr. Warren located the plane in Philadelphia, where Eastern has no major operations base. A local supervisor had to summon two off-duty mechanics to make the proper repair by the book and obtain the overdue deferred-item number. According to the logbook entry, it took 24 hours to complete the job properly, although that may include the time it took to fly in needed sheet metal from Boston.    Eastern says that during the repair in Philadelphia, mechanics got a close look at the underside of the damaged panel. Hat channels, cross beams and control cables all were intact, the company says.    Mr. Hudak still remained in the dark. He kept fretting over his job -- perhaps with reason. The day after his second call to the FAA, he was summoned by loudspeaker to a shift foreman, Al Jenkins.    &quot;Did you call the FAA on Larry Warren?&quot; Mr. Jenkins recalls asking. Mr. Hudak said yes. &quot;If you called the FAA on me, I'd nail you,&quot; Mr. Jenkins shot back. He now says, &quot;I was just being honest.&quot;    An affidavit signed by Mr. Hudak says the shift foreman also warned him that Mr. Warren was looking for a pretext to fire the mechanic, a comment Mr. Jenkins denies making. Mr. Hudak's affidavit also asserts that Mr. Jenkins admonished him against &quot;entering discrepancies in the logbook without contacting management first.&quot; Mr. Jenkins says he only instructed him not to write up repairs if their need was doubtful.    In any case, it was far from the first time that Mr. Hudak had been told to check with management before making a logbook entry. &quot;This is my policy as a manager,&quot; explains Mr. Warren, the lead foreman. He says he would never demand that anyone consult management before writing up a genuine hazard -- a &quot;crash and burn&quot; item. But he adds that it never hurts to have &quot;another set of eyes&quot; to help decide whether something requires immediate repair. Mr. Warren says he would never put this in writing, however, &quot;because of the possibility it would be misinterpreted.&quot;    On the midnight shift nine days later, Mr. Hudak suddenly observed Aircraft 934 back on the ramp in Atlanta. On his dinner hour he went aboard to see what repairs had finally been noted in the logbook -- and says he was astonished to see that someone had altered his original entry. Now, instead of locating the broken panel at Seat 2C, the logbook placed it at &quot;Seat 12C.&quot;    Logbooks are sacrosanct, an airline's primary record of what has been done, or needs doing, to keep planes safe. A felony had been committed, but by whom?    Mr. Upton says the alteration &quot;would raise suspicions&quot; about the foreman, Mr. Warren; the false entry would direct anyone curious about the repair to &quot;check in the wrong portion of the plane.&quot; He also speculates that a third party with &quot;political&quot; motives in the labor-management battle might have been responsible.    In the internal investigation, even Mr. Hudak had to be included as a suspect, Mr. Upton says, however remote the likelihood he had changed his own entry. &quot;He was going to the FAA,&quot; Mr. Upton says, and a forged logbook could make his complaint &quot;more believable.&quot;    Foreman Warren strenuously denies any involvement; he points out that he carries only pens and that the improper entry was made in pencil. &quot;I can't possibly be a suspect,&quot; says Mr. Hudak. He says his shift had ended before Mr. Warren signed the log book.    Certainly, on peering into the logbook, Mr. Hudak behaved like a man in shock. He sought out an FAA official who, as part of the Eastern probe, was conducting an unrelated inspection nearby. Mr. Hudak implored him to examine the plane and the forged logbook entry. The FAA man refused, giving Mr. Hudak the phone number of another inspector. &quot;Look, the airplane is right there,&quot; Mr. Hudak said. &quot;The airplane is getting ready to leave!&quot; The inspector then jabbed his finger in Mr. Hudak's chest, again demanding that he telephone the other inspector, according to Mr. Hudak. The second inspector, in turn, was &quot;evasive&quot; and said he probably couldn't look at the plane until later in the day, according to Mr. Hudak.    The two inspectors declined to be interviewed. Mr. Barker, the FAA official, says they did nothing wrong. The first inspector, he says, couldn't drop his inspection just to satisfy an outraged mechanic -- least of all a mechanic at Eastern, where union workers have lost their credibility, Mr. Barker says. &quot;There's a big confrontation going on between the unions and management,&quot; he says. &quot;We have spent literally hundreds of man-hours chasing allegations that have absolutely no merit.&quot;    In any case, Mr. Barker says, the second inspector did get around to examining the first-class floor later that day and judged the repair satisfactory.    Yet another curiosity emerged. Someone decided to pull up the carpet alongside Seat 12C. The panel there was damaged as well, with some screws pulled through one side. Eastern as yet has no idea whether this was a fantastic coincidence or whether someone had clumsily tried to cover up the problem by 2C, or the repair, by diverting attention to a similar problem that conveniently existed elsewhere on the plane.    On May 10, two weeks after his foot first sagged aboard Aircraft 934, Mr. Hudak was walking by another jet, Aircraft 968, and stopped to look at the landing gear. Out came the pencil. &quot;Right main landing gear aft brake lines deteriorated and chafed,&quot; he wrote in the logbook.    Mr. Warren then looked at the hoses. They were in impeccable condition. Now Mr. Hudak was really in trouble. &quot;I must assume that this is a deliberate job action by you to delay an on-time departure,&quot; Mr. Warren wrote in a letter, in which he informed Mr. Hudak of his 10 days' unpaid leave. &quot;Any other action by you to disrupt the safe, on-time departure of Eastern flights will result in your termination.&quot; To back up the disciplinary action, Mr. Warren obtained a signed statement from another mechanic who examined the right aft hoses and also found them to be perfect.    The mechanic's statement did contain an observation about the hoses on the left landing gear, however. They were chafed, the mechanic said. The hoses were easily repaired -- although the repair was never entered in the logbook, as standard practice requires.    Mr. Hudak had confused left and right -- a mistake that mechanics prefer not to make but one for which they don't often get suspended.    After spending part of his suspension riding his dirt bike in Ohio, Mr. Hudak returned to the midnight shift last Friday. When he arrived, two members of Eastern's SWAT team sat him down and spent eight hours questioning him about his story. Last Monday, Mr. Hudak spent the day with the FAA, whose investigation is continuing. &quot;So far we haven't found anything that was done wrong,&quot; the agency's Mr. Barker says.    The company's problems with Mr. Hudak and his foreman are probably &quot;fixable,&quot; says Mr. Upton, the maintenance vice president. Mr. Hudak could probably stand a dose of training, he believes. (In fact, Eastern has never sent him to DC-9 school.) Eastern rescinded Mr. Hudak's suspension yesterday after finding that Mr. Warren had failed to employ &quot;progressive discipline&quot; with him. And Mr. Warren's management style &quot;needs to lose some of its aggressiveness,&quot; the investigators say in their draft report. The company yesterday assigned him to a series of courses on management sensitivity and other topics -- newly established to help upgrade maintenance operations -- beginning next week.    The draft report concludes that the entire controversy might have been avoided had Mr. Warren used more delicate language to begin with. But, it adds, Mr. Hudak is also to blame. He is overly &quot;sensitive&quot; to his managers at Eastern, the investigators claim.    But with labor-management tension still running high, even the foreman who likes to &quot;move the meat&quot; is feeling a trifle sensitive himself these days. A newly scrawled message on a men's-room wall here warns, &quot;Warren is dead meat.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>