<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880225-0034 </DOCNO><HL> Northrop Faces Inquiry Over Bomber Billing --- U.S. Is Investigating Claims Of False Stealth Costs; Employee Lawsuit Filed </HL><AUTHOR> Eileen White Read (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> NOC BA </CO><IN> ARO </IN><G> DEF CNG JUS </G><DATELINE> LOS ANGELES  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Air Force and the Pentagon inspector general's office are investigating claims by Northrop Corp. employees that the defense contractor is engaged in widespread fraudulent billing on the secret Stealth bomber program.    Separately, one current and three former Northrop employees filed a civil suit in federal court here yesterday, claiming Northrop destroyed internal audit documents that identified $400 million in false labor charges and projected that such charges totaled about $1 billion.    In a briefing with investigators this week, the employees claimed that the company double-billed the government for parts, inflated production man-hours to receive excessive payments, and misrepresented its progress in building the bomber to receive additional payments. Northrop's motive, the employees assert in the suit, is to use Pentagon funds earmarked for the secret bomber project to pay for its development of the advanced tactical fighter and repairs for its part of the F/A-18 fighter program.    The employees also claimed that the Air Force has been aware of the overcharges but conspired with company officials to keep the information from the Congress, which has called for investigations of the Stealth program. The project has been rumored to be behind schedule and substantially over budget for some time.    A Northrop spokesman said the company doesn't comment on matters involving the advanced technology bomber. Air Force officials in charge of the Stealth program couldn't be reached for comment.    The suit was filed under the False Claims Act, which allows plaintiffs to share in any judgment awarded. The Justice Department has 60 days to decide whether to investigate. The employees' attorney, Robert Kilborne of Claremont, Calif., said the suit was filed under seal so that the employees' names wouldn't be made public. Under government rules, employees on classified programs are forbidden to disclose the name or nature of their work, even after they have left the programs.    Although most information about the Stealth, or advanced technology, bomber project is classified, the Air Force in 1981 acknowledged that Northrop was building 132 of the bombers for about $36.6 billion. Aerospace analysts estimate that the budget has grown to $53 billion.    Last year, Northrop wrote off $214 million for a program that analysts said was the Stealth bomber -- so named because it is designed to evade enemy radar. The Air Force has been withholding certain monthly contract payments because of unidentified irregularities in Northrop's purchasing system for parts for the bomber. Last June, a General Accounting Office report said Northrop couldn't account for 780 documents related to the bomber. The agency was unable to determine if national security had been compromised.    The allegations regarding the Stealth bomber are just the latest in a series of problems for Northrop. A government investigation into employee claims that the company falsified tests, threw out parts and mischarged costs on guidance equipment contracts for the MX missile were partly responsible for Northrop losing a $165 million contract to Rockwell International Corp. last year. Northrop is cooperating with a Justice Department investigation of a second case of alleged test tampering, on the air-launched cruise missile. The company removed the manager and three employees from a plant that makes the missile parts.    The Stealth, however, is Northrop's crown jewel, accounting for about half its net income and about one-third of its labor force. Rep. Les Aspin (D. Wis.), chairman of the House Armed Services Committee -- which has access to classified audits and investigatory documents -- has repeatedly called for changes in Northrop's handling of the program, including competition from other aerospace companies.    Rep. Aspin added an amendment to the Defense Department authorization bill last year that directed a team of Pentagon officials to look into the Air Force's supervision of the contractor. An aide familiar with the team's work said one route under consideration is turning management of the Stealth project over to Seattle-based Boeing Co., which is a major subcontractor to Northrop on the project. Boeing declined to comment, citing the bomber's classified status.    The employees filing suit include an electronics engineer, a manager of test systems and two auditors. One of them is still employed as an auditing manager at Northrop's Los Angeles headquarters. They agreed to be interviewed on the condition that their names not be used because it would endanger their government clearances to work on classified programs.    In an interview, the auditing manager said company officials ordered a massive audit of the Stealth program just after investigations of the MX program surfaced last summer. A team of auditors from Northrop's Los Angeles headquarters found the $400 million in false charges, but the company suddenly called off the audit and ordered auditors to turn over their working papers, which were shredded, he said.    The former Northrop auditor claimed in the briefing with investigators that he kept copies of numerous memorandums he wrote over the past two years warning superiors of accounting irregularities. The auditor said he intended to give the documents to investigators, but they were confiscated by Northrop attorneys last week. A representative of the Air Force Office of Special Investigations said the agency is trying to retrieve the documents.    The former Northrop electronics engineer gave investigators a copy of a grievance he filed with the company, claiming he was fired from its Palmdale, Calif., plant after refusing a supervisor's order to write allegedly improper information on his time card. &quot;I was told that we had run out of money for the work I was actually performing and to use another sales order,&quot; the grievance document says.    The engineer said in an interview that he was paid $36,000 a year to design electronic circuitry, but spent many days sitting around with little to do. His department, consisting of 15 people, was several times dismissed for the day at 11 a.m., although their time cards reflected an entire day's work, he said. &quot;You'd walk by a manager's desk, and three or four of them would be sitting there reading newspapers for hours,&quot; he said. </TEXT></DOC>