<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880829-0118 </DOCNO><HL> Wage Stagnation May Be Ending </HL><AUTHOR> William A. Cox </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> ECO </IN><TEXT>   The presumed American birthright of rising living standards has been on hold for 15 years. Average hourly pay of blue-collar and clerical workers is slightly lower in purchasing power now than it was in 1973 and has made no progress even in the prosperous mid-1980s. Counting managers, professionals, other self-employed people, and the rising share of employee compensation received as fringe benefits, real earnings per hour have increased only 0.7% a year from 1973 through 1987.    Income per capita has risen faster than income per hour because a larger share of the adult population is working more hours per capita. In other words, we are working harder for it, and this has its cost in leisure, child care, and home-cooked meals. Per-capita income also rose faster than hourly pay because of the faster rise in interest income and Social Security.    The reasons for stagnant real wages will be much debated in this election year. But this epoch may now be ending, regardless of who becomes the next president.    The world's postwar economic boom foundered in the 1970s just when the U.S. labor force was growing at a pace unmatched since early in the century. Pay fell behind oil-fueled price rises partly because plentiful young workers were a drag on productivity. Young and other marginal workers, including swelling ranks of low-income single mothers, lost ground rapidly relative to others in the general retrenchment in the 1980s.    Intense foreign competition, due mainly to exchange-rate maladjustments, held down wages (as well as prices and profits) in the mid-1980s in all industries exposed to international competition. Some of the lag in average wages stemmed from erosion of union wage scales that were out of line with the rest of the economy. Union wages in manufacturing, construction and transportation have been undermined by spreading nonunion competition. Federal deregulation of the airline and trucking industries accelerated the breakdown of their sheltered wage and price structures by allowing new competition in markets that for decades had been protected.    An important fact explaining the stagnation of productivity and real wages is that bumper crops of new workers were not matched by faster additions to capital. Total hours worked in the private economy grew by only 0.5% a year from 1950 through 1968 but three times as fast from 1969 through 1986. But the wherewithal and motivation for business investment did not suddenly increase with swelling labor supplies. According to the Commerce Department, the net stock of fixed capital in private business expanded more slowly in the later period, as economic growth slowed and profitability declined. Since its peak postwar growth rates of the mid-1960s, net private capital has grown more slowly in each successive business upswing, including the present one. The amount of capital per hour worked has continued to grow, but only about half as fast as before 1968.    Given the drop in domestic saving and extremely high real interest rates since 1979, it is remarkable investment has not slowed by more. Private saving as a share of gross national product was sustained in the 1970s by rising corporate saving (undistributed profits), which offset the decline in personal saving. But corporate saving plunged during the 1980-82 recession and never recovered, while personal saving, after rising in 1978-81, resumed its fall.    The federal government, moreover, had deficits (dissaving) that averaged 0.1% of GNP from 1950 through 1969; during that period, deficits exceeded 1% of GNP only during five years of recession or war. But in 13 of the 19 years from 1970 to date, deficits have been at least 2% of GNP and usually much larger. Since 1980 they have averaged 4%.    As a result, net national saving -- the sum of personal, corporate and government saving -- which averaged 8% of GNP from 1950 to 1979, has fallen to 3.1% from 1980 through 1987. Partly for this reason, real interest rates (represented here by Treasury bill rates minus concurrent consumer inflation), which ranged between 1% and 2% traditionally and were negative during most of the 1970s, averaged 3.7% from 1979 through 1987.    Starting in 1979, the number of teenagers reaching working age began to fall. Labor-force growth plummeted from 2.9% annually in 1978 and 1979, peak years of the last business cycle, to 1.7% in 1985 through 1987. This scarcity of newly trained young workers will intensify until the mid-1990s, with little relief even then. The 1986 immigration law, moreover, limits labor-force growth further by curtailing illegal aliens' access to jobs.    The Labor Department recently forecast that labor-force growth will average only 1.2% annually from 1986 through 2000, assuming that the new law is partially effective in curtailing illegal workers. This means a return to labor-supply conditions of the 1950s, except that many more of the future new workers will be minority and female workers.    With labor scarcity wages will rise, especially for entry-level workers, regardless of minimum-wage legislation. Employers will have to take much more vigorous measures to recruit and train workers. Firms incurring those &quot;start-up&quot; costs will improve amenities to retain people. Opportunities for inexperienced and poorly educated workers will be revolutionized. This makes a shift from welfare to workfare very timely and suggests that improved child-care and work-sharing arrangements are the wave of the future. Conditions favor a reduction in the high rate of poverty among female-headed households.    Effects on wages of the deregulation moves of the late 1970s have nearly run their course. The exchange-rate maladjustment, which depressed U.S. industries, has now been corrected, and American producers are coming back strong. Thus wage catch-up is likely to replace wage givebacks as labor's agenda in the future.    The $64 billion question is whether supplies of home-grown saving available for investment will recover. The federal deficit has been reduced from 5.2% of GNP in 1983 to about 3.2% in 1988, although the improvement was more than offset by the remarkable drying up of private saving. The Gramm-Rudman-Hollings law requires the deficit to be eliminated, and steadily rising surpluses in the Social Security trust fund suggest that the overall budget may in fact be balanced sometime in the 1990s and could move into surplus for 20 years or so.    A big question mark hangs over the future of private savings, corporate as well as personal, both of which are at historic lows. But there may be hope. Corporate saving did not recover from its plunge of the early 1980s because of poor profits in industries facing international competition and woe in the financial sector. Profitability in manufacturing, insurance and commercial banking is now being restored. Even the personal saving rate could rise gradually as the baby-boomers finish acquiring initial stocks of automobiles, housing and equipment, and move into a stage of life characterized by greater saving.    A shift toward scarcer labor and more plentiful capital -- the reverse of conditions that marked the past 15 years -- would raise returns to labor relative to capital. Scarcity of labor is an imminent certainty. A rise in domestic saving, evolving over several years, could result in a long-term decline in real interest rates from today's inordinate levels. Rising wages and lower capital costs would strengthen incentives for labor-saving investment, boosting capital-labor ratios and productivity. Faster growing productivity is the missing link to convert faster rising wages into rising real living standards.    With today's global capital markets, however, an increase in American saving could flow into investments abroad if returns are higher there. The earnings would help to cover payments on the recent buildup of foreign-held assets in this country, but the productivity and wage gains would go to foreigners. The extent to which savings will flow abroad depends in part on the extent to which technology development creates attractive new investment opportunities in this country.    The bill to service the foreign-debt buildup of the 1980s is coming due. This will divert some future income gains abroad. How large this burden will become depends on two interrelated factors: How fast the U.S. saving rate rises and how fast the trade deficit declines. In any event, faster-growing productivity and real wages would make the burden easier to bear and leave more for renewed gains in American living standards.    ---   Mr. Cox was deputy chief economist at the Commerce Department, 1978-81, and now specializes in economic policy at the Congressional Research Service. </TEXT></DOC>