<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880526-0052 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   NORIEGA REBUFFED U.S.-negotiated arrangements to relinquish power.    Shultz said talks intended to induce the military leader to leave Panama had collapsed because Noriega &quot;wouldn't carry through&quot; with the offer worked out by his negotiators. The secretary of state said that further discussions weren't planned, and that &quot;no offers remain on the table.&quot; Under the deal, the U.S. offered to drop drug charges against Noriega in return for his departure. Shultz said the U.S. would work through other countries to get Noriega &quot;out of power.&quot;    Panamanian officials refused to comment on the breakdown of the talks until Noriega delivers a speech today to disclose details of the negotiations.    ---   REAGAN EMBARKED on his first trip to Moscow for a summit with Gorbachev.    The president, at a White House departure ceremony, extolled advancements in U.S.-Soviet relations, but pledged &quot;to go still farther&quot; in the interests of freedom and peace. Reagan arrived in Helsinki, Finland, for a three-day stopover before heading to Moscow for his fourth meeting with Gorbachev, which begins Sunday. On Capitol Hill, GOP Sen. Helms of North Carolina conceded defeat in his effort to amend a superpower treaty banning intermediate-range missiles, clearing the way for ratification.    Senate leaders said the pact could be approved in time to fly the ratification notice to Moscow so Reagan could present it to Gorbachev at the summit.    ---   The Supreme Soviet appears poised to approve legislation to enable budding entrepreneurs to establish private ventures without special permission. In theory, the ventures would be equal to state enterprises. The Law on Cooperatives is considered the nearest thing to private enterprise in the Soviet Union in 60 years.    Moscow announced that 13,310 Red Army soldiers had been killed in the war in Afghanistan. It also said that 35,478 troops were wounded and that 311 remained missing in the Soviet Union's battle with anti-Kabul Moslem insurgents. The Kremlin's forces entered the conflict in 1979.    ---   Israeli-backed militias attacked strongholds of the pro-Iranian Hezbollah in southern Lebanon after Israeli warplanes raided the villages. As many as 40 Moslem guerrillas were killed, Lebanese police said. In the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, Israel's army imposed curfews as Palestinian merchants observed a one-day strike.    ---   The Sandinistas and the Contras agreed to hold a third round of peace talks in Managua in an effort to reach a permanent ceasefire in the six-year-old civil war in Nicaragua. The negotiations were expected to begin by today. In Washington, the White House rejected a call by Democrats to halt a cash aid program for the rebels.    ---   House-Senate conferees agreed to a major expansion of Medicare that would provide coverage of the cost of catastrophic illnesses. The expansion, costing about $5 billion a year, would be paid for by the beneficiaries. The bill must go back to the House and Senate for approval before it is sent to the White House.    ---   A 15-member research team reported that a muscle protein is either missing or defective in muscular dystrophy patients. The finding supports the belief that a genetic defect discovered last year causes the disease and opens the way to determining how lack of the protein leads to the gradual emaciation of muscles.    ---   House Speaker Wright said he wants an ethics inquiry to &quot;clear the air&quot; of questions about his personal finances. A citizens group said last week that Wright may have broken House rules by realizing $54,600 in book royalties through a campaign contractor, and by contacting Sandamp;L regulators on behalf of Democratic campaign donors.    ---   Bush told graduating cadets at West Point that a &quot;liberal elite&quot; has failed to understand that &quot;peace flows from strength.&quot; Dukakis, meanwhile, visited Capitol Hill and picked up a number of endorsements a day after defeating Jackson in Idaho's Democratic primary. Bush easily captured most of the state's GOP delegates.    ---   Vietnam said it is withdrawing 50,000 troops from Cambodia by the end of this year, Western diplomats said. They said the move by Hanoi, which invaded Cambodia 10 years ago, could create a more favorable atmosphere for the Reagan-Gorbachev summit in Moscow, which begins Sunday.    ---   Marcos was hospitalized after suffering chest pains, officials in Honolulu said. The deposed Philippine president, 70, was listed in guarded condition, and his physician ruled out a heart attack. In Manila, the Philippine Senate approved legislation to enforce a ban against nuclear weapons in the country, including those on visiting ships.    ---   Libya's Gadhafi offered aid to reconstruct towns in Chad bombed by Tripoli's warplanes, and said he wanted to end all &quot;outstanding problems&quot; with the N'Djamena government. The offer came in a speech to African ambassadors in the Libyan capital, state-run television said.    ---   Thousands of Chinese soccer fans battled police and besieged a rival team's hotel during a riot Monday night. About 135 people were injured and more than 40 arrested, official reports disclosed. The clashes in Sichuan province were considered the most serious sports violence in China since rioting in Peking after a 1984 World Cup match. </TEXT></DOC>