<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880825-0108 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): A Failing Empire </HL><SO> </SO><CO> FREST EUROP </CO><TEXT>   Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman Gennady I. Gerasimov told the press Tuesday, &quot;We closely follow the situation in Poland.&quot; No doubt. Since at least Babylonian times, imperialists have quivered at the news that their subjects were striking and demonstrating, as the Poles now are doing -- not to mention the Estonians, Hungarians, Czechs et al. You can bet Moscow is watching.    None of this means the Soviet empire is near collapse. The skill with which Mikhail Gorbachev is manipulating events in Afghanistan displays the centuries-old Russian talent for imperial management. Pravda on Monday unintentionally fueled speculation over who killed Pakistani President Zia ul-Haq -- the foremost obstacle to the Gorbachev Afghan strategy -- by asserting that Zia was the &quot;victim of his own policies.&quot;    However, the Politburo cannot be comfortable as it gazes at the political fires flaring up within its domain. For the time being, the Russians will probably wait and watch, hoping that the Poles and other dissidents will run out of courage and return to work. The Soviet proconsul in Warsaw, General Jaruzelski, will be under pressure to keep order, as will his counterparts in other trouble spots.    But neither force nor guile will solve Moscow's central problem: Its empire doesn't work. Successful empires are built on mutual benefits. The British brought trade and civil administration, creating enough good will to preserve the Commonwealth even after the empire was dismantled. Franz Josef introduced a measure of social liberalism, including improved schools, to middle Europe. The Romans brought trade, culture and security of a sort. The Russians brought only communism, an archaic and unworkable system of economic organization, and inflicted it on subject peoples with troops and secret-police thugs.    Because of the failures of communism, General Jaruzelski must constantly demand more austerity from workers who have had enough austerity already and want higher wages instead. He broke up a steel strike with police truncheons in May, so now he has an even bigger strike on his hands.    Power is wielded just as arrogantly in Czechoslovakia, where Milos Jakes is a Gorbachev disciple. Mr. Jakes's reform rhetoric didn't prevent a march Monday by 10,000 people -- unparalleled in 20 years -- to mark the anniversary of the 1968 Soviet invasion. Their chants were &quot;svoboda&quot; -- freedom -- and &quot;Russians Go Home.&quot; The panicky regime responded with police batons and arrests of scores for &quot;hooliganism,&quot; then dismissed the march as not a &quot;matter which need concern our government.&quot; Some 500 sympathy demonstrators in Moscow were dealt with in the same fashion.    Perestroika and glasnost are basically incoherent adjustments to the Soviet system and are generating little public confidence in the Kremlin's abilities or intentions. In the Baltics, Estonians earlier this year won a promise of economic independence &quot;inside a federated Soviet Union&quot; beginning in 1989, including large-scale privatization of industry and agriculture. Now the Estonian grass-roots movement, the Popular Front, is pushing for absolute freedom. It wants Estonian as the official language and Estonian citizenships. New party leaders authorized rallies for the anniversary of the Molotov-Ribbentrop pact, which led to the annexation of the Baltic states in 1940, and people turned out waving Estonian national flags.    The growing list of peoples demanding greater freedom also includes Armenians, Ukrainians, Romanians and East Germans. Yugoslavia, a non-aligned Communist state, is teetering very close to something approximating civil war. At a weekend rally in Titograd 20,000 Serbs and Montenegrins mobbed the streets, demanding weapons to settle their nationalist dispute with the Albanian majority in the impoverished Kosovo province in the south. Relatively prosperous Slovenia in the north meanwhile wants to secede from the mess that the Yugoslav experiment has become.    Clearly, Moscow has a lot to keep watch on. As British historian Paul Johnson wrote on this page Tuesday, a wave of irredentist sentiment is sweeping all across Eastern Europe. There might be those in the West who would argue that at least the Soviet empire has kept a semblance of order among these restive national and ethnic groups that have feuded and fussed over so many centuries. But the order of the prison cell is not something Western democrats should be supporting. The Russians will have enough temptation to ring down the Iron Curtain and launch a new reign of terror, even if it costs them the good will Mr. Gorbachev has so carefully cultivated.    That might preserve order for a time. But as the Kremlin &quot;follows the situation&quot; in Poland, it surely must know that time is running out on the world's only remaining military empire. </TEXT></DOC>