<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880114-0025 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   TAIWAN'S PRESIDENT DIED, intensifying uncertainty about the island's future.    Chiang Ching-kuo, the 77-year-old son of former Chinese leader Chiang Kai-shek, died of a heart attack and was succeeded by Vice President Lee Teng-hui. Taiwan now must decide whether to cling to its insistence that it will someday recover the Chinese mainland, or set off on a more independent path on the back of its phenomenally successful export economy. Chiang's father brought the fleeing Kuomintang government to Taiwan in 1949 as Communists took over the rest of China.    Chiang's death presents a dilemma about who will represent the U.S. at his funeral. Washington broke ties with Taipei and recognized Beijing in 1979.    ---   THE SUPREME COURT RULED school officials can censor student newspapers.    The 5-3 decision continues the court's recent trend of curtailing high school students' rights and giving more latitude to administrators. The court said First Amendment rights come into play only when censorship serves no &quot;valid educational purpose.&quot; The decision came in a case involving a principal at a Missouri high school who censored articles by students about teen-age pregnancy and divorce.    Justices also decided to narrow federal officials' immunity from lawsuits for damages. The administration had asked the court for absolute immunity.    ---   ISRAEL EXPELLED four Palestinians from the occupied territories.    The four, part of a group of nine ordered deported for leading recent protests, were flown to Lebanon in defiance of a U.S.-backed U.N. resolution condemning the deportations. The U.S. said it viewed the action with &quot;deep regret.&quot; Israel has deported more than 1,000 Palestinians from the West Bank and Gaza Strip since 1967. Meanwhile, two more Palestinians were reported killed by Israeli troops as violence continued.    A riot broke out in a Gaza Strip refugee camp during a visit by a U.N. envoy. He and the Israeli government accused each other of starting it.    ---   U.S. and Soviet negotiators are set to resume today talks in Geneva aimed at halving superpower arsenals of long-range nuclear missiles. U.S. negotiators are under orders to take a firm stand on Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative, which the Soviets have said must comply with limits set by the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty.    ---   Costa Rican President Arias ordered three Contra leaders to leave his country unless they abandon their war against Nicaragua's government. The three said they wouldn't halt the struggle. Arias's action came as he and four other Central American presidents prepare to meet tomorrow on the regional peace plan he authored.    ---   Haiti's military government said it will permit access by foreign observers and reporters to polling places in Sunday's presidential vote. The junta had barred such observers after it halted a November vote because of election-day violence. Many residents are reported to be leaving Haitian cities because they fear renewed violence.    ---   The State Department has found that the government of Pakistan likely was involved in a plot to smuggle material for nuclear devices out of the U.S., but is urging that aid not be cut off. The finding arose from the case of a Canadian of Pakistani origin convicted in Philadelphia last month of trying to ship restricted materials to Pakistan.    ---   Thatcher urged NATO leaders to hold a &quot;full-scale&quot; summit before Reagan meets with Soviet leader Gorbachev in Moscow. The British prime minister said it was of the highest importance that Western allies show &quot;unity and solidarity,&quot; particularly in a U.S. election year. NATO leaders last met formally in 1982.    ---   Kim Young Sam met for three hours with Roh Tae Woo, South Korea's president-elect, signaling an easing of political tensions after last month's election. Kim, leader of South Korea's main opposition party, had called for massive protests following the vote because he claimed it had been rigged. He called his meeting with Roh &quot;fruitful.&quot;    ---   Paris will allow seven anti-Khomenei Iranians it deported to Gabon last month to return to France for humanitarian reasons and has arranged for eight others, Iranians and Turkish Kurds, to move to Spain. The deportations were ordered shortly after France reached an accord with Iran to gain freedom for French hostages in Beirut.    The French government approved two bills restricting campaign expenses in the spring presidential vote in an attempt to halt secret funding of political parties.    ---   Italy said it will withdraw a minesweeper and a support vessel from its eight-ship fleet in the Persian Gulf, and may order a frigate out of the gulf soon. Separately, Sen. Specter (R., Penn.), a member of the Intelligence panel, said U.S. minesweeping helicopters recently helped a Soviet vessel clear a mine in the gulf.    ---   Soviet Premier Ryzhkov said recent economic reforms in the Soviet Union and improvements in East-West relations should obviate the need for Western export controls on sensitive technology to the East bloc. Ryzhkov made the remarks on the final full day of a three-day visit to Sweden.    ---   A computer analysis shows that California would gain four House seats if Congress were reapportioned based on the most recent Census Bureau projections, while Florida and Texas would add three apiece. New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania and Michigan would lose two seats each, the private study says. Reapportionment is due in 1991.    ---   A Cuban exile has re-entered the U.S. quietly after being deported in 1982 to Cuba, where he then spent four years in jail. The release of Andres Rodriguez, now living in Miami, was arranged by U.S. and Cuban authorities. His deportation provoked demonstrations by the Cuban exile community because he had no criminal record.    ---   The Soviet magazine Novy Mir has begun publishing installments of Boris Pasternak's novel &quot;Doctor Zhivago,&quot; which had been banned. Pasternak was forced by Soviet authorities to renounce the 1958 Nobel Prize for literature that he won for the book. It is being published under Soviet leader Gorbachev's policy of intellectual openness. </TEXT></DOC>