<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870227-0009 </DOCNO><HL> Personal Taxes (A Special Report): Planning for '87---Disappearing Perks---By Roger Ricklefs</HL><DD> 02/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXES LABORSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)MUTUAL AND MONEY-MARKET FUNDS (FND) </IN><TEXT>   For many executives, the dark side of the new tax law lies in their benefit packages.    If their employers don't help, these executives could find themselves out thousands of dollars and perhaps even forced to postpone retirement, all because of tax-law changes that begin to take effect in 1987.    Among other changes, the much-loved incentive stock options that have made millions of dollars for America's executives have suddenly lost their big tax break. The maximum amount a qualified pension plan can pay an early retiree has been slashed to less than $40,000 a year at age 55 from $75,000. In many cases, this alone could rule out all hope of tropical shuffleboard at an early age. &quot;For some executives, the effect could be devastating,&quot; says Samuel Berger, senior tax manager at Price Waterhouse andamp; Co., an accounting and consulting concern.    The tax-law changes affect benefits of highly paid employees far more than anyone else's. The new law includes numerous changes affecting employee benefits, but a few could have an especially sharp impact. Some companies are willing to pick up some of the slack, but on certain issues, many companies don't know which way they will turn. Stock-option strategy especially generates controversy.    The new tax law &quot;will probably virtually kill the incentive stock option,&quot; says Jude T. Rich, president of Sibson andamp; Co., a Princeton, N.J., consulting concern. But Avery E. Neumark, a senior manager at accounting and consulting firm Ernst andamp; Whinney, says, &quot;The incentive stock option is still a viable tool, and I think a lot of companies will keep it.&quot;    With incentive stock options, an executive doesn't pay any tax until the stock is sold. In the past, the gain incurrred tax at only the capital gains rate. But with another kind of stock option, known as the &quot;nonqualified&quot; option, as soon as an executive exercises the option, he pays ordinary income tax on the difference between the option price and the fair market price. When he sells the stock, he also pays tax on the capital gains on any rise from this basis price.    But when a nonqualified option is exercised, the benefit that is taxable for the executive is deductible for the company. Thus, nonqualified options cost companies much less than incentive options, which don't produce such company deductions.    Now that capital gains will be taxed at the same rate as ordinary income, the executive will eventually pay the same tax on incentive as on nonqualified options. Many companies therefore figure they may as well switch to nonqualified options to get the tax deduction.    In a survey of 100 major companies late last year, Sibson found that 72% had eliminated incentive options or intended to do so. Another 18% were considering the move. United Technologies Corp., Hartford, Conn., which previously had both nonqualified and incentive options, says it recently dropped incentive options, largely &quot;because of the elimination of the capital gains tax.&quot;    But many companies are torn because the tax on exercising a nonqualified option hits executives when they don't have funds from the sale of the stock. &quot;We're still debating this,&quot; says John Kambanis, vice president of human resources at Bell andamp; Howell Co., Skokie, Ill. Eliminating incentive options in favor of the nonqualified variety would subject executives to a tax at exercise, &quot;but we have to look hard at the impact on the company,&quot; he adds.    In addition, some companies figure the preferential tax rate on capital gains may eventually return, making incentive options more attractive again. And the need for cash to pay a tax on nonqualified options at the point of exercise often encourages executives to sell the stock quickly, Mr. Neumark says. &quot;The companies that will keep incentive options want to encourage executives to hold stock for long periods of time,&quot; he says.    P. Joseph Walshe, partner at the accounting and consulting firm of Coopers andamp; Lybrand, adds, that among his client group, &quot;there is not as much movement to nonqualified options as we might have expected.&quot;    In another approach, some companies are considering deemphasizing options entirely in favor of more cash now that all stock-option profits are taxed at ordinary income tax rates. Of the major companies surveyed in the Sibson study, 22% plan to decrease the use of stock options of all sorts and a quarter of these companies plan to eliminate them entirely.    &quot;I think there is some renewed interest in cash,&quot; Mr. Walshe says. But companies still want executives to identify with the stock, he says. &quot;Thus, we are seeing discussion of cash incentive plans linked to stock performance,&quot; he adds.    If companies are undecided about stock-option strategy, most intend to help offset the new tax law provisions that slash the value of 401(k) company-sponsored tax-deferred savings plans to high-paid workers. The maximum an employee can contribute on a deferred basis to these plans has been cut to $7,000 a year from $30,000.    &quot;Most of the big companies will move to some sort of restoration,&quot; says Everett T. Allen, Jr., vice president of Towers, Perrin, Forster andamp; Crosby, consultants. For instance, Bell andamp; Howell is expanding the list of employees offered its executive deferred compensation plan. Many companies will accumulate funds in a book reserve to make up for the loss of the benefit and give the person the money when he leaves the company, Mr. Allen says.    Some executives worry because these funds, held for many years, will be unsecured. Thus some companies plan to establish &quot;rabbi trusts,&quot; originally devised to cover an agreement between a rabbi and his congregation. In such a trust, the money remains an asset of the company, so an executive doesn't pay any tax until he receives the cash. Because the money is a company asset only for purposes of credit, it can be touched only in case of bankruptcy -- and not in case of a takeover.    Mr. Walshe says some companies that don't have 401(k) plans are talking of installing them to offset the loss of the Individual Retirement Account deferral opportunity for many employees. Effective this year, high-paid workers covered by retirement plans can no longer defer as much as $2,000 a year in an IRA. Beyond this, most companies plan nothing to offset the loss of the IRA advantage, consultants say.    But companies are helping executives take advantage of one big break in the transition to lower maximum tax rates: the chance to defer income to future years when tax rates will be lower. &quot;People are doing it like mad,&quot; says Elaine Church, a senior tax manager at Price Waterhouse. &quot;Some are deferring 100% of 1987 income,&quot; she adds. But consultants say many executives avoid deferring income beyond 1988 for fears that tax rates may rise thereafter.    On another key issue, companies still worry about how to handle the new rule that slashes the amount a qualified pension plan can pay to an early retiree. Depending on date of birth, the maximum for a person retiring at age 55 will plummet to between $34,902 and $39,888 a year from $75,000 under the old code, Towers Perrin calculates. The figures rise for those retiring at later ages, but the change could rule out early retirement for many.    American Express Co. says it plans to offset the full loss for everyone. &quot;We don't want to make it so that people can't afford to retire early,&quot; says Kevin Flatley, vice president for employee benefits.    But given the potential costs, other companies may supplement only when the early retirement is company-induced, consultants say. &quot;This is an issue not just for top executives, but for masses of managers,&quot; says Mr. Rich of Sibson. &quot;Companies are struggling with this; they still don't know what they will do.&quot;    ---   Mr. Ricklefs, based in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau, is a national correspondent.    ---   How Tax Overhaul Affects Benefits   --Incentive stock options lose privileged capital-gains tax rate.    --Employee's maximum deferred contribution to a 401(k) plan slashed to $7,000 a year from $30,000.    --Reduction of yearly maximum paid to early retirees from a qualified pension plan.    --End of tax deferred IRA contributions for higher paid, qualified pension plan participants.    --New vesting schedules for qualified pension plans.    --Forward averaging for lump sum qualified plan distributions halved to five years.    --Tax deduction ended for interest on loans over $50,000 from certain company-owned life insurance policies.    --Tighter non-discrimination tests for fringe benefits. </TEXT></DOC>