<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870213-0033 </DOCNO><HL> Insider Trading: The Scandal Spreads --Arrests Stun Employees at Kidder Peabody, GoldmanAnd Come at a Crucial Juncture for Both Brokerages---This article was prepared by Steve Swartz,Michael W. Miller and Janet Guyon in New York</HL><DD> 02/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GESTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Workers at Kidder Peabody Group Inc. and Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co. were stunned by the sight of federal marshals flashing handcuffs and by the thought of what the arrests of three current and former executives might mean for two of Wall Street's oldest and most prestigious firms.    &quot;This kind of thing doesn't happen around here,&quot; said one senior Kidder official, who was so taken aback by the day's events he couldn't remember what time the marshals arrived.    &quot;Our lawyers told us we were fine,&quot; said one clearly upset Goldman partner, referring to the firm's possible involvement in the government's widening insider-trading probe. With apparently no warning of yesterday's events, Goldman's chairman, John L. Weinberg, had just left on a trip to Tokyo, sources at the firm said.    Yesterday's arrests come at a crucial time for Goldman and Kidder. Kidder is still adjusting to its takeover last year by General Electric Co. Goldman is considering whether to undertake a public offering of stock to bolster its capital position.    Founded in 1869, Goldman Sachs prides itself on its reputation as one of Wall Street's most elite firms. Goldman partners routinely have emphasized their teamwork approach to investment banking and insisted that they had higher ethical standards than competitors'. For example, Goldman proudly proclaimed that its investment bankers weren't allowed to take phone calls from arbitragers, and that the firm rarely advised firms planning hostile takeovers.    Kidder Peabody, founded four years earlier, long has been a socially well-connected and profitable investment bank. But its power on Wall Street ebbed in recent years as it was overtaken by larger, more aggressive firms. Kidder officials have recently hoped that its link with General Electric and GE's large amount of capital would restore it to its earlier preeminence.    Arrested were Robert M. Freeman, head of the arbitrage department and a partner at Goldman; Richard Wigton, head of over-the-counter trading and risk arbitrage at Kidder; and Timothy L. Tabor, a former arbitrager at Kidder, who most recently had worked at Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. All three men were charged with securities fraud. The charges against Mr. Tabor pertained to his activities while employed at Kidder.    Employees at all three firms were stunned as much by the way yesterday's events took place as they were by the charges themselves. Messrs. Wigton and Freeman were led from their offices by federal marshals; Mr. Wigton was frisked and handcuffed. Mr. Tabor was arrested at his New York apartment.    A Kidder official said he was so surprised to see the marshals his first reaction was to inspect their credentials to make sure they were authentic. A Merrill Lynch official, informed by telephone of Mr. Tabor's arrest, called federal officials back to make sure the original call wasn't a prank.    All three firms said they had no knowledge of any wrongdoing by their employees.    A GE spokesman said it was &quot;premature&quot; to take any action as a result of the events at its 80%-owned Kidder Peabody unit. But executives at GE's financial services unit speculated that Fairfield, Conn.-based GE might become more involved in Kidder's affairs as a result of the government's charges. GE has just completed an annual review of policies on conflict-of-interest, corrupt business practices and antitrust matters, one company executive said.    Although Kidder is developing a host of businesses with other parts of GE's financial services organization, GE thus far hasn't placed any of its executives at the firm or leaned on Kidder to adopt its operational or management style.    Yesterday's activities also could affect Goldman's decision about whether to conduct a stock offering. While officials of the firm emphasized recently that no decision had been made, it is known that they had been studying such details as how to structure employee compensation after a public offering.    The government's charges against Mr. Freeman raised the potential issue of future lawsuits against the firm by disgruntled investors or clients. The possibility of such suits could damage public reception of a stock offering, Wall Street professionals said.    At Kidder, employees expressed particular shock at the arrest of the 52-year-old Mr. Wigton. An amiable Wall Street veteran who had been at Kidder for decades, he was described as an unlikely figure to be embroiled in an insider-trading scheme.    &quot;Wigton was a company man -- he'd been part of the family here for years,&quot; said one surprised employee.    &quot;He's the most honest, straightforward guy in the world,&quot; said another. &quot;He had no idea he was the target of investigations.&quot;    Shortly after Mr. Wigton's arrest, smoke burst out on the same floor as his office. &quot;People said, 'They're burning all their records,'&quot; said one employee. Paper jammed in a computer printer was causing the smoke.    In contrast to the low-profile Mr. Wigton, the other two men arrested were considered two of Wall Street's most visible, aggressive traders.    The 33-year-old Mr. Tabor in particular enjoyed a reputation as a high-flier. His sister once called him &quot;a garden-variety yuppie on a very high scale.&quot; Three Merrill Lynch officials yesterday described Mr. Tabor as &quot;arrogant.&quot;    A former Rhodes Scholar, Mr. Tabor spent six years as an accountant at Peat, Marwick, Mitchell andamp; Co., where he often worked around the clock to set a firm record for most hours billed in a year: 3,200.    Mr. Tabor gained attention in the past year by occupying three prominent Wall Street positions in rapid succession: the No. 2 job in Kidder's arbitrage department, where he had worked since 1983; the head of a new arbitrage unit at Chemical New York Corp. and, finally, the head of risk arbitrage at Merrill Lynch.    After the Ivan Boesky scandal broke last fall, Mr. Tabor's unit at Merrill Lynch, like most arbitrage operations, had heavy losses. Shortly afterward, Mr. Tabor was stripped of his day-to-day trading duties. Merrill Lynch officials said that in early January they had told him to find employment elsewhere.    Mr. Freeman, 44 years old, described as trim and athletic, is a former varsity basketball player at Dartmouth College. A Goldman partner since 1978, he was described by one arbitrager as &quot;a very intense guy. He's a bit like Bobby Knight,&quot; the Indiana University basketball coach known for his emotional outbursts, the arbitrager said.    Said another arbitrager: &quot;He was highly respected in the business. I was pretty surprised to see him in this.&quot;    Despite having been named in previous government subpoenas, Mr. Freeman remained active at Goldman, officials at the firm have said. Mr. Freeman had assured the firm that he hadn't violated any laws, Goldman partners have said. Though the arbitrage unit at Goldman consisted of only about a half dozen professionals, it was one of the company's most profitable units.    At Goldman, senior managers canceled midday appointments for an emergency meeting to discuss Mr. Freeman's arrest. As the afternoon wore on, an air of crisis hung about the firm. Television cameramen, chased out of the lobby of the firm's headquarters by security guards, hovered around the long line of limousines parked outside Goldman's headquarters.    ---   Phillip L. Zweig contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>