<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870528-0101 </DOCNO><HL> NRC Rule Holds Power Plants 'Hostage'---By Gerald Charnoff</HL><DD> 05/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)UTILITIES (UTI) </IN><TEXT>   Two nuclear plants that are ready to operate sit idle, &quot;hostages&quot; to the surrounding state and local governments' refusal to develop emergency evacuation plans.    The problem stems from Nuclear Regulatory Commission rules that tie evacuation plans to the granting of operating licenses but do not compel localities to design such plans. When the NRC created the regulations in 1980 in response to the 1979 accident at Three Mile Island, the nuclear industry expressed fears about putting so much control in the hands of the state and local governments, which alone possess the &quot;police power&quot; required for such evacuation functions as activating sirens and directing traffic. The industry warned that state and local governments that refuse to develop plans have effective veto power over nearby plants.    That's exactly what happened in Suffolk County, N.Y., which since 1982 has refused to cooperate with Long Island Lighting Co. in emergency planning for the Shoreham plant. The state has backed the county's position. Similarly, since 1984, several Massachusetts towns (recently joined by the state) have refused to participate in emergency planning for the plant at Seabrook, N.H.    Shoreham and Seabrook are only the most celebrated of similar cases. In the past several years, state or local governments, or both, have publicly withdrawn from, or not gotten involved in, emergency planning covering at least five other nuclear plants, or have threatened to do so.    Officials involved in these cases have maintained that evacuation is not feasible. But a history of large, successful evacuations -- conducted in the absence of any specific emergency plans -- belies those assertions. In August 1965, Baton Rouge, La. (population 150,000), was almost totally evacuated in only two hours following an accident involving a chlorine-carrying barge. In June 1972, virtually all of Wilkes-Barre, Pa. (population 75,000), was evacuated in an hour after flood warnings. Traffic-engineering analyses demonstrate that the Shoreham and Seabrook areas could be evacuated in a matter of hours -- well within the range of evacuation times for other U.S. nuclear plants.    However, the best evidence of the workability of nuclear-emergency plans is their actual use in nonnuclear emergencies. For example, 17,000 residents of St. Charles Parish, La., were evacuated in 2 1/2 hours, in a driving rain, following an explosion at a chemical plant on Dec. 11, 1982. Emergency plans for the nearby Waterford 3 nuclear plant were used. Similarly, 10,000 people were evacuated from Cedar Rapids, Iowa, on July 15, 1985, following a fire at a sewage-treatment plant that dispersed toxic fumes. Officials there relied on draft emergency plans developed for the Duane Arnold nuclear plant. In 1985 alone, at least 13 communities relied on nuclearemergency response plans and capabilities for response to nonnuclear emergencies.    Whether premised on sincere (albeit misguided) beliefs that emergency evacuation would be impossible or based purely on generalized opposition to nuclear power, the result of state and local refusals to plan at Shoreham and Seabrook has been the same: an impasse. Weary of seemingly futile negotiations for the release of these &quot;hostage plants,&quot; the NRC has developed a plan to free them. Under a rule proposed in early March, the NRC could license a plant despite a lack of local emergency planning if the utility itself prepares an evacuation plan for the public reflecting the likely governmental response in the event of an actual emergency.    Response to the proposal has been strong and divided. Many officials in New York, Massachusetts and elsewhere have said the proposal infringes upon &quot;states' rights&quot; and is an attempt to remove governments from participation in emergency planning. On the contrary, the rule is drawn precisely to deal with those that refuse to participate. And it is entirely appropriate for the federal government to establish rules that prevent parochial interests from frustrating the national interest in a diverse range of energy sources.    But while the proposed rule is laudable, it does not go far enough. NRC regulations should be amended to eliminate off-site emergency planning requirements. This is not to say that the NRC should turn its back on the many local governments that desire nuclear-emergency response capabilities. Rather, the NRC and the Federal Emergency Management Agency should continue to review plans and critique drills when local governments request that assistance. The governments would still be free to do as much -- or as little -- planning as they pleased. However, a plant's operating license would not depend on the cooperation of local governments in emergency planning, nor would utilities be required to assume traditional governmental functions by drafting plans for governments that refuse to cooperate.    Divorcing emergency planning from NRC licensing would place the responsibility for off-site planning with those having the authority to do so, and likely would result in state and local planning for Shoreham and Seabrook. Once it is clear that plant operation will be authorized, independent of off-site planning, previously uncooperative officials are likely to change their positions and participate in planning to ensure their constituents' safety. Indeed, they are obligated to do so. Their solemn oath of office includes no exception for nuclear emergencies.    Some members of Congress -- including Sen. Edward Kennedy of Massachusetts and Sens. Daniel Moynihan and Alfonse D'Amato of New York -- have threatened legislative retaliation if the NRC adopts its proposed rule. The wholesale elimination of the NRC's off-site emergency-planning requirements proposed here may further provoke them. Yet nothing in the Atomic Energy Act requires the NRC to consider off-site planning in its licensing decisions.    Prior to Three Mile Island, many plants were legally licensed without such plans. The act allows the NRC to demand of its licensees what they may reasonably and responsibly do to ensure the safety of their facilities. But off-site emergency response is the responsibility of state and local officials, not of private utilities. Just as any industrial enterprise may reasonably assume that local authorities will exercise their police powers to provide adequate fire and police protection, so, too, should nuclear-plant owners be permitted to rely on the responsible exercise of those powers.    Decoupling off-site emergency planning and NRC licensing also would be consistent with Congress's recent reenactment of Superfund. In response to the Bhopal tragedy, that law was amended to require emergency planning for areas near toxic-chemical facilities. However, while the new Superfund rules were generally patterned on the NRC's 1980 regulation, there is one major difference: Superfund's rules stop short of conditioning chemical-plant operations on the existence of emergency plans. Clearly, Congress has learned from the NRC's experience. Has the NRC learned the same lesson?    ---   Mr. Charnoff is a partner in a Washington law firm that represents nuclear-industry interests. </TEXT></DOC>