<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870326-0131 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint:Down the Memory Hole With the Contras---By Michael Kinsley</HL><DD> 03/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM </IN><TEXT>   The memory hole: That's what George Orwell called the place where outmoded facts and arguments disappeared at the Ministry of Truth in &quot;1984.&quot; Arturo Cruz disappeared down the Reagan administration memory hole this month when he quit the leadership of the Nicaraguan contras, complaining that the American-invented force could never be turned into a genuine popular resistance movement. Previously, the presence of this certified democrat and anti-Somocista was proof that the contras were &quot;a group that deserves American support,&quot; as The Wall Street Journal put it. &quot;Perhaps not all of the contras are democrats,&quot; the Journal wrote a year ago, &quot;but all of the democrats are contras.&quot;    Now Mr. Cruz has lost his luster. According to the conservative columnists Evans and Novak: &quot;Cruz is a 63-year-old international bureaucrat who, aside from a brief stint on the Sandinista junta, spent the past 20 years outside Nicaragua.&quot; As Mr. Cruz's daughter pointed out in the Washington Post, this echoes what the Sandinistas have been saying about Mr. Cruz for years. In her own column, Jeane Kirkpatrick labeled Mr. Cruz a &quot;technocrat&quot; and raised the possibility that &quot;Cruz and his supporters had sought control over the contras in order to negotiate their surrender to Managua.&quot;    Contra supporters accuse critics of exaggerating the importance of Mr. Cruz's departure. But it wasn't the critics who built up this admirable but ineffectual man as a charismatic moral hero and natural leader. The invention and disinvention of the Arturo Cruz legend is typical of the propaganda war that has been waged in support of the contras.    Arturo Cruz isn't the only person to disappear down the memory hole. Remember Eden Pastora? An authentic hero of the revolution against Anastasio Somoza, &quot;Comandante Zero&quot; was paraded around Washington like a prize bull when he defected from the Sandinistas and set up a resistance movement. But when the CIA found him too difficult to work with, his funds were cut off and he was stripped of his hero status.    The next hero to take the plunge will be Rep. Les Aspin. When he broke the promise that got him elected chairman of the House Armed Services Committee and supported contra aid last year, he was hailed as a man of vision and &quot;conscience&quot; (by The New Republic, since you ask). This year he voted against contra aid. Expect Rep. Aspin's vision to be dreadfully astigmatic next time it's tested by these optometrists.    What to do about an oppressive Marxist regime consolidating power in our own hemisphere is not an easy question. But the propaganda campaign in favor of the contra solution has been so dishonest that reasonable people might well conclude that a serious case cannot be made. Last spring, when the Nicaraguan army launched a small attack over the border into Honduras, the administration carried on as if Sandinista perfidy knew no bounds. This was at a time when the U.S. was (as it still is) promoting raids across the same border from Honduras into Nicaragua.    When the CIA was creating the contras more or less from scratch, the administration line was that America's role was merely to aid an indigenous fighting force that had arisen as a natural response to Sandinista repression. Now we are starting to hear the opposite argument: We can't abandon the contras because we created them in the first place. With the real possibility that aid may now be cut off, contra supporters rail against congressional zigzags and write disquisitions about the difficulty of maintaining a consistent foreign policy in a democracy. But Congress voted against contra aid many times before finally approving it last year. In their long battle to achieve that reversal, contra supporters did not fret over the dangers of zigzags and inconsistency.    The administration makes no bones anymore about its goal in Nicaragua, which is overthrowing the Sandinistas. But it was not always thus. At first we were only trying to interdict arms being smuggled into El Salvador. Then we were only trying to get guarantees of no Soviet troops or weapons and no interference with Central American neighbors. President Reagan said in 1984 that the U.S. &quot;does not seek to destabilize or overthrow the government of Nicaragua.&quot; Down the memory hole with that one.    And remember this one? &quot;I know every American parent concerned about the drug problem will be outraged to learn that top Nicaraguan government officials are deeply involved in drug trafficking. . . . There seems to be no crime to which the Sandinistas will not stoop.&quot; That was President Reagan a year ago. The Drug Enforcement Agency immediately denied any connection between drug smuggling and &quot;top Nicaraguan officials.&quot; Meanwhile, there has been inconclusive but serious evidence that some contras are also involved in drug smuggling. No surprise: This is Central America after all. But the drug issue no longer serves the simplistic fantasy of good vs. evil that Mr. Reagan wishes to promote. Down the memory hole. Forget you ever heard it.    A bigger aspect of that fantasy is also in the process of being discarded: the vision of an antiseptic war fought by rebels with an exquisite concern for human rights who avoid harm to civilians. As stories of contra atrocities dribble into the newspapers -- a baby with a slit throat here, an old man blown up there, women abducted, families shot, a health clinic burned down -- the argument will shift: war is hell, these things happen, freedom is costly. The State Department has defended bloody contra attacks on government-sponsored farm cooperatives, saying that these civilian facilities have military aspects.    And, of course, that's true. In a Marxist society geared up for war, there are no clear lines separating officials, soldiers and civilians. A guerrilla struggle can't be won by attacking only card-carrying Sandinistas. You can't fill a rebel army with graduates of advanced sensitivity training. But obscuring these truths about guerrilla war has been central to the propaganda campaign for the contras.    All that has kept the antiseptic fantasy alive this long is the contras' own failure to do very much. If the promised &quot;spring offensive&quot; comes to pass, the true nature of the enterprise will become impossible to ignore. Harm to civilians is not just a matter of random atrocities; destroying a society and an economy is how guerrilla war works. The Nicaraguan government has slashed health and education spending to help pay for the war. The New York Times reports that the CIA is helping the contras to plot forays against dams, bridges, electric plants and so on. The goal is to undermine morale and confidence in the government: a perfectly legitimate goal if you believe in the cause, but impossible to achieve without vast civilian suffering.    Any sensible policy must meet the test of cost-benefit analysis. That's not timorous lack of vision speaking. That's life -- it's why we don't invade the Soviet Union tomorrow. Supporters of the contras, at least in public, consistently misrepresent both the costs and the potential benefits of their policy: the amount of blood and misery that will be poured in, and the likelihood that democracy will emerge at the other end. Maybe an honest case can be made, but the administration has not tried to make it.    ---   Mr. Kinsley edits The New Republic. </TEXT></DOC>