<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871116-0108 </DOCNO><HL> U.S. Sanctions Against Brazilian GoodsIncrease the Likelihood of a Trade War---By Eduardo LachicaStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MSFT AAPL TATE ACADMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)COMPUTERS (EDP)AEROSPACE (ARO)INDUSTRIAL EQUIPMENT, MACHINE TOOLS (IND)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   President Reagan's order to impose trade sanctions against Brazil heightened the likelihood of a trade war between the U.S. and one of its most important Third World trading partners.    Brazil appears unlikely to remove barriers against imports of U.S. computer products in order to avert sanctions ordered by Mr. Reagan on Friday. &quot;Sanctions aren't the way to go about it,&quot; said Brazilian Finance Minister Luiz Carlos Bresser Pereira. &quot;They won't make Brazil change its mind.&quot;    Brazilian President Jose Sarney, meanwhile, called the U.S. decision a &quot;discriminatory threat&quot; and said he had instructed the Finance and Foreign ministries to study possible retaliatory measures.    Brazil, besides being one of the U.S.'s most important Third World trading partners in terms of volume, relies heavily on its export earnings to help pay its massive foreign debt, much of which is owed to U.S. banks. Unless Brazil changes course, Mr. Reagan's order will result by the end of December in the imposition of punitive tariffs against $105 million in Brazilian shipments to the U.S. That figure represents the White House's estimate of the injury to U.S. exporters caused by Brazil's controversial &quot;informatics&quot; policy, which effectively reserves markets for information products in Brazil for domestic producers at the expense of foreign competitors.    The White House said the U.S. next week will publish a list of products from Brazil that may be subject to the retaliatory tariff increases. The final list will be set after public hearings to be held within the next three weeks. U.S. trade-policy officials said imports from Brazil that may be subject to penalty duties include commercial aircraft, machine tools, men's leather footwear, wood furniture, ceramic tiles, earthenware products and other items.    The president also authorized a ban on Brazilian data-processing products that benefit from barriers to U.S. software products in Brazil. The list of these affected products also will be determined later.    Mr. Reagan's aides said Brazil, at a minimum, should reverse a decision it made last month to deny six Brazilian companies the right to import Microsoft Corp.'s MS-DOS software system. This action was taken by Brazil's Special Secretariat for Informatics, or SEI, which supervises the market-reserve policy.    The U.S.-Brazil impasse could be solved if SEI reverses itself or if a Brazilian review body called the National Committee on Information Policy, or Conin, overrules SEI. Four of the six Brazilian applicants already have filed an appeal, and there is enough time for either agency to act before the U.S. sanctions take effect.    The Brazilian Senate also could lower the heat by passing a pending software-copyright bill without certain protectionist features that could defeat its original intention of protecting foreign software from piracy. One of the provisions that the U.S. finds objectionable would impose tariffs of as much as 200% on imported software.    However, Brazil doesn't appear to be in an accommodating mood. Some of its economic nationalists are demanding the approval of another bill pending in the Brazilian Senate that would authorize retaliation against any country that imposes sanctions against Brazil.    At worst, U.S. traders fear, Brazil could slap retaliatory sanctions on $278 million in U.S. data-processing products shipped to Brazil every year. Most of these products are mainframe computers or other advanced electronics goods that aren't covered by the informatics policy.    The U.S. computer industry, including International Business Machines Corp. and other mainframe producers that so far haven't been hurt by Brazilian trade policies, has closed ranks to back U.S. sanctions against Brazil. &quot;We've always urged restraint, but now we've concluded that it's time for action,&quot; said a spokeswoman for the Computer and Business Equipment Manufacturers Association, which is made up of both large and smaller producers.    The U.S. software industry also rallied behind the president. &quot;Market-reservation policies are applied with bureaucratic mischief and have no place among the civilized countries of the world,&quot; asserted Kenneth Wasch, executive director of the Washington-based Software Publishers Association.    Microsoft, in a prepared statement, voiced its appreciation for the administration's action and urged that Brazil provide better legal protection for intellectual-property rights of foreign concerns. Microsoft has organized a group of other U.S. software and personal-computer concerns, including Apple Computer Inc., WordPerfect Corp. and Ashton-Tate Co., that has lobbied the administration in recent weeks to impose sanctions on Brazil.    Brazil's policies have especially perturbed Apple, which charges that its personal computers are being widely copied in Brazil. &quot;We certainly welcome the sanctions,&quot; said David Barram, Apple's vice president for community and government relations, who was one of Apple's key lobbyists for sanctions.    Another American software concern, Autodesk Inc., of Sausalito, Calif., pulled out of Brazil altogether last month in frustration at the government's policies. Threatening sanctions &quot;is a good, symbolic statement to Brazil that they have to come up with a more reasonable policy,&quot; said Christopher Record, general counsel for Autodesk, who was the company's main negotiator with Brazilian authorities.    U.S. officials charge that Brazil's decision in the Microsoft case violated an understanding between the two countries to settle informatics disputes bilaterally. They also contend that the lack of copyright protection in Brazil for software has exposed Microsoft and other U.S. software vendors to the risks of increased piracy.    The dispute will be difficult to resolve both because it has ignited national pride in Brazil and because of bread-and-butter concerns. Brazilian officials argue privately that they have to protect investors who have put up large amounts of capital in minicomputer and software companies on the assumption that the government would live up to its promise to give them a competition-free market.    There are no plans for Trade Representative Clayton Yeutter to revisit the Brazilian capital, but State Department aides said U.S. Ambassador Harry Shlaudeman will seek a revival of the interrupted dialogue between the two governments during the few weeks remaining before the U.S. sanctions become final.    ---   John Barham in Sao Paulo, Brazil, and Brenton R. Schlender in San Francisco contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>