<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880510-0018 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE SENATE POSTPONED debate on an arms-control pact with the Soviets.    Citing serious differences with Moscow over how to verify compliance with the treaty to eliminate U.S. and Soviet medium-range nuclear missiles, senators said the dispute should be resolved before ratification proceeds. Debate had been scheduled to begin tomorrow, but Armed Services and Intelligence panel leaders sought the delay. Reagan and Soviet leader Gorbachev signed the pact last year, and the administration had urged ratification before a summit later this month.    A top U.S. arms-control adviser said September was now the likely deadline for a pact halving superpower arsenals of long-range nuclear missiles.    ---   POLISH WORKERS REJECTED a management offer at a shipyard in Gdansk.    Workers at the Lenin shipyard, demanding that Warsaw recognize Solidarity, rebuffed the government-authorized offer of pay raises and reinstatement of fired activists. Leaders of the outlawed union called for nationwide work stoppages to back the workers and deter authorities from using force against them. The government, claiming the shipyard was losing money, threatened to close it if work doesn't resume.    A sympathy strike at the giant Ursus tractor factory near Warsaw apparently fizzled after most employees refused to heed a call by activists to stop work.    ---   Rival militias in Beirut fought hand-to-hand for control of Shiite slums in the southern part of the city, and 65 were reported killed and 150 wounded. The Syrian army warned it would step in if fighting doesn't cease. The fighting raised fears about the fate of 18 foreign hostages, including nine Americans, believed held in the area.    ---   The State Department said Shultz will travel to the Middle East early next month in another attempt to persuade Arab and Israeli leaders to agree to talks on Palestinian self-rule and an overall peace accord. Separately, a Palestinian protester was killed by Israeli troops during a general strike on the West Bank.    ---   A Soviet opposition party succeeded in meeting despite a police swoop Sunday in which 20 members were detained and a blockade by authorities of a planned meeting place and six more detentions yesterday, a spokesman said. Organizers of the party, the Democratic Union, say it was formed as an alternative to the Communist Party.    ---   Afghan rebels fired 17 missiles into Kabul, killing at least 11 people and wounding 12, the Soviet news agency Tass said. Western diplomats said attacks on the capital, which had been relatively secure until recently, are expected to rise as rebels try to demonstrate strength as a planned withdrawal of Soviet troops proceeds.    ---   A U.S. safety board is expected to conclude that the August crash of a Northwest Air jet in Detroit was caused by the crew's failure to properly extend flaps. The report on the crash, which killed 156, is due today. It is expected to leave open the question of whether a warning system malfunctioned or was shut off.    ---   Indian security forces fought an extended battle with Sikh extremists inside the Golden Temple in Amritsar, and at least five people were killed and five injured, police said. About 2,500 paramilitary troopers surrounded the temple, the Sikhs' holiest shrine, and clamped a curfew on the central district of the northern city.    ---   Denmark's election campaign drew to a close as voters prepare to decide today on whether to tighten a ban on ships carrying nuclear weapons into Danish ports. The government called the snap election after passage of the opposition-sponsored anti-nuclear resolution, which the government said threatens Denmark's NATO membership.    ---   A federal jury in Seattle convicted a woman of killing her husband and another woman in 1986 by lacing their Excedrin painkillers with cyanide. Two of the counts against Stella Nickell carry life sentences. It was the nation's first case involving charges of death through product-tampering.    ---   Panamanian banks reopened for limited withdrawals for the first time since a U.S.engineered cash crisis began two months ago, but the mobs of angry depositors predicted by opponents of Gen. Noriega didn't materialize. The reopening, which the government decreed last week, appeared to be a blow to U.S. efforts to oust Noriega.    ---   Secretary of Education Bennett said he will resign his post in the Reagan cabinet in mid-September. The secretary, a frequent critic of standards in American schools, said he hasn't made any definite plans.    ---   The U.N. Security Council voted to condemn the use of chemical weapons in the Iran-Iraq war, but failed to censure either side. It was the first U.N. resolution dealing with gas warfare in the 7 1/2-year-old conflict. Previous U.N. reports have said Iraq has repeatedly used chemical weapons.    ---   Died: Robert A. Heinlein, 80, science fiction writer, Sunday, in Carmel, Calif. </TEXT></DOC>