<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870122-0034 </DOCNO><HL> Lawyer David W.C. Clark Is ChargedWith Embezzlement, Use of Journal Data---By William PowerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> DJSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)PUBLISHING (PUB)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   David W.C. Clark was indicted on 55 felony counts that charge the lawyer with embezzling $3.7 million from clients of his former law firm and with using nonpublic information misappropriated from The Wall Street Journal by R. Foster Winans in 1983 and 1984.    A federal grand jury handed up the indictment 2 1/2 years after Mr. Winans, a former Journal reporter, was charged with insider trading for leaking advance word of market-sensitive Journal stories. Mr. Winans was convicted in 1985 of passing the stolen information to a former Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co. broker, Peter N. Brant, who then, the grand jury charges, passed along some of the information to his client Mr. Clark.    The indictment of Mr. Clark, 37 years old, charges the former partner of Appleton, Rice andamp; Perrin, a New York law firm, with 38 counts of using inside information in 1983 and 1984; 10 counts of mail fraud and wire fraud regarding embezzlement from his clients; three counts of tax evasion; and a count each of false statements and perjury before the Securities and Exchange Commission. Two other felony counts charge him with filing a false federal income tax return and making false statements to get a bank loan.    Mr. Clark faces a maximum of 270 years in prison and $262,000 in fines. He will be arraigned in federal court here next Thursday.    Three people have been convicted after trials in the Winans case: Mr. Winans, his friend David Carpenter, and Kenneth P. Felis, formerly a broker with Mr. Brant at Kidder Peabody. Mr. Brant pleaded guilty to three felony counts and cooperated with the government prosecution. Mr. Brant is awaiting sentencing. Messrs. Winans, Carpenter and Felis have appealed their convictions to the U.S. Supreme Court, which recently agreed to hear their cases.    Though Mr. Clark never appeared at the trial of Mr. Winans, he was the subject of extensive testimony by Mr. Brant. It was Mr. Clark, Mr. Brant said, who introduced him to the free-spending, fast-living, aristocratic world that fueled Mr. Brant's own ultimately self-destructive ambitions.    According to colleagues of the two men, Mr. Clark brought Mr. Brant into the exclusive Racquet andamp; Tennis Club in New York, introduced him to Social Register friends, invested with him in the Palm Beach Polo Club, and entertained him at his Fifth Avenue Manhattan cooperative apartment.    Mr. Clark, who now lives in Fort Lauderdale, Fla., was charged in yesterday's indictment with making $453,000 trading in 17 stocks or stock options from October 1983 through February 1984 in the days before articles or columns concerning the stocks appeared in the Journal.    The indictment charges that on the night of Oct. 18, 1983, Mr. Clark met with Mr. Brant at Appleton Rice, at which time Mr. Brant told the lawyer of an agreement he had with the Journal reporter to acquire advance notice of articles to appear in the paper. However, the indictment charges, Mr. Clark lied to SEC officials on March 1, 1984, when he said he hadn't any pre-publication knowledge of Journal articles.    Mr. Winans has said that he didn't know Mr. Clark was involved in the scheme.    Carl H. Loewenson Jr., an assistant U.S. attorney working on the Clark case, declined to comment on why it took as long as it did to indict Mr. Clark, who had been fighting the charges vigorously.    The government charges that Mr. Clark financed his allegedly illegal trading by a &quot;continuing scheme&quot; to defraud various clients of his law firm, including Roger W. Wilson Jr. and his sister Rosalie, both beneficiaries of separate multimillion-dollar trust funds administered by a New Orleans bank. Mr. Clark transferred his clients' money to his own accounts at Kidder Peabody and &quot;then used substantial portions of said stolen, converted, misappropriated and fraudulently obtained funds to trade in the stock market,&quot; the indictment charges.    Roger Wilson, the Clark client, has his own civil lawsuit pending against Mr. Clark, alleging fraud. An SEC lawsuit against Mr. Clark is pending, as is Mr. Clark's own suit against Kidder Peabody. In the latter suit, Mr. Clark asserted that he knew nothing of the illegal scheme involving information misappropriated from the Journal and instead blamed Mr. Brant and the brokerage firm.    Mr. Clark couldn't be reached to comment. His attorney, F. Lee Bailey, was said to be traveling yesterday and couldn't be reached.    In New York, Appleton Rice didn't respond to requests for comment.    Seventeen of the counts against Mr. Clark aren't directly related to the Winans case and don't involve charges of insider trading. Hence, even if the Supreme Court reverses Mr. Winans's conviction, Mr. Clark would still face trial on the embezzlement counts.    The indictment charges Mr. Clark with an assortment of breaches of his fiduciary duty to Appleton Rice clients. For example, the government charged, Mr. Clark transferred money from certain custodial accounts of clients into his own accounts at Kidder Peabody; deposited checks payable to several clients into his personal checking accounts; and used client accounts to guarantee his own trading accounts.    The indictment charges that Mr. Clark in 1982 used 500 shares in a Park Avenue apartment building and the lease for the apartment belonging to a client, Bernard DeGanay, to guarantee a $300,000 loan from J. Henry Schroder Bank andamp; Trust Co.    Separately, the New York State Crime Victims Board ordered St. Martin's Press, publishers of a book about the case by Mr. Winans, to turn over to the board all money owed Mr. Winans by the publisher pursuant to New York's so-called Son of Sam law. The law is intended to prevent criminals from profiting from their notoriety by writing books, movies or other reenactments of their crimes. The board hasn't made a final determination in Mr. Winans's case, but indicated in its order that the law applies to Mr. Winans's book.    Roy Gainsburg, a lawyer for St. Martin's, said the publisher won't turn over the money despite the order. &quot;We don't think the law applies to this particular case,&quot; he said. Mr. Winans declined to comment. </TEXT></DOC>