<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870320-0186 </DOCNO><HL> Executive Style (A Special Report)---Cut From CEO Cloth:A Dollop of Dullness, a Brace of PurdeysAnd a $1,000 Suit Outfits You for the Top---By James P. Sterba</HL><DD> 03/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   You see it daily in the corridors of corporate America: the would-be chief executive officer committing the classic eager-beaver boo-boo. He comes to work early, stays late and conducts after-hours chicanery, if any, with the discretion of a George Smiley.    For lunch, he starts nibbling nail-bed regimens of rabbit food at his desk. His dark-blue tie stays taut. His shirt -- one of those colored jobs with white collar and cuffs -- stays buttoned. Sometimes his dark-blue suit coat stays on all day.    With a new, paternal smile, he starts acknowledging hallway colleagues with a measured, low-decibel &quot;Nice to see you.&quot; Mail starts getting answered like this: &quot;Thank you for your (pick one) kind/generous/thoughtful/engaging note,&quot; instead of like this: &quot;I thought I knew the depths to which stupidity could be measured, but your letter . . . .&quot; His bad breath miraculously stops. Hair growing out of his ears disappears.    You'll want to keep an eye on this turkey, because he's eventually going to make your life miserable. What's happened? Somebody from upstairs has pulled him aside and whispered the chromosome-altering words: &quot;One day, son, all this could be in your hands.&quot;    It won't be, of course. His highest title will be vice president in charge of serious. (Somebody's got to do it). He's peaked too early. He's gotten dull too soon.    You have to get dull in stages, shedding just enough humanity, whimsy, collegiality and sartorial eccentricity with each promotion to exhibit a bit more of the progress, maturation and fine-tuning required to comfort (or sedate) board members and shareholders. As a fast-rising underling, you want to excite. As a CEO, you want to soothe.    This reverse metamorphosis from flash-and-trash butterfly to well-turned-out worm is a delicate maneuver that requires perfect timing and a devotion to greed strong enough to overcome the mental torture associated with going bland. (If you own your company and don't have to grovel to bankers and investors, forget this part.)    We aren't talking about executive style here. (Incidentally, men's fashion designer John Weitz, who wrote &quot;Man in Charge&quot; and lunches with tycoons a lot, says that in today's takeover-ravaged corporate America, CEOs rarely last long enough to develop their own style. Ousted CEOs, on the other hand, have a definite style. &quot;It's extraordinary how they shrivel and slouch,&quot; Mr. Weitz says. But that's another story.)    What we are talking about here is packaging -- that expensive game of visual trickery long associated with the Cheshire cat and annual reports. Both sexes can play, though experts say the aspiring female CEO will have to spend at least 50% more on packaging than her male counterpart to achieve prudent levels of blandness.    All this is especially perilous at the moment because you're climbing the ladder in the middle of a slight uptick in flamboyance -- bright hankies (pocket squares), suspenders (braces) with frolicking nudes, tie bars, that kind of stuff. As always, ascent rates depend on looks, not deeds (though for men, marrying the boss's daughter remains a strong move).    So forget about hard work, innovative thinking, the bottom line and the rest of the stuff in this report. This is the straight poop. We've consulted the oracles of corporate fashion, read the how-to books, scoured the magazines and ads (&quot;Introducing DeRigueur, for the man who has learned to wear his income properly.&quot;)    We've even attended a &quot;dynamic Executive Wardrobe Engineering seminar,&quot; conducted for $2,500 by Lois (&quot;Dress for Excellence&quot;) Fenton. This is the same seminar Ms. Fenton gives for the troops at Drexel Burnham Lambert, so she is obviously the real power behind junk bonds. (For $900 a day, she'll go shopping with you, too.)    Dash out and buy yourself the proper writing implement: a Mont Blanc Diplomat fountain pen (List: $265) is fine; the same model in solid gold ($6,500) is a bit much. And take good notes.    Basics first. Columnist Dave Barry, author of the seminal work &quot;Claw Your Way to the Top,&quot; says it best: &quot;Basically, the American businessman should dress as though he recently lost his entire family in a tragic boat explosion.&quot;    This is neither cheap nor easy. Furthermore, CEO candidates aren't just business executives. They're would-be titans. They can't be just average. They have to mold the basic dull look into their own fashion statement and pay exorbitant sums to achieve it.    You can't get away anymore with a dark blue suit, white shirt and dark blue tie. It says you're playing it safe. It makes board members suspicious. You can't get away with being what the trade calls &quot;fashion forward,&quot; either. (That means wearing togs designed by guys whose names end in vowels.) It says you're playing it unsafe. It makes board members suspicious.    Men have a primordial fear of dandyism. Potential CEOs have to pretend they don't care about clothes. They must keep their preoccupations with mirrors in the closet. And if you don't think they know about mirrors, how do you explain the stock market?    The basic problem (beyond the fact that American men usually wear pants that are too short, scruffy shoes, short-sleeved shirts and things colored purple or green) is dumb suits. Unless you're paying a grand or so for your dark blue or grey caulk stripe, you may as well punt.    The safest suit in America (price range: $875 to $1,295) is made in Chicago by Oxxford Clothes Inc., whose chairman, Jack McDonald, humbly explains: &quot;We aim it at the power structure of the United States. We aim to separate the men from the boys.&quot;    Says designer-author Alan Flusser (whose own tailor-made suits sell for $895): &quot;Wearing an Oxxford is like wearing molded air, it's so soft. It actually feels like what it costs. It's better than 99% of the custom-tailored suits in the world. But in my opinion, it's designed for a guy who wants to feel great in a suit yet has no sense of aesthetics whatsoever.&quot;    Custom-made suits: Besides Mr. Flusser, there's Morty Sills, also in New York, and Savile Row. You can do all right in Hong Kong (cheap buttons are a dead giveaway) if you're smart. It's kind of like shopping at Brooks Brothers -- okay, but you want to try to avoid being seen doing it.    Dark blue, gray, striped or solid, and tan. Not dark brown. If you think Ronald Reagan is in trouble with Americans because of his Iran-Contra fiasco or deficits, think again. Our sartorial sleuths say it's because he wears dark brown suits.    Shirts: Paying through the nose is the best policy. Custom-mades by Turnbull andamp; Asser (London) can skirt dandyism. Paul Stuart (New York, Tokyo) sells made-to-measure shirts for from $58 to a seemingly hefty $130 each because, among other things, their &quot;cuffs have a personal relationship to the wrists they encircle.&quot; Any shirts that have personal relationships seem highly desirable to us.    &quot;You will never, ever, as long as you live, wear a short-sleeved shirt for any business purpose,&quot; wrote John T. (&quot;Dress for Success&quot;) Molloy. This is nonsense if you live in San Diego, says Mr. Weitz.    Watches: The way science education is going in this country, it may soon be a sign of intellectual prowess to be able to tell time on an analog. So you want a watch with hands, not digital displays. That chunky Rolex diving watch that James Bond and JFK popularized in the '60s, Mr. Weitz notes, was made to say: &quot;Stay down here at 140 feet for another four minutes, and a meteor storm of nitrogen bubbles will soon make cottage cheese out of your brain.&quot; If you want to say that around the office, wear one. If your brain is already cottage cheese, wear the solid gold version.    Footwear: People who wear scuffed shoes are communists. Period. People who wear dumb shoes are Japanese businessmen. If you want to know why having all the money doesn't bring Japan respect, look at Japanese feet.    Best off-the-shelf shoes in America are at, of all places, Brooks Brothers. They're British-made. So, of course, are good Church's. Our man, surely, needs custom-made. And that means John Lobb, the legendary British bootmaker. But when somebody asks, &quot;Aren't those Lobb of St. James?&quot; you say, &quot;Oh, heavens no. Lobb of Paris, of course.&quot; Older, more experienced shoemakers there, Mr. Flusser points out.    In any case, dip into your children's education fund. Lobbs cost around $500 each. No, not each pair. Each foot. Note: White shoes are fine, if you're aspiring to be CEO of a company selling pre-owned Oldsmobiles in Podunk.    Ties: There is nothing wrong with spending $50 for a necktie. When some ties start costing $100, however, you'll have to throw all your $50 ties away or risk looking cheap.    Please, no ties that tell a story, like the one we own that shows Fred Astaire and Ginger Rogers dancing. Says Ms. Fenton: Ties need names, like foulards. Our paced-incremental-dullness formula dictates that whatever gewgaw patterns you have on your foulards (diamonds, crowns, pheasants, dots, baby sharks, whatever), do this: With each major promotion, buy new ones on which the gewgaws are one size smaller. Men who wear dark blue ties with microscopic pin dots are called &quot;Sir&quot; a lot.    And only buy silk. (For that matter, never wear any clothes made out of petroleum, only things made by sheep, plants or worms).    Colors: For people who actually produce a tangible product, dark blue, burgundy and power red are in. Wall Street money shufflers can still get away with yellow (very 1985). Pink is still around, but avoid it if your company makes a product with more than three moving parts.    Bow ties are making a bit of a comeback. But would you trust Arthur Schlesinger or George Will to be your CEO?    Leisure: You need to start practicing now so you won't show up at the fox hunt in bluejeans.    Tennis, running and sweat sports are exercise, not leisure. Golf should be considered work and thus conducted during working hours. True leisure starts with a Thomas andamp; Thomas catalog. You need a fine Tonkin bamboo or old Leonard flyrod, a reel by Ross, Hardy or Michel Pezon and custom-made Ranger waders (trout can be trite unless you go to Bhutan or New Zealand for them, but Labrador and Norway salmon never are).    To demonstrate they aren't averse to bloodletting at the helm, CEOs must appreciate sedate blood sports (not dog-fighting, dummy). Thus the need for shotguns. Purdeys, of course, or Holland andamp; Holland. A brace. While you may think that sacrificing your child's education is a high price to pay for $40,000 worth of shotguns, just remember: There is nothing more telling than a man with a single Purdey.    If death disturbs you, shoot clay pigeons. Just keep it to yourself.    Dogs: Two or three Chinese sharpeis for the wife are okay. But your dogs should do what dogs were made to do: hunt, point and retrieve, not roll over or chase some dumb ball. A stubborn Chesapeake Bay retriever or American water spaniel will do. Borzois, mastiffs -- we don't know. If you need a dog for protection, you live in the wrong neighborhood to be a CEO. For children: any old expensive mutt.    And a yacht. But, pul-eeze, refer to it as a boat.    ---   Mr. Sterba is a senior special writer in The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau. </TEXT></DOC>