<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870302-0009 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 03/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   HOWARD BAKER PREPARED to take over today as Reagan's chief of staff.    The former Tennessee senator, who accepted the White House post Friday following the resignation of Donald Regan, faces the task of attempting to repair a presidency that many think may be damaged irreparably. Baker, 61, a former Senate GOP leader, is expected to push the president toward compromise and consensus on many domestic and foreign policy issues.    Iran provided an arms merchant with nearly $87 million while he served as the key middleman for U.S. arms sales to Iran, according to the Tower Commission report. Separately, documents show that an operation to supply Nicaraguan rebels received funds after U.S. arms sales to Iran last May.    Former Sen. Paul Laxalt said he doubts Reagan will concede during a nationwide speech this week that U.S. weapons sales to Iran were wrong.    ---   THE U.S. WELCOMED an arms-control proposal by Soviet leader Gorbachev.    The Kremlin leader said Saturday that he is willing to negotiate &quot;without delay&quot; an agreement eliminating U.S. and Soviet medium-range nuclear missiles in Europe, without demanding new restrictions on Reagan's proposed space-based antimissile system. U.S. and European officials said the proposal, reported by Tass, might clear the way for the first major arms accord in eight years and for a Reagan-Gorbachev summit in the U.S. Soviet and U.S. arms-control negotiators are expected to discuss the plan today in Geneva.    Some U.S. officials expressed concern that the proposal could put pressure on the White House to make concessions on other arms-control issues.    ---   Shultz arrived in Beijing for a six-day tour of China. Shultz's trip has become a mission to explore whether the conservative backlash from the December student protests could become a lasting shift that could harm Sino-American relations. The secretary of state is to meet today with Chinese Vice Premier Li Peng.    ---   France began reinforcing security following the life sentence given Saturday to Georges Ibrahim Abdallah for complicity in two 1982 murders in Paris. The court's verdict, reached after a six-day trial, sparked surprise because the prosecutor, citing possible terrorist reprisals, had urged a more lenient sentence.    ---   Italian Prime Minister Craxi is expected to resign tomorrow, the first step in the long process of forming Italy's 46th postwar government. Political observers said, however, that leaders of Craxi's Socialist party could block any attempt to form a government under the leading candidate of the Christian Democrats, Giulio Andreotti.    ---   A Philippine communist leader described as a &quot;bribe&quot; the Aquino government's offer of full amnesty for rebels. He predicted that the country's estimated 23,000 insurgents would continue fighting from jungle hideouts. Aquino offered Saturday full amnesty to rebels who surrender within six months.    ---   Fighting erupted in southern Lebanon between a mutinous splinter group and militiamen of the Shiite Amal movement. At least seven people were killed, and a deposed Shiite official claimed to have seized control of the militia. In Beirut, Syrian peacekeepers supervised the entry of food into two Palestinian refugee camps.    ---   Iran claimed its forces broke through Iraqi defenses and seized territory east of the Iraqi port city of Basra in a weekend offensive. Baghdad said it repulsed the attack and &quot;annihilated&quot; three Iranian divisions. Leaders in Tehran also renewed a pledge to launch a &quot;final and fateful&quot; offensive in the six-year-old Persian Gulf war.    ---   Police in France said at least five people were killed and nearly 80 others injured when a string of ski-lift chairs plunged about 100 feet to the ground at the Luz-Ardiden resort in the Pyrenees. Rescue workers said 30 of the injured were seriously hurt.    ---   Israeli Prime Minister Shamir said Foreign Minister Peres's support for an international conference on Mideast peace &quot;is undermining&quot; Israel's coalition government. Shamir, who opposes such a parley, said members of the coalition should follow a common policy or &quot;part company.&quot;    ---   Shevardnadze is scheduled to begin a three-day tour of Australia tomorrow. The Soviet foreign minister's trip is viewed as part of a major diplomatic push by Moscow for economic and possibly military entry in the South Pacific. He also is to travel to Indonesia at the end of the week.    ---   South Korean police searched 16 universities in Seoul over the weekend and seized thousands of leaflets, placards and gasoline bombs, a government spokesman said. The raids were designed to prevent students from joining nationwide anti-government protests scheduled for tomorrow.    ---   National Guard troops patrolled a 20-mile corridor in southeastern Mississippi that was struck Saturday by a tornado. At least eight people were killed, more than 140 others injured and nearly 500 families left homeless by the twister. Authorities estimated damage at as much as $25 million.    ---   Died: Frederic Donner, 84, former chairman of General Motors Corp., Saturday, in Greenwich, Conn. </TEXT></DOC>