<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871106-0136 </DOCNO><HL> Tracking a Trend:Business Cycle May Overwhelm Policies---Its Impact on DeficitsAnd Rates Can Be Huge---By Alfred L. Malabre Jr.Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMT LABOR TAXESECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   Discussions in Washington and elsewhere over how best to steer the economic course in the wake of the stock-market crash tend to overlook a crucial consideration: the role of the business cycle.    But ignoring the business cycle -- in particular where within it the economy may be right now -- could lead policy makers astray as they hash over precisely what levels should be set for the federal budget deficit, interest rates and so on. If the crash has hastened the onset of the next recession, then efforts to shrink the budget deficit through such typically restrictive measures as tax increases and spending cuts may actually serve to enlarge the deficit.    Indeed, what happens to the budget deficit and interest rates will surely depend far more on business-cycle developments than on what develops in Washington. &quot;Like a tidal wave, the business cycle sooner or later will simply overwhelm the best laid plans in the various power centers,&quot; declares David Bostian, an economic consultant in New York. He adds: &quot;Anything agreed upon in coming days in Washington will ultimately have a minimal impact, compared to the impact of the business cycle.&quot;    When stocks crashed last month, most economists agreed that the economy was still expanding, although slowly, and that a new recession wouldn't set in until late next year or in 1989. Now, however, all bets appear to be off because it's feared -- but not yet known -- that the ferocity of the October crash may have caused a significant retrenchment in spending plans of businesses and individuals.    Any such cutback, in turn, could hasten the anticipated recession, as such expenditures are crucial to economic growth, especially in an expansion that, at the five-year mark, is already among the oldest ever. Consumer outlays alone constitute about two-thirds of overall business activity.    The economy could in fact be nosing down into a new recessionary phase of the business cycle now, but it is impossible to know because many of the pertinent numbers emerge from Washington's statistics mills only long after the event. The 1973-75 recession began in November 1973, but as late as August 1974 no less an authority on the business cycle than the late Arthur Burns, in his role as chairman of the Federal Reserve Board, told Congress that the economy's &quot;movements do not have . . . the characteristics of a cumulative decline in business activity.&quot;    While economists may have difficulty in detecting the onset of a recession promptly, they have little trouble agreeing that a recession, as an essential part of the business cycle, inevitably will follow an expansion. The business cycle, like sex, defies definitive description. But essentially it is the continuing tendency of the economy -- defined as the gross national product, adjusted for inflation -- to expand for a while and then contract for a while.    Economists of varying schools keep seeking ways to perpetuate the cycle's expansion phases and eliminate the contractions. However, for whatever reasons, the cycle persists -- though no two upturns or downturns have been close to identical, and the nonprofit National Bureau of Economic Research has tracked 30 of each through more than a century of recordkeeping.    If the economy has in fact entered a new cyclical contraction, or is close to doing so, the top chart raises major questions about the efficacy of the deficit-cutting plans afoot in Washington (See accompanying illustration -- WSJ Nov. 6, 1987). It indicates, among other things, how much easier it is to reduce red ink when the economy is in the midst of a long expansion than when a recession is at hand. And it suggests that the surest way to shrink the budget deficit may be to try to prolong economic growth -- which in turn suggests fiscal stimulation, rather than higher taxes and spending cuts.    This tendency of the budget to sink into deepening deficit during cyclical contractions reflects, in the main, two forces. As business activity, and therefore earnings, turn down, so naturally do federal tax receipts. And as joblessness climbs, so do federal transfer payments, as they are called, that help to sustain the unemployed and others hurt by a slumping economy.    Against such a background, it seems unrealistic in the extreme to debate, as is being done in Washington in the wake of the stock-market crash, whether the budget deficit should be cut by precisely this amount or that amount. In the 1969-70 recession, federal tax receipts from corporations fell about $4 billion, while transfer payments climbed nearly $7 billion. Still more striking patterns prevailed in other recent recessions, as the top chart shows. In 1981-82, when the jobless rate reached a post-World War II high of 11%, receipts from corporations fell nearly $19 billion, while transfers soared more than $30 billion. This contributed to a fourfold rise in the budget deficit, to about $200 billion.    As the economy expands, by the same token, budget deficits tend to disappear. As joblessness declines, transfer payments tend to rise more slowly or to decline. Similarly, as earnings recover, so do tax receipts. A cyclical narrowing of the budget deficit, as the upper chart shows, occurred in the past year. But this narrowing came far later than usual in the cycle, which economists attribute in large measure to repeated federal tax-cutting while outlays have continued to climb.    If a new recession should develop now, business-cycle experience points to deficits ahead that would make the recent red ink, in retrospect, seem minimal. If the 1981-82 pattern recurred, for example, a fourfold increase in the red ink accumulated in the latest fiscal year, which ended in September, would mean a deficit approximating $600 billion in the course of a new slump.    Francis H. Schott, chief economist of Equitable Life Assurance of the U.S., estimates that the budget deficit -- &quot;at the minimum&quot; -- would surge $60 billion, if economic growth were to fall by as little as one percentage point for two straight years.    The actual rise in red ink, he reckons, would be far greater, as &quot;various recession-relief programs would surely be expanded.&quot; He adds that &quot;increased early retirements -- tending to swell transfer payments -- plus federal efforts to prop up shaky institutions and other pump-priming moves would doubtless add many billions more&quot; to the federal deficit. And Mr. Bostian estimates that, regardless of overall economic growth, a percentage-point rise in the unemployment rate &quot;would increase the budget deficit by as much as $30 billion.&quot;    The budget deficit is but one facet of the economic scene mightily affected by the business cycle. As the middle chart shows, interest rates tend to rise most sharply in the latter stages of an expansion, and they usually keep rising in the early part of a recession. But as a slump deepens they usually drop again and continue falling even in the early stages of the ensuing expansion.    To be sure, a huge imponderable in all this is Federal Reserve policy. But the same chart suggests that the underlying factor may well be what phase of the business cycle the economy happens to be in. Accordingly, if the economy is indeed close to a new recession now, business-cycle experience points to a further rise in rates -- whatever planners may devise -- and then a prolonged decline until once again overall business activity is well along the recovery road.    Still another major facet of the economic picture is foreign trade. As the bottom chart shows, the nation's trade account in recent years has languished in record-deep deficits. In theory, the trade balance should strengthen during recessions, as demand in general -- including demand for imported goods and servicess -- oftens and hard-pressed companies fight more for customers, particularly ones in areas abroad where business may still be expanding.    The trade balance did indeed strengthen in three of the four recessions shown in the lower chart. However, it weakened severely in 1981-82. This aberration is widely attributed in part to the dollar's exceptional strengthening at the time, which served to raise the cost to foreigners of U.S. goods and services. Also, the unusual severity of the 1981-82 recession exacerbated business slowdowns abroad, and this in turn restricted foreign buying in the U.S.    In the event of a new recession now, would the trade balance strengthen, as the lower chart shows usually happens, or weaken, as in 1981-82? There seems no easy answer. The dollar has weakened sharply of late, unlike the situation in 1981-82. On the other hand, many analysts reckon that a new recession may prove fully as severe as in 1981-82 and spread to many potential U.S. export markets. </TEXT></DOC>