<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880727-0134 </DOCNO><HL> We Need Justices Who Mean Business </HL><AUTHOR> Michael W. McConnell </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> KM DQU PNH </CO><IN> ECO MON UTI NUK </IN><G> SUP JUS EXE </G><TEXT>   The most prominent Supreme Court decisions last term may have involved the legality of special prosecutors, a principal's decision to censor a high-school newspaper, a warrantless search of garbage, the death penalty for underage murderers and demonstrations in front of an abortionist's house. But they're unlikely to have much impact on most people's ordinary lives or on the economy.    Yet last year as every year, billions of dollars were riding on cases of sometimes little ideological content but major importance to the economy. The proper handling of those ever-more-complex but significant cases ought to be a matter of concern as appointments to the high court emerge as an issue in the presidential campaign.    Take the &quot;gray-markets&quot; case, K mart Corp. v. Cartier Inc. At issue was a multibillion-dollar industry that purchases goods abroad and imports them into the U.S., undercutting the price of the U.S. trademark holder. The Customs Service is required by statute to bar entry of gray-market goods, but longstanding Customs regulations carve out major loopholes. Trademark holders asked the court to overturn these regulations.    The economics of the case are vexingly difficult. Does the gray market protect American consumers from international price discrimination by producers of brand-name goods -- such as Mercedes-Benz automobiles -- that otherwise would have sufficient market power to charge higher prices here than they do abroad? Or does it frustrate the lawful expectations of trademark owners who make investments in marketing and distribution of goods in competition with other brands? If the former theory is correct, the gray market is good for consumers and the American economy; but if the latter is correct, it hurts interbrand competition and hence the consumer as well.    The court's response was to split three ways. Justice William Brennan, joined by Justices Thurgood Marshall, John Stevens, and in part by Justice Byron White, trumpeted the cause of the gray marketeers. Justice Antonin Scalia, joined by Chief Justice William Rehnquist, Sandra Day O'Connor, and Harry Blackmun, made the case for the trademark holders. None of the opinions paid much attention to the economic effect on the consumer. The deciding vote fell to the newest justice, Anthony Kennedy, who voted to uphold two of the loopholes and close another.    If the decision is right, it is almost by coincidence. Justice Kennedy's short, almost offhand opinion is based neither on analysis of the purposes of the statute nor on deference to the agency charged with administering it. He rested his decision solely on a strange and technical parsing of the statutory language, ignoring not only the economic issues but even the inconvenient fact that the provision had appeared as a quickly drafted &quot;midnight amendment&quot; to an unrelated bill, with little or no attention to precise wording.    In coming terms, the court will face decisions of still greater importance to the economy. On the docket for the fall is a challenge to the emerging principle that electric-utility shareholders must bear the entire risk of nuclear-power plant construction that -- though prudent when made -- turns out in hindsight to have been a mistake. The particular case, Duquesne Light Co. v. Barsasch, involves only a paltry $4.4 million a year. But waiting in the wings is an appeal by Public Service of New Hampshire, which was driven into bankruptcy by the regulatory treatment of its $2 billion investment in the Seabrook plant, and, behind that, billion-dollar disputes in at least a dozen states.    In these cases, the court will be called upon to decide how, or whether, to apply its revived &quot;takings&quot; jurisprudence to utility regulation. Again, the economics of the question are complex. The soak-the-utilities approach of most states, while tempting in the short run, has potentially catastrophic consequences. If utilities are asked to bear all the risk of investments that turn sour, but are limited to a &quot;normal&quot; rate of return on successful investments, then we should count on electrical shortages in the future. On the other hand, Edison Electric Institute's argument in an amicus brief that utilities should be guaranteed return on all prudent investments, no matter how poorly they turn out, would eliminate incentives for shrewd planning and saddle consumers with inefficient plants and inflated electric rates.    One can only hope that the Supreme Court will view the nuclear-power plant issue with more economic sophistication than it did the gray-markets case.    Similarly, the court will be asked to decide whether punitive-damages awards in tort cases can violate the &quot;excessive fines&quot; provisions of the Constitution -- an issue raised, but not answered, last term. This contentious question is worth millions to defendants in tort actions every year, and even more to would-be consumers of useful products driven from the market.    The punitive-damages question is not particularly difficult as an economic matter. There is little doubt that excessive tort awards deter useful, even if risky, production. But it raises hard issues of federalism and &quot;judicial activism.&quot; A decision recognizing constitutional limits on punitive damages would restrict the power of state legislatures and juries to mulct out-of-state corporations for the benefit of in-state plaintiffs. But like the Warren court revolution in criminal procedure, this would impose federal standards on a process governed by state law for 200 years.    How the Supreme Court will address these and other questions of importance to the economy may depend more on the next president of the U.S. than on the current court. Three members of the court who are commonly considered liberals are in their 80s, and Justice White, rarely an exponent of free-market principles, is rumored to be on the verge of retirement. On the current court, only Justice Scalia has any solid professional expertise in economic issues.    A Dukakis presidency could result in the appointment of justices with little interest in or knowledge about the market, or worse, a reflexive hostility toward the institutions of free enterprise. Certainly, legal scholars from the leftward side of the political spectrum are sometimes known to meet that description. At the same time, a President Dukakis would have available nominees with impeccable Democratic credentials who would also lend expertise and real understanding to business issues.    Stephen Breyer, a First Circuit judge and former staffer to Sen. Edward Kennedy, is one of the nation's foremost authorities on economic regulation and administrative law, and was a leading proponent of transportation deregulation during the Carter years. Second Circuit Judge Amalya Kearse would seem a dream appointment to a liberal president who wants a little prosperity along with his ideology. While solidly liberal on social and civil-rights issues, Judge Kearse has earned an excellent reputation in the business community. Being young, black and female -- as well as a former corporate lawyer in a major New York law firm -- will not hurt her chances either.    Other circuit judges with strong reputations, such as the D.C. Circuit trio Patricia Wald, Harry Edwards and Abner Mikva, have a more mixed record in business cases. While seemingly optimistic to a fault about the virtues of regulation, each of the trio has, on occasion, given business litigants a pleasant surprise.    If George Bush is elected president, there is little danger of judicial appointments overtly hostile to business interests. After seven years of Republican appointments, the courts of appeals are filled with able judges of a moderate to conservative stripe. It remains to be seen whether Mr. Bush would favor general jurisprudential conservatives, such as Patrick Higginbotham of the Fifth Circuit in Texas or Kenneth Starr of the D.C. Circuit, or whether he might turn to judges with more particular interests in business-related fields, such as D.C.'s Stephen Williams, a regulatory expert, or the Sixth Circuit's Danny Boggs, an authority on energy and the environment. Most observers assume that Mr. Bush would avoid more controversial figures such as the Seventh Circuit's Richard Posner and Frank Easterbrook.    Either way, Mr. Dukakis or Mr. Bush, the court is likely to be transformed during the next president's term. It is well to remember that the court is not just a debating society for cases of purely ideological interest. When the court gets down to business, the economy is affected in a big way -- whether the justices understand the consequences of their decisions or not.    ---   Mr. McConnell, formerly an assistant to the U.S. solicitor general, is an assistant law professor at University of Chicago. </TEXT></DOC>