<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870128-0019 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 01/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN SAID his Iran arms policy was his one and only &quot;major regret.&quot;    In his sixth State of the Union message, the president stopped short of apologizing for the recent sale of arms to Tehran and the diversion of funds to Nicaragua's rebels, but conceded that &quot;serious mistakes were made.&quot; Reagan renewed his support for the Contras and reiterated his backing for a space-based antimissile system. He also faulted Congress for cutting his defense requests and said the U.S. was open to &quot;more constructive&quot; ties with the Soviet Union.    Democratic leaders, in response to Reagan's address, outlined an agenda that included a restructured budget and a comprehensive trade bill.    ---   GORBACHEV URGED significant changes in Soviet election procedures.    Speaking before a plenary session of the Communist Party Central Committee, the Kremlin leader proposed that party officials be elected by secret ballot rather than by the current practice of a show of hands. Gorbachev also called for changes in rules to allow more than one candidate to run for office. He specified that the procedures should apply to party first secretaries of the 15 republics and all regional, city and district organizations.    According to Soviet experts, the proposals would be a means of countering widespread resistance to Gorbachev's program of economic modernization.    ---   SHULTZ SAID Reagan approved a U.S.-Iranian meeting last month in Frankfurt.    Testifying before the Senate Foreign Relations panel, the secretary of state said the meeting was arranged to deliver a message that &quot;any thought on {the Iranians'} part that there were going to be further arms sales was wrong.&quot; Separately, Swiss officials said eight appeals have been filed objecting to the release of bank data sought in the Iran-Contra affair. A source said one appeal was filed on behalf of Maj. Gen. Richard Secord.    Eugene Hasenfus, convicted by Nicaragua of gunrunning and later pardoned, was subpoenaed to testify this week before a House Iran-Contra panel.    ---   Authorities in Beirut launched a search for Anglican envoy Terry Waite, who may have been abducted while on a mission to win the release of Western hostages in Lebanon. Separately, security sources confirmed that West German police arrested the brother of a Lebanese man wanted by the U.S. in the 1985 hijacking of a TWA jet.    The Pentagon has ordered the Navy to extend indefinitely the deployment of the aircraft carrier Kennedy in the Mediterranean Sea. A source said the move was a precaution in response to recent kidnappings in Beirut. The U.S. also is considering revoking or limiting passports to discourage U.S. citizens from remaining in Lebanon.    ---   Philippine troops clashed with Marcos supporters outside a Manila television station where mutinous soldiers held out despite President Aquino's announcement that the military had crushed their revolt. Aquino branded the rebels &quot;misguided personnel&quot; and pledged to court-martial the rebellious soldiers.    ---   Iran said it captured a one-mile stretch of highway leading to Basra, killing or wounding about 1,200 Iraqi troops and pushing closer to the port city. Baghdad denied the Iranian claims. A trip to the war front shows that Iranian troops have begun consolidating their hold on territory, but their progress is limited.    ---   The Supreme Court agreed to review a New Jersey law permitting a moment of silence in public school classrooms. Two years ago, the justices struck down an Alabama moment-of-silence law, ruling that the law was unconstitutional because its aim was to promote religion and prayer in public schools.    ---   The U.S. announced the establishment of diplomatic ties with Mongolia, one of Moscow's closest Asian allies, and the State Department dispatched a senior official to three East European countries. It is the first time that Washington and Ulan Bator have had diplomatic relations since 1924.    ---   Moslem insurgents have escalated attacks since Afghanistan's Soviet-backed government declared a unilateral cease-fire Jan. 15, Western diplomats said. Fighting has been reported in many parts of the country, at levels considered above normal for winter. The diplomats said dozens of Soviet and Afghan soldiers had been killed.    ---   The Vatican urged industrialized nations to fashion a &quot;broad plan of cooperation and assistance&quot; to save the Third World from its debt crisis. In a report, the Vatican called on creditors to refrain from burdening the debtor with &quot;intolerable demands,&quot; and urged Third World leaders to examine the domestic causes of their debt problems.    ---   Syrian President Assad demanded that Egypt sever relations with Israel, and he accused the U.S. of terrorism. Speaking at a closed-door meeting during an Islamic summit in Kuwait, Assad said Arab states can't have ties with other Arabs and &quot;be at the same time&quot; with the Israeli government.    ---   Ecuador's defense minister said two air force officers and 79 paratroopers who held President Leon Febres Cordero hostage Jan. 16 would be tried in a military court. The president was freed after releasing an imprisoned general and pledging that the rebel soldiers wouldn't be punished.    ---   Officials in Brazil said heavy flooding in Sao Paulo caused by a weekend storm killed at least 58 people and left another 7,000 homeless. The city's governor authorized $6 million in emergency funds to house the homeless and begin cleanup operations. </TEXT></DOC>