<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880407-0104 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88: Dukakis's Issues Director Deals With Paradoxes As He Seeks Ways to Counter Jackson's Magnetism </HL><AUTHOR> Gerald F. Seib (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Life is a paradox within a paradox for Christopher Edley Jr. these days.    He is the issues coordinator for Michael Dukakis, a presidential candidate who has detailed positions on a wide range of issues but has trouble translating them into a galvanizing message to voters.    Mr. Edley also is a black man trying to help Mr. Dukakis beat a black man -- Jesse Jackson.    So Mr. Edley, as much as anyone else, is at the center of the Dukakis campaign's mission: It must develop a message passionate enough to enable the clinical Massachusetts governor to stave off the dynamic Mr. Jackson.    The sensitivity of his job isn't lost on Mr. Edley, a bearded 35-year-old professor on leave from Harvard Law School.    &quot;It puts me under extra pressure to do what I can to be sure that the economic opportunity theme of the Dukakis campaign comes through loud and clear,&quot; he says. If that happens, he says, &quot;the choice between Jackson and Dukakis, from the perspective of the black community, is understood not to be a choice based on values but rather a choice based on experience and competence.&quot;    Experience and competence, in fact, are the two Dukakis themes that Mr. Edley, in an all-night session in a Milwaukee hotel room last Thursday, molded into an effective new stump speech during the Wisconsin primary campaign. Those themes subtly distinguish Mr. Dukakis, a two-term governor, from the Rev. Jackson, who has never held public office, and the approach seemed to work. In Tuesday's Wisconsin balloting, Mr. Dukakis scored one of the campaign's most important victories, winning 48% of the Democratic vote to Mr. Jackson's 28%.    Still, Mr. Jackson's solid showing in Wisconsin underscores the strength of the challenge he continues to pose as the campaign moves to the important state of New York. A look at Mr. Edley illustrates the role an issues coordinator plays in addressing such a challenge, as well as the peculiar position of blacks who aren't supporting Mr. Jackson.    It also shows that although detailed stands on issues are necessary for a presidential candidate -- Mr. Edley's shop has produced more than 40 long position papers -- a campaign still has to work constantly to bridge the gap between positions and a clear message.    &quot;It's great to have issues positions on 99 different things, but you've got to be able to sense which way the wind's blowing,&quot; says Democratic pollster Paul Maslin, who has worked for Sen. Paul Simon during this campaign. The Dukakis campaign message conveys the governor's ability to make government work, Mr. Maslin says, but, &quot;What you don't get in it is sort of the passion, or the gut-level approach, or the simple message that registers with people's emotions.&quot;    Mr. Edley acknowledges that, much to his frustration, politicians as well as journalists have focused on vague qualities such as character and charisma rather than on the issue positions his staff works so hard to hone.    &quot;Most of the stuff hasn't gotten that much coverage because up until recently there hasn't been much of a news hole for substance in the campaign,&quot; he says. &quot;As the campaign narrows, we hope there will be.&quot;    Though he professes to dislike the &quot;nuts and bolts of politics,&quot; Mr. Edley, the son of a Harvard Law School graduate, has been dabbling in politics since a Harvard classmate persuaded him in 1975 to work for Jimmy Carter's presidential campaign.    That led to a job in the Carter White House after he finished law school and a role in Mr. Carter's unsuccessful 1980 re-election campaign. Mr. Edley then joined the Harvard faculty and was brought into the Dukakis campaign by Susan Estrich, a fellow Harvard law professor who now is Mr. Dukakis's campaign manager.    As the issues director, Mr. Edley's main job is to translate Gov. Dukakis's thoughts into precise positions. The campaign speechwriter, William Woodward, works under him, as do three deputies. His shop handles tasks that range from compiling an 11-page position paper explaining Mr. Dukakis's views on conventional defense to preparing thick briefing books listing facts such as unemployment rates and records of the high school basketball teams in towns that Mr. Dukakis visits, just in case those topics arise.    The task now before Mr. Edley and the rest of the campaign staff is to focus on issues that convey Mr. Dukakis's main message: that his record in Massachusetts shows he runs an activist government that can work with both legislators and business to get things done. As a result, Mr. Dukakis will be stressing issues such as health insurance, housing, job training and drugs, &quot;people&quot; issues that also allow him to stress his record of actually acting on such issues in Massachusetts.    Thus, when Mr. Dukakis conferred with Mr. Edley after a lackluster speech last Thursday night in Milwaukee, the issues coordinator worked until 4 a.m. melding passages from two existing speeches into a punchier talk aimed straight at workers.    Instead of just saying he favors a law requiring companies to give notice about plant closings, Mr. Dukakis stressed that Massachusetts has such a law and attacked Vice President George Bush for opposing the idea. Instead of just talking about universal health insurance, he declared that he expects to soon sign such a plan into law in Massachusetts.    Mr. Dukakis also dressed up his usual rhetoric about corporations' duty to invest by proclaiming: &quot;Wall Street pirates and corporate 'hit teams' aren't the future of this country.&quot;    Drugs may be a hot issue in New York, where worries about drug abuse are acute, and that issue also illustrates the struggle to translate issue papers into campaign slogans. Mr. Edley's staff prepared a four-page position paper on drugs weeks ago. Yet Mr. Edley had to spend the better part of a day last week honing the drug message into a 15-second passage in a speech that could be filmed for a television commercial.    And the Middle East will be a big issue in New York, with its large Jewish population. Mr. Edley has had his foreign-policy deputy, Jim Steinberg, talking to Jewish leaders in New York, and one of the campaign's main outside foreign-policy advisers, Madeleine Albright of Georgetown University, has been canvassing Middle East experts. Mr. Edley estimates the campaign has sought advice from more than 150 outsiders already in developing issue positions.    Even as he works on issues to propel Michael Dukakis, Mr. Edley acknowledges that he is &quot;incredibly proud&quot; of the success a fellow black, Mr. Jackson, has had in this campaign. But he says he is convinced that the &quot;pragmatic&quot; Dukakis campaign is &quot;much closer to governing.&quot; He says: &quot;The real question is, how can we make a difference in the lives of people? . . . I can't deny there's some ambivalence for me, but not in the question of who would be the best president.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>