<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880407-0011 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   GORBACHEV TRAVELED to Uzbekistan to meet with Afghan leader Najibullah.    The official Tass news agency reported that the Kremlin leader arrived in Tashkent, capital of the central Asian republic, for talks apparently aimed at arranging the withdrawal of about 115,000 Soviet troops from Afghanistan. Najibullah traveled to the meeting with Shevardnadze, who had been in Kabul for discussions on ending the nine-year-old war. The meeting came amid indications that negotiators in Geneva are near a settlement of the Afghan conflict.    Defense Secretary Carlucci met in Islamabad with Pakistani officials to discuss U.S. weapons for that nation, which funnels arms to Afghan rebels.    ---   AN ISRAELI GIRL WAS KILLED by Arab villagers in the West Bank.    Authorities said the teen-ager was stoned to death by the Palestinians after Jewish settlers killed two Arab youths in a clash in a West Bank town south of Nablus. At least 15 Israelis were wounded. The girl was the first Israeli civilian to be killed in four months of unrest in the occupied lands. In Jerusalem, Shultz declared a U.S. peace initiative &quot;intact and alive&quot; despite apparently unsuccessful efforts to narrow differences during his final meeting with Shamir.    The secretary of state traveled to Egypt and Jordan to promote the U.S. plan for Mideast peace. He is to hold talks with Saudi officials today.    ---   THE PENTAGON SAID it was sending about 800 Marines to Panama.    Defense Department officials said the Marines from Camp Pendleton, Calif., would begin arriving in Panama tomorrow for three weeks of jungle training exercises. The White House, which is weighing further sanctions against Panama, denied that the move was part of a U.S. drive to oust military leader Noriega. About 1,300 U.S. troops began arriving in the country Tuesday to bolster security at U.S. facilities.    Panama's state-run television reported that two U.S. soldiers were detained by Noriega's troops near an opposition demonstration in Panama City.    ---   Dukakis turned his attention to New York's April 19 primary following his victory over Jackson in Tuesday's Democratic contest in Wisconsin. With nearly complete returns, Dukakis won 48% of the Wisconsin vote to Jackson's 28%. On the GOP side, Bush easily defeated Robertson.    ---   Ethiopia is temporarily withdrawing all foreign relief workers from the drought-stricken northern provinces of Eritrea and Tigray because of mounting rebel activity. Relief workers in the region said fighting in recent weeks had brought emergency food distribution to about three million drought victims to a near standstill.    ---   Meese's choice for a top post belongs to a country club without black members and an athletic club that doesn't permit females to join, associates said. The membership in the organizations by John Shepherd, a St. Louis attorney, is likely to delay his Senate confirmation as deputy attorney general.    ---   Prison officials said alleged cocaine trafficker Juan Ramon Matta was imprisoned in the maximum-security federal penitentiary at Marion, Ill. Matta, wanted for questioning in the 1985 slaying of a U.S. drug agent in Mexico, was arrested Tuesday by Honduran police in Tegucigalpa as the result of a monthlong U.S.-Honduran operation.    ---   A judge in New Jersey granted surrogate mother Mary Beth Whitehead-Gould immediate unsupervised visitation of eight hours a week with the child she agreed to bear under a $10,000 contract. The visits with Melissa Stern, the two-year-old girl once known as Baby M, are to be expanded this fall.    ---   Iraq fired four missiles into Tehran, where a children's hospital was destroyed, and bombed eight other Iranian cities. Tehran said at least 37 civilians were killed. Iraqi warplanes reportedly also attacked a supertanker near an Iranian oil complex in the Persian Gulf. Iran fired missiles into Baghdad and Basra in retaliation.    ---   Arab hijackers released 32 more passengers being held aboard a Kuwaiti jet. The gunmen warned that about 50 people remaining on the aircraft, including members of Kuwait's royal family, would be in danger unless Kuwait freed 17 pro-Iranian prisoners. The jet was commandeered Tuesday en route to Kuwait from Bangkok.    ---   The White House confirmed that Reagan made a remark suggesting he would like to pardon former aides indicted in the Iran-Contra affair. A spokesman characterized the president's statement as &quot;a throw-away remark&quot; that hadn't any significance.    ---   Philippine President Aquino dismissed strong indications of a new coup attempt by army rebel Col. Gregorio Honasan, who escaped from a Manila prison ship Saturday. Honasan called on soldiers loyal to him to &quot;act and act boldly.&quot; Aquino, who is to visit China next week, said the leader of last August's failed coup lacked popular support.    ---   The Dalai Lama has rejected an offer by China to return to Tibet. The exiled spiritual and civil leader, who fled to India in 1959, said he couldn't agree to the condition that he accept Chinese rule of Tibet.    ---   The judge in the Iran-Contra case ruled that he needed more time to study independent counsel Walsh's plan to prevent unauthorized disclosure of 150,000 pages of classified documents. The federal judge denied Walsh's motion for expedited consideration of the proposed protective order, saying it &quot;appears to be far too complex.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>