<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870821-0107 </DOCNO><HL> He'll Keep the Home Fires Burning---By Dan Walters</HL><DD> 08/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> SACRAMENTO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   American governors usually like to court national attention, and for a reason. The past two presidents have emerged from state capitals, and several of the 1988 presidential candidates are either current or former governors.    Thus, when the nation's governors gathered recently in Michigan for their annual conference, they preened and plotted for coverage from the nation's political press. An exception was George Deukmejian, the Republican governor of California.    Mr. Deukmejian, coming off a landslide re-election victory of historic proportions in the nation's largest and most media-conscious state, would seem to be well-positioned to pick up Ronald Reagan's legacy and carry it eastward.    But the governor, who climbed up the political ladder as an advocate of tough-on-crime and, later, tough-on-taxes policies, exhibits no symptoms of Potomac Fever. He says he wants to make government work better in his prosperous state. His first five years in office have seen revisions in school and welfare programs and a push for economic development, all with at least initially higher expenditures, rather than a dismantling of the public sector as some more extreme conservatives would prefer.    He's content to sit out the 1988 scramble, disdains -- convincingly -- any interest even in a vice presidential slot and seems bent on continuing his mastery of a Democrat-controlled state Legislature.    When, therefore, C-SPAN, David Broder and other elements of the national political press sought him out for interviews at the governor's conference, Mr. Deukmejian turned them all down.    California politicians and political journalists have come to expect that low-key approach from Mr. Deukmejian -- a sharp contrast to the 16 years of political flash and dash during the Reagan and Jerry Brown eras, when the governor's office in Sacramento was engaged in nonstop campaigning for higher office.    If there were mysteries to be solved, motives to be learned, about Mr. Reagan and Mr. Brown, there are none about their successor, who is exactly what he appears to be: a pleasant, quintessentially middle-class man who has propelled himself into powerful political office by hard work.    Mr. Deukmejian began a law practice in Long Beach, Calif., in 1958 after leaving his Armenian family's home state of New York. He spent 16 years in the state Legislature and four as California's attorney general before narrowly winning the governorship in 1982.    If he lacks the charisma and media appeal of a Reagan or a Brown, he also lacks their capacity to polarize, and thus he is wearing well with increasingly conservative California voters. They not only gave him a nearly two million-vote margin last November but continue to give him high marks in public-opinion polls. A recent survey by one of the state's leading pollsters gave him a 60%-plus approval rating that includes high marks from half of the state's Democrats.    That's not to say that Mr. Deukmejian is a Casper Milquetoast. As the only Republican holding state office in Sacramento and facing a hostile Legislature, Mr. Deukmejian has found himself embroiled in some fierce ideological and partisan battles -- especially over tax and spending policies in the post-Proposition 13 era. (Ironically, then-state Sen. Deukmejian opposed the landmark 1978 property tax-cutting measure.)    He's won virtually all of those battles, starting with a huge confrontation over a state fiscal crisis in 1983, with a flinty demeanor that earned him the nickname &quot;Iron Duke.&quot;    Mr. Deukmejian has used his line-item veto power -- one that President Reagan says he should have in Washington -- to reduce Democratic-written budgets by billions of dollars, while maintaining a unified Republican bloc in the Legislature to avoid any veto overrides.    That austerity, coupled with a lengthy boom in the California economy, produced a billion-dollar-plus state budget surplus this year, even after Mr. Deukmejian set aside a billion dollars for an emergency reserve, and thus sparked in May a debate over how to spend the windfall.    The governor, citing a spending limit adopted by voters in 1979, wants to return most of the money to taxpayers as a rebate, while Democrats and critics such as Bill Honig, the state superintendent of schools, want to spend the money on education, health and welfare programs.    Mr. Deukmejian is prevailing in that battle as well, leaving Democrats sputtering over how the tax rebate is to be structured. Mr. Honig, nominally nonpartisan but a prospective Democratic gubernatorial candidate in 1990, has been left to stew along with the powerful schools lobby.    Persistent public unhappiness with the judiciary has provided the governor with another foil. Mr. Deukmejian was a leader of the successful drive to remove three Jerry Brown-appointed liberals from the state Supreme Court in last November's election. And he has endeared himself to the state's growers by turning around the pro-union bent of California's Agricultural Labor Relations Board.    The governor is being helped in his partisan wars by a continuing shift of political power in California from the Democrats to the Republicans.    No Democrat has won California's presidential electors since 1964 and Democratic Party registration, after reaching a peak in the immediate post-Watergate era, has been sliding downward since. In the last decade, the voter-registration gap -- when adjusted for the nearly two million names of persons who've moved or died that clog official registration rolls -- has dropped from 25 percentage points to about five points. Viewed in terms of real voting patterns, the parties are virtually even.    Republicans have been making steady gains in legislative seats and have been prevented from controlling the Legislature and the state's congressional delegation only by a highly partisan reapportionment plan enacted by Democratic legislators and then-Gov. Jerry Brown in 1982.    Although the state's population is headed for an ethnic-minority majority by the early 21st century, &quot;Anglos&quot; remain overwhelmingly dominant within the voting electorate and clearly are shifting their allegiance from the Democratic Party to the Republican.    Within that bloc, Mr. Deukmejian's brand of moderate conservatism is popular, leaving him in an unassailable political position in the state.    His major political problem is that the state's rapid population growth, much of it fueled by immigration from Latin America and Asia, is creating demands for government services that austerity policies cannot meet.    The state's fabled freeway system, for instance, is becoming more congested -- in part because few new roads were built during the Reagan and Brown governorships -- and Mr. Deukmejian refuses to raise gasoline taxes to expand highway capacity. He's suggesting, instead, that additional bonds, which are exempt from the state spending limit, be floated to build highways.    The governor also faces challenges on toxic waste and other environmental matters that brought him the greatest measure of criticism during his first term.    If he can somehow work his way through those kinds of tough policy choices and win another term in 1990, Mr. Deukmejian, 59, could be in a strong position to move into the national arena. A lot would depend on whether the GOP could gain the lieutenant governorship, which is elected separately. Currently, the presence in that office of Democrat Leo McCarthy, waiting to succeed to the governorship and position his party for continued dominance after the coming reapportionment, is a major restraint on any Deukmejian national ambitions.    Some advisers privately see him as presidential timber in 1992 or 1996. Says one who requests anonymity: &quot;A guy with ethnic appeal who has successfully taken on a Democratic Legislature, fought crime and held down taxes in the largest state could be dynamite.&quot;    For now, Mr. Deukmejian is content to remain in Sacramento, offering Californians something they haven't had for a while: a governor who wants to govern.    ---   Mr. Walters is a political columnist for The Sacramento Bee. </TEXT></DOC>