<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880608-0127 </DOCNO><HL> Neighborly Advice on Health Care </HL><AUTHOR> Michael A. Walker </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> CANDA </CO><IN> PHA INS </IN><TEXT>   Michael Dukakis is touting the new compulsory health-insurance scheme he introduced in Massachusetts, and the rising costs and perceived inadequacy of U.S. health care provide a natural constituency for a national health policy.    Mr. Dukakis noted this week in Canada's Maclean's magazine: &quot;The fact that you have a well-functioning and well-regarded health-care system that provides coverage for all Canadians was an inspiration.&quot; This rosy picture of Canada is badly outdated.    The Dukakis policy was based on a proposal by Sen. Edward Kennedy, based in turn on Canada's system circa 1978. A quick look at the Canadian health-care system a decade ago provided ample attributes for emulation. Costs were at 8.4% of gross national product, vs. 9.7% for the U.S., and quality was about as good. All Canadians, under a compulsory, publicly provided program received a standard of care that in the U.S. was available only to those whose incomes could support a comprehensive health-insurance premium.    Canadian medicine, like that in the U.S., is a private monopoly supported by public occupational licensure, and physicians are paid on a fee-for-service basis. Hospitals are funded by the government, though run by privately elected, local boards.    Politicians such as Sen. Kennedy drew the understandable conclusion that the U.S. should emulate the Canadian system, since it looked to provide the same quality of health care to a larger percentage of the population while spending 1.3% less of GNP. Yet another illustration of the dangers of drawing policy conclusions from casual empiricism.    There is no excuse for drawing such conclusions today. In 1979, the Fraser Institute published &quot;The Health Care Business,&quot; which noted structural anomalies in the Canadian system that would lead to serious deterioration and the emergence of the difficulties familiar in other socialized medical-care systems, such as Britain's. These problems are already showing up.    The anomalies are centered in the fact that health care in Canada, being publicly funded, is just one of the many expenditures that have to be allocated by the political process. In Canada, spending on health care, like spending on asphalt and social programs, is determined by the requirements of the marginal electoral constituency. Unfortunately, public perception of the system is based on the conditions under which people get access to their family doctors. Such access is &quot;free&quot; in Canada and recent, extremely popular, changes in the National Health Act have effectively outlawed any coinsurance or user fees.    In this way, the Canadian system is similar to the first-dollar, zero-coinsurance plans running out of control in the U.S. And for similar reasons. Patients have no incentive to economize, and doctors -- driven by the nightmare of unlimited liability and punitive damages -- seek, by exhaustive testing, to eliminate the probability they will mistakenly reject symptoms of a serious disorder. While Canada has been spared some of the horrors of the U.S. liability crisis, there is a growing concern about malpractice suits.    The big difference between Canada and the U.S., however, is in the response to the escalating pressure of demand on the available supply of resources. In the U.S., the first response has been to devote more resources to health care -- currently more than 11.5% of GNP. Since employers and government funders see this as increased costs, the second response has been to find ways to reduce the costs. In Canada, the political response to rising demand pressures has been the imposition of funding ceilings or even limitations on the number of doctors who will be permitted to practice. In 1988, Canada will spend about the same fraction -- 8.5% -- of GNP on health care as it did in 1978.    The U.S. response to rising costs has involved innovation on both sides of the market. The supply response has involved increased experimentation with different delivery arrangements: health maintenance organizations, preferred-provider organizations and other alternatives are being pursued so as to retain service levels while reducing costs. The characteristics of these responses are constrained by the fact that the health-care environment is competitive and consumers know what they want.    On the demand side, there are changing agency relationships through the PPOs and HMOs, but also in the form of second opinions before surgery. And, as always, there is the possibility to use deductibles to make consumers more alert to the costs of their decisions.    The net effects of these adaptations in the two countries are very different. While the U.S. experiences a widening surplus of hospital beds and diagnostic capability, Canadians are beginning to experience the sorts of malfunctions that might be expected when health care is free and ceilings on funding have been imposed. Waiting lists for most postponable surgery are now commonplace. Cardiac-bypass queues grow and patients die before their turn; hip replacements and cataract operations join a growing list of corrections that are triaged, ostensibly because more serious operations must be performed, but in reality because the resources are being used to continue first-dollar insurance coverage for sniffles and splinters -- and for asphalt laying in the constituencies of members of the government.    Meanwhile, diagnostic capability is failing as older technologies, such as CAT scanners, are in excess demand (Newfoundland has one machine and a population of 579,000) and new technologies, such as nuclear magnetic resonance scanners, are available only in a few locations.    There are other less obvious developments that can be substantiated only in anecdote. Canada's is becoming a two-tiered health-care system. Those with high incomes, greater powers of persuasion, or &quot;pull&quot; get the same high standard of care they always got. High-income earners go to the U.S. for their bypass surgery; to the Mayo clinic for their annual medical examinations. The persuasive or well-connected manage to jump the queue.    Whatever may have been the case in the past, it is no longer appropriate to compare the Canadian and American systems as though they provided the same product. So, comparisons of medical-care costs as a percentage of GNP are not revealing the comparative capability of public and private systems to deliver medical care. The as yet unaccepted fact is that while both Canada and the U.S. faced the same cost pressures on health-care systems, Canada has responded by eliminating service.    For the sake of Americans and the Canadians who will increasingly have to use American health care, it is to be hoped that American political leaders, even if they find it inspirational, do not seek to emulate the Canadian experience.    ---   Mr. Walker is executive director of the Fraser Institute in Vancouver. </TEXT></DOC>