<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871218-0023 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Oil Price Slide Eases After Fifth Day,As Demand Appears to Trim Losses---By John ValentineStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PETROLEUM (PET)PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS)STOCK INDEXES (NDX)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><TEXT>   Prices of crude-oil futures declined for the fifth consecutive day, but for the first time since the plunge began last Friday, sufficient demand developed to stiffen prices and trim losses.    At one point, the price of January delivery oil dipped $1.06 to $14.90 a barrel, but a rally brought the price back to $15.84, a loss of only 12 cents from Wednesday's close. Trading was extremely volatile.    The February contract swung over an even wider range, first dropping the daily limit of $1 a barrel (January has no limit), to $14.93, the only contract to do so, and then at one point recovering enough to range nine cents higher than Wednesday's close. Ultimately, the February contract settled at $15.71 a barrel, two cents below Wednesday's close.    &quot;This market has been deeply oversold,&quot; said Peter Cardillo, trading adviser for Josephthal andamp; Co. of New York. &quot;I think we will be hearing soon from OPEC, that an emergency meeting will be called to assess and do something to counter the current situation,&quot; he said.    Mr. Cardillo said he wasn't looking for a total collapse in prices. &quot;I think its ready to stabilize at $17 and then rise to $18 again.,&quot; he said.    Trades set a record for the third consecutive session, with an estimated 179,572 contracts topping Wednesday's 151,141, according to a spokeswoman for the New York Mercantile Exchange.    Heating oil for January delivery rose 0.34 cent a gallon to 49.61 cents, while January gasoline was off 0.02 cent at 41.68 cents.    In the spot, or non-contract, market, the price for North Sea Brent, an abundantly traded European crude, fell 70 cents a barrel to $15.70. The spot price of West Texas Intermediate, the U.S. benchmark crude, in late trading was down 15 cents to $15.80 a barrel.    The continued plunge in prices prompted divergent opinions.    &quot;The fall continues because there is no word from OPEC. Absent that word, the decline will keep going,&quot; said Michael Smolinski, an economist at Data Resources Inc., Lexington, Mass. &quot;If OPEC remains silent, people are going to continue to sell the market on fears that OPEC is producing too much oil.&quot;    David T. Mizrahi, editor of the New York-based newsletter, MidEast Report, said that the five major producers -- Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, Qatar, the United Arab Emirates and Iraq -- are not inclined to cut output or do anything that will strengthen prices and favor Iran.    Separately, the Mercantile Exchange yesterday raised energy futures margins, or good-faith deposits to trade contracts, by $500 a contract for the second time this week. The new margins will be effective as of the close of business today. Initial minimum heating oil, gasoline and crude oil margins will be raised to $2,000 a contract for clearing members and to $2,500 a contract for customers, according to an exchange spokeswoman.    In other commodity markets yesterday:    PRECIOUS METALS: Gold-futures prices posted a strong recovery from early losses to end with modest declines, while silver and platinum prices mostly ranged stronger on diminished inflationary prospects. February-delivery gold, after falling as low as $475 an ounce in early trading, ended at $489.70, down 40 cents. December-delivery gold was $485.10 an ounce, down 20 cents. March-delivery silver was up four cents an ounce at $6.915, while April platinum ended at $505.80 an ounce, up $6.60. Jeffrey Nichols, American Precious Metals Inc. president, said most of the trading came from locals -- or brokers who trade for their own account on the futures exchange -- and speculators. He said the recovery demonstrated strong support for gold. Bernard Savaiko, senior precious metals analyst for PaineWebber Inc., said a gradual weakening in the dollar through the day and the fact that oil futures came off the day's lows helped prop gold prices. After having absorbed two liquidations, gold appears to be &quot;very strong at this point,&quot; said Dennis Suskind, partner in charge of metals at J. Aron andamp; Co. &quot;The decline in oil prices is helping to create a more optimistic economic scenario, and silver and platinum, which have broad industrial use, are expected to benefit from the improved climate,&quot; said Bette Raptopoulos, senior metals analyst for Prudential-Bache Securities.    COTTON: Futures prices rose the daily limit of two cents a pound for the second consecutive day on expectations that exports would show a sharp jump, which they did in a report issued after trading closed. The March contract settled at 67.70 cents a pound, for a net gain of 1.82 cents, after trading up the limit in final moments. The U.S. Agriculture Department said that for the week ended Dec. 10, export sales amounted to 244,800 bales, more than triple the 73,000 bales of the week before. The principal buyers were Egypt, with 89,100 bales, and South Korea, with 56,900 bales, the report said.    SUGAR: Futures prices rose on indications that the Philippines will have smaller crops in the next two years and on expectations of demand from major buyers. The March contract rose 0.43 cent to 8.79 cents a pound. The Philippines announced its sugar production will drop 300,000 tons in 1988 and an additional 400,000 tons in 1989, because of crop problems, a sugar dealer said. The dealer also said that while India, Pakistan, the Soviet Union and China, have not yet bought sugar on the world market, they are expected to do so, and this anticipation is boosting the market.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Prices of soybean futures soared as traders shook off some of the deflationary sentiment that sank grain prices Tuesday and Wednesday, said Richard Loewy, a grain and oilseed analyst at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., New York. The rebound was ignited when crude-oil futures rallied from a steep morning slide. Traders track crude oil as an inflation indicator. The big slump in crude-oil prices earlier in the week fueled the perception that many prices are headed down. The rebound in the soybean pits was a short-covering rally: traders tried to buy back contracts they sold earlier. Wheat contracts for March and May delivery rose amid news of subsidized sales of U.S. wheat. The Soviet Union tendered for 725,000 metric tons, Egypt tendered for 115,000 metric tons and Tunisia tendered for 157,000 metric tons. The U.S. Agriculture Department is compensating exporters that sell the wheat at lower world rates. Corn-futures prices rose amid speculation that the Agriculture Department is trying to stoke Soviet interest in U.S. corn, said Steve Freed, an analyst at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., Chicago. Some traders see the department's move earlier this week to trim the price it pays farmers for corn as an attempt to lower the market price, and make corn more affordable to the Soviets.    STOCK INDEXES: Futures prices declined for most of the day, and their descent gained speed in the final hour as traders unwound positions ahead of today's quarterly expiration, said John Andrea, a futures trader for Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., New York. Also depressing stock-index futures were lower bond-futures prices and the fact that oil-futures prices came off their lows for the day. Falling oil-futures prices over the past week have been widely cited by stock-index futures traders as one of the main factors behind the recent rally in the stock and stock-index markets. Standard andamp; Poor's 500 stock-index futures for December settlement fell 4.35 to close at 243.15. The December contract's final settlement price is set at this morning's opening of trading in the Sandamp;P 500 stock-index future. The stock market also plunged late in the day, closing down 50.07 at 1924.40. Treasury-bond futures fell 11/32 to 86 11/32. </TEXT></DOC>