<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870930-0084 </DOCNO><HL> Let Private Industry Revive U.S. Space Program---By Jerry Grey</HL><DD> 09/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTAEROSPACE (ARO)TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL) </IN><TEXT>   Thirty years ago this Sunday the Soviet Union wowed the world by launching Sputnik, the first satellite in space. Today, the Soviets once again are poised on the brink of space supremacy.    The Soviets can point to an impressive list of triumphs:    --Last year they staged 90 successful launches in 91 attempts; the U.S. recorded six successes in nine attempts.    --While NASA kept Skylab empty for most of its 75-month life, the Soviets have kept seven successive stations in orbit and accumulated three times the U.S. total of hours in space.    --The Soviets have run about 1,600 industrial experiments and are regularly producing pharmaceuticals in space.    --They are marketing advanced communications satellite Earth photos with the highest-quality resolutions yet offered.    --Next year, the Soviets will send a robot specialist to land on and explore Phobos, a moon of Mars; and in 1992 they plan to launch a Mars orbiter and atmospheric sensor.    Despite these impressive Soviet accomplishments, the U.S. has managed to stay ahead in many of the key technologies needed for future space missions, most notably computers and data processing. But we are in danger of losing even that lead. Burdensome regulations and vacillating federal policies have seriously impeded the U.S. space industry in its efforts to take advantage of our greatest asset -- the vitality and productivity of the American free-enterprise system. Despite the Reagan administration's laudable policy pronouncements encouraging the private sector to embark on space projects, companies willing to invest have been stymied by the absence of firm government commitments to implement those policies.    Changes in policies occur because of changes in administrations and disagreements between presidents and Congress. They also occur because of bureaucratic &quot;turf battles&quot; within NASA and among government agencies. These shifts in policy are not the exceptions; they are the rule. They have occurred in several commercially important areas, including aeronautical communications, satellite service to mobile ground stations, and in remote-sensing from space.    The concept of a global aeronautical communications system for civilian aircraft has been pursued vigorously since the early 1960s. Such a system promises great benefits. A plane that wanders off course takes more time and more fuel to reach its destination. Satellites can warn planes of impending collisions with other aircraft, storms and other weather hazards, and can provide instant communication in case of emergencies.    Satellite service to mobile groundstations also is a promising market in the commercial development of space. Currently, cellular phones are useful only in large urban areas. But phones in cars and trucks with access to satellite communications can communicate from remote areas.    Remote sensing from space is another commercially promising field. Observing the Earth from orbit reveals economically important information such as the health of crops, the need for moisture, the movement of pests, the development of flood conditions, the changes in direction and temperature of ocean currents, the detection of air and water pollution, and the spread of forest fires.    Despite the commercial promise of these activities, the shifts in government policy have created a climate of uncertainty for private industry and have discouraged private investment in space-related activities. What company wants to commit millions of dollars to develop products or technologies that can become useless overnight because of yet another shift in government policy?    Take satellite communications, for example. Private companies in the satellite-communications industry must answer to 13 regulatory bodies, two international organizations and four international treaties. Over the past 30 years there have been seven major policy shifts in the role of NASA with respect to research and development in the industry.    No policy has been more devastating than that toward the development of a private-sector launch industry. It was the development of a reliable launch rocket that gave the Soviet Union its initial surge of preeminence in space. Europe, Japan and China became &quot;space powers&quot; solely by virtue of their ability to launch payloads into space with their own rockets.    In the U.S., there have been five major policy changes toward satellite launching and until recently the government retained a virtual monopoly on it.    This monopoly goes back to the formative years of the space program, when NASA contracted for and supervised the development and construction of the expendable launch vehicles (ELVs) needed to launch its spacecraft and satellites. When commercial satellites were first produced in the mid-1960s, NASA agreed to launch them, too.    This policy continued when the space shuttle was developed. To promote commercial launches on the shuttle and thereby justify its investment, the government phased out ELVs, encouraged private-sector users to design their satellites exclusively for shuttle launches and encouraged companies to develop hardware uniquely designed for use on the shuttle. These policies forced the private sector to invest in NASA-dependent technologies and discouraged the development of technologies for launch systems that were independent of NASA.    Yet that policy was almost totally reversed by the president's announcement in August 1986 (in response to the Challenger disaster), barring use of the shuttle to most commercial customers and saying that the government would return to using ELVs for some missions.    This new policy should finally provide a sound base for the growth of the private ELV market, long stymied by competition from the government-subsidized shuttle. Yet there has been no clarification of the government's conditions on the private use of launch facilities. Nor has there been a firm policy established for government procurement of ELVs for civil government payloads (the Air Force has contracted for ELVs to launch its critical national-security payloads), or for a U.S. position on fair-trade practices with respect to government-subsidized foreign launchers. Until these points are clarified, private industry will continue to be reluctant to incur substantial financial risks.    In contrast to the U.S., other free-world countries have created a stable policy environment that encourages private-sector development. They also are making a much stronger budgetary commitment to space:    --In 1986, the governments of France and Japan each spent more on communications satellites than the U.S. government did. The European Space Agency spent 2 1/2 times what the U.S. government spent, and all free-world nations combined spent more than five times as much as the U.S.    --In the field of remote sensing, the governments of Canada, Japan and France all outspent the U.S. government. The European Space Agency spent almost eight times what the U.S. government spent, and all free-world nations combined spent nearly 20 times that amount.    --In materials processing in space, the U.S. government spent less than the European Space Agency and only slightly more than Japan. All free-world nations combined spent almost three times more than the U.S.    By far the most important step the U.S. could take to encourage the private industrial development of space is a commitment to a long-term national plan to guide NASA and other relevant agencies and to give the private sector a firm basis for investment. Dozens of competent plans have been offered, by NASA and others, over the past two decades. For industry, the key element of such a plan is the implementation of the major goals of the Reagan administration's program to privatize government space activities. Under this program, several elements of which were announced in 1984, a number of regulatory obstacles are to be eliminated or consolidated, but so far there has been little action.    As part of the plan, the government should redirect its spending priorities. Government spending should continue to be phased out in the manufacture and use of commercially viable products and services (such as launch vehicles for communications satellites) in which the private sector has indicated a willingness and capability to do the job on its own. The industry, for example, long ago took over the now-profitable manufacture and use of the communications satellites themselves.    Spending should be increased in areas that promise broad, national benefits that are too diverse and as yet too far from marketability to attract private capital, such as research on manufacturing in space, and particularly, the orbital laboratories and factories needed to pursue it. Spending should also be increased in areas that provide a sound infrastructure upon which private-sector development can flourish, such as the new U.S. space station and development of new low-cost, more reliable transportation systems.    But by far the best thing the government can do to help regain U.S. leadership in the space race is to decide on a sound, pro-free-enterprise space policy and stick to it.    ---   Mr. Grey is director of science and technology policy for the American Institute of Aeronautics and Astronautics. This article is based on a study for the National Center for Policy Analysis. </TEXT></DOC>