<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870914-0102 </DOCNO><HL> Peril to Democracy:Corruption ThreatensPolitical Gains MadeBy U.S. in El Salvador---Earthquake Aid Is Diverted;Christian Democrats TurnPrograms Into Patronage---'Peasants Are Always Fooled'---By Clifford Krauss and Robert S. GreenbergerStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAMMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> MAQUILIQUAT, El Salvador  </DATELINE><TEXT>    For a while this year, itlooked as though something good was happening to Maquiliquat.   Fedeccredito, a U.S.-financed credit agency that also administers public-works projects, came to this remote village last February to build a bridge over a deep gorge to a nearby highway. The 35 families here, believing that their days of lugging produce up and down the gorge to market would soon be over, celebrated with a rare feast of roast chicken and French bread.    But the local official who headed the project for the ruling Christian Democratic Party padded the payroll, say workers and Salvadoran officials. Costs soared beyond the budget, and in May work was suspended. Today, piles of rocks amid adobe huts and hilly corn and bean fields are a bitter reminder of unkept promises. &quot;We peasants are always fooled,&quot; says Daniel Arias Hernandez, a 31-year-old farmer who worked on the project.    The Reagan administration fostered democracy in this tiny Central American nation by working to curb the activities of both Marxist guerrillas and right-wing death squads. Now the unfinished bridge at Maquiliquat symbolizes the corruption and mismanagement that are subverting El Salvador and threatening one of President Reagan's few foreign-policy successes.    &quot;The two greatest problems in this country are communism and corruption,&quot; says Carlos Arturo Muyshondt, the president of a nationwide bank, Banco Hipotecario. &quot;The question is, Which is worse?&quot;    A close adviser to Salvadoran President Jose Napoleon Duarte worries about the political costs of corruption. &quot;The image of corruption not only damages the Christian Democratic Party but also the democratic process,&quot; he warns. &quot;It weakens the president, and I'm afraid at some point the corruption issue could interrupt the development of democracy. In this country, corruption can justify a military coup.&quot;    According to American and Salvadoran officials and classified U.S. documents, the problem is widespread. Millions of dollars of U.S. housing reconstruction aid, rushed here following last October's devastating earthquake, were diverted by government banks to unqualified recipients, U.S. reports show. Other U.S. funds have been doled out by the Christian Democratic Party as political patronage. For example, lucrative government contracts have been won by a phantom holding company, Corporacion H, that is run by Christian Democratic leaders, including some members of President Duarte's family.    There is nothing new about corruption in El Salvador. For years, open corruption among army officers was rampant. But, officials in the U.S. and El Salvador insist, Christian Democratic corruption is more extensive, reaching down to the tiniest village.    Mr. Duarte was elected president in 1984 on promises to revitalize the economy, clean up government and end the civil war. But El Salvador's problems haven't been solved and there is growing disillusionment with the nation's taste of democracy. The regional peace plan negotiated recently in Guatemala has helped enhance Mr. Duarte's image as an international statesman, but the economy continues to stagnate and it isn't certain whether promised negotiations with leftist guerrillas will bear fruit.    Corruption is pervasive and blatant. Although Fedeccredito wasn't able to bridge a gorge in Maquiliquat, it had no trouble building a retainer wall with government materials and labor to protect a Fedeccredito supervisor's house in Chalatenango City against mud slides.    U.S. officials, who once chalked up El Salvador in the win column for President Reagan, now worry that the erosion of confidence in its elected centrist government could lead to a resurgence of the extreme left or right. &quot;We're aware of the allegations about corruption, and this is an issue that can hurt the Christian Democratic Party in the next election if President Duarte doesn't respond adequately,&quot; says Elliott Abrams, assistant secretary of state for Inter-American affairs.    President Duarte is the linchpin of the Reagan administration's successful effort to forge a bipartisan policy with Congress on El Salvador. When the U.S. administration came to office, leftist guerrillas, aided by Nicaragua's Sandinista regime, were advancing, and army-linked death squads were murdering thousands of civilians each year. In exchange for administration pressure on the Salvadoran far right, Congress has approved $2.5 billion in military and economic aid to El Salvador over six years, making it the third-largest recipient of economic assistance, after Israel and Egypt.    However, President Duarte hasn't made the transition from politician to statesman. He places political cronies in important jobs and, although he is widely considered to be personally honest, his reputation has been tainted by his tolerance of rampant corruption among his party colleagues. He himself hasn't responded to questions about corruption from Wall Street Journal reporters. Reagan administration officials, meanwhile, haven't sent the same strong signal about corruption that once was sent about human-rights abuses, and this omission is translated here as a green light.    Fedeccredito, a sprawling government agency headed by Rafael Pleites Menendez, who also happens to be the finance secretary of the Christian Democratic Party, illustrates these problems. U.S. aid money earmarked for those economic programs run by Fedeccredito has been misappropriated, and the agency's payroll is bloated with party officials, according to a U.S. report.    In 1985, Fedeccredito was put in charge of a public jobs program for the nation's 400,000 war refugees. The program, says the U.S. Agency for International Development, is vital to rebuilding the country of 5.2 million people. But according to a 177-page State Department report last year, 70% of the program participants in towns like Ilobasco &quot;were hired on the basis of Christian Democratic Party membership.&quot; Either the jobs go to party hacks or the refugees are forced to join the party before they get the jobs.    The abuses are so widespread, says the State Department report, that &quot;mismanagement and politicalization of the program, and the corruption which is a natural consequence, have passed tolerable levels and jeopardized the fundamental feasibility of the program.&quot; One version of the report was classified by the U.S. to avoid embarrassing the Salvadoran government.    Earlier this year, the Agency for International Development, in a highly unusual step, suspended eight road and latrine construction projects in Cabanas province valued at $48,507. Fedeccredito's former local director was accused of authorizing payments for transportation of materials that didn't exist, and of paying local party activists for work they didn't perform. In Sensuntepeque, construction of First Avenue North, a major road, was stopped when half the cobblestones were stolen. Middle-level Fedeccredito officials concede that similar problems exist in the politically strategic provinces of Chalatenango, Morazan, San Miguel and La Union.    Fedeccredito President Pleites denies that his agency has used programs to benefit the Christian Democrats and calls charges of mismanagement &quot;a tropical storm in a glass of water.&quot;    The devastating earthquake last October also exposed layers of corruption. According to U.S. officials in Washington, donations of heavy equipment disappeared from warehouses; corrugated zinc roofing material and large quantities of canvas flown here on American C-5A transport planes remain unaccounted for.    As part of the relief effort, the U.S. earmarked $20 million for government-controlled banks to provide housing reconstruction loans to earthquake victims. But, according to U.S. officials and Salvadoran banking sources, as many as 30% of the loans from several banks were improperly given to bank employees, favored bank customers and Christian Democratic Party members. The U.S. protested, and the banks pledged to return the money to the Agency for International Development.    In San Salvador, other Christian Democratic officials as well as members of President Duarte's family are enriching themselves by steering government contracts toward corporations that they control through Corporacion H, according to a classified memo prepared by a private American consultant for the U.S. Embassy here in 1985.    As a result of these activities, the classified memo concludes: &quot;No serious {Salvadoran} businessman can conceive that the U.S. isn't aware of the corruption, since to them {Salvadoran businessmen}, it is so open and flagrant as to be a matter of common knowledge.&quot;    U.S. officials here and in Washington are becoming increasingly aware of the problem of corruption in El Salvador, but they are divided over what to do about it. According to some officials, U.S. Ambassador Edwin Corr is collecting evidence of corruption and intends to present it to President Duarte. However, midlevel civilian and military officials in the embassy and in Washington complain that although corruption has been raised in passing at sessions with Mr. Duarte, it hasn't ever been a major agenda item.    &quot;We've never read them the riot act on that the same way we did on human rights with the military,&quot; says a State Department analyst. &quot;So many of them see it {corruption} as the price the gringos will have to pay for their larger strategic objectives being met.&quot;    Here in El Salvador, there is growing disenchantment with the Duarte government. It is blamed for the generally dismal economic climate -- caused in large part by sinking commodity prices of major agricultural products such as coffee, sugar and cotton -- a combined unemployment and underemployment rate estimated at 50% and an inflation rate of over 30%.    Because of the growing disenchantment, the Christian Democrats could lose control of the Legislative Assembly next year and the presidency in 1989. ( Under Salvadoran law, Mr. Duarte can't succeed himself in the 1989 election.) Most analysts believe that the right wing will reap the immediate benefits. They fear that this would polarize the country, as it did in the late 1970s and early 1980s, jeopardize several programs jointly sponsored by the Christian Democrats and the U.S., such as land reform, and open new opportunities for the far left.    This would shatter the bipartisan consensus within the U.S. Congress. &quot;Sooner or later,&quot; warns Rep. Matthew McHugh, a New York Democrat who is a member of the Foreign Operations Subcommittee of the House Appropriations Committee, &quot;this will erode the confidence of the Congress and the American people in the government we're supporting with large amounts of money.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>