<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870828-0019 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 08/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REBEL TROOPS ATTEMPTED to oust Aquino, who said they were repulsed.    About 300 mutinous Philippine troops attacked the presidential palace in Manila and a state-owned TV station in Quezon City. The attack on the palace was quickly ended, and the rebel troops broke off their assault at the station several hours later. Groups of the rebels continued to hold out at several military bases. President Aquino, who has faced several coup attempts since taking office in 1986, said in a radio address that she was unharmed.    The Reagan administration said it was confident Aquino could deal with the attempted coup and reaffirmed U.S. support for the Philippine president.    ---   A MINING FIRM DISMISSED more than 15,000 striking South African workers.    As the 750,000-member Congress of South African Trade Unions said its affiliates were preparing for a nationwide strike, Anglo American Corp. fired black miners who voted to reject the company's offer to improve some benefits. It said another 15,000 miners faced dismissal today. Other firms fired about 5,000 striking workers. A walkout by Cosatu could turn the strike in South Africa's coal and gold industries into a nationwide job action.    The Pretoria government announced new state-of-emergency media restrictions, including the censorship of newspapers prior to publication.    ---   CONTRA LEADERS PROPOSED that new U.S. military aid be held in escrow.    Following a meeting in Los Angeles with Reagan, the Nicaraguan rebel officials said they were willing to have the military assistance put aside until at least Nov. 7, the cease-fire deadline set in a peace plan signed earlier this month by five Central American leaders. The Contras, whose plan calls for the continued disbursement of humanitarian aid, asked that the U.S. approve new assistance once current funding expires Sept. 30.    The Reagan administration reacted favorably to the plan, but a spokesman said the White House needed to explore its details before making a decision.    ---   A shuttle rocket test was delayed following three failed attempts, including two final countdowns halted less than 15 seconds before ignition at a site in Utah. Morton Thiokol, maker of the redesigned booster rocket, said the full-scale test burn would be conducted tomorrow.    ---   Moscow cautiously welcomed a West German offer to scrap 72 Pershing missiles, but said Reagan failed to indicate whether the U.S. would accept the elimination of the missiles' American-controlled warheads. A Soviet Foreign Ministry spokesman also denied a BBC report that Gorbachev would travel to the U.S. next month.    ---   North indicated that Reagan had authorized his Iran-Contra activities, according to the testimony of North's top aide. The aide said North also assured him last November that the Marine hadn't violated any laws. Separately, Pentagon sources said Poindexter submitted a request to retire from the Navy this fall.    ---   South Korea's government ordered a crackdown against leftist agitators whom it accused of fomenting labor unrest. Prime Minister Kim, in a radio address, said dissident activities could threaten February's direct presidential elections. The remarks came as an opposition group called for a nationwide general strike today.    ---   The EPA imposed modest sanctions against a scientist who used genetically altered bacteria on elm trees without government approval. It issued a warning to the Montana State University researcher, and said he must have a co-sponsor for any research application made in the next year.    ---   The FAA's administrator exhorted the nation's pilots to maintain alertness during flights, warning that routine, repetitive tasks can lull a crew into making serious mistakes. The remarks came at a meeting in Kansas City, Mo., in the wake of the Aug. 16 Northwest Airlines crash near Detroit.    ---   A U.S. appeals court ruled that states can't require minors to notify both parents before having an abortion. The opinion by the three-judge panel in Minnesota upheld an order prohibiting enforcement of the state's notification statute.    ---   Iran rejected an Arab League ultimatum to accept a U.N. call for a cease-fire with Iraq or face the severing of diplomatic ties. Iraq said a formal dismissal of the truce would leave Baghdad free to attack Iranian ships in the Persian Gulf. Meanwhile, two U.S. mine-sweeping ships arrived in the gulf to aid convoy operations.    ---   Wisconsin Sen. Proxmire said he won't run for re-election in 1988. The 71-year-old Democrat, who cited his age when making the announcement, currently is chairman of the Senate Banking Committee and is the the third most senior member of the Senate.    ---   The White House will propose a sale of as many as a dozen F-15 fighter planes to Saudi Arabia, but the aircraft would be released only to replace planes lost in accidents or in combat with Iran, United Press International reported. The move was said to be an attempt to quell Israeli opposition.    ---   Japan's lower house approved tighter controls on strategic exports to communist countries and increased penalties for violators. The bill, introduced after the disclosure of illegal high-technology sales to the Soviet Union, will go to the upper house of parliament for final approval.    ---   New Delhi's parliament appointed a 30-member panel to investigate alleged kickbacks paid to Indian officials by Swedish arms maker Bofors. Opposition parties refused to join the inquiry, saying a majority of Gandhi's Congress (I) members on the commission will ensure a whitewash.    ---   Violence flared in Beirut as hundreds of people angered by the plunging Lebanese pound looted currency exchange shops, set fires and threatened to storm the central bank. Syrian peacekeeping forces dispersed the crowd. Casualties weren't reported. </TEXT></DOC>