<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870702-0108 </DOCNO><HL> Speaking of Business:Perhaps It's Time to Reform Tax Reform---By Lindley H. Clark Jr.</HL><DD> 07/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXES </IN><TEXT>   The so-called Tax Reform Act of 1986 has been on the books for only eight months, but academic evidence is piling up that the lawmakers blundered. Throughout its history, of course, the act was an example of legislative futility.    Everyone likes the idea of tax reform, provided that the law is revised in the &quot;proper&quot; way. So President Reagan had a receptive audience in May 1985 when he called for &quot;historic reform&quot; aimed at &quot;fairness, simplicity and incentives for growth.&quot;    The big lure was simplicity. Visions of single-page forms danced in taxpayers' heads. The nightmare of April 15, and the days preceding it, would be a thing of the past. Eat your hearts out, Handamp;R Block.    Unfortunately, the tax-advising Blocks will be as busy as ever. The aim was to cut tax rates for everyone by eliminating a lot of special provisions that had been written into the law over the years, mainly to cut taxes for individuals and businesses. Some of the provisions were eliminated, especially those that helped business. But many provisions remained. Congress also added a lot of new provisions, more or less to make it clear just what had been done. So the bill that finally made its way into law late last year surely wasn't simple.    How about the &quot;incentives for growth&quot;? Early in the administration, depreciation allowances and the investment tax credit were enacted to spur savings and investment, and these moves seemed to work well. Last year, however, the administration found it would have to boost taxes on business to achieve the individual tax rates it wanted in a bill that would be &quot;revenue-neutral.&quot;    It was a little ironic, since for several years business savings, encouraged by the existing tax code, had been the strongest element in national savings.    But don't worry, the administration said. Lower marginal tax rates would encourage savings by individuals, offsetting the impact on business saving. But a couple of economists from the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, Jerry A. Hausman and James M. Poterba, say that isn't really so. On balance, they contend, last year's tax bill will slightly reduce private saving. Their findings appear in National Bureau of Economic Research Working Paper No. 2120, issued earlier this year.    There has been a popular assumption that the new tax law reduced marginal rates for nearly everybody. The NBER study says that is an exaggeration. In 1988, more than 40% of taxpayers will face marginal rates either equal to or higher than they would have faced under prior law. Although a majority of them will have lower marginal rates, only 11% will get marginal rate reductions of 10% or more.    Households with lower marginal tax rates will have an incentive to increase their savings. The authors believe, however, that this effect will be offset for most taxpayers by the higher taxes on corporate capital; companies often will not be able to offer the after-tax returns that would encourage individuals to save and invest.    The new law also affects savings through its new rules for Individual Retirement Accounts. Under old law each taxpayer could make a $2,000 tax-deductible contribution to an IRA each year. Two-earner families could contribute $4,000 a year. Under the new law, for a single taxpayer who is not covered by an employer-maintained pension plan or who is covered by such a plan and has income under $25,000 a year before deducting IRA contributions, nothing changes. But those with income between $25,000 and $35,000 can deduct only part of their IRA contribution, and taxpayers with incomes above $35,000 get no deductions.    The change obviously won't encourage a lot of new IRA contributions, but it won't stop all contributions either. With or without deductions, the funds build up in the IRA and aren't taxed until they're withdrawn. That will be an incentive to continue present plans.    For an administration committed to &quot;incentives for growth,&quot; however, it did seem a strange move to make. In another National Bureau study (Working Paper 2217), Steven F. Venti of Dartmouth and David A. Wise of Harvard show that the vast majority of IRA contributions represent net new saving. The evidence comes from the government's consumer expenditure surveys for the period from 1980 through the first quarter of 1984.    The authors note that savings plans like IRAs have been available in Canada since 1956 and were greatly expanded and promoted in the early 1970s. It was at this time that savings rates in Canada and the U.S., which had been highly similar, diverged. Rates have been substantially higher in Canada thereafter.    Yet another blow to savings and investment is the act's treatment of capital gains. Last year's law included the largest capital-gains tax-rate increase ever. But Lawrence B. Lindsay of Harvard in another National Bureau study (Working Paper No. 2215) suggests the rate increase will produce less, not more, revenue.    For the first time since 1922, the tax treatment of long-term capital gains will be the same as the tax treatment of ordinary income. During the intervening 65 years, capital gains were either taxed separately from ordinary income or received a partial exclusion from tax under the regular rate schedule.    The reasons for special treatment were several. A lower rate encourages investors to take the risks often involved in economic growth. Keeping the rate low encourages mobility of capital, making it easier for investors to move funds from declining to expanding businesses.    The law did provide an incentive to investors to take capital gains -- in late 1986, before the rate went up. Now investors will have an incentive to avoid realizing gains until they have to. That's why Mr. Lindsay, after considering a number of econometric models, concluded that the new law, despite its higher rates, was unlikely to produce any increase in tax revenues.    What it is likely to produce, in addition to reduced mobility of capital, is less incentive for risk-taking. Bonds and other debt investments offer less opportunity for capital gains, but now that interest income will be taxed at the same rate as gains, there is surely less incentive for taking a chance on the stock market.    All in all, the Tax Reform Act was a strange product. Congress has been working on a &quot;technical-corrections&quot; bill to clean up some of the errors. More substantive reform of tax reform is needed. </TEXT></DOC>