<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870812-0075 </DOCNO><HL> Islam on the Move:North Africa's Rulers Seeking to Stem Fundamentalism---Moslem Revival Finds Fertile GroundIn Morocco, Algeria and Tunisia---By Philip RevzinStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AFRIC </IN><TEXT>      {Part of a Series}   TUNIS, Tunisia -- The fifth-floor walk-up in the anonymous suburban apartment house has been hastily abandoned. Pots and pans wrapped in newspaper are piled in the kitchen. There is no furniture except for a disconnected television. A broken egg has dried on the living room floor.    Jubali Hamedi sets an orange prayer rug in the corner of the otherwise empty dining room and kneels on his haunches to greet a visitor. He is 39 years old, an expert in superconductivity who runs his own solar-engineering consultancy in Tunis. The apartment's owner, he explains, is on the lam from the police. He, too, is running.    &quot;Islam tells us to study science, to be intellectuals,&quot; says Mr. Hamedi in fluent French. &quot;Islam is logic. Islam is science.&quot; He sweeps his arms in front of him. &quot;Nature is so magnificent that there had to be a creator, and God gave us rules to conserve the world he created, and those rules are the Koran.&quot;    For such sentiments Mr. Hamedi and other officials of the Islamic Tendancy Movement have been imprisoned in the past. The Tunisian government is again cracking down on fundamentalists who want an Islamic state to replace the secular regime. The movement's leader, Rached Gannouchi, is in jail awaiting trial, and could face the death penalty. Mr. Hamedi says his group, known by its French initials MTI, wants freedom to spread its beliefs, without having to hide.    Mr. Hamedi's faith and activism are finding a resonance across North Africa. Feeding on poor economic conditions and a reaction against imported European culture and morals, Islamic movements that sprang up in the early 1970s have recently touched a nerve in Tunisia, Algeria and Morocco. All three governments are trying to eliminate or neutralize them. But the movements remain significant forces likely to survive or even thrive.    With the estimated support of 20% to 25% of the population, MTI is said to be Tunisia's strongest opposition force. In Algeria, the socialist government recently required all speakers at Friday prayer services to register with the police, after speakers at some of the 9,000 state-run mosques called for the replacement of civilian authority by an Islamic state. In Morocco, followers of fundamentalist Abdelsallam Yassine say they have &quot;thousands&quot; of followers and &quot;millions&quot; of sympathizers despite occasional imprisonments and the banning of their publications.    But in none of the three countries has the Islamic movement attempted to seize power on the Iranian revolutionary model. Violence has been scattered, usually in response to government crackdowns. Generally, North Africa's majority Sunni Moslems don't believe in the type of strong, organized system of mullahs that exists in Shiite-Moslem Iran, and favor non-violent political action.    But fundamentalists preach the need to return to Islamic law, including the abolition of interest rates, the legalization of polygamy, and the prohibition of alcohol. Current governments should be replaced if they won't do this, they say.    Despite government charges of manipulation by Iran, all three movements are home-grown. All say, however, that they have been influenced by the Egyptian Moslem Brotherhood's ideas, and all confess to being delighted, at first, that the Iranian revolution succeeded. &quot;When your team scores a goal after 900 years, you want to go score another goal,&quot; says a Tunisian activist. &quot;Even if you don't really like the guy who scored the first goal.&quot;    The growth of fundamentalism in North Africa, one of Islam's strongholds since the seventh century, reflects both a yearning for the past and a revulsion at the present. The three countries are still throwing off relatively recent colonial pasts and rejecting the cultural influence of Europe. Young people get good educations but face terrible job prospects.    &quot;Fundamentalist movements spring from the educated middle classes,&quot; says Johannes Jansen, a professor at the University of Leiden, the Netherlands, who has studied the phenomenon in Egypt and elsewhere. &quot;Their university degrees don't lead to jobs or material bliss, so they come to think the Islamization of society would solve their, and the world's, economic problems.&quot;    This idea, reinforced in meetings like the ones that occur nightly at private houses in Morocco, or secretly in rural mosques in Algeria, or openly in study rooms at the Faculty of Science at the University of Tunis, finds fertile ground especially among disaffected youth.    Government responses to this psychological challenge range from occasional repression in Tunisia to consistent repression in Algeria to co-optation in Morocco.    The Tunisian government rounded up 40 MTI leaders this spring after allegedly discovering connections with Iran. The MTI scoffs at state evidence of collusion, including a 500-rial Iranian banknote produced at a government press conference. &quot;We have absolutely no ties to Iran,&quot; says Mr. Hamedi of the MTI. &quot;It's just the latest excuse to get us.&quot;    The MTI draws much of its support in reaction to aspects of the government of 84-year-old President-for-life Habib Bourguiba that they consider anti-Islam. Mr. Bourguiba outlawed polygamy, allowed by Koranic law, and once, during the Ramadan fast, drank a glass of orange juice in a daytime television appearance, to make the point that essential workers could break the fast. Moslems are supposed to abstain from food and drink during the daylight hours of Ramadan. Mr. Bourguiba has long viewed the fundamentalists as a threat to his regime.    The government also detained 50 student leaders at the University of Tunis, where fundamentalism has taken strong root, particularly among science and engineering students. Clashes between fundamentalists and leftists at the law school and letters school, once over whether a snack bar should stay open during Ramadan (it was closed), led to a month's loss of classes last term and to the building of a 10-foot-high iron-spike fence between the schools. Confrontations in downtown Tunis between demonstrating fundamentalist students and police have led to scores of injuries and arrests.    On the second day of class after spring vacation, a police helicopter circles over the campus. Three vanloads of plainclothes police wait at the gate. Scores of girls wearing headscarves and boys with neatly trimmed beards sit at long tables in the study room of the Science Faculty.    &quot;Science students are always solving problems,&quot; says Mohammed Amara, a mathematician and president of the university. &quot;Maybe it's a relief for them to throw up their hands and let God solve the world's problems.&quot; But, he adds: &quot;They'll grow out of it.&quot;    Mr. Hamedi, kneeling in the abandoned Tunis apartment, says his movement believes in persuasion and in free elections, and will wait patiently for the majority to approve its platform. &quot;If a majority vote for us, we would install our government, our program as the Koran tells us,&quot; he says. &quot;Four years later they could vote us out if we didn't solve their problems.&quot;    Nonsense, replies official Islam. &quot;They just want power, and would never give it up,&quot; says Mohammed Mokhtar Sellami, the grand mufti of Tunisia. He is a tiny man sitting behind a huge carved-wood desk in a room tiled in blue mosaics. &quot;You can't reject modern civilization. You can't go back to cutting off the hands of thieves. Knowledge doesn't lead to extremism, ignorance does.&quot;    In neighboring Algeria, the single-party government has long cracked down even harder on its extremists. In January, police ended an 18-month long manhunt by shooting to death Mustapha Bouali and three of his followers. Mr. Bouali claimed to be a fundamentalist, and had stolen arms from a police station in 1985.    &quot;There was a message there,&quot; says a foreign diplomat in Algiers. &quot;They didn't ask a lot of questions before shooting.&quot; Last month, 187 alleged supporters of Mr. Bouali were convicted of conspiracy and other crimes. Four were sentenced to death, the others to prison terms ranging from one year to life.    Algeria fights fundamentalism with its police force, which monitors what is being preached in mosques, and by offering a hefty dose of religion to all who want it. Alone in the region, Algeria has appeased the religious by making its weekend Thursday and Friday, instead of Saturday and Sunday. The construction of 160 mosques has been exempted from government spending cutbacks. Says Mohammed Loumi of the Ministry of Religious Affairs, &quot;Our mosques are open to all to do the work of the Koran, though we do try to eliminate erroneous interpretations.&quot;    The Moroccan government is fighting &quot;false Islam&quot; too, starting from the Royal Palace. Even fundamentalists accept King Hassan II's claim to be a direct descendant of Mohammed, and as such head of the religion as well as the state.    The king &quot;skillfully manipulates these roles,&quot; says a foreign diplomat in Rabat. &quot;He knows how to satisfy religious needs while keeping the country open to the modern world. No other Islamic leader could host both the pope and {Israeli Premier} Shimon Peres.&quot;    During Ramadan, for example, the king, dressed in white robes, hosts a nightly televised religious discussion with an Islamic scholar. A ubiquitous poster shows the king in religious garb praying in the Sahara with soldiers fighting the separatist Polisario rebels.    &quot;We have no separation between religion and politics here,&quot; says Mohammed Makki Naciri, the 80-year-old head of Rabat's &quot;ulema,&quot; or council of holy men. Mr. Naciri holds court in a big rectangular room lined with couches. Visitors take their shoes off before entering. &quot;The king gives religion the place in life it deserves. We have 16,000 mosques. His majesty is a fundamentalist. I am a fundamentalist.&quot;    The view is different in another couch-lined receiving room in a Rabat suburb. Young, bearded men enter singly or in pairs, slipping off their shoes and nodding to an elderly man in a brown robe and white knitted cap. The arrivals wear suits and ties, or leather jackets, or Izod shirts and cotton slacks. Some take notes as their leader speaks.    &quot;Our program is simple: the implementation of Islamic law as prescribed in the Holy Koran,&quot; says Abdelsallam Yassine, speaking slowly and softly. &quot;Society is being destroyed by consumerism, by immorality, by AIDS, by drunkenness in Russia, by the nuclear threat. West and East have failed. The future is Islam.&quot;    By 8 p.m., an hour into the session, the 15 rapt listeners have slipped onto the couches or sit at Mr. Yassine's feet on the red and blue carpet. They include an engineer, three high school teachers, a bureaucrat, a middle manager, a statistician, two merchants, a factory worker, a doctor.    The doctor says he turned to fundamentalism five years ago to quench &quot;a spiritual thirst.&quot; Public school teachers taught him &quot;a false image,&quot; he says, and only when he read the works of Mr. Yassine and other Islamic thinkers, did he discover the &quot;true path.&quot;    He adds, &quot;Society is sick. The more I learn about the secrets of anatomy, the secrets of cells, the more I understand the glory of Islam and of God.&quot;    The regime has never been comfortable with Mr. Yassine. He was released last year after two years in jail for publishing a newspaper without official permission. His repeated requests to form a legal political party have been denied.    He was jailed for three years beginning in 1975 for printing 3,000 copies of an open letter calling on the king to implement Islamic law. The nightly gatherings at his house aren't illegal, but Mr. Yassine, who for half his 60 years was a functionary in the Education Ministry, says the police watch the house and take names. </TEXT></DOC>