<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880310-0087 </DOCNO><HL> Candidates Need Help in Chasing The Long Green </HL><AUTHOR> Albert R. Hunt </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Money, which the late California Democrat Jesse Unruh called the &quot;mother's milk of politics,&quot; is making a mess of the presidential election this year.    Only a month after voters started to the polls, money shortages have already caused some candidates to drop out. The scarcity of funds was devastating for Rep. Richard Gephardt in the Super Tuesday contests, and Sen. Robert Dole -- even if he stays in the race -- won't have funds to wage much of a campaign in some large states. Pat Robertson plans to fudge, and perhaps outright cheat, on the campaign finance laws, while the candidates in the best shape are those in powerful positions: Vice President George Bush and Massachusetts Gov. Michael Dukakis.    But any temptation to abolish campaign finance regulations should cause flashbacks to 16 years ago -- to black satchels full of illegal contributions and abuses of power fueled by excessive amounts of money. It was called Watergate.    Moreover, it isn't difficult to correct the deficiencies in the current system, which limits contributions and spending, partially funds presidential primaries and totally funds the general election. There are benefits to money in politics. It provides a barometer of support for a candidate, weeds out most of those with insubstantial support and gives citizens an opportunity to participate in the political process. The harm comes when too much influence goes to the rich and powerful, when ideas become secondary to special interests and when candidates have to spend more time raising money than meeting voters or thinking about governing.    Nobody argues any more that presidential candidates are being bought. But the system does force them to spend too much time raising money and doesn't permit enough money overall in the race to genuinely encourage competition.    Congress, with bipartisan backing, should fix this swiftly, in time for the next presidential election. Four changes in the current law are necessary. They are:   --The current $1,000 contribution limit should be boosted at least to $3,000. The existing limit was set in 1974; inflation alone would take that to about $2,400 now. Nobody seriously believes that a future president can be bought for $3,000.    --Raise the limit for private contributions that the federal government will match for the primaries to $500 from $250. It would cost the Treasury only about $5 million to $10 million a year and would, with an increase in the individual limit, make campaign financing much easier and less time-consuming.    --Scrap the state-by-state limits on spending and significantly increase the overall primary limit. The state-by-state limits only really matter in Iowa and New Hampshire, and are widely violated anyway. If a candidate wants to blow $3 million on an early primary, let him; he may pay a price later. Bob Dole has spent more than 75% of his money by now, making it very tough for him to wage a protracted battle -- a lesson that shouldn't be lost on future candidates.    --Increase disclosure of the use of so-called &quot;soft money&quot; -- funds raised by the parties to help candidates in the general election. The goal of strengthening parties is commendable, but abuses ought to be highlighted.    These changes alone would make the system more competitive, enable presidential candidates to spend less time on fundraising, and eliminate some petty and unenforceable regulations. None of this would require action by the infamously inept Federal Elections Commission, and it isn't an issue with ideological overtones: Charles Black, who ran conservative Jack Kemp's campaign, says that with these changes, &quot;we'd have no trouble living with the system.&quot;    Despite some obvious defects in the current campaign-financing laws, none of the horror stories forecast by opponents a decade and a half ago have materialized. Back then it was argued that a public financing system would be an incumbent's protection act, since a challenger needs more money to defeat an incumbent. That argument disappeared in the first two elections under the new law, 1976 and 1980, when the incumbents lost.    Critics also argued the system either would eliminate any third-party possibility or, alternatively, would produce a plethora of splinter parties. Instead, one third party -- John Anderson's in 1980 -- was able to mount a serious effort, but the balkanization of elections hasn't occurred.    Finally, there was the worry that the use of matching funds in primaries would produce dozens of frivolous candidates sopping up federal dough. Sen. James Allen, the late Alabama Democrat, predicted 25 or 30 candidates for each party's nomination. But there were only about a half-dozen aspirants for each nomination this year, and none could be called frivolous.    Meanwhile, the benefits have been enormous. As the bipartisan National Elections Commission, chaired by former GOP cabinet member Melvin Laird and former Democratic chairman Robert Strauss, said a few years ago: &quot;Public financing of presidential elections has clearly proved its worth in opening up the process, reducing undue influence of individuals and groups, and virtually ending corruption in presidential election financing.&quot;    Over the past seven years, Ronald Reagan has engineered controversial tax cuts, rearranged spending priorities, presided over the largest peacetime buildup in defense spending in this century and eliminated governmental regulations that drew the wrath of many business interests. This has produced heated and at times very bitter opposition. But never once has anyone accused Mr. Reagan of proposing something to pay off campaign contributors.    That's the most important legacy of this campaign-financing system for Ronald Reagan, as it will be for his successor. Whatever the problems, that's too precious to discard.    ---   Mr. Hunt is chief of The Wall Street Journal's Washington bureau. </TEXT></DOC>