<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870116-0120 </DOCNO><HL> What's New in Prison Jewelry---By Lawrence W. Sherman</HL><DD> 01/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   One of the hottest new technologies in crime control is the &quot;ankle bracelet&quot;: an electronic device for detecting violations of house arrest. The appeal of these devices to overburdened criminal-justice officials is understandable. But much more careful field testing is needed before they can be adopted safely on a widespread basis.    The devices are being used on a limited basis with both convicted and accused offenders, at home, work and school. A radio transmitter is placed around an offender's ankle and cannot be removed without triggering the device. If an offender is not in the right court-ordered place at the right time, a central monitoring system is supposed to register the violation with an enforcement agency, which is supposed to at least return the offender to the proper location.    These programs have mushroomed almost overnight. According to a forthcoming report by Annesley Schmidt of the National Institute of Justice, the first continuing program was established in Florida barely two years ago. By last month she found that 45 programs were in operation in 20 states. While they monitored only about 900 offenders at that time, the programs seem likely to continue to expand geometrically. They are already used in a wide range of functions: probation, parole, pre-trial release and work-release sentences.    Most of the offenders are charged with relatively minor offenses, and eligibility requirements often exclude drug addicts and violent offenders. Many programs monitor repeat drunken drivers, and one program includes a victim of acquired immune deficiency syndrome the jail did not want.    The reasons for the growing interest in this technology are clear. For what appears to be a fraction of the cost of building new prisons and jails, electronic monitoring offers the promise of reduced crime. Yet major questions need to be resolved about the proper purpose of the technology and the kinds of offenders for which it is appropriate. Even more basic questions must be answered about the reliability and effectiveness of the technology itself.    Electronic monitoring attracts both liberals and conservatives. Liberals want to use it for people who might otherwise be kept in jail or prison. Conservatives want to impose it on offenders who might otherwise have complete freedom. Both sides have reasonable arguments.    Massive overcrowding has undermined even minimal conditions of human decency, especially the prevention of violence against inmates. If we can reduce overcrowding without endangering the community, we will all be better off.    Conservatives, naturally, would rather not let more people out of jail or prison. They prefer the use of electronic monitoring to &quot;widen the net&quot; of official control of criminals who otherwise would be free on probation or parole. Throughout most of the past quarter-century we have cut back drastically on the chances of offenders going to prison. The fact that we have recently begun to increase those chances does not alter the fact that prison is still used much less than it was in 1960.    At that time, there were 6.1 state and federal prison inmates for every 100 FBI-reported serious crimes. By 1974-75, that rate dropped to 2.1 inmates per 100 crimes. By 1984, it rose to 4 per 100, but that is still only two-thirds of the 1960 level.    And for all of the recent growth in incarceration, the growth in probation has been even more rapid. From 1979 to 1984, the Bureau of Justice Statistics reports, jail populations grew 48%, and prison populations grew 60%. But in that same time period, probation populations grew by more than 70%. For every jail and prison inmate, there are three offenders serving sentences in the community. So while some conservatives might oppose electronic house arrest because it is &quot;not enough&quot; punishment, it could be far more effective at controlling crime than conventional probation and parole.    In any case, the ideological debates may be premature. Any widespread use of electronic monitoring should be premised on firm evidence of its effectiveness. National Institute of Justice Director James K. Stewart has launched a research program that may answer many of the vital questions.    Perhaps the most important question is whether the devices are mechanically reliable. There is disturbing evidence that at least some of the devices are not. After one year of using one of the systems, the Utah Department of Corrections concluded that &quot;the equipment has proved so inaccurate that it cannot be used.&quot; Utah officials were plagued by frequent false alarms when offenders had not actually left their assigned locations. Even worse, random visits to those locations found some offenders missing, even though the system had not registered them as absent.    With National Institute of Justice support, Utah is now testing eight different products by having student volunteers wear the devices while logging their daily whereabouts. The students also will try to beat the systems. Researchers will compare the students' logs with the electronic record to determine each product's rate of both false alarms and alarm failures.    Another key question is how different types of offenders will behave under different types of electronic monitoring systems. These issues will be examined by the controlled experiments the National Institute of Justice is sponsoring in San Diego with offenders on work furloughs, and in Indianapolis with both accused and convicted property offenders. These experiments will compare the outcomes of electronic monitoring with those of conventional treatments.    The experiments also will study how well human operators perform with these electronic systems. How quickly do humans respond to electronically detected violations? Do they ask law enforcers to find the offender immediately, and, if so, what is the response? Or is the offender just called into the office days later and merely given a lecture?    While the equipment costs of electronic monitoring have been estimated to be as little as $2 a day per offender, the hidden costs in providing a fully staffed, effective system may be much more substantial. If the main attraction of the technology is the theory that it is cheaper than jail, then we should pay close heed to the National Institute of Justice's test of that theory.    The need for careful testing should not be held against ankle bracelets. The National Cancer Institute invests 10 years and $60 million to $90 million in developing each anti-cancer drug. The National Institute of Justice is investing considerably less than $1 million in these initial experiments on a technology that could still reduce crime substantially.    But if ankle bracelets fail, we should move on to testing many other crime-control options. More than 500,000 anti-cancer compounds had to be tested to develop the 40 cancer treatments now in clinical use. Our struggle against crime deserves at least as much freedom to test carefully a wide range of ideas.    ---   Mr. Sherman is a professor of criminology at the University of Maryland and president of the Crime Control Institute in Washington. </TEXT></DOC>