<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880929-0028 </DOCNO><HL> Palestinians Are Deeply Divided on Peace With Israel --- Hard-Liners Aren't Sure Leadership's New Moderation Is the Way to Go </HL><AUTHOR> Geraldine Brooks (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST </CO><DATELINE> TUNIS, Tunisia  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When Deena Shoma goes to summer camp, it's in Libya.    As might be expected of a summer camp in Col. Moammar Gadhafi's Libya, the 13-year-old Palestinian girl spent this summer learning hand-to-hand combat. Back at school in Tunisia, her ambition is to become a computer engineer.    Deena lives with 53 other youngsters, most of them orphans of Palestine Liberation Organization fighters, in a home staffed and funded by the PLO. Chairman Yasser Arafat is a frequent visitor. Teenagers such as Deena Shoma, academically gifted and ideologically committed, are the pride of the PLO. But they are also part of its problem.    &quot;We must fight for all of Palestine,&quot; she says. Alongside her, a 15-year-old in blue jeans and running shoes nods in vigorous agreement. &quot;Up to now, everything Chairman Arafat has done has been right,&quot; says Fadi al-Khalidi. &quot;But the day he recognizes Israel is the day I will oppose him. I will win my {Palestinian} state by fighting, not by recognition.&quot;    Such hard-line sentiments aren't popular in the PLO these days, as Mr. Arafat gives Jewish New Year's greetings in Hebrew and his aides outdo one other in the moderation of their public statements.    Mr. Arafat has been offered a historic opportunity by King Hussein's renunciation of Jordan's claim to the Israeli-occupied West Bank, which ended Israel's hopes of negotiating with the moderate monarch. The PLO is the only plausible Palestinian representative, and the message emanating from much of its top level is that the organization is ready at last to recognize Israel and conclude a constructive peace -- if only the intransigent Israelis will accept its overtures.    That message is a bitter pill to many PLO loyalists raised on the revolutionary rhetoric of revenge and bloodshed. In the next few weeks Mr. Arafat must quiet those voices, reach a consensus and present an acceptable face to outsiders.    But consensus, as ever in the PLO, is elusive. &quot;As Israelis have their Kahane, so we have our own Kahane,&quot; says Bassam Abu Sharif, Mr. Arafat's senior adviser, referring to Meir Kahane, the Israeli member of parliament who wants all Palestinians expelled from Israel. &quot;The difference is that Israel's ruling party is rejecting peace while the PLO leadership is offering to make peace.&quot;    The organization, however, has failed to make that offer clearly. Mr. Arafat hints he is waiting for the Palestine National Council, which formulates PLO policy. But a meeting of the council has been repeatedly postponed as the various PLO factions struggle to find a strategy that won't split the organization. The council is now expected to meet Oct. 14.    This procrastination is testing the patience of Mr. Arafat's Arab allies and his constituents in Israel's occupied territories. &quot;He is indecisive, a survivalist,&quot; says an Arab official. &quot;But now is the time everyone has to grow up and say what they really mean.&quot;    Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza, where the PLO is banned but almost universally supported, also are beginning to demand that the PLO forge a clear political program. An August editorial in Al Fajr, a Jerusalem newspaper, implied unusual criticism of the PLO, asking for &quot;specific and straightforward&quot; decisions by the Palestine National Council. &quot;There is no room left for confusing rhetoric.&quot;    The Palestinians in the territories know their Israeli enemies as occupiers, but often have also come to know them as employers, customers, neighbors. The result is a sophisticated Palestinian community, fiercely nationalistic but also pragmatic, that has lived for 20 years in the midst of Israel's vigorous democracy.    Many tactics of this year's Palestinian uprising come straight from the repertoire of Israeli dissent: Barricading streets with burning tires is a favored tactic of militant Israeli trade unions, for instance, and stone-throwing typifies Orthodox Jewish protest against Sabbath violators.    But the PLO is scattered in 90 countries. It is often led by Palestinians who have seen only Israel's harshest face -- as victims of its bombing raids against PLO facilities in Lebanon and Tunis -- and whose political experience is limited to repressive and bloodthirsty Arab regimes and factions in Syria, Iraq or Lebanon.    Many of these Palestinians cling to the tactics of revolution and terror. The PLO's most public contribution to the uprising was the fatal hijacking of an Israeli bus, an operation that only weakened world sympathy for the Palestinian cause.    But in Tunis, where the PLO set up headquarters after being driven from Lebanon, the tune among leaders is changing, with many of the clearest peace overtures coming from the organization's former hard-liners. Bassam Abu Sharif, Mr. Arafat's adviser, is credited with the authorship of the PLO's most moderate position paper to date. The document, released at an Arab summit in June, calls for coexisting Jewish and Palestinian states.    &quot;We believe that all peoples, the Jewish and the Palestinian included, have the right to run their own affairs, expecting from their neighbors not only nonbelligerence but {also} the kind of political and economic cooperation without which no state can be truly secure,&quot; he wrote.    An unlikely peacemaker, Mr. Abu Sharif was the No. 2 official of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine, an extremist PLO faction whose terrorist devastation culminated in the multiple detonations of three hijacked planes in 1970. He carries the scars of his exploits: Fingers burned to stubs and a face blotched by skin grafts following the explosion of an Israeli reprisal bomb said to have been concealed in a book about Che Guevara.    He switched allegiance to Mr. Arafat's mainstream Fatah organization only recently and now accompanies the chairman on his hectic, head-of-state-style visits to Arab capitals. While his moderate position paper couldn't have been released without Mr. Arafat's approval, the chairman characteristically hasn't endorsed it.    Critics say this fits Mr. Arafat's behavior -- encouraging deputies to send up trial balloons while his own position remains unclear. (Mr. Arafat declined to be interviewed, saying he didn't want to pre-empt the Palestine National Council meeting.)    Salah Khalaf, also known as Abu Iyad, is another unlikely dove. He became the PLO's No. 2 after the assassination of Mr. Arafat's former deputy, Kahil Wazir, or Abu Jihad, last April. (The Israelis never acknowleged the operation, but security sources confirm their responsibility.)    Since Israeli bombs flattened the PLO's Tunisia headquarters in 1985, its offices have been scattered throughout the Tunisian capital's suburbs. Mr. Khalaf works from a high-walled villa, guarded by a dozen men armed with assault rifles.    As an adviser to the Black September terrorist group, Mr. Khalaf is reputed to have organized the kidnapping of the Israeli athletes at the Munich Olympics, although he blames the West Germans for the shootout in which the hostages died. &quot;Terrorism should be evaluated with two eyes, not one eye,&quot; he says. &quot;By any account, Palestinian terror doesn't exceed 1% of the Israeli terror that has been unleashed on us in the Lebanese refugee camps and in the occupied territories.&quot;    Now, he says bluntly that the initial Arab rejection of Israel as created by the 1947 partition plan was &quot;a mistake,&quot; and he favors a Palestinian state in the West Bank and Gaza. &quot;We have a great opportunity now to make peace,&quot; he says. &quot;But if we fail to explore this opportunity the alternative will be the extremists -- on our side and the Israeli side.&quot;    While Fatah officials say they are close to agreement with the PLO's extremist factions, statements last week by George Habash, head of the Syria-based Popular Front, diverged widely from the moderate words coming from Tunis. Mr. Habash wants the Palestine National Council to reaffirm the PLO charter, which calls for the destruction of Israel.    Palestinians in the West Bank and Gaza are apt to support whatever emerges from the council meeting. Israeli authorities haven't let any alternative leadership emerge in the territories, banning political activity and jailing or deporting any potential leaders who won't collaborate.    The Islamic fundamentalist movement in Gaza could benefit from a PLO failure. But without a coherent political platform, radical Moslem groups can't lead Palestinians anywhere but into more violence.    Whatever happens to newly moderate officials such as Mr. Abu Sharif and Mr. Khalaf, Mr. Arafat's position probably won't suffer. &quot;The chairman can change his clothes very quickly,&quot; says a PLO official. &quot;If this peace offensive comes to nothing, you will see him very easily dressed as a militant once again.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>