<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861202-0062 </DOCNO><HL> U.K. LaunchesAn InvestigationInto Guinness---Probe Apparently FocusingOn Purchase of Distillers;Possible Boesky Tie Seen</HL><DD> 12/02/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROPSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><DATELINE> LONDON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The British government said it is investigating Guinness PLC, apparently focusing on the company's $3.6 billion takeover of Distillers Co. earlier this year.    In a brief statement, the Department of Trade and Industry said it appointed two investigators to &quot;examine circumstances suggesting misconduct of the affairs of Guinness PLC in connection with its membership.&quot; The trade department said &quot;membership&quot; referred to share owners of the British brewer and distiller, but it didn't elaborate.    A senior official of Guinness's adviser in the Distillers bid, others in the London financial community and Britain's Labor Party opposition said they suspect the inquiry will examine the possible role of the U.S. takeover speculator Ivan F. Boesky in Guinness's acquisition of Distillers, a Scottish maker of spirits. They suggested that Mr. Boesky may have purchased a substantial number of Distillers shares that were sold to Guinness in the takeover.    In the U.S., Mr. Boesky's main attorney, Harvey Pitt, a partner of Fried, Frank, Harris Shriver andamp; Jacobson, declined to comment on any aspect of the situation, including whether Mr. Boesky had held a stake in any companies in the Distillers fight.    Guinness said it hasn't been told the reason for the investigation, which it said came as &quot;a complete surprise.&quot; It said it would cooperate fully with the investigation.    A source at Morgan Grenfell Group PLC, financial adviser to Guinness in the Distillers bid, said government investigators yesterday visited Morgan Grenfell offices seeking records relating to Guinness for the nine months that roughly coincide with the brewer's pursuit of Distillers. This source said he suspected they were looking for links to Mr. Boesky.    The investigation of Guinness, one of Britain's most acquisitive companies, raises further questions about the company's already controversial takeover tactics. It also comes when the trade department is investigating Geoffrey Collier, a former Morgan Grenfell investment banker, for alleged insider trading in a separate takeover bid.    On the London Stock Exchange yesterday, Guinness shares fell 47 cents, to $4.28 a share. Morgan Grenfell shares fell 36 cents, to $5.29 a share.    Although exact details of the trade department's investigation aren't known, suspicions yesterday in London focused on Mr. Boesky. &quot;We understand that Mr. Boesky had a substantial interest in Distillers shares and participated in the Guinness bid,&quot; said Robin Cook, a member of Parliament who has been one of the opposition Labor Party's main spokesmen on insider trading.    At a special parliamentary debate on insider trading scheduled for today, Mr. Cook said he intends to ask government officials &quot;to come clean&quot; about their inquiries into Mr. Boesky's activities, and to say whether they include the Guinness bid for Distillers.    As previously reported, the U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission has sent information to the trade department on the Boesky case under terms of a new information-sharing agreement between the U.S. and Britain on securities-markets investigations. Last month, Mr. Boesky agreed to pay $100 million in settlement of SEC insider-trading charges against him. He also agreed to plead guilty to one felony count carrying a prison sentence of one year to five years.    It is rare for the trade department to launch a full investigation of a British company -- and even rarer for it not to say what the investigation concerns. Department spokesmen yesterday said only bare details of the inquiry were released because the department didn't want to tip off people who might be questioned.    At Guinness, investigators arrived unannounced early yesterday morning, showed their credentials and were given a room in which to work, a Guinness spokesman said. Guinness officials said investigators spent most of the day deciding how the investigation would proceed.    In the investigation, the government is using powers that have been rushed into use in response to concerns about insider trading in London. Provisions of the new Financial Services Act allow investigators for the first time to compel testimony and the production of documents in investigations such as these.    Under an order issued last week by Michael Howard, Minister for Corporate and Consumer Affairs, information obtained by inspectors can be disclosed to other regulatory organizations, including the SEC. Heading the trade department investigation are lawyer David Donaldson and Ian Watt, an accountant at London accounting firm KMG Thomson McLintock.    Controversy has surrounded Guinness's acquisition of Distillers, which was one of Britain's biggest takeovers. Guinness acquired the company only after a bitter fight against Argyll Group PLC, a British supermarket chain.    One area of the controversy may be at issue in the trade department's investigation. A source close to Argyll said yesterday that in the late stages of the contest for Distillers, Argyll asked Britain's Panel on Mergers and Takeovers to investigate the &quot;mysterious purchases&quot; of large blocks of Guinness shares.    These purchases drove up Guinness's share price and, consequently, the value of its bid for Distillers, the source said. Although the identity of the buyers of Guinness shares was never determined, the source said he believes the trade department's investigation may be aimed at determining the purchasers of those shares.    During the takeover battle, Guinness also persuaded Distillers to agree to pay its estimated $23 million in takeover costs if its friendly bid failed.    Later, Guinness avoided government intervention on antitrust grounds by agreeing to sell the marketing rights to certain marginally profitable brands of Scotch. Both moves were unsuccessfully challenged in court by Argyll.    To gain support in Scotland and from the Distillers board, Guinness promised in takeover documents to name Sir Thomas Risk, governor of the Bank of Scotland, chairman of the combined company. Later, Guinness changed its mind, and received shareholder approval for the change only after vocal criticism from some shareholders and institutional investors. </TEXT></DOC>