<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871224-0053 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Crude-Oil Rally Fizzles as Traders ViewWith Skepticism OPEC's Output Vows---By William PowerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PETROLEUM (PET)MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)STOCK INDEXES (NDX) </IN><TEXT>   The week's surprise oil rally fizzled as traders viewed with skepticism various statements from Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries members.    In London, the U.K. benchmark North Sea Brent crude for January delivery traded 80 cents higher, at $17.40 a barrel. But later in the day, in extremely volatile trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange, the rally petered out. The February-delivery crude contract closed up three cents a barrel, at $16.64.    Analysts and traders in New York said the market opened strongly because of a bullish U.S. stockpile report. Weekly inventory statistics from the American Petroleum Institute, released after the market closed Tuesday, showed a significant reduction in crude and heating-oil stockpiles, a statistic that often boosts prices.    A continuing barrage of statements by OPEC ministers -- including one indicating the United Arab Emirates would cut production to defend the cartel's $18-a-barrel benchmark -- were somewhat bullish as well. Ultimately, traders said, the statements were digested with skepticism.    &quot;I don't think the market places too much faith in anything these OPEC members say,&quot; said Chris McCormack, a broker at E.D.andamp;F. Man International Futures Inc., New York. &quot;It seems the market is very skeptical of rhetoric from OPEC right now.&quot;    As previously reported, many analysts label as premature reports that OPEC members are serious about cutting output in the wake of plunging prices. Such reports sent crude prices soaring on Tuesday.    Nauman Barakat, an analyst at Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co., New York, said many of the OPEC ministers are probably just trying to &quot;bull the market&quot; with their statements.    Rather than a positive reaction to OPEC, the market's relative stability was the result of other factors, Mr. Barakat said. He said that with the long Christmas weekend coming up, many traders don't want to take any short positions, which effectively bet prices will fall, in case there is war-related news over the weekend that will boost prices.    &quot;God knows what the Iranians or the Iraqis will do over the weekend when the markets are closed,&quot; Mr. Barakat said.    Elsewhere, Iran is holding off negotiating new long-term contracts at least until February and will sell oil to Japanese customers on a non-contract basis for January, sources involved in those negotiations said. The Iranians didn't say why they refused to enter into long-term contract talks, the sources said.    Meanwhile, Norway told OPEC's news agency it will continue to support for an additional six months the cartel's efforts to stabilize oil markets. Norway's support so far has been in the shape of a limit on its oil output, which is about 7.5% below what it would have been without restraint.    In other commodity markets yesterday:    SUGAR: Futures prices soared to contract highs, partly on a rumor that Japan was buying significant amounts of sugar because its regular suppliers couldn't deliver. On the Coffee, Sugar andamp; Cocoa Exchange, the March sugar contract rose 0.31 cent to 9.08 cents a pound. Prices have risen 50% since late August. Analysts said that besides the rumor, the market generally has been strong because, over the past half year, there have been continued projections of supply deficits. Weather problems in a number of countries have contributed to price rises.    COPPER: Futures prices for current delivery rose 5.1 cents to $1.36 a pound on New York's Commodity Exchange, again hitting their highest levels in five years. Prices are seven cents below the all-time record, and &quot;there's a chance we'll hit it in another two days,&quot; said Frederick Demler, metals economist at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. Comex warehouse supplies fell another 680 tons to 20,217 tons. Supplies have been unusually low at the London Metal Exchange. Analysts said already depleted supplies might get worse in the 1988 first quarter, the peak buying season. Copper's continued ascent has dumbfounded some investors. Comex broker Vincent McCrudden, of Managed Accounts Corp., said: &quot;I've talked to I don't know how many fund managers who are trying to pick a top. They can't believe (prices are) up that high. It's a bull market and people just don't want to face that fact.&quot;    STOCK INDEXES: Standard andamp; Poor's 500 stock-index futures for March settlement rose on thin trading in the wake of yesterday's rise in the U.S. dollar, said Norman Frey, an analyst at Northern Futures Corp., Chicago. Some traders see a rise in the dollar as a sign that interest rates will ease, which would tend to fuel economic activity. The rise in the dollar was sparked by the joint statement made Tuesday by the Group of Seven industrial nations that the U.S. dollar shouldn't fall further.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Soybean-oil futures soared as rumors of Soviet interest in the product set off buying in the thin holiday market. The May contract for bean oil reached a new contract high of 21.35 a pound before settling at 21.33 cents a pound, up 0.5 cent for the day. The buying in oil helped spark interest in beans and meal. The soybean contract for January settlement closed at $6.075 a bushel, up 8.5 cents. Corn futures were unchanged to higher as traders reacted to speculation that the Soviets could be in the market for U.S. corn. Wheat futures were mixed.    COTTON: A bullish consumption report helped March-contract prices rise 1.69 cents a pound, to 68.91 cents, in light trading on the Cotton Exchange. The rise was near the daily limit of two cents. A U.S. Census Bureau monthly report showed consumption of 30,626 bales in November, down slightly from the previous month but 16% higher than the 26,461 bales consumed in November 1986. Cotton demand is near record highs. Ernest Simon, cotton specialist at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., New York, said the bullish census report was the &quot;catalyst&quot; that got the market moving, then technical factors pushed it even higher. </TEXT></DOC>