<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871130-0021 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><TEXT>   HAITI CANCELED national elections in the face of widespread violence.    The country's military-dominated junta announced over state-run radio that it would remain in power and called off the elections, which would have restored civilian rule. The broadcast from Port-au-Prince was made after violence erupted Saturday night throughout Haiti, leaving as many as 27 people dead. Yesterday's elections were to have been the first freely held vote in the Caribbean nation in more than 30 years.    The State Department said the U.S. would suspend all non-humanitarian aid to Haiti in the wake of the renewed violence and cancellation of elections.    ---   CUBAN INMATES RELEASED the 26 hostages held at a Louisiana prison.    At the urging of a Cuban-born Roman Catholic bishop, the detainees allowed their captives to leave the federal detention center in Oakdale, La., where they had been held for eight days. Following the hostage release, inmate representatives signed an agreement with government negotiators. Details weren't disclosed. In Atlanta, Cuban inmates freed another four hostages, leaving 90 people still captive.    Cuban inmates seized control of the prisons last weekend following a State Department announcement that many detainees would be returned to Cuba.    ---   France said it wouldn't press charges against an Iranian Embassy translator accused of involvement in a 1986 wave of bombings. He left for Iran. In Tehran, a French diplomat accused of spying appeared before a tribunal. The moves followed Friday's release of two French hostages in Beirut.    A freed French hostage said his pro-Iranian captors in Lebanon were holding Anglican envoy Terry Waite. He also said that American captives &quot;suffered very much.&quot;    ---   A South Korean airliner vanished somewhere near Burma and apparently crashed into the sea or thick jungle, officials in Seoul said. The Korean Air jet, with 115 people aboard, was en route to Seoul from Baghdad when aviation officials lost contact with the plane. KAL officials wouldn't rule out the possibility of hijacking or sabotage.    Search teams recovered five bodies from the Indian Ocean, where a South African Airways jumbo jet crashed Saturday with 159 people aboard. All were believed killed. The plane, apparently on fire, crashed as it approached Mauritius for refueling while traveling to Johannesburg from Taiwan.    ---   Millions of Poles cast ballots in a national referendum on economic changes, including steep price increases. Police broke up sporadic demonstrations against the referendum, the first in Poland in 41 years. Final results were expected today.    ---   Turkish Premier Turgut Ozal claimed victory for the ruling Motherland Party with nearly half the votes counted in Turkey's civilian-run general elections. Ozal said he was certain the party would maintain a majority in Ankara's 450-seat parliament.    ---   Reagan returned to the White House from California to prepare for next week's summit in Washington with Soviet leader Gorbachev. Secretary of State Shultz, in a CBS-TV interview, said he didn't see any last-minute problems to the signing of a superpower treaty eliminating U.S. and Soviet intermediate-range missiles.    ---   Union Carbide and New Delhi failed to meet a deadline for an out-of-court pact for victims of the Bhopal poison-gas incident. While an accord is viewed as still possible, preliminary hearings will resume on the Indian government's $3 billion lawsuit against the company.    ---   Reagan plans to campaign for the repeal of the 22nd Amendment to the Constitution, which limits the presidency to two four-year terms. The president, in a BBC interview, said he didn't intend that change to allow him to serve a third term.    ---   Mbeki was barred from making a public address as South African police banned a rally Saturday in the black township of Zwide. The former ANC leader, who was released three weeks ago after 23 years in prison on charges of sabotage and conspiracy, later said those opposed to the government &quot;shall triumph.&quot;    ---   Supporters of Kim Dae Jung disrupted a campaign rally for South Korea's ruling party presidential candidate Roh Tae Woo. The backers of the opposition candidate in the Dec. 16 election hurled rocks, sticks and eggs at the rally in Kwangju and drowned out the former general's speech.    ---   Afghan guerrillas penetrated security around Kabul and fired rockets as Afghanistan's Soviet-backed leader, Najibullah, was condemning the rebels at a national assembly. One explosion rocked the hall where the meeting was taking place. The rebels are trying to end a nearly eight-year occupation of Afghanistan by Soviet troops.    ---   Iraqi warplanes bombed installations at two power-generating stations in southwestern Iran. Baghdad also said that the jets raided a ship in the Persian Gulf. Meanwhile, Iran said it would send an envoy to the U.N. for talks on the Security Council's call for a cease-fire in the gulf war. </TEXT></DOC>