<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881006-0034 </DOCNO><HL> International -- Foreign Insight: Moscow Innovations Have Shallow Roots --- Conservatives Still Endanger Gorbachev's Reforms </HL><AUTHOR> Karen Elliott House (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><IN> MON </IN><DATELINE> MOSCOW  </DATELINE><TEXT>   To a visitor last in Moscow five years ago at the close of the stagnant Brezhnev era, it is apparent that Mikhail Gorbachev has planted some seeds of change.    But it is equally apparent that the changes he is trying to nurture are much like hothouse plants -- too fragile to thrive in the real world.    Among the most obvious changes a visitor finds is the willingness of Russians to invite foreigners to their homes. In earlier times, only dissidents dared meet with Westerners, so the encounters were surreptitious and somber.    Now, standing in the crowded living room of Rustam Ibragimbekov, vice-president of the U.S.S.R. Association of Filmmakers, and surveying a boisterous group of Russians and Americans downing vodka and debating a dozen different topics, one could easily mistake the scene for a New York arts and society gathering. In one corner, a Soviet sociologist deplores the popularity of black-market videos starring Arnold Schwarzenegger. Across the room, a young man from Azerbaijan discusses the tension between Azerbaijanis and Armenians over a disputed piece of territory. And all over the room people chat about Mr. Gorbachev and his chances for success, much as Americans handicap the presidential race.    At government ministries and think tanks, some Soviets discuss internal and external problems with surprising candor. &quot;A lot of people won't believe in perestroika until they can see its results on the shelves and feel it in their pocketbooks,&quot; says Lev Voznesensky, spokesman for the Council of Ministers.    Around town one can now dine at small &quot;enterprise&quot; restaurants where attentive service and broad menus make dining a pleasure, unlike the ordeal at massive state restaurants where most items on the menu are unavailable and service is indifferent to rude.    All this suggests there are indeed some unusual flowers growing in Moscow -- the rational foreign-policy expert, the sensitive movie director, the eager entrepreneur. But outside the hothouse, the landscape is largely unchanged, if not impervious to change.    The sharpest Moscow image remains the ubiquitous plastic shopping bag, usually dangling empty from its owner's hand, symbolizing the triumph of hope over daily experience. Shortages abound and no Russian can leave home without a bag in case he stumbles across a rare stock of meat, sugar or milk to carry home. Russia remains a nation of bag ladies in search of scraps of perestroika (economic reform) that Mr. Gorbachev promises.    Meanwhile, the openness called glasnost, which blossoms in diplomatic circles and drawing rooms, hasn't put down the kind of roots that extend into Moscow's daily life. For instance, Vitaliy Korotich, editor of the muckraking weekly magazine, Ogonek, and the very model of Mr. Gorbachev's new free-thinking Soviet man, arrives to meet Westerners for lunch at the Riviera, a new French restaurant aboard a boat in the Moscow River.    Mr. Korotich, an urbane, outspoken disciple of glasnost and perestroika, is recently back from an overseas trip and is about to fly off to Brazil on another. Unfortunately, he arrives at the Riviera five minutes ahead of his foreign hosts. A Soviet militiaman unceremoniously orders Mr. Korotich back down the gangplank. The Riviera is a hard-currency restaurant and, because Soviet citizens can't legally possess hard currency, they are refused entry unless accompanied by foreigners to pay the bill.    It's significant -- and new -- that there are men like Mr. Korotich in Moscow. A visitor, with luck and perseverance, can find them dotted about the upper levels of ministries, think tanks and the media. For example, Anatoli Adamishin, an articulate deputy foreign minister, discusses Soviet-Japanese relations with all the candor and dispassion of a policy maker at Whitehall or the Quai d'Orsay.    &quot;Japan one day will find money isn't everything just as we found armaments aren't everything,&quot; he predicts. But for every Mr. Adamishin, there are scores of bureaucrats still preaching and practicing out-worn Marxist-Leninist dogma. It's a minor problem that a Western visitor has to surmount a half-dozen layers of such plodders to reach a thinker. The much bigger problem is that officials like Mr. Adamishin must deal through these plodders to translate their &quot;new thinking&quot; into anything approaching a new reality.    This is a fundamental fact of the Soviet system and if it's a problem in the Moscow ministries, it's magnified manyfold across a far-flung empire that has known nothing but psychological and economic stagnation since long before the Communist revolution. No one knows this better than Mr. Gorbachev. He talks &quot;democracy&quot; but appears painfully aware of the paradox that the more he seeks to spread a Soviet version of it, the more he must amass personal power to try to force-feed it to the citizenry.    Mr. Gorbachev thus continues to shuffle key players, as he did last week in pushing out old guard remnants like Andrei Gromyko. But there is little sign that any of this can motivate the massive, largely resistent bureaucracy, and reverse the rigor mortis of the body politic below.    Westerners can wish Mr. Gorbachev well, but there is little more they can or should do. Mr. Gorbachev is trying to deal with a Soviet disease that Western medicine won't cure. The good doctor Gorbachev wouldn't turn the Soviet Union into a Western-style democracy even if he could; he is trying to make a repressive Marxist system function more efficiently with steroid shots of glasnost and perestroika.    The West can buy Mr. Gorbachev time by giving him bank loans and trade deals that might put a few more consumer goods on Soviet shelves. But the fundamental problem isn't money; it's motivation. Not even a Marshall Plan would significantly affect a society that just doesn't encourage enterprise.    Westerners can hope that the rare orchids growing in Mr. Gorbachev's hothouse somehow survive and find fertile conditions in which to spread. But the West can do nothing to make the Soviet soil less hard or the Soviet climate less harsh on Mr. Gorbachev's fragile creations. </TEXT></DOC>