<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880818-0075 </DOCNO><HL> Is the Crazy Weather Still Another Sign Of a Climate Shift? --- Greenhouse Effect or Ice Age, Atmospheric Hypotheses Take the Public by Storm </HL><AUTHOR> Michael J. McCarthy (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> ENV </IN><TEXT>   Quiz for the day: What freakish weather caused the following?    Temperatures flew off the charts. Crops failed. States begged for disaster relief. Some 75 people died from the severe weather. News articles and government reports spoke of the possible dawning of a new climatological era.    The drought of 1988? Wrong. The account describes the severe cold spell of 1977. And the climatic change being heralded? A new ice age.    When the weather goes crazy, climate theorists aren't far behind. In this drought-scorched summer, the press and airwaves are full of discussions of the &quot;greenhouse effect,&quot; a much-feared warming of the planet as its polluted atmosphere traps more and more of the sun's heat. That may be a real threat, yet just a little over a decade ago, the talk was of a planetary cooling. What on earth is going on here?    The climatologists don't deserve all the blame. Rain or shine, they mostly sit at their computers, feeding in data and tinkering with mathematical models of how the skies behave. A little more carbon dioxide in the air, and it will hold a few more infrared heat rays. Then again, other gases might cause a lot of clouds to form, blocking sunlight and cooling things off. There are also sunspots to take into account, deforestation, the oceans' tendency to soak up gases, volcanic smoke -- it's all terribly complicated.    No wonder the climatologists have offered more than one scenario over the years. No wonder that at a given time, one of the scenarios should seem to agree with what it's doing outside. And when the weather is weird, no wonder that an agitated public -- which has been known to blame weather on space shots and atom bombs -- should seize upon a seemingly plausible theory about the climate.    &quot;Every time we go through dramatic weather events, whatever the fresh big-picture problem is gets blamed,&quot; says Donald Witten, a spokesman for the National Weather Service.    &quot;People tie things together just because they happen together,&quot; adds David Ludlum, a Princeton, N.J., weather historian. &quot;They just have to jump on a hobby horse.&quot; Thus do climatologists, normally the most obscure of folk, finally have their day in the sun.    But weather is weather, and climate is climate. Major changes in a region's climate -- the range within which its weather fluctuates year after year -- occur gradually, over millenniums. Nature takes its course.    Unless, of course, people mess with nature. That's what is feared now -- that the huge volumes of carbon dioxide and certain other gases spewed out since the Industrial Revolution are throwing the cosmos a curve -- depleting the Earth's protective ozone layer and also trapping too much solar heat. Many climatologists don't doubt that such an artificial warming, or greenhouse effect, will eventually pose a real peril. A few think it has already begun, most notably James Hansen of the National Aeronautics and Space Administration. Yet even Mr. Hansen doesn't blame the drought on it, or claim that the drought proves it.    Nevertheless, the greenhouse effect makes good conversation this long, hot summer. It has been splashed across the covers of news magazines, and Congress has held hearings on it. Scientists convened an international conference on it, ending with a warning of global devastation if the process isn't slowed.    Some think greenhouse theorists are jumping the gun. &quot;How many successful 50-year forecasts can you think of?&quot; quips Reid Bryson, a climatologist at the University of Wisconsin. And meteorologist Gail Martell of Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., noting that Russia recently had one of its coldest winters ever, says, &quot;You'd be hard pressed to convince the Soviets that the Earth is getting warmer.&quot;    But then, weather experts aren't noted for their unanimity. In the late 1970s, the Pentagon polled many of the world's best, trying to assemble a definitive forecast through the year 2000. After sifting through the answers, it produced a forecast revealing, predictably, no agreement whatever.    Even those who agree on what will happen often don't agree on why. Iben Browning, who puts out a newsletter that includes weather trends, foretold this summer's high-plains drought last December. His explanation: Winter tornadoes along the Gulf Coast showed that the jet stream was unusually far south, pushed there by volcanic activity and low sunspots. Physicist Paul Handler of the University of Illinois also predicted an unusually dry Midwest summer. He blamed a lack of volcanic activity in equatorial regions, providing no particles to shade the land.    The drought has brought out some amateurs, too. A Florida man recently wrote to the Agriculture Department's chief meteorologist, Norton Strommen, to warn that the Russians may be somehow using electromagnetism to scorch the Corn Belt.    As for the greenhouse effect, it made its first splash in the mid-1950s when Hurricanes Carol, Edna and Diane successively battered New England states, recalls Peter Leavitt of Weather Services Corp. in Bedford, Mass. Some greenhouse theorists, he says, warned that the predicted warming of the Earth might be under way, creating tropical conditions that bred hurricanes farther north than usual. But, Mr. Leavitt notes, that wouldn't explain why New England also had hurricanes in the 1930s and the 1800s.    Then in the 1970s several severe winters, with snow and cold that brought Northeastern cities to a standstill, spurred a flurry of books and articles with titles like &quot;The Weather Conspiracy: The Coming of the New Ice Age&quot; and &quot;The Cooling: Has the Next Ice Age Already Begun? Can We Survive It?&quot; A television documentary popularized the snow-blitz theory, which held that the beginnings of a full-blown ice age could arrive within a decade. The National Academy of Sciences, a well-respected and generally cautious group, said it was possible the next ice age could begin to be felt within 100 years.    Even the government got into it. &quot;In a cooler and therefore hungrier world,&quot; a declassified 1974 Central Intelligence Agency report said, &quot;the U.S.'s near-monopoly as a food exporter . . . could give the U.S. a measure of power it never had before -- possibly an economic and political dominance greater than that of the immediate post-World War II years.&quot;    Now the spy theory is out in the cold. &quot;An ice age is coming,&quot; says Mr. Leavitt, the Massachusetts meteorologist. &quot;But I'm not going out to buy a heater. It won't be here for 2,000 years.&quot;    The last weather extreme to stir theorists before this summer came in 1980, when Europe had one of its worst summers of the century -- heavy rainfall and record-low July temperatures. Some European meteorologists put the blame on an American volcano, the bilious Mount St. Helens. But while few experts doubt it is possible for a volcano's emissions to affect weather (as Benjamin Franklin first suggested), most say Mount St. Helens didn't qualify; it was too small.    As with many follies, some of this may result from a yen for government financing. Many climate theorists rely on such financing, says Mr. Leavitt, and finding a way to relate one's theories to current weather problems may be useful in getting it. &quot;Tying your theories to disasters is a matter of survival for these theorists,&quot; he contends.    But out where it's truly dry, the climate theories won't wash. Charles Notis, a private weather forecaster in Des Moines, Iowa, has all the weather explanations that he needs. &quot;Basically,&quot; he says, &quot;we have a drought because we do. We've had them before and we'll have them again.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>