<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861203-0047 </DOCNO><HL> Taking Stock:Wall Street May FaceBig Changes in WakeOf the Boesky Scandal---Takeover Business Is LikelyTo Be the Most Affected;New Legislation Possible---But Market May Suffer Little---By Steve Swartz and Bruce IngersollStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/03/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   The insider-trading scandal could bring sweeping change to Wall Street, especially to the takeover business that has given the securities industry plump profits and new-found notoriety. But the stock market itself is expected to emerge unscathed if not a bit sturdier from Wall Street's biggest crisis in more than a decade.    Wall Street leaders, merger experts, arbitragers, regulators and lawmakers say the scandal and its aftershocks could trigger:    --New legislation making hostile takeovers more difficult.    --A cutback in such takeovers because of legal curbs and investor wariness.    --A shrinkage in the amount of capital bet on takeovers, as some arbitragers leave the business and other investors hesitate to speculate on possible deals not yet publicly announced.    --Some slippage in profits of investment-banking and brokerage firms that rely heavily on takeover fees and trading commissions.    --A shift by some investors toward higher-quality stocks and bonds but otherwise no change in the level of individual participation in the market or in the market's volatility.    --And a move to bolster enforcement of securities laws.    On Capitol Hill, the transgressions by arbitrager Ivan F. Boesky and others, coupled with growing misgivings about junk-bond financing of hostile takeovers and widespread aversion to greenmail and other excesses in the takeover arena, are &quot;giving Democrats an issue,&quot; says A.A. Sommer Jr., a former member of the Securities and Exchange Commission.    Incumbent managements, however, could regret any resulting takeover legislation. The new Democratic Congress could turn the takeover debate into a broad, populist-tinged review of business ethics, corporate governance and shareholder rights. &quot;What we have here is a match thrown onto a well-laid fire,&quot; says John Finch, a Washington attorney and lobbyist.    The full ramifications of the insider-trading scandal won't be known until the current federal investigations are over. Many observers don't anticipate significant changes unless other major Wall Street figures are implicated -- as many expect some to be. But Edward I. O'Brien, the president of the Securities Industry Association, says, &quot;I don't think it's fair to say that after this passes, everything will go back to normal.&quot;    Already, the fallout from the scandal has been significant.    Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., the high-flying force behind the high-yield, high-risk &quot;junk bonds&quot; that have financed much of the takeover craze, has been put on the defensive by news that its junk-bond operation is under investigation.    The hostile-takeover business itself has been shaken up; several deals have been halted or restructured. In recent days, for example, Revlon Group Inc. backed off its plans to acquire Gillette Co., and Sir James Goldsmith stopped short in his bid for Goodyear Tire andamp; Rubber Co.    Some takeovers, of course, continue to be announced, particularly those aimed at combining companies in similar industries rather than at selling a target company's assets. For example, Limited Inc., an apparel retailer, and Edward J. DeBartolo, a big investor, have announced a bid for Carter Hawley Hale Stores Inc., another retailer.    For the stock market itself, the Boesky case may be somewhat helpful. The Dow Jones Industrial Average slid 56 points in the first two trading days following the announcements of Mr. Boesky's settlement with the government and of the investigation of Drexel Burnham, but the broader market -- except for takeover stocks -- has come back strongly. Many observers predict that higher-quality stocks and corporate bonds will be bolstered by investors' aversion to high-risk securities, at least in the short run.    The plunge in takeover stocks following the Boesky announcement battered the arbitrage community. &quot;A lot of arbitragers suffered losses that will influence them to get out of the business,&quot; says the head of a medium-sized Wall Street firm with a large arbitrage business. A reduction in the number of arbitragers isn't significant in itself, most observers say. John W. Bachmann, managing partner of Edward D. Jones andamp; Co., a retail brokerage house based in St. Louis, says, &quot;The Republic's come a long way without arbs.&quot;    But a shrinkage in the arbitrage community is just one of several factors that, observers say, could reduce trading volume and profits at many securities firms. Many big investors, including some Wall Street houses, are expected to become more reluctant to bet on possible transactions before they are announced. What's more, any reduction in takeover attempts would compound this shrinkage in volume and would also cut into the large fees that investment banks have reaped in recent years by providing advice on such transactions.    Nevertheless, experts say the expected shrinkage in takeover-stock gains shouldn't significantly affect the broader market. Leon Cooperman, the director of research at Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co., says the 1,000-point rise in the Dow Jones Industrial Average over the past few years has been fueled largely by declines in interest rates rather than by the &quot;swashbuckling&quot; of corporate raiders. He adds, however, that the market will remain volatile even if some speculative fuel evaporates. He attributes recent ups and downs mostly to development of options and other derivative securities used in so-called program trading.    Individual investors aren't expected to desert the market because of the Boesky case. In recent years, many individuals have switched to indirect investment anyway, through mutual funds or pension funds. And &quot;the further one gets away from the coasts toward the center of the country, the less concern there seems to be about long-term implications of this kind of scandal,&quot; says Leon T. Kendall, the chairman of Mortgage Guaranty Insurance Corp. of Milwaukee.    In fact, the Boesky scandal, though generating considerable publicity, doesn't measure up to some other crises faced by the Street in this century. The stock-market collapse of 1929 wiped out legions of investors. The back-office crunch of the late 1960s halted stock trading on several occasions and wrecked many securities firms. And Wall Street's 1974 profit crunch inflicted yet another round of securities-firm collapses and lifesaving mergers.    The Boesky scandal comes at a time when many already were predicting a slowdown in corporate takeovers and mergers. &quot;There will be fewer mergers in 1987,&quot; says Barry S. Friedberg, the head of investment banking at Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. He cites the impending increase in capital-gains taxes and his firm's forecast of a general climb in stock prices next year; higher prices would discourage takeovers by making them more expensive.    Over the past few years, the takeover game and the junk-bond market have become inextricably linked. A Salomon Brothers Inc. study estimates that of the $69.5 billion in junk bonds issued since 1981, two-thirds to three-fourths were used to finance mergers and takeovers.    Most experts cite two wild cards that could dramatically affect the markets' long-term viability.    &quot;If investigators find pervasive use of inside information by all sorts of people involved in the acquisition business, the arbitrage business and investment banking generally, you might have markets that become crippled,&quot; says George L. Ball, the chief executive of Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. &quot;But that's unlikely.&quot; Nevertheless, Mr. Ball echoes the Wall Street consensus when he says, &quot;It's quite possible others will be implicated or the SEC wouldn't have let Mr. Boesky off as comparatively lightly as it did.&quot;    One widely discussed possibility is a crippling of Drexel's junk-bond operation by the insider-trading case. Should that occur, experts say, other firms, such as Merrill Lynch, Salomon Brothers and Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., would leap into the void. But most say that Drexel, which has about half of the junk market today, would be difficult to replace and that that market would be hampered, at least in the short run, by a liquidity crunch and unstable prices. Drexel has repeatedly said its junk-bond business is as strong as ever, and the firm says it isn't in any peril of slipping from the market.    A more likely wild card, experts say, is new legislation. Both Sen. Howard Metzenbaum, the Ohio Democrat who is the incoming chairman of the Senate Antitrust subcommittee, and Sen. William Proxmire, the Wisconsin Democrat who will head the Senate Banking Committee, say they want to slow down hostile takeovers. And Rep. Ferdinand St Germain, the Rhode Island Democrat who heads the House Banking Committee, says he plans hearings on junk bonds and the role of banks and thrift institutions in takeovers.    Sen. Metzenbaum terms the prospects for legislation next year &quot;good,&quot; especially if another Wall Street heavyweight gets caught in the federal investigation. &quot;If we get another Boesky about February or March, it'll really give us a shot in the arm. You have to move legislation when the issue is in the public eye.&quot;    That comment, however, highlights a difficulty that reformers could face once again in Congress unless the Boesky scandal grows. Last year, 64 bills to regulate corporate takeovers were introduced, and not one made it out of committee. Capitol Hill reformers also can expect resistance from the Reagan administration, which opposes takeover curbs. The president's SEC appointees, who share his free-market views, may tinker with tender-offer regulations, but a major overhaul is highly unlikely. The Boesky case, SEC Commissioner Edward Fleischman says, is &quot;proof that the regulatory system is working the way it's supposed to.&quot;    Nevertheless, lawmakers, congressional staffers and lobbyists see a decent chance that the 100th Congress will:    --Close the 10-day window that gives acquirers that long to build up a stake before reporting their purchases to the SEC. The SEC has unanimously supported closing the window to two business days, a move that it says would prevent &quot;sneak attacks&quot; by corporate raiders.    --Eliminate an antitrust loophole that allows partnerships to make hostile bids without waiting for a government opinion on antitrust implications.    --Lengthen the minimum time that a tender offer must be left on the table, before a deal can be closed, to as much as two months from 20 business days. This measure, along with the antitrust change, would make hostile takeovers more time-consuming and more expensive.    --Prohibit &quot;greenmail&quot; -- paying a corporate raider a premium on his stake to get him to abandon the chase -- unless all shareholders get such a premium.    A heavy lobbying effort is likely on two fronts. The Business Roundtable and the National Association of Manufacturers are expected to push for modest measures to deter hostile takeovers; such measures, if limited enough, would probably avoid a Reagan veto. At the same time, investment-banking firms and many companies will fight restrictions on junk bonds.    What worries David Aylward, a lobbyist for 50 companies that rely on junk bonds for non-takeover financing, is that the public and many lawmakers share a &quot;misperception that Ivan Boesky equals junk bonds equal hostile takeovers equal insider trading. There's a good chance restrictions will pass if the misperception continues.&quot;    Regardless of how far the insider-trading-scandal investigation progresses and of possible actions on Capitol Hill, some say the markets for junk bonds and hostile takeovers may already have been permanently damaged. &quot;There will be less junk-bond financing,&quot; says John Bogle, the chairman of Vanguard Group, a big mutual-fund operator. &quot;People are going to be a little more cautious&quot; because of the Boesky scandal and because the market for junk debt &quot;isn't inexhaustible.&quot;    Those expecting less junk financing also expect fewer hostile takeovers. The takeovers that could be jeopardized, experts say, are those in which the acquirer uses few assets of his own and those in which the target company's returns aren't expected to be sufficient to pay the interest on the junk debt. &quot;This will stop the guy with the cap pistol&quot; from mounting hostile offers for major corporations, says the head of risk arbitrage at a major Wall Street firm.    Others contend, however, that once the dust from the Boesky scandal settles, junk bonds and hostile takeovers will rebound. The Salomon Brothers study, done after the Boesky case was announced, says &quot;merger activity for the full year {1987} could well equal or exceed the 1986 total&quot; because &quot;there is considerably more restructuring potential in the system.&quot; As for junk bonds, Mr. Friedberg of Merrill Lynch says, &quot;The high-yield market is driven by investor demand, and the demand will exist.&quot;    Greg A. Smith, the chief investment strategist at Prudential-Bache, attributes the demand to junk bonds' yields. &quot;You get 3% from the stock market, 5% from passbook savings, 7.5% from governments. Junk is the only thing offering anything like double-digit returns,&quot; he says.    An eventual upshot of the Boesky affair is expected to be renewed calls for a bigger SEC budget and greater enforcement powers for regulators, including the agency, the stock exchanges and the firms themselves. &quot;The industry has exploded in recent years, and I don't think the supervision commensurate with that has been provided for,&quot; says Howard Stein, the chairman of Dreyfus Corp., a mutual-fund operator based in New York.    The role of self-regulatory organizations such as the New York and American stock exchanges is likely to get particular attention. Their critics say that although the exchanges' computers aided detection of insider trading, the Boesky case wouldn't have been brought without the SEC's involvement.    There has been some talk of giving the exchanges the power to subpoena witnesses, a power now possessed only by the SEC. But exchange officials say they don't plan to ask for enhanced regulatory powers and instead would defend their current regulatory role. Arthur Levitt Jr., the American exchange chairman, calls criticism of the self-regulatory organizations &quot;off base,&quot; adding that &quot;a vast majority&quot; of insider-trading cases within the past five years &quot;have been uncovered by exchange surveillance procedures.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>