<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861217-0137 </DOCNO><HL> Board of Contributors:Why Did Reagan Do It?---By Irving Kristol</HL><DD> 12/17/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGNEXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   That is the really interesting question: &quot;Why did President Reagan do whatever it was he knowingly did?&quot; It is a much more interesting question than &quot;What did he know?&quot; or &quot;When did he know it?&quot;    The answers to those latter questions could be acutely (perhaps terminally) embarrassing to the administration only if it should turn out that the president has been brazenly lying to the American people and sacrificing some loyal subordinates in the process. But it is possible we will never have a definitive answer to all questions about presidential knowledge -- the inquiries under way already resemble nothing so much as efforts to solve a jigsaw puzzle when there is an ever-increasing number of superfluous pieces.    But we do know that President Reagan sanctioned the sale of arms to Iran, so the &quot;revelations&quot; about those transactions are rather beside the point. We also know that he encouraged aid to the contras by private sources and other, friendly governments, so the &quot;revelations&quot; about such aid are rather beside the point as well. Wallowing in these daily &quot;revelations,&quot; one forgets that the issue being pursued by Congress and the press is not the wisdom of such actions, about which reasonable men may disagree, but presidential foreknowledge of the linkage between them. Did Mr. Reagan know that money from the sale of arms was being transferred to the contras in Nicaragua?    One wonders: What if President Reagan had simply said that he knew, and that he sincerely believed those actions were in the national interest? What would Congress have done with such an admission? Censure the president? Doubtful. Impeach him? Unthinkable. In fact, a great many presidents -- Franklin D. Roosevelt most notably -- have taken actions that evaded congressional intent, and so long as there was neither a personal nor a political motive (as in Watergate), whatever furor was evoked simply subsided with time.    But the president has denied that he knew of any such linkage. As a supporter of the Reagan administration, I certainly want to believe he is telling the truth. As an American, I hope that he is, and I suspect that most Americans feel that way. The U.S. does not need and can ill afford another &quot;destabilized&quot; presidency.    The press, of course, does not feel that way. It has its own agenda, which is the public crucifixion of &quot;guilty men&quot; and the destabilizing of any or all institutions (especially conservative ones). Such actions demonstrate, to the media's own satisfaction, that &quot;it is doing its job,&quot; i.e., displaying the proper mixture of self-righteous integrity and subversive power. Besides, there are material benefits to be earned -- a Pulitzer prize, an enhanced reputation, a promotion even. So, once there is the smell of blood in the air, a frenzy of &quot;investigative reporting&quot; is precipitated. Never mind that such &quot;investigative reporting&quot; requires only the same talents as successful &quot;insider trading&quot; in Wall Street -- that is to say, &quot;cultivating sources&quot; (mainly congressional or executive -- branch staffers) who will then &quot;leak&quot; profitable information. The successful &quot;investigative journalist&quot; does little investigation of his own, any more than an Ivan Boesky did a diligent asset analysis of his own. Both types rely on discreet leaks from insiders who have their own fish to fry. The newspapers currently are full of such leaks, all under bylines, giving the impression that some extraordinary journalistic skill was involved.    All of this tumult in Congress and the media so preempts one's attention that there is hardly time and energy left to wonder: Whatever it was that President Reagan knowingly did, why did he do it?    At the very outset of the whole affair, before we were drowned in leaks about all sorts of people with odd names doing strange things in far-off places, some attention was indeed paid to this question. We know, for instance, that President Reagan kept expressing intense personal concern for the condition of the hostages in Lebanon. This testifies handsomely to the niceness of the man, though less to his qualities as a statesman. After all, most of those hostages were in Lebanon of their own free will and presumably knew the risks involved. In any case, the seizure of those hostages was a challenge to the American government, not to Mr. Reagan personally. It required a cool and calculating foreign-policy response -- one in which personal feelings about the hostages would be at best a subsidiary factor. Apparently Mr. Reagan permitted his personal sentiments to swell to a point where sentimentality became the basis for his policy of selling arms to Iran. But foreign policy is just about the last place in the world where sentimentality can properly claim residential rights.    We also know that President Reagan felt frustrated and outraged by post-Watergate and post-Vietnam legislation that &quot;tied his hands&quot; in area after area of foreign policy. His frustration was legitimate, his outrage justified. In no other country of the world is the chief executive so deliberately confined in the formation and execution of foreign policy. Moreover, the American Congress is about the worst legislative body in the world to be involved in making foreign policy. There is little party discipline in our Congress (unlike European parliaments), so individual congressmen feel free to exploit (that is the proper term) any foreign-policy issue to their personal political advantage. And, being largely ignorant of foreign affairs, even not much interested to begin with, this is exactly the way congressmen do behave.    How on earth can the chief executive of one of the world's &quot;superpowers&quot; conduct a foreign policy, and be held responsible for that foreign policy, under such conditions? It is close to impossible -- which is why, in particular circumstances, a president will be inclined to think of ingenious ways of circumventing the inhibitions and prohibitions imposed on him.    Having said that, however, one must also add that the president still has some scope for action -- especially military, quasi-military (i.e., a blockade) or economic action. The president did not need congressional approval to send Marines to Lebanon, to invade Grenada, to bomb Libya. Under current crazy-quilt legislation, the president could not send arms to the contras in Nicaragua without prior congressional approval, but he could send the entire U.S. Army to Nicaragua and need not seek congressional approval for 90 days. So the interesting question is: Why didn't the president use the stick instead of the carrot in responding to Iran-inspired (and Syrian-tolerated) kidnappings in Lebanon? Why has he fought so hard for aid to the contras instead of coercing the Sandinista regime to behave differently?    The answer to that question points to the basic flaw of the Reagan presidency. It is a two-track presidency, and the tracks are always diverging. Mr. Reagan is a populist conservative and an American nationalist. But he is also a traditional conservative and a conventional liberal-internationalist. Moreover, his major appointments in the foreign-policy area -- in the Pentagon and the State Department -- have been from the traditional-conservative wing of the Republican Party. The result is that Mr. Reagan has not only found his hands tied by Congress -- he has managed to tie his own hands as well. Hence the extraordinary spectacle of the president engaging in a foreign-policy initiative with both his Defense Department and State Department being deliberately &quot;cut out&quot; of the action. This is no way to conduct a foreign policy.    It is no secret that the Pentagon today still suffers from a post-Vietnam syndrome. Though it is not, as some conservative critics claim, &quot;pacifist-minded,&quot; it is strongly allergic to getting involved in &quot;small wars&quot; -- though these are precisely the kinds of conflicts we are most likely to be drawn into. It is, on the other hand, prepared to contemplate and plan for an eventual war with the Soviet Union -- a conflict we are unlikely to see and should be eager to avoid. All of this goes against the grain of President Reagan's activist instincts in foreign policy. But it is nevertheless his Pentagon, and if he is unhappy with it he has never given any signs of being so.    As for the State Department -- well, it is populated by &quot;professionals&quot; who will always believe that diplomacy is the very core and substance of foreign policy, instead of being its handmaiden. After all, it is diplomacy that is their profession, not foreign policy. Henry Kissinger, an untraditional American conservative, saw this clearly enough, which is why, when he was secretary of state, he pretty much ignored the department. George Shultz, a traditional conservative, feels it is important to &quot;represent&quot; his department. He is too intelligent and strong-minded to do so consistently or blindly, but he does, more often than not, end up doing so.    Note that one of the first actions Secretary Shultz felt it necessary to take, when the current scandal broke, was to fly to Europe to &quot;reassure&quot; our allies. Why? How &quot;reassuring&quot; were they to us when they subsidized the Soviet economy by financing a gas pipeline to Western Europe, an act taken over our strongest objections? How &quot;reassuring&quot; to us have they been in Central America?    And what if we decided not to &quot;reassure&quot; them? What would they do? Join the Warsaw pact? In any case, what kind of &quot;reassurance&quot; are we giving them? That the U.S. will survive the current crisis? The whole business is absurd -- but it does provide a clear insight into the State Department's habits of thought and its sense of priorities.    Nevertheless, this is Mr. Reagan's State Department, and if he is unhappy with it he has never given any suggestion of it. So it is fair to say that Mr. Reagan's problems are of his own making -- though not in the sense that this is now being glibly said. He has had a whole range of options with regard to Iran, Syria and Nicaragua -- involving the use of pressure or a credible threat of force. But it was his own State Department and his own Defense Department that ruled these options out of court. This is what went wrong.    Does President Reagan realize it, even now? Or is he making the opposite inference -- that the Reagan doctrine and his assertiveness in foreign policy are basic errors? The answer to those questions will play a significant role over the next two years in shaping the future of American conservatism -- and in defining an appropriate foreign policy.    ---   Mr. Kristol is the John M. Olin professor of social thought at the NYU Graduate School of Business and a senior fellow of the American Enterprise Institute. </TEXT></DOC>