<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871013-0094 </DOCNO><HL> On Their Own:In Increasing Numbers,White-Collar WorkersLeave Steady Positions---Often by Choice, They TakePart-Time, 'Temp' JobsOr Start Own Businesses---A Risk of Second Class Status---By Michael J. McCarthyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR </IN><DATELINE> Barbara Carr is known for hopping from job to job  </DATELINE><TEXT>    andthat's just fine with her.   For one thing, her reputation is accurate: In the past year and a half, the 33-year-old radiologist has worked in 27 different cities and towns. More important, all the moving around is by her own choice.    Dr. Carr is what is known as a temporary employee -- more usually called a &quot;temp.&quot; Filling in for doctors vacationing or attending conferences, the Columbus, Ohio, resident has worked in such cities and towns as Plymouth, Mass.; Henderson, Ky.; Cambridge, Ohio; Clarinda, Iowa; and Menominee, Mich. She could get a full-time job easily, but she doesn't want one.    &quot;With temporary work, you get to choose your own jobs, you get to choose your own vacation, and you don't have to go where you don't want to,&quot; she says. &quot;I love it.&quot;    More and more, people like Dr. Carr are leaving the safety of steady jobs and big corporations and flocking into part-time and temporary work. Since the beginning of the decade, the Conference Board estimates that the number of so-called contingent workers -- usually defined as part-time or temporary workers, the self-employed and people who work at home -- has grown by 20% to 34.3 million people, nearly a third of the labor force.    Unlike the past, when temporary and part-time workers were mostly manual laborers, secretaries and salesclerks, the fastest-growing group today is in the white-collar world as managers, professionals and technical employees, says Richard Belous, a labor economist with the Conference Board. And, increasingly, temporary and part-time workers are maintaining that status for years, making them an entrenched new part of the labor force.    &quot;This is one of the most significant developments in the work force since World War II,&quot; Mr. Belous says.    Why are so many people leaving the security of full-time jobs? Some are forced into it by the new, lean corporate mentality. After six years of painful layoffs and restructurings, companies don't want to hire permanent employees, even when business is good. Part-time and temporary workers also save firms the cost of expensive benefits.    Others, like Dr. Carr, prefer temporary work; they like the flexibility and variety of temporary jobs. In still other cases, working part time helps parents deal with a corporate world that has adjusted little to the demands of child-rearing.    But for both companies and workers, the trend poses risks. It raises questions, for instance, about the loyalty and commitment of a growing part of the work force. Temporary workers, some experts say, are less willing to &quot;walk through walls&quot; for companies because their fate and fortune aren't tied to their employers. They say companies will have to find ways to motivate part-timers to embrace broad corporate interests, such as cost cutting or strategic change.    For workers, the change threatens condemnation to second-class status, locked outside this country's vast private welfare system where steady employment brings free medical care, access to better jobs and generous retirement plans. Eventually, the trend may foster increased pressure on companies to pay health benefits to part-time and temporary workers. But for many workers, even that won't solve the biggest problem: Once outside the full-time, core work force, it is tough to get hired back in.    &quot;For some workers outside the core, it may mean flexibility,&quot; says Myron Roomkin, a management professor at Northwestern University. &quot;For others it may be a life sentence to never really obtaining access to the better jobs, higher income and promotions. That's a real fundamental change in the American work force.&quot;    What follow are the stories of four contingent workers. Some like their status, some don't. All have paid a price for their role in the broad shift in the labor force.    The Systems Analyst   Over the past 17 years, on-again-off-again contingent work has taken its toll on James Waranius, a 50-year-old computer-systems analyst. He scrambled for full-time work to get medical benefits when his 15-year-old daughter was dying of leukemia. He let bills slide and teetered near personal bankruptcy. And he split up with his second wife after persistent battles about his feast-and-famine work hours and pay.    &quot;I wasn't about to blow my brains out,&quot; says Mr. Waranius, whose hulking build and bushy beard make him look like a lumberjack. &quot;But I was close to going off the deep end for a couple of years.&quot;    Mr. Waranius is living proof that life outside the core work force can be hard and that getting back into the core can be even harder. Seventeen years ago, the allure of being an entrepreneur was overwhelming. He liked the challenge of working with various clients -- a school district, an electronics firm, a chemical manufacturer, a computer-services firm, a church and two food companies. &quot;When I started, I was young, idealistic and wanted to go my own way, make my own hours,&quot; he says.    But the years of uneven and uncertain income chipped away at his entrepreneurial spirit. Sometimes he would work weeks on end to finish a project, then the work dried up. In between paychecks, as savings dwindled, the father of six sometimes couldn't afford medical insurance. &quot;Then,&quot; he says, &quot;you sweat, you pray and you hope nothing goes wrong.&quot; Even when he bought insurance for his family, mounting payments from his daughter's struggle with leukemia left him with $8,000 in uncovered bills. At the time, he was able to get full medical coverage by taking a two-year special-project assignment with W.R. Grace andamp; Co.    He hoped the job would lead to full-time work, but Grace closed the division when the project was finished. The return to independent work was humiliating. Says Mr. Waranius: &quot;You have to do a whole bunch of groveling: 'Yes, I love you. Oh, thank you for having confidence in me. Without your backing, I wouldn't be here today.'    &quot;And the sad thing is, you mean it.&quot;    After a few years as a contingent worker, Mr. Waranius was in the peculiar position of having an important skill -- systems analysts are near the top of the computer pecking order -- but few employers willing to take a chance on him. Some prospective employers noted that one of Mr. Waranius's full-time stints had paid $40,000 a year and deemed the applicant too expensive; others doubted he would settle down into a full-time job. &quot;Employers know I can go out on my own. I've been there before, and that worries them,&quot; he says.    In August, after 19 months of searching, dozens of interviews and 300 resumes, he landed a full-time, $32,000-a-year job as a systems analyst at a Chicago medical-billing company. His new salary is $3,000 less than he earned last year on his own, but the new job includes benefits. &quot;It's a good feeling to know I have my own desk,&quot; he says, walking into a small square room with one window, no pictures, and two desks lost under computer terminals and reams of printouts.    &quot;I don't ever want to get back into independent work,&quot; he says. &quot;Ever.&quot;    The Doctor   Examining X-rays at a doctor's office in Owensboro, Ky., Dr. Carr dictates a diagnosis into her portable tape recorder. Putting the recorder down, she says: &quot;I don't know what they charge these patients, so I never have to feel guilty about recommending a particular procedure. I get no part of the bill. I feel good about that -- kind of snobby. Noble.&quot;    Dr. Carr is the kind of contingent worker who both gladdens and worries employers. She is dedicated and works hard; she is on call nearly every day of every assignment. But she also has little loyalty to the institutions she works for. &quot;I just walk in, practice good radiology and walk out,&quot; she says. &quot;It's great not to have to think about the business of medicine.&quot;    The flexibility is what lured her to temporary work. Her husband is finishing a doctorate at Ohio State University in Columbus; until he is finished, the couple don't want to move. But Dr. Carr was put off by practice in Columbus. The job market wasn't the most inviting for women, she says, and her peers rubbed her the wrong way. &quot;I would talk to other doctors about patients. They would talk about ski trips and CDs.&quot;    So she works for Kron Medical Corp. of Chapel Hill, N.C., a temporary-doctor firm that finds jobs and pays her travel expenses and malpractice insurance. Dr. Carr likes the work. She is building a list of contacts around the country that she can use when she seeks a permanent job. The variety of experience sharpens her expertise. At one hospital near a coal-mining town in West Virginia, she examined hundreds of X-rays for black-lung disease.    But even for a doctor earning about $90,000 a year, it is a difficult life. &quot;I'm scared every time I walk into a new assignment,&quot; she says, her face illuminated by a light board filled with X-rays of curved spines, fractured fingers and arthritic knees. &quot;Will I fit in? Can I find the hospital? It's fear of the unknown.&quot;    She once agreed to a four-week assignment at a Midwestern hospital but left after the first week. The hospital was in turmoil. Doctor turnover was high. And the staff doctors were condescending toward the temps, insisting on reviewing their work. &quot;They made me feel like I wasn't needed,&quot; she says. &quot;Nobody wants to work that way.&quot;    She hates the fast-food meals, the hassles of travel and the laundry bag she carries home most weekends. And she misses her husband. &quot;You need to keep busy, not think about it and remember to try to think about life in one-week intervals,&quot; she says.    &quot;I'm just trying to get through the next couple of years before we make a big career move.&quot;    The Marketing Consultant   Sitting on Carol Bowen's desk in the basement office of her home in Concord, Mass., is a small enameled cube with a quotation from philosopher Bertrand Russell: &quot;Success is getting what you want. Happiness is wanting what you get.&quot;    These days, the 33-year-old Ms. Bowen is finding both are elusive. She is a contingent worker by choice: In September 1985, three months after her daughter, Stephanie, was born, Ms. Bowen quit her job as a marketing manager at Abt Associates Inc., a research-consulting firm in Cambridge, Mass. She doesn't regret the choice. &quot;When your baby is ill, you see the big tears,&quot; she says. &quot;It gets to you. You've got to be there.&quot;    But hanging up her business suits for T-shirts and shorts in the basement, where she operates a part-time consulting business, has been frustrating. One businesswoman vowed never to work with a part-time consultant. A friend said the consulting was merely &quot;dabbling.&quot; And at first, Ms. Bowen stammered when secretaries asked what firm she worked for.    &quot;When I meet people, I never mention I work part time,&quot; she says. &quot;I feel very defensive about it.&quot;    Ms. Bowen says it is common for clients, especially large clients, to forget to pay her. And her part-time status makes some employers question her loyalty. Before a recent three-week vacation, Ms. Bowen notified all her clients that she would be gone. But one manager didn't get the word and lost patience after leaving several messages on Ms. Bowen's answering machine. She thinks that because of the incident, the manager later rejected a proposal from her.    &quot;I'm not a regular employee,&quot; she says with a hint of frustration in her voice. &quot;I'm a consultant.&quot;    Other frustrations: She can't get a promotion, or even a performance review; and with no mentor or company-paid training programs, it is more difficult to grow professionally -- something her friends seem to be doing with ease. &quot;I definitely have tinges of envy,&quot; she says.    &quot;I guess being a mother is more important,&quot; she says. &quot;But even there I caught myself saying, 'I guess.'&quot;    The Public-Relations Man   Richard Kemplin first learned about harsh economic realities growing up during the Depression. His father had trouble finding work because of a war wound, a piece of shrapnel lodged in his hand. The Kemplins lived on relief.    Many years later, Mr. Kemplin, now 57, is learning again that life can be harsh. Last year, Gould Inc., the suburban Chicago electronics company, eliminated his $137,000-a-year job as vice president for corporate communications. He asked for a lesser position. &quot;I had a daughter in college and didn't want to be put out on the street,&quot; he says. He was turned down.    Like many of the new contingent workers, Mr. Kemplin is a victim of corporate downsizing. But unlike some, he was so disillusioned about corporate life and its illusions of security that he decided to stay outside the core work force. After being laid off at Gould, he had two serious job offers, one for as much money as he made at Gould. He turned them both down and, with a partner, started a public-relations firm that isn't likely to ever pay him $137,000 a year.    &quot;You have more of a feeling that you're loved and appreciated,&quot; he says, &quot;even though it may not be as financially rewarding.&quot;    That feeling comes at a big price. He and his wife are living off savings and investments; in the firm's first four months, it has just covered expenses. Mr. Kemplin lost his retirement benefits when he left Gould. His home in Arlington Heights, Ill., is paid for, but he still faces three years of college bills for his daughter. And every month, Mr. Kemplin grudgingly writes a $280 check for medical and dental insurance-benefits he received gratis for a quarter-century from corporations. &quot;It's a big bite,&quot; he says. &quot;But you can't be without it, you absolutely can't.&quot;    His office these days is on the second floor of his partner's house in Lake Forest, an affluent Chicago suburb. The partner, Walter Mulhall, and Mr. Kemplin tap away at personal computers, calling up proposals on their screens and typing letters. The work is different from what he was used to, he acknowledges, but he doesn't feel alone. Along the short street, Honeysuckle Road, neighbors have started their own home-based businesses: One sells computer software, another is a headhunter, one sells educational toys and another offers management consulting.    The power lunches are downstairs at Mr. Mulhall's kitchen table. The two talk about business, eat smoked-ham sandwiches, and drink Budweiser or wine. Mr. Kemplin, in a short-sleeved yellow shirt, says it is nice not wearing a coat and tie to work. These days the coat is in the car, the tie in the glove compartment.    And control over his work is firmly in his hands. &quot;If we succeed or fail, we're the guys,&quot; he says. &quot;It's not someone else who will screw up our jobs.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>