<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871217-0023 </DOCNO><HL> Koreans ElectRoh as PresidentIn Easy Victory---Little Is Found to ConfirmCharges of Wide FraudMade by the Opposition---By Frederick KempeStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> SEOUL, South Korea  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The ruling party's candidate, Roh Tae Woo, scored a surprisingly wide victory in South Korea's presidential election.    The two million-vote plurality for the 54-year-old former general apparently reflected Koreans' desire for the stability and gradual democratic change that he promised in the sometimes violent election campaign. The opposition quickly alleged vote fraud, but independent observers said in the first hours after the polls closed that while they had witnessed some election irregularities, they hadn't found evidence of widespread fraud.    The massive turnout Wednesday by almost 90% of South Korea's 26 million eligible voters, Mr. Roh's unexpectedly wide margin, and the third-place finish of his sharpest critic, Kim Dae Jung, should help buttress the legitimacy of Mr. Roh's victory and reduce the impact of opposition demonstrations on the stability of the Roh government. He is to start his five-year term on Feb. 24 as South Korea's first directly elected president since 1971, succeeding Chun Doo Hwan, a fellow general he helped bring to power in a coup in 1979.    Stability in South Korea is important to the U.S. The Asian country is a major trading partner, and its strategic importance is reflected by the presence here of 40,000 American troops. Instability also would threaten the 1988 Summer Olympics in Seoul that South Korea hopes will mark its coming of age.    Mr. Roh claimed victory late Thursday morning, local time. &quot;The battle is over,&quot; he said as the National Election Commission reported that, with 83% of the vote counted, Mr. Roh was leading with 37%, followed by opposition candidates Kim Young Sam with 26.7% and Kim Dae Jung with 26.1%. Former Prime Minister Kim Jong Pil had 8% of the vote. The outcome was bullish for the business community; the election outcome caused stocks to soar on the Seoul exchange.    Yet with more than 60% of the votes against Mr. Roh, his deputy, Hyun Hong Choo, said the ruling party must undertake a &quot;reconciliation offensive&quot; to ensure its legitimacy. &quot;We must reach out to the majority of South Koreans who cast their votes against us,&quot; he said. To do that, Mr. Hyun said the party would expand the cabinet to include figures acceptable to the opposition, consult with opponents on major political decisions, and conduct a broad amnesty for political prisoners. He conceded reconciliation could be a long and sometimes violent process.    By late in the morning, opposition leaders Kim Young Sam and Kim Dae Jung hadn't conceded defeat because of their parties' allegations of massive election cheating. But many South Koreans interviewed at polling places criticized the two Kims for splitting the opposition vote by failing to agree on a single candidate to contest the election.    In a working-class district of Seoul, produce wholesaler Park Woon Sok complained, &quot;The two Kims' personal rivalry could prevent us from removing the military dictatorship.&quot; Indeed, Kim Dae Jung's failure to withdraw, as he had earlier promised, and the fact that he finished third, could threaten his political future.    While the opposition parties reported election irregularities from across the country, Western diplomats and independent election observers said the number of irregularities appeared to be relatively small. Their true extent and impact on South Korean willingness to accept the election outcome mightn't become clear for days.    &quot;We're aware of the allegations, but it's too early to draw any conclusion,&quot; a U.S. diplomat said.    The ruling Democratic Justice Party hopes its comfortable margin will ensure that inevitable student and pro-opposition protests will fizzle before gaining broad enough support to pose problems to the government. But protests were already flaring in working-class districts of Seoul and in Kim Dae Jung's home province of Cholla. And opposition groups promised demonstrations in Seoul and most other major cities Thursday and Friday.    The ruling party's Mr. Hyun said the party hopes to quickly refocus national attention from street protests to the high-stakes campaign for National Assembly seats. The election, likely to be held in the first quarter of 1988, is important because of the assembly's increased power under the new constitution.    Government officials said their extensive party machinery enabled them to mobilize voters and revive Mr. Roh's political fortunes, which polls indicated had flagged early in the month. And they said heightened tension before election day and the crash of a Korean Air Lines passenger jet earlier this month shifted many stability-minded voters their way. The government and most South Koreans blame North Korean agents for the crash.    The opposition charges of election fraud had put the U.S. in the uncomfortable position of deciding just how unconditionally to congratulate the victor. Washington's likely course will be a clear pat on the back for Mr. Roh, noting that South Korea has legal means to investigate the charges of election fraud.    In Washington, a State Department spokesman said the &quot;historic&quot; elections &quot;appear to have been conducted in an orderly manner overall,&quot; but declined further comment.    Western diplomats agreed the apparently comfortable margin of victory will make Washington's chore somewhat easier and help Mr. Roh against opponents over the short term. But they argued that the regime must bring prominent non-party figures into the government and further liberalize the country through such measures as freeing political prisoners and allowing more press freedom.    This effort will help determine if South Korea can make its presidential election stick, bringing its first peaceful transfer of power and graceful retirement of a national leader. Otherwise, the cycle will continue of military-tied governments losing legitimacy and then being ousted by student uprisings or military coups, the diplomats said.    Mr. Hyun said Mr. Roh would invite the two Kims to meet with him as soon as possible. But &quot;it may be rather impractical to expect they will respond favorably to such a gesture at this time,&quot; he conceded.    The opposition effort to rally South Koreans against a ruling-party victory began even before election results were all in. By early Thursday morning in Seoul, some 2,000 young South Koreans had gathered around an absentee ballot box seized by Kim Dae Jung's party as it was being moved in a bakery truck concealed under boxes of candies and cakes.    Regional government official Kang Shin Won told a kangeroo court of opposition members that the ballots were in his office in case the region needed extras. He said the box was being transported to the counting place in the back of a food truck because another vehicle wasn't available.    Kim Dae Jung's party supporters positioned a bus with a sound system behind the small truck and ballot box, upon which two of its members perched. They dragged out an official of the government election management committee, Shin Il Hong, to shouts of &quot;kill him, kill him.&quot; After organizers calmed the crowd, Mr. Shin apologized for &quot;irregularities.&quot;    The mood was unusually quiet at Kim Dae Jung's headquarters, where one adviser conceded that the party hadn't yet been able to gather much evidence to back up its many claims of election cheating.    Foreign election observers also reported few cases of obvious fraud. &quot;There was not very much that deviated from the book&quot; said Steve Schneebaum of the International Human Rights Law Group, a private organization based in Washington that helped to monitor the voting. &quot;We saw some irregularities in the polling places we visited,&quot; he said. &quot;But that isn't what we would call widespread fraud.&quot;    Mr. Roh led across most of the country except in the southwest, Kim Dae Jung's political heartland, and southern Kyongsang and its capital, Pusan, Kim Young Sam's stronghold. One key to Mr. Roh's victory was a better-than-expected showing in Seoul, where he was narrowly in second place behind Kim Dae Jung. Both Kims had predicted overwhelming support in the Seoul region, where 40% of the country's voters reside. </TEXT></DOC>