<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880624-0061 </DOCNO><HL> Confusion Over Merger-Disclosure Law --- Some Attorneys Advise Silence; Others Say Tell All -- and Early </HL><AUTHOR> Wayne E. Green (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> FIN TNM SCR </IN><TEXT>   When the Supreme Court handed down an important securities-law decision last March, companies were hoping it would answer a pressing question: Do they have to disclose merger talks right away, or can they wait until fruition seems more likely?    The answer was yes.    Confusion has reigned ever since. Some attorneys are advising clients to keep quiet. Others are telling them to speak up. The result is that corporate executives don't really know what to do -- and are afraid of making the wrong decision.    &quot;It has added a risk to merger negotiations that has never been there before,&quot; says Scott T. Smith, a San Francisco attorney specializing in corporate and securities law.    The stakes are high. A wrong call invites challenges from the Securities and Exchange Commission and from stockholders who allege they were misled. And because shareholder lawsuits often are brought as class actions, the potential damages can run into millions of dollars.    At issue is a provision of federal-securities law designed to protect investors against stock manipulation. It prohibits a public company from making untrue, misleading or incomplete statements about facts that are &quot;material&quot; to its fortunes.    In the case before the court, a stockholder class action against Basic Inc., the company had falsely denied in public statements that it knew what was behind its stock activity, or that it was in merger discussions. In fact, it was in merger talks with Combustion Engineering Inc., which ultimately acquired Basic. But the question was whether preliminary merger talks are &quot;material.&quot; If not, even untrue statements aren't illegal.    Basic's lawyers asked the court to adopt an easy-to-follow rule many companies already were using to answer that question. Endorsed by several lower courts, it says that merger negotiations are never material until an agreement in principle is reached on price and structure. Prior to that, companies usually don't have to worry about disclosure.    But the court, disdaining the &quot;comfort of corporate managers,&quot; said materiality depends on the facts of each case, taking into account the significance of the possible merger and the likelihood of its completion. It didn't say when companies must disclose talks. It did note that they still might choose to remain silent or say no comment in response to inquiries.    The SEC endorses the case-by-case approach, but many corporate lawyers and their clients believe it leaves too much to chance.    Consider, for instance, the tricky task of deciding whether merger talks still in flux look promising enough to be material. If an investment banker calls and says he has a client interested in acquiring your company, that may not be material, notes John F. Olson, a Washington D.C., attorney. (It's potentially significant, but its prospects are hard to gauge.) But the picture gets fuzzier, he says, if you meet with the guy and the prospects look good. And even if you conclude talks are material, that doesn't necessarily mean they have to be disclosed at that point. Or does it?    &quot;These are tough counseling questions, and the court has made them tougher,&quot; says Mr. Olson.    But lawyers disagree on how to deal with the increased risks. Many argue that silence is still the safest route. The less you say, the less likely you are to mislead investors. And while the court may have made it harder to decide when merger discussions become material, these lawyers contend that, barring unusual circumstances, the decision confirms a company's right to keep quiet until it has reached agreement in principle.    &quot;There's now developing a pretty universal practice of saying our policy is not to comment on rumors of mergers or acquisitions,&quot; says Andrew E. Bogen, a Los Angeles mergers and acquisition attorney. &quot;It's pretty simple, and it avoids the problem created by the Basic case.&quot;    But other lawyers read the case to mean that the right to silence diminishes as merger talks progress and an accord appears more likely; disclosure, they reason, must occur when the talks become material, and the Court said materiality varies with each case.    One result is that lawyers tell of corporate clients that have disclosed merger offers earlier than they preferred. Some lawyers are even advising clients in merger discussions to defer pinning down details for as long as possible. Mr. Smith tells of negotiations on a leveraged buy-out where the company's counsel kept discouraging the buyers from seeking a bridge loan. Getting such a loan, he argued, would indicate the two sides were committed, triggering the need to go public.    Even non-merger matters are being affected, says one securities lawyer. He describes a company that recently disclosed a proposal to oust management even though it &quot;came from someone who lacked any credibility.&quot; The company would have kept quiet prior to the Basic case, the attorney says. But it is afraid that the decision might somehow portend &quot;broader disclosure obligations,&quot; the attorney says.    Pressure for early disclosure could increase even further, depending on the outcome of an SEC action filed last June against George C. Kern Jr., a prominent New York mergers and acquisitions lawyer. He had represented Allied Stores Corp. during its unsuccessful effort to fend off a hostile takeover by Campeau Corp. The SEC says he failed to promptly disclose material information about the situation, including separate merger discussions with Edward J. DeBartolo Corp. Mr. Kern, who was also an Allied director, said disclosure wasn't required because DeBartolo didn't have financing nailed down.    The Kern proceeding involves a specific filing requirement of the SEC's tender offer rules, not the general anti-fraud provisions at issue in the Basic case. But lawyers say both pose the question of when merger negotiations become material. An SEC victory, they worry, would raise the risk of keeping silent. &quot;People are sweating,&quot; says Carl W. Schneider, a Philadelphia securities lawyer.    That's because publicizing secret merger talks makes corporate executives nervous. Some say it can torpedo a deal -- by scaring off a potential merger partner, for example. Some also worry that disclosure about preliminary merger talks may force a company to provide updates as facts change.    But keeping the public current on fast-changing details is like negotiating in a fishbowl. And it isn't always practical. For example, says Mr. Schneider, if you disclose an offer of $12 a share, when do you have to say it has been increased to $12.50, or $13? &quot;That's the trap that lawyers are worried about,&quot; he says.    Meanwhile, all of this disagreement over disclosure is making merger discussions -- never easy -- even more difficult. One New York attorney says he has already seen several negotiating sessions stalled by &quot;utter confusion&quot; over whether the parties involved had reached a point where disclosure was required.    That isn't surprising, suggests Dean M. Hennessy, a senior vice president of Emhart Corp., who is also chairman of the law council for the Machinery and Allied Products Institute in Washington.    &quot;It takes two to tango,&quot; he says, &quot;And you get two lawyers on opposite sides, along with two strong-willed chief executives, and it's going to be a donnybrook as to when you disclose.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>