<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870410-0008 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 04/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN'S PROPOSAL to scrap ballistic missiles is a dead issue, an official said.    As Secretary of State Shultz prepared to depart tomorrow for weapons talks in Moscow, U.S. arms control chief Adelman said the Soviets had rejected the president's Iceland summit proposal, though it remains on the Geneva negotiating table. Adelman said Shultz will try to shift the emphasis to slashing strategic weapons and will offer to swap a &quot;Star Wars&quot; experiments timetable for data on the Kremlin's anti-missile work.    The Warsaw Pact proposed to NATO a military spending freeze of up to two years, to open the way to reduce troops and conventional arms concentrations in Europe, Romania's news agency said.    ---   THE SOVIETS COUNTERED accusations of a spy campaign on U.S. sites.    The Kremlin's Foreign Ministry displayed listening devices that it said were hidden in Soviet diplomatic missions in the U.S., in a response to outrage in Washington over its Moscow embassy sex-spy scandal. Most of the devices apparently were found years ago, but the Soviets said gear disguised as window insulation in one of their Washington buildings was found recently.    The Senate passed a nonbinding resolution urging Shultz either to cancel next week's talks with Soviet officials or to find a secure place to hold them.    ---   Italy's Premier Craxi quit a second time in five weeks after his Socialist-led coalition government collapsed Wednesday. President Cossiga, who had rejected Craxi's first resignation, asked him to stay on as caretaker pending moves to form a new government. The action is likely to lead to a June general election, a year early, politicians said.    ---   A House panel cleared a $306 billion defense authorization bill that would trim the Pentagon's request only $6 billion but would set different priorities for weapons procurement and research.    ---   Webster agreed to review CIA Deputy Director Gates's Senate testimony on the Iran-Contra affair to determine whether he should remain at the agency. The Intelligence panel's confirmation hearings on FBI chief Webster's nomination to head the CIA may be recessed until after Easter.    ---   Jaruzelski is about to try a fundamental revamping of Poland's feeble economy, his resolve strengthened by Soviet leader Gorbachev's vision of modern socialism. Central planners are resisting, yet the deliberations are being carried on in almost full public view.    A Polish military defector asserted Warsaw never intended to compromise with Solidarity and planned martial law before the end of strikes that spawned the since-banned union. The officer, who spied for the U.S., shed new light on Warsaw and Moscow's response to the challenge to Soviet-backed one-party rule.    ---   Gorbachev began talks in Czechoslovakia with President Husak on cooperation between Moscow and Prague's Communist parties. In his first official visit, more than 150,000 people greeted the Soviet leader and his wife, Raisa. In a dinner speech, he pushed for allied states' adopting Moscow's drive for political and economic changes.    ---   U.S. nuclear officials allowed sensitive data to leak to a utility, held talks with targets of Nuclear Regulatory Commission investigations and generally hampered probes of utility or NRC misdeeds, a Senate committee was told.    ---   The U.S. isn't trying to turn up the heat in its six-year campaign to destabilize Gadhafi's regime, though the Libyan leader is reeling from a serious military defeat in Chad, officials said. The CIA continues to promote opposition to Gadhafi and insist the U.S. would replay last April's bombing of Libya if necessary.    ---   South Korea's ruling party said it won't compromise with a new opposition party that split from the New Korea Democratic Party, leaving it a splinter group. President Chun Doo Hwan's party said constitutional revision talks may be futile now. The split came less than a year before Chun was to step down under an altered constitution.    ---   Israeli helicopter gunships raided two suspected Palestinian guerrilla bases near Sidon in southern Lebanon, killing at least two people, security sources said. In Israel, Prime Minister Shamir called &quot;insane&quot; Foreign Minister Peres's bid for an international conference on Mideast peace, after Peres conferred with Soviet officials.    ---   Current sulfur emissions could cause substantial acidification of streams in the Southeast, where the risk of acid damage is greater than in the Northeast, scientists advising the EPA said. The Northeast has been viewed as the most vulnerable area.    ---   Topeka, Kan., has eliminated forced racial segregation in its public schools, even though they aren't racially balanced, a U.S. judge ruled. The decision came in a suit filed eight years ago that revived the Brown vs. Topeka Board of Education case that led to the Supreme Court's landmark 1954 ruling outlawing &quot;separate but equal&quot; bias.    ---   The Soviet Union failed in its second attempt this week to link securely its new Kvant scientific laboratory with the orbiting space station Mir, which has two cosmonauts aboard, Moscow news agencies said. Western diplomats said official reports indicated the unmanned spacecraft might have been damaged in the docking maneuver.    ---   Iran said it launched a central-border offensive against Iraqi positions and captured a pivotal southern defense line near Basra, where Iraq said it repelled the assault. Iran claimed casualties in the past three days totaled 7,000. The U.S. said Iran's new attack didn't appear to be a major offensive.    ---   A U.S. technician allegedly sold uranium and classified data to the PLO, among other crimes, Congress's General Accounting Office said. The unidentified Energy Department senior lab worker hasn't been charged with any crime. A House panel said the case shows why the agency needs to re-investigate personnel with security clearances. </TEXT></DOC>