<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870122-0002 </DOCNO><HL> Baker, Miyazawa Recognizes 'Temporary Instability'In Exchange Market, but Stop Short of Pledge to Act---West German Central BankMay Cut Rates in EffortTo Halt Mark's Surge---By Art PineStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN EUROPMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)EXECUTIVE (EXE)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED) </IN><TEXT>   The U.S. and Japan agreed that there have been &quot;recent instances of temporary instability&quot; in exchange markets, but stopped short of any pledge to intervene in an effort to calm the markets.    Instead, Treasury Secretary James Baker and Japanese Finance Minister Kiichi Miyazawa, who met in Washington, agreed only to &quot;monitor&quot; the situation and to &quot;continue to cooperate&quot; in efforts to coordinate their economic policies. They said despite the dollar's decline, the dollar-yen exchange rate &quot;has been broadly consistent with underlying fundamentals&quot; since last October.    Meanwhile West Germany's central bank, also worried about about the weak dollar, was reported ready to cut two key interest rates.    The U.S.-Japan statement, which followed a two-hour meeting last night, was clearly a disappointment to Mr. Miyazawa. The Japanese minister, who had sought the closed-door session to express concern about the harm of the falling dollar to Japan's economy, looked worn and haggard at a press conference following the session. He sidestepped reporters' questions about the likely effect of the accord.    U.S. officials refused to discuss the Baker-Miyazawa statement, contending the document would stand on its own. A Treasury spokesman said only that Mr. Baker was &quot;very pleased with the meeting.&quot;    The statement also appeared to suggest that Japan might take some additional, unspecified steps to stimulate its domestic economy. The U.S. has been pressing Japan to spur demand at home so that it can absorb more imports, but policy-makers in Washington so far have found Tokyo's new stimulus measures to be disappointing.    Sources close to West Germany's Bundesbank said they expect the bank to unilaterally cut its interest rates today, perhaps by a half point, in an effort to halt the mark's surge against the dollar.    But it's believed the German central bank also will take steps to curb excess liquidity and partially offset stimulative effects of the lower rates on money supply.    The West German bank is hoping currency traders will react to the symbolically important rate cuts and pay less attention to the accompanying, and somewhat contradictory, efforts to keep a lid on money supply growth.    After their meeting, Messrs. Baker and Miyazawa also made a special, though veiled, appeal to West Germany and other industrial countries to join them in the effort to coordinate economic policies. Messrs. Baker and Miyazawa also vowed to &quot;intensify consultations&quot; with other major industrial countries, presumably in an early meeting of finance ministers of the five or seven largest industrial nations.    Monetary sources suggested that the U.S. has begun sounding out other finance ministries about the possibility of holding such a session sometime in February.    It wasn't clear whether Japan had agreed to reduce its discount rate as part of the latest meeting of finance ministers. There have been conflicting reports from Tokyo on whether the Bank of Japan was prepared to lower the rate.    West German officials said they expected the country's central bank to reduce its discount rate at a meeting today of its 18-member policy-setting board. They said U.S. officials already have been told such a move is likely.    West German officials insisted the reduction would come entirely for domestic reasons. But the move comes after U.S. demands that West Germany stimulate its economy to take in a larger share of world-wide exports. West Germany has resisted any such action for months, but may be forced into it because of pressure from the dollar's decline against the West German mark, which also is putting new strains on the European Monetary System.    Still, U.S. officials said it was unlikely that the West German gesture would assuage U.S. annoyance over Bonn's refusal to spur its domestic economy. U.S. analysts said West German interest rates already are so low that a discount rate reduction most likely wouldn't make much difference in stimulating the economy there. The Bundesbank's discount rate now is 3.5%, while its Lombard rate is 5.5%.    The vaguely worded, four-paragraph statement summarizing the results of the Baker-Miyazawa meeting was distributed to journalists a few minutes after the meeting between the two men ended.    Senior U.S. officials flatly refused to explain the statement, even under traditional ground rules that assure them anonymity. Mr. Miyazawa told a press conference later that &quot;there has been a common recognition that there was temporary instability and that there will be cooperation on exchange-rate issues. In that respect,&quot; he insisted, &quot;the objective of my visit has been achieved.&quot;    Mr. Miyazawa evaded questions about whether the two governments had agreed to intervene jointly if the dollar falls further. &quot;What the U.S. would do is a matter for the U.S. to decide,&quot; he said. &quot;I have a feeling that the U.S. will not say whether they will intervene or not.&quot;    Yesterday's statement essentially followed the lines of an accord the two men hammered out last Oct. 31. At that time, Japan cut its discount rate and announced a tax-revision package in exchange for agreement by the U.S. that Washington wouldn't &quot;talk&quot; the dollar down further. Mr. Baker had sought the pact with Japan partly to prod West Germany into agreeing to a similar accord.    Japan ultimately followed through on its part of the arrangement but Tokyo's latest budget package all but vitiated any new stimulus from those measures. Since then, the dollar has slid to the lower end of the range that Messrs. Baker and Miyazawa described in October as &quot;in line with fundamentals.&quot;    The dollar-yen exchange rate was about 153 yen to the dollar just before the accord was reached, and rose to 160 when the accord was announced last Oct. 31. Reagan administration officials made it clear then they didn't commit the U.S. to intervene in the exchange markets if the dollar slid below the 153 level. The dollar fell slightly below the 150 level a few days ago, but has since edged up.    Yesterday's statement appeared to acknowledge that at times during the past few days the dollar had dropped below the lower boundary implied by the Oct. 31 agreement. But it didn't suggest the exchange rate was seriously out of line.    Earlier yesterday, top Reagan administration and Federal Reserve officials signaled that the dollar may be sliding too rapidly, but stopped short of saying the U.S. will intervene in exchange markets to slow the decline.    In testimony before the Senate Banking Committee, Federal Reserve Board Chairman Paul Volcker said he thought the dollar now is &quot;reasonably close to what should be a competitive level.&quot;    Separately, Beryl Sprinkel, President Reagan's chief economic adviser, expressed hopes for stable exchange rates, saying that big fluctuations are costly. And another White House official said the administration believes that &quot;theoretically, there is a point&quot; at which a continued decline in the dollar would pose problems for the U.S. economy. But he added: &quot;We don't know where that is.&quot;    In his testimony, Mr. Volcker cautioned it was &quot;not sensible&quot; to drive the dollar down indefinitely simply to pare back the U.S.'s $170 billion trade deficit. He said policy makers also must consider other issues that militate against letting the dollar drop too far -- such as the need to attract foreign capital to finance the U.S. budget deficit. Failure to consider such matters, he said, would raise &quot;real risks&quot; that the U.S. currency would fall into a precipitous decline.    Similarly, Mr. Sprinkel said he would prefer seeing the U.S. trade deficit narrowed through faster economic growth abroad and a reduction in federal budget deficits, rather than through too steep a decline in the dollar. &quot;Many of us prefer to have more stable exchange rates than we've had of late,&quot; he said. But he added, &quot;we have no objective about what the dollar price should be.&quot;    ---   Also contributing to this article was Paul Blustein.    (See related story: &quot;Dollar Declines in Tokyo; Market Is Disappointed By Detail of Statement&quot; -- WSJ Jan. 22, 1987) </TEXT></DOC>