<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880901-0147 </DOCNO><HL> Dukakis Should Pledge Allegiance to the Facts </HL><AUTHOR> L. Gordon Crovitz </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE SUP </G><TEXT>   &quot;The Supreme Court of the United States has not had an occasion to consider whether a teacher has a constitutional right to decline to participate in the recitation of the pledge of allegiance to the flag,&quot; the Massachusetts Supreme Court wrote in the advisory opinion on which Gov. Michael Dukakis based his 1977 veto of a bill requiring teachers to lead the pledge.    The Massachusetts court went on to note that the 1943 Supreme Court case, West Virginia State Board of Education v. Barnette, concerned not teachers but students &quot;under the threat of expulsion for failure to comply&quot; and &quot;who objected to the requirement on religious grounds.&quot; Similarly, Gov. Dukakis's attorney general at the time, Francis X. Bellotti, offered an opinion on the 1977 law specifying &quot;the United States Supreme Court has not specifically addressed this question.&quot;    Yet the received wisdom seems to be that because of the Supreme Court's Barnette decision, the 1977 law was not only unconstitutional but beyond the pale. Commentators everywhere accept Gov. Dukakis's claim that, &quot;It was so held by the Supreme Court of the United States. Any first-year law student knows that.&quot; And, &quot;If the vice president is saying he'd sign an unconstitutional bill, then in my judgment he's not fit to hold the office.&quot;    The commentators ought to take the time to read the cases.    To begin with, compulsion was at the heart of the Barnette case, which concerned Jehovah's Witnesses students who opposed saluting the flag, which they considered a graven image. (In fact, the students did not object to reciting the pledge.) They were expelled, and their parents were threatened with jail for &quot;causing delinquency.&quot;    Justice Robert Jackson's opinion hinged on the fact that students were required by law to attend school. (Felix Frankfurter's forceful dissent upholding the criminal penalty agreed there was coercion, but noted that West Virginia didn't require attendance in the public schools.) The majority held that what was unconstitutional was the one-two punch of state power: &quot;The State asserts power to condition access to public education on making a prescribed sign and profession and at the same time to coerce attendance by punishing both parent and child.&quot; As the Massachusetts court and Attorney General Bellotti recognized in 1977, no person is coerced by law to become a teacher.    The facts and precedent most relevant to the law Gov. Dukakis vetoed came in a 1957 New York case, Lewis v. Allen. It concerned an effort by parents of school children to force the state to drop &quot;under God,&quot; two words added by Congress in 1954, from the required pledge. Judge Isadore Bookstein, the trial judge in Albany, ruled that it is constitutional to require teachers to lead the pledge so long as there is no penalty for students who refuse to recite it.    Judge Bookstein wrote that, in Barnette, &quot;the United States Supreme Court indicated approval of the congressional enactment of the pledge of allegiance but declared the West Virginia flag-salute law unconstitutional. In that instance, however, the salute to the flag was compulsory.&quot; The regulation under attack in the New York case, Judge Bookstein noted, calls for recital of the pledge, but is constitutional because it &quot;has no compulsory aspect. No penalties attach to a failure or refusal to take the pledge. The pledge is made voluntarily and no penalties are imposed for non-compliance.&quot;    Noting that many curriculum materials have religious references, he wrote: &quot;If petitioners' contention be sound, it may be wondered whether the public school curriculum might properly include the Declaration of Independence and the Gettysburg address. Could 'America' ('. . . Protect us by thy might, Great God, our King!') be sung in a public school without offending the First Amendment? And might not the presidential oath of office have questionable constitutional status?&quot;    When the plaintiffs in the New York case appealed to the U.S. Supreme Court, attorneys general from 29 other states joined to support Judge Bookstein's decision upholding the voluntary pledge. In 1964, the Supreme Court agreed to refuse to hear the appeal. While this is not as powerful a precedent as the court upholding the New York case outright, it left the best law in 1977 and today as holding that a state may require the recitation of the pledge so long as there is no penalty on students who refuse to participate. This is precisely the law that was vetoed by Gov. Dukakis in 1977, then passed over his veto by the Massachusetts legislature.    In his decision to veto a pledge that put no obligation on students, Gov. Dukakis raises questions about whose interests he was trying to protect. His current attorney general, James Shannon, made clear it was teachers Gov. Dukakis was worried about when he asked the Washington Post: &quot;Does George Bush feel that a teacher, who because of religious conviction feels unable to lead the pledge, should end up with a criminal conviction?&quot; Mr. Shannon, to be charitable, apparently hasn't read the cases either.    In its advisory opinion, the Massachusetts Supreme Court noted that the bill included no legal penalty for non-complying teachers. Indeed, the 1977 bill invalidated the previous penalty -- a $5 fine -- for teachers who refused to lead the pledge. The bill the governor later vetoed, the advisory opinion allowed, &quot;removes criminal penalties against non-complying teachers.&quot;    The majority in the advisory opinion based its findings on the conclusion that even without any criminal penalty the law &quot;nevertheless contains a direction that each teacher lead the first class of each day in a recitation of the pledge of allegiance to the flag. Failure to adhere to this mandate may threaten the continuance or advancement of a teacher's career.&quot; Thus, &quot;there is an element of compulsion on a teacher inherent in the mandate&quot; and the law is unconstitutional.    The dissenting justices, including one former Harvard law professor, disagreed that teachers have any right to refuse to lead the pledge. &quot;There is no constitutional obstacle to a provision for voluntary participation in a pledge of allegiance,&quot; the dissenters wrote, citing Lewis v. Allen.    The opinion by the Massachusetts attorney general in 1977 sheds some light on the real issues before Gov. Dukakis. Mr. Bellotti wrote that &quot;a number of teachers in local school districts&quot; have refused to lead the pledge. Some cited religious reasons. But Mr. Bellotti said others objected &quot;because they believe the phrase, 'with liberty and justice for all,' which is part of the pledge, is untrue.&quot; In other words, the Dukakis veto was to protect the career paths of teachers who do not believe that the United States is one nation, under God, indivisible, with liberty and justice for all.    Ironically, the law he vetoed was supposed to replace an earlier, more coercive law. The older law not only included the $5 fine, but also required that teachers &quot;shall cause&quot; students to salute the flag and recite the pledge. The vetoed law required teachers only to &quot;lead the class&quot; in a recitation without any salute.    Mr. Dukakis was overridden by lopsided votes of 201-27 in the House and 24-7 in the Senate, yet refuses to enforce the new law. It's unclear which of the two laws is now on the books, but what is certain is that Gov. Dukakis as the chief executive officer of his commonwealth has a constitutional duty to enforce the law. He flouts this obligation by refusing to enforce the pledge law.    He'd better be more careful if he gets to Washington. Congress does not take kindly to presidents asserting the power to modify legislation or use discretion in interpreting its meaning, much less flatly refusing to enforce duly enacted laws.    For the Bush campaign, the point of the pledge issue is to undercut the Democratic nominee's stance as a moderate centrist. Looking at what actually happened in 1977, this seems a fair shot. Or at least the governor has some explaining to do.    The veto was not dictated by any constitutional requirement, but by the governor's desire to protect the career paths of teachers who objected to leading the pledge because they disagreed that this country stands for liberty and justice for all. Such doubts about the United States may have been common in 1977, at least in Massachusetts, but happily they seem anachronistic now. It would clarify matters if Gov. Dukakis and others would simply say they have changed their minds.    Rather than sign a bill that would reduce the pledge duties of teachers and students, the governor chose to seek an advisory opinion, which of course is not an option for a president under the federal Constitution. In his request, he indicated that he opposed any pledge requirement.    After hiding behind judicial robes to veto the pledge, now Gov. Dukakis is hiding behind some shockingly weak legal arguments to avoid defending the position that he actually took -- that teachers who do not believe in the words of the Pledge of Allegiance should have their careers protected. So far, the commentators are buying his spurious legal defense of this curious political decision.    ----   Mr. Crovitz is assistant editorial page editor of the Journal. </TEXT></DOC>