<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870320-0116 </DOCNO><HL> Executive Style (A Special Report)---Life After the Top:Retired Chiefs Discover That There'sA New World Outside the Corner Office---By Linda M. Watkins</HL><DD> 03/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Life at the top isn't easy. But life after life at the top poses problems, too.    The big question: What to do in retirement?    Running a Fortune 500 company often isn't just a job, but a way of life. At times exhilarating, at times numbing, it's an endless series of meetings, of multimillion-dollar decisions, of 60-hour workweeks, of business breakfasts, lunches and dinners.    For some, retirement is a welcome and well-earned respite, a time to slow down and do things they never had time to do before. But for others, a life of leisure is a life of boredom. Indeed, many retired top executives return to business within six months, according to a 1984 study by Russell Reynolds Associates Inc., an executive recruiting firm. &quot;Leaving it all behind could be a blow to the ego if the individual hasn't accepted the move,&quot; says David Merrill, who counseled executives before he himself retired from Rohrer, Hibler andamp; Replogle, a consulting firm.    A glimpse at four former chief executive officers of Fortune 500 companies -- one who really has retired, one who is working as hard as ever, one who left corporate life abruptly at age 55 and one who is championing business solutions for social problems -- shows how different retirement can be.    ---   On a recent winter day, the temperature hovered around the freezing mark in Pittsburgh, home of Westinghouse Electric Corp. But it was a balmy 75 degrees in the Naples, Fla., area, home of Robert Kirby, the company's 68-year-old retired chairman.    He got up at 6 a.m., browsed through the newspaper, did the crossword puzzle and monitored his stocks. After perusing his mail, it was out to the golf course adjacent to his spacious Spanish villa-style home for a four-hour round with friends. In the late afternoon he returned home, taped some music (big band jazz is his favorite, and he has 3,000 tapes) and enjoyed a quiet dinner (hot dogs and baked beans). Then Mr. Kirby ended the day by plunking himself in front of the television to take in a basketball game and an America's Cup yacht race.    Other chief executives may feel lost away from the hustle and bustle of corporate life, but not Mr. Kirby, who retired in 1983 after serving nine years as chairman of the electrical equipment and broadcasting concern. &quot;I don't miss it,&quot; Mr. Kirby says. At Westinghouse, he put in 12-hour to 14-hour days -- often followed by business dinners -- and traveled frequently. &quot;When you're chairman, you have to do things when others want you to do it,&quot; Mr. Kirby recalls. &quot;Down here, I set the schedule. That, to me, is really great.&quot;    Mr. Kirby, planning for a life of leisure, bought his home in an exclusive enclave of Naples in 1981. &quot;I was really looking forward to being able to relax as much as possible and spend time on things I didn't have time to when I was working,&quot; he says. That means golf at least four times a week and frequent dips in his outdoor swimming pool and backyard Jacuzzi. And each year, to escape Florida's steamy weather, Mr. Kirby and his wife, Barbara, spend summers at their home in Pittsburgh.    Of course, it isn't all the life of Riley for Mr. Kirby. He stays active as a director of the Professional Golf Association tour, a director of Mellon Bank -- where, he notes, he keeps his money -- and chairman of the University of Pittsburgh's board, among other things. Still, he turns down invitations to serve on other boards, and his current obligations require only about 50 meetings a year -- far fewer than he had to squeeze into his hectic schedule before retiring.    ---   &quot;I'd rather wear out than rust out,&quot; declares Kemmons Wilson, the founder and former chairman of Memphis, Tenn.-based Holiday Inns Inc.    When Mr. Wilson retired in 1979 from the company he started 27 years earlier, it was for all of three weeks -- and that was spent recuperating from a heart attack and open heart surgery. Then it was back to work. Now 74 years old, Mr. Wilson still puts in 12-hour days at Kemmons Wilson Co., a company that he founded in 1935 and that his three sons run.    By the time he left Holiday Inns (currently named Holiday Corp.), Kemmons Wilson already owned or had stakes in 25 businesses, from small hotel chains to cemeteries. The entrepreneurial Mr. Wilson has expanded it by adding a nacho corn chip and jalapeno pepper dip company, a time share resort in Florida and a savings and loan association, among others. &quot;I would go crazy if I didn't have anything to do,&quot; he says.    Most of the day-to-day operations are left to other executives or partners, but Mr. Wilson still keeps tabs on things. He spends about six hours a day in his office sifting through mail, answering telephone messages and dictating letters. Just like his old office at Holiday Inns, his new office has about 100 awards and plaques hanging from the walls and a large portrait of his mother hanging over his desk.    The rest of the time, Mr. Wilson visits his nearby businesses to check things out. Strolling through his Wilson World hotel and conference center recently, he was constantly interrupted by onlookers wanting to shake his hand. Mr. Wilson's family was poor when he was growing up in Memphis, but today he is one of the city's best-known citizens. &quot;We call him Mr. Memphis,&quot; says Mayor Richard Hackett, who joined Mr. Wilson for soft vanilla ice cream.    Several months ago, Mr. Wilson took his first extended vacation since 1951, and even that was just for six days. But life isn't all work. To relax, he goes hunting with his sons, plays tennis and joins the family's weekly Sunday dinner gatherings.    His advice to other retiring chief executives? &quot;Get out and get another job as quickly as you can,&quot; he says. &quot;You can't play golf and make love all day.&quot;    ---   Most chief executives retire in their 60s. Archie McCardell retired -- unexpectedly -- at 55.    When Mr. McCardell became chief executive of International Harvester Co. in 1978 at age 51, there was every reason to think he would be around for a long time. But after a lengthy strike and recession led to steep losses at the maker of farm equipment and trucks, Mr. McCardell left under a cloud in May 1982. Despite reports that he was ousted, Mr. McCardell says he left on his own accord. &quot;I was relieved. And I felt no bitterness,&quot; he recalls.    Still, for a while Mr. McCardell didn't know what to do. Lacking any plans, he decided simply to relax and think things over. For several months, he didn't do much more than sleep, jog and play golf and tennis. He slimmed down, dropping 20 pounds. In between the sports, he tended to his personal finances, setting up trusts for his three children.    He passed up opportunities to return to corporate life. Soon after leaving Harvester (since renamed Navistar International Corp.), for example, Mr. McCardell received offers to become chief executive at several companies. &quot;I didn't see anything that turned me on,&quot; he recalls.    Six months after he retired, Mr. McCardell's daughter, Sandy, and her husband asked him to go into business with them and his other two children. &quot;We thought he was our greatest asset,&quot; remembers Raul Arcenas, the son-in-law. Mr. McCardell accepted the offer, becoming chairman of ARM Properties Inc., a residential real estate concern, and ARM Enterprises Inc., a management firm that advises ailing small businesses.    At Harvester, Mr. McCardell put in 13 hours a day, spent evenings with a briefcase full of work and often took aspirin in the morning to relieve headaches. &quot;There was no time to do anything other than work,&quot; he recalls. At ARM, he usually works seven or eight hours a day, most of the time advising family members, who handle day-to-day operations. He often takes off four or five days a month, which gives him plenty of time to commute between his ivy-covered mansion in Fairfield, Conn., and homes in Florida, Canada and upstate New York, and to play golf and tennis.    Retiring early, Mr. McCardell now says, has worked out to his liking. &quot;Don't wait until you're 65,&quot; he advises other top executives. &quot;Do it while you still have energy. The older you get, the less flexible you are.&quot;    ---   William Norris vividly remembers his last day as chairman of Control Data Corp. in January 1986. &quot;The day I walked out of my office, I felt a little tug in my belly, like when I left the (family) farm in Nebraska to take a job at Westinghouse Electric,&quot; he says. &quot;It was the realization that an important chapter in my life had ended.&quot;    But not the last chapter. A year after retiring, the 75-year-old Mr. Norris -- who founded Control Data in 1957 -- is still going strong. Instead of beginning a second business career like many retired executives, however, Mr. Norris is pursuing his avocation -- preaching about ways that business can help solve America's problems.    To spread his gospel, Mr. Norris is giving at least three lectures a month around the U.S. His favorite topics: how U.S. computer companies can combat foreign rivals (by sharing technology), how America can create more jobs (by helping people start and grow small businesses) and how education can be improved (by expanding computer-based education).    Mr. Norris's proselytizing on these topics resulted in more criticism than praise when he was running Control Data. Critics inside and outside the company contended that he was so busy promoting these issues that it distracted Control Data from its main business of selling computers, and resulted in losses in his final two years at the helm; the company has axed many of his pet programs. But now, though he remains a director of Control Data and is a consultant to the company, he can say what he wants without causing grumbles.    Because he operates out of a Control Data office across the street from the company's headquarters in Bloomington, Minn., much of his daily routine has stayed the same. Still, some things are different. &quot;He's as busy as ever, but probably a little more relaxed,&quot; says Betty Jane, his wife for 43 years, noting that Mr. Norris has more time to swim, fish and go for walks. &quot;He talks in his sleep less often than he used to. I interpreted that as tenseness when the company was under a lot of pressure.&quot;    ---   Ms. Watkins is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's Boston bureau. </TEXT></DOC>