<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880406-0077 </DOCNO><HL> Who Should've Been This President's Men? --- The Best and The Worst Of Reagan's Appointees </HL><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>      With the thought that &quot;personnel is policy,&quot; we asked a range of notables to name those Reagan appointees who had best and worst served the nation:   Paul Burka, executive editor, Texas Monthly   BEST -- James A. Baker III (chief of staff): Shut out Far Right and its social agenda, did most to keep administration in conservative mainstream.    William Bennett (secretary of education): On most important issue of our time was consistently outspoken and consistently right.    Sandra Day O'Connor (Supreme Court): Clever appointment -- a woman, so impossible to attack from left, but also anti-abortion so satisfactory to right. Eased fears of conservative judicial revolution while changing direction of court.    WORST -- Edwin Meese (attorney general): Openly refused to acknowledge authority of Constitution, shut eyes to criminal misconduct, messed up Iran/Contra investigation.    William Casey (CIA director): Undercut fabric of democracy by running a government within a government.    James Watt (interior secretary): So abrasive he was totally ineffective speaking for viewpoint that deserved hearing -- that federal lands should be opened to some activities. Never accepted idea federal lands are public trust.    Col. Harry Summers, contributing editor, U.S. News and World Report   BEST -- Caspar Weinberger: Best defense secretary since George Marshall; &quot;Weinberger Doctrine&quot; enduring legacy.    Gen. John W. Vessey, Jr. (chairman, joint chiefs): True soldier; gave intellectual honesty, moral courage good name.    John Lehman and James Webb (Navy secretaries): In grand tradition; Alfred Thayer Mahan would have been proud.    WORST -- David Stockman (budget director): Reagan's Benedict Arnold.    Frank Carlucci (defense secretary): In sorry tradition of Truman's hack, Louis Johnson, who sacrificed American lives on altar of political expediency.    Rear Adm. John Poindexter and Lt. Col. Oliver North (national security adviser and aide): Dishonored oaths to serve Constitution, disgraced uniforms.    Paul Craig Roberts, former assistant Treasury secretary   BEST -- Preston Martin (vice chairman, Federal Reserve): Prevented Volcker from causing a second &quot;Reagan recession.&quot;    Donald Regan (Treasury secretary): Took heat to defend tax rate reductions.    Weinberger: Built up defense.    WORST -- Michael K. Deaver (deputy chief of staff): Undermined Reagan's conservative advisers.    Stockman: Blamed own failure on Reagan.    Paul Volcker (Fed chairman): Preempted Reaganomics.    Edward I. Koch, mayor of New York   BEST -- C. Everett Koop (surgeon general): Unflinchingly answered AIDS call for leadership, led fight against smoking.    Volcker: Steady hand, great judgment and long commitment to public service guided nation to economic recovery.    James Baker: First term White House operation unparalleled; future president would be well advised to study its MO. Excelled at Treasury, too.    WORST -- Regan: In contrast to Baker, singlehandedly created divisive atmosphere in White House, damaged relations with Hill, undermined administration ability to promote agenda (maybe a plus).    Daniel Manion (U.S. Circuit Court): Everything this man says is, and will be, held against all of us in court of law.    Watt: Anything this man said was, and should be, held against him in court of public opinion.    Prof. Richard P. Nathan, Princeton Univ.    BEST -- George Shultz (secretary of state): In every way, exceptional public servant.    Stockman: Brilliant in critical early days of momentum and '81 budget act.    Baker/Meese/Deaver: Lest we forget, first-term troika smooth, balanced.    WORST -- Regan: A disaster -- completely unsuited to job when things soured in second term.    Alexander Haig (secretary of state): Made things more difficult in otherwise smoothly run first term.    Poindexter: Ouch!    Charles Murray, author, &quot;Losing Ground&quot;   BEST -- Bennett: Thought-out framework, ability to articulate it and courage to take on rest of the world. (Where do I vote for this guy for president?)    William Bradford Reynolds (assistant attorney general for civil rights): Maybe not effective, for his is ideal whose time came and went 20 years ago, but a moral hero to some of us.    WORST -- All secretaries of health and human services: Reagan never took his chance to put a Bill Bennett in the belly of the beast -- they were all &quot;Gee, if only we had more money. . . .&quot; Republicans.    Victor Navasky, editor, The Nation   BEST -- Koop   WORST -- Meese: Ask one of those special prosecutors why.    Clarence M. Pendelton, Jr. (chairman, Civil Rights Commission): Undermined program he was supposed to uphold.    Reynolds: Ditto.    Reed Irvine, Accuracy in Media   BEST -- Casey: Did much to restore CIA effectiveness, morale after disastrous Turner years.    Bennett: First occupant of office with courage and wit to talk sense to educational establishment.    Patrick J. Buchanan (communications director): Spoke out for president, marshaled support when others ran for tall grass. Fought mice on White House staff nibbling Reagan agenda to death.    WORST -- Thomas Griscom (communications director): Couldn't even get president on network TV to give one of most important speeches of second term.    Deaver: Apparently proud of doing most to keep those who shared Reagan's political philosophy from exercising influence in Reagan's administration.    Sharon Percy Rockefeller (Corporation for Public Broadcasting board): Reappointment made it impossible to clean up liberal mess.    Hodding Carter III, Viewpoint columnist   BEST -- Baker: Attempted in each post to make government function using, not assaulting, the democratic process.    Carlucci: National service came and comes before ideology.    Volcker: Carter named him first, but Reagan kept him; to degree economy is sound, he is primarily responsible.    WORST -- Meese: Advice consistently wrong and ethics consistently dubious.    Pendleton: In administration that made speciality of polarizing Americans on race, he was polarizer without equal.    Weinberger: Unrestricted love affair with uncoordinated spending helped wreck budget intelligent military policy.    Paul W. McCracken, Journal's Board of Contributors   BEST -- Alan Greenspan (chairman, Federal Reserve): Judicious temperament, practical experience and sophisticated understanding of economic policy.    Robert Bork (Supreme Court): Only a nomination, for lynch mob of left denied country man who would have been great justice (Senate, especially Judiciary Committee, never looked more craven).    Shultz: Extraordinary intelligence, absolutely rock solid. Lacked an extensive background in foreign policy, but a quick and thorough learner.    Paul Greenberg, editorial page editor, Pine Bluff (Ark.) Commercial   BEST -- Shultz: Competent, calm, persistent and principled.    Koop: Puts medicine above politics.    Jeane Kirkpatrick (ambassador to U.N.) -- Intelligent, tough and rational.    WORST -- Watt and Meese: These should be self-explanatory by now.    Ernest W. Lefever, president, Ethics and Public Policy Center   BEST -- Kirkpatrick: Courage and clarity in articulating how America must respond to totalitarian threat to West and totalitarian temptation to third world.    Bennett: Committed to humane values and excellence in education and insistent personal character and civic virtue be taught along with knowledge and skills.    Weinberger: Understands Soviet threat, attentive to advice from Joint Chiefs and largely successful in restoring U.S. military strength.    John McLaughry, formerly White House Office of Policy Development   BEST -- Charles D. Hobbs (assistant to president for welfare reform): Dedicated, patient, competent expert who is quietly bringing welfare reform to America.    Armando Valladares (U.S. delegate to the U.N. Human Rights Commission): Relatively unimportant post, but man who can confront Castro's apologists with marks on his own body.    Mark Fowler (chairman, Federal Communications Commission): Restored freedom to airwaves; belonged in Cabinet on sheer merit.    WORST -- Margaret Heckler (secretary of Health and Human Services): Probably single worst Cabinet appointment since Harding administration.    Deaver: Gives snakes a bad name.    Meese: Poor, well-meaning, decent Ed, who could never keep track of his friends, his finances, his nominees or even his briefcases.    Arthur B. Laffer, economist   BEST -- Volcker and Shultz: Abundance of common trait -- absolute integrity. That plus Volcker's undaunted quest for price rule of money and Shultz's early-on absolute commitment to tax cuts fundamentally changed America. (If jobs had been reversed, it wouldn't have been pretty.)    Ken Adelman, former head, Arms Control and Disarmament Agency   BEST -- Kirkpatrick: Defended American values on the front lines.    Donald Rumsfeld (special envoy on Law of the Seas): Succeeded marvelously at &quot;scuttle diplomacy&quot; to deep-six this disastrous treaty to socialize nature.    Richard Armitage (assistant secretary of defense): Stays put, turning down higher rungs to do job he's good at.    Murray Weidenbaum, former chairman, Council of Economic Advisors   BEST -- Shultz: Crucial post, class act.    Antonin Scalia (Supreme Court): Perhaps longest reach of any Reagan move.    Richard Stroup, formerly Interior official; Political Economy Research Center   BEST -- James Miller (budget director): Professional, knowledgeable, true to Reagan rhetoric within limits of role.    WORST -- Anne Gorsuch Burford (EPA administrator): Appointment unfair for she lacked &quot;street smarts&quot; to handle vicious attacks from outside and bureaucratic antipathy inside; lacked vision to bring constructive Reagan-like approach to environmental issues.    Tom Bethell, media fellow, Hoover Institution   BEST -- Meese: Refused to back down or abandon sound principles in face of media campaign of slander that dwarfed excesses of McCarthy era.    Scalia: Understands that U.S. Constitution, as liberals like to say of First Amendment, &quot;means what it says.&quot;    Bennett: Like Kirkpatrick, has shown that (ex) Democrats often make the best Republicans. They understand there are differences of principle between two parties, not mere misunderstandings.    WORST -- Deaver: Although he never understood issues, worked tirelessly to bring Reagan's position on them in line with Washington consensus.    William K. Verity (secretary of commerce): Like Malcolm Baldrige before him, seems to believe primary purpose of U.S. government is to serve interests of big U.S. businesses.    Robert McFarlane (national security adviser): In way over his head; unwisely steered Reagan down arms control path, quietly campaigned against SDI and brought disastrous hostage-swap scheme to Reagan's notice.    Warren Brookes, Washington editorialist, Detroit News   BEST -- Weinberger: Truly noble man of uncommon courage, decency and commitment. Knighted by grateful ally abroad even as magnificent defense revival was scorned and sabotaged at home.    Bennett: Guts to take on America's intellectually administratively corrupt education establishment. (Helped start &quot;Bonfire&quot; for Tom Wolfe's &quot;Vanities.&quot;)    John Shad (chairman, Securities and Exchange Commission): Tried to get Wall Street to clean up act before destroying itself, while keeping Congress from doing more damage.    WORST -- Volcker: Most overrated central banker in U.S. history. Reappointment in 1983 led to astonishing kill-off of strong recovery; 80% of deficits result from Fed's volatile policies.    Stockman: A Judas more beguiled by fools-silver of Washington press than by golden opportunity to serve cause.    Terrel Bell (secretary of education): So much a part of problem that he couldn't be part of solution.    Henry Cisneros, mayor of San Antonio   BEST -- Shultz: Stable, consistent, goal-oriented and has perspective.    Baker: Pragmatic manager; ability to respond to world events; mature good judgment.    Volcker: Confidence-inspiring; steady; public-minded.    WORST -- Elliott Abrams (assistant secretary of state for Latin America). Meese. Regan.    Mark Helprin, author, commentator   BEST -- Weinberger: Intelligence, courage, and clear purpose; did what he did entirely for sake of his country.    Shultz: One of &quot;grandfathers&quot; who provide government not only individual talents and virtues but sense of continuity and link to history. (Average age of my cabinet would be about 70. See China.)    Webb: Despite hasty and ill-considered resignation, imaginative man of letters with military background is right kind of youthful appointee. (Abrams, too.)    WORST -- Carlucci: Consummate bureaucrat and apple-polisher, whose hangman's glee at doing what Weinberger wouldn't is painful to observe. His delight at high office seems to indicate he is out of his depth.    William Wilson: Reagan confidant, representative to Holy See and occasional Libyan tourist was embarrassing fusion of arrogance, mystery, incompetence.    Stockman: Reminds me of a squid -- when threatened, turns tail and spews out enormous volumes of ink.    Owen Harries, National Interest editor   BEST -- Kirkpatrick, Abrams and Richard Perle (assistant secretary of defense): Three who share refreshing belief America must be more than good loser. Fought against pernicious and debilitating orthodoxies with high intelligence, skill and resolution.    WORST -- Deaver, Regan, John Whitehead (deputy secretary of state): Each in own way demonstrated danger of assertive incompetence in high places.    Robert D. Reischauer, senior fellow, Brookings Institution   BEST -- Stockman: Proved president could change budget priorities significantly and that powerful interest groups, government bureaucrats and congressional committees did not have stranglehold on tax and spending policies.    WORST -- Stockman: However, new budget course he set nation on entailed huge and dangerous deficits which will be administration's enduring legacy.    Paul M. Weyrich, Coalitions for America   BEST -- Bennett: One cabinet officer who's managed to set a national agenda and actually changed things.    Gary Bauer (domestic policy adviser): One of few in Reagan White House who understands politics of value-related issues and thus has held coalition together in its latter days.    James Burnley (secretary of transportation): Best example of rapid move up ladder in governing while maintaining philosophical principles.    WORST -- Deaver: Made national decisions in own rather than country's interest; most everything he did was for image rather than substance.    Shultz: Even more than Kissinger, has become total captive of State Department bureaucracy dedicated to seeing U.S. lose internationally.    Verity: Protectionist at heart, also soft on Soviet trade. Worse combination for national interest hard to imagine.    Irving Kristol, Board of Contributors   BEST -- Bennett: Only appointee who really knew how to talk about &quot;moral-social&quot; issues in such a way as to define the public agenda.    Kirkpatrick: Fully appreciated importance of tapping wellsprings of American nationalism in defining American foreign policy (something neither secretary of state nor defense understood at all).    Abrams: Seemingly only person at State who understood substance of foreign policy takes precedence over rituals of diplomacy, rather than vise versa.    K.E. Grubbs Jr., editorial director, Orange County (Calif.) Register   BEST -- Fowler: Sought to apply First Amendment to electronic journalism.    Miller: Principled in thankless job.    Bennett: Took illegitimate function of government, made it interesting.    WORST -- Pendleton James (personnel director): Assumed that a Reagan administration should resemble a Nixon or Ford administration.    Nancy Reagan: Appointed taipan of the administration.    Deaver: Chief lickspittle.    Jude Wanniski, Polyconomics   BEST -- Baker: Brilliant choice; an essential ingredient to success of first Reagan term. (Reagan wisely chose can-do chief of staff over Meese, an ideologue.)    Weinberger: Vastly underrated; put together magnificent Pentagon team that breathed new life into military, put SDI into play, and got INF Treaty at point of Pershing missiles.    Regan: Instrumental in implementing '81 tax cuts, but also fostered revolutionary tax-reform ideas in way that disarmed liberals.    WORST -- Stockman: Youth and intellectual arrogance led to betrayal of mandate for economic growth; pushed austerity, TEFRA and tight money, the combination producing horrendous deficits.    Shultz: Lip service to Reaganite global objectives, but effectively blocked reforms in foreign economic policy, undermined SDI when he could, and left president twisting in wind in Iran/Contra.    Volcker: Should have learned dangers of commodity deflation in '81-82, but repeated mistakes in '84-85, shutting off growth with supertight money and producing his second deflation.    Rep. Stephen Solarz (D, N.Y.)    BEST -- Steven Bosworth (ambassador to the Philippines): When fate of that nation hung in balance two years ago, provided perfect combination of finesse and forcefulness.    Mike Mansfield (ambassador to Japan): Octogenarian whose vigor and zest for life have made him perhaps our most effective envoy ever to nation that venerates age and tradition.    Carlucci: Returns a prudent sense of proportion and reality to Pentagon after seven years of profligacy.    WORST -- Casey: According to testimony before Irangate committee, led Reagan down primrose path to biggest foreign policy fiasco of his presidency.    Poindexter: Either lied to Congress or displayed deplorable judgment in keeping from president information he needed.    Watt: Made stripminers look like charter members of Sierra Club.    Edwin J. Feulner, Jr., president, Heritage Foundation   BEST -- Meese: Absolute commitment to conservative principles and loyalty to Reagan, despite incessant media attempts to discredit him.    Kirkpatrick: Most articulate supporter of president's foreign policy; put in place framework to evaluate support/opposition toward U.S. policies at U.N.    Daniel Oliver (chairman, Federal Trade Commision): quietly raised issues and implemented policies to strengthen free enterprise by fostering competition and reducing role of feds.    WORST -- Deaver: Book only confirms what conservative Reagan backers suspected all along.    Bell: Opposed Reagan's policies when nominated; while in office did nothing to change expectations of him.    Margaret Heckler and Otis Bowen (HHS secretaries): Both lost opportunity to reform largest department in federal government.    Fred Krupp, Environmental Defense Fund   BEST -- Lee Thomas (administrator of EPA): Surpassed expectations by championing world-wide treaty on ozone-destroying chemicals.    Ann C. McLaughlin (undersecretary of the interior): Brought common sense and accessibility post-Watt.    Koop: Showed uncommon boldness in speaking frankly about hazards of tobacco use and problem of AIDS.    WORST -- Watt: Rape-and-ruin approach to resource conservation was ultimately self-destructive.    Burford: Ideologue committed to undoing decade of environmental progress; elevated partisan considerations over human health and public welfare concerns.    Donald Hodel (secretary of the interior): Watt with a more pleasant demeanor; appointment revealed Reagan never understood how unpopular his environmental policies are.    David Hale, Kemper Financial Services   BEST -- Baker and Richard Darman (deputy treasury secretary): Reversed damage done to international economic policy by Regan and Beryl Sprinkel; highly effective firefighters following a team of arsonists.    Shultz: Administration's strengths are in State's domain of foreign policy.    WORST -- Regan: Poorest finance minister to preside over industrial country's economic policy in modern era. History will judge him very harshly, especially if U.S. goes protectionist.    Beryl Sprinkel (assistant treasury secretary for monetary policy): Magnified Regan's incompetence. Ideological rigidity about exchange rate policy in face of rapidly growing trade deficit.    Richard Holbrooke, investment banker, assistant secretary of state under Carter   BEST -- Darman: Extraordinary ability; without him, little could have been claimed in domestic/economic areas.    Michael Armacost (undersecretary of state): Epitomizes best of career federal service; played key roles in Philippines policy success, Afghanistan, etc.    Mansfield: Best holdover; best &quot;political&quot; appointee.    WORST -- Casey: Automatic place.    Poindexter/North/McFarlane: Package entry; unable to sort out roles in arms for hostages deal.    Watt: May be gone, but attempts to wreck national heritage not forgotten.    John Boland, financial writer   BEST -- Casey: Revived agency and lifted morale.    Kirkpatrick: Articulate voice for West. Justices Scalia, O'Connor: Rationalizing court.    WORST -- David Ruder (chairman, SEC): Tally-ho for regulation.    Verity: Red carpet for Soviet trade.    Phyllis Schlafly, conservative activist   BEST -- Bennett: Articulate and courageous advocate of traditional American values and excellence in education.    Weinberger: Excellent advocate of superior military strength, need for SDI.    George Bush: Right choice for vice president at a critical time.    WORST -- Shultz: Disloyal to Reagan promises and policies and GOP platform.    Carlucci: Ditto.    Michael Horowitz, ex-general counsel, Office of Management and Budget   BEST -- Baker/Meese/Deaver/Stockman/Darman/Fuller: &quot;Inefficient&quot; and often fractious first term staff followed FDR organizational model to Reagan's great advantage.    Bill(s) Bennett/Baxter (assistant attorney general for antitrust): Altered terms of debate.    Peggy Noonan (speechwriter): When she left, Great Communicator sang no more. -   WORST -- Regan: Singular goal to run railroad on time, inevitably ran it into the ground; central figure in second term collapse and '86 election debacle.    HHS Secretaries: Apparatchiks all.    Robert Tuttle (personnel director): Never had a clue; champion creator of lost opportunities.    John Train, author, investment counsel   WORST -- Frank Sinatra: Was bestowed prestige of White House -- and a Medal of Freedom.    Prof. John Lukacs, author, &quot;Outgrowing Democracy&quot;   BEST -- Bennett, Shultz and Bork: Conservatives, true and real.    WORST -- North, Buchanan and Weinberger: Rabid and ignorant ideologues.    Jerry Falwell, Thomas Road Baptist Church   BEST -- Meese. Hodel. Weinberger.    WORST -- Stockman. Carlucci. Bowen.    Arthur M. Schlesinger Jr., Board of Contributors   BEST -- Baker. Koop. Shultz.    WORST -- Meese. Abrams. Watt.    Reed Larson, National Right to Work   BEST -- Raymond Donovan (secretary of labor).    Donald Dotson (National Labor Relations Board).    Bennett.    WORST -- William Brock (secretary of labor).    Stephen Schlossberg (undersecretary of labor).    Rosemary Collyer (general counsel, NLRB).    R. Emmett Tyrrell Jr., editor-in-chief, American Spectator   BEST -- Casey: Recognized historic forces bearing down on U.S.; intent on advancing its influence -- always with same audacity Schlesinger thought he found admirable in JFK's thousand days.    Bennett: Took a small job at Education and made it powerful instrument for scrutinizing social and domestic policy.    Lehman: Built Navy into powerful foundation for U.S. diplomacy of peace.    WORST -- Deaver: Dutiful about the humdrum while attempting to thwart all higher values and many of wisest policies his boss stood for.    Bell: Defended education as though it were vested interest like sugar growers' lobby and not vivifier of American mind and culture.    Stockman: A genius provincial: cut budgets whether cuttable or not, raise taxes whether growth-retarding or not; then, having followed prescriptions of Capitol Hill, behold in retirement highest levels of peacetime spending in history.    Horace Busby, adviser to Lyndon Johnson   BEST -- Justice O'Connor: Timely appointment -- acknowledged important societal change in and beyond legal profession.    Clayton Yeutter (trade representative): Superb background (in academia, government and business); brought new professionalism to important post.    Ralph Stanley (mass transit administrator): Best of many young GOP administrator/regulators; changed Fed-local relationship without confrontation.    WORST -- Watt: A misfit.    Regan (chief of staff): Wrong man, wrong place, wrong time.    Donovan: Insensitivity to unions outside home state cost GOP chance for political gains.    Lawrence Uzzell, Scripps Howard editorialist   BEST -- Samuel Pierce (Secretary of Housing and Urban Development): Cut budget in half -- far better than any other cabinet member.    WORST -- Bell: Redefined &quot;education reform&quot; to equate it with more spending and regulation.    Dina Rasor, military-reform advocate   BEST -- Stockman: Questioned total lack of planning in early years of Reagan defense buildup.    WORST -- Richard DeLauer (undersecretary of defense for research and engineering): Chaired review that approved production of Maverick missile in face of overwhelming negative evidence.    James Ambrose (undersecretary of Army): Went from Ford Aerospace to Pentagon and rammed through many dubious weapons systems, including DIVAD, a Ford Aerospace product.    (See related stories: &quot;A Revolution but for the Revolutionaries&quot; and &quot;Dutch Reagan Leads the League in Hits&quot; -- WSJ April 6, 1988)</TEXT></DOC>