<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880914-0065 </DOCNO><HL> Fearful Exodus: Iraq's Kurds Receive Welcome in Turkey, Despite Old Animosity --- Refugees Strain Resources Of Their Host Nation; But Where Can They Go? --- Horrors of Chemical Warfare </HL><AUTHOR> Kathryn Christensen (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST EUROP </CO><DATELINE> HAKKARI PROVINCE, Turkey  </DATELINE><TEXT>   For thousands of desperate Kurds, the exodus from Iraq and the horror of death by chemicals end here at the Yueksekova refugees camp.    Turkey, which for hundreds of years has resisted the idea of a Kurdish nation, is welcoming and sheltering the refugees. They promise to impose a heavy political and economic burden on Turkey. It increases with each cattle truck grinding to a halt to unload its bedraggled human cargo here.    The refugees have lost their guns but not their will to fight. Some 10,000 are here. Inside a tent, a dozen men in guerrilla khaki insist that it was a barrage of chemical bombs dropped by the Iraqi air force that drove them from their homes in Iraq.    &quot;We are &quot;Pesh Merga&quot; {Forward to Death} fighters,&quot; says Mehmet Selman, 30 years old. &quot;We'll only stop fighting when they have finished off the entire Kurdish nation.&quot; Vows Mecit Ibrahim, recalling the execution of women in his village, &quot;We are ready to fight another 100 years.&quot;    Just as it appeared that Iraq and Iran might be ending their eight-year-old war, finally bringing peace to this region, Iraq has started yet another war -- against its own Kurdish minority. Despite official denials, Iraq appears to be using poison gas on the Kurds, just as it did against Iranians, further raising the risk that chemical warfare will become routine in Third World conflicts.    For hundreds of years the Kurds have struggled to establish an independent Kurdistan in a territory that straddles parts of Turkey, Iraq and Iran. Like the Palestinians, the world's 20 million Kurds share a religion, a culture, a language and a passion for autonomy. Nearly half live in Turkey, which refuses even to recognize them as a distinct national minority and refers to them only as &quot;mountain Turks.&quot; Though the Kurds outnumber the Palestinians by a ratio of 5 to 1, the Kurdish cause has attracted little global attention.    With all its economic troubles, and its fear of Kurdish nationalism, Turkey can hardly afford to offer the Iraqi Kurds a permanent home. Yet failing to offer them sanctuary would undermine Prime Minister Turgut Ozal's carefully cultivated image as a defender of human rights. Turkey's reputation in this area is a source of concern to the government; Turkey aims to establish itself as a first-class citizen of the world in all respects. Delivering the hostile Kurds to Iraq's Iranian enemy would also jeopardize Turkey's role as a friend to both nations.    &quot;It is only a fragile cease-fire between Iran and Iraq,&quot; says Aydin Alacakaptan, a retired Turkish diplomat. &quot;How can we transfer the combat potential of these guerrillas from one country to another without approval from Iraq?&quot;    The Kurdish refugees say they are grateful for their sanctuary here. In Cigli, a Turkish village on the Iraqi border, some 19,000 have been waiting 12 days for trucks to take them to a camp. They subsist mainly on bread made from flour brought by the Turks. Only 30% of those who started the journey survived the chemical and artillery attacks along the way, says Kamiran Beryari, a 26-year-old Pesh Merga. He and others here say they will &quot;do whatever Turkey says.&quot; But these are fighting men, who won't become passive peasants. &quot;We are strong,&quot; Mr. Beryari says, &quot;and we are tired and we are impatient.&quot;    In little more than two weeks, 60,000 to 100,000 Iraqi Kurds have walked across the mountains to Turkey. No one in the region disputes their accounts of gassing. &quot;Even the birds were falling from the sky,&quot; says Mehmet Seven, a Turkish Kurd in Hakkari, capital of Turkey's most remote province. &quot;We have seen the burned faces and arms. The Pesh Merga are here to lick their wounds, then return to fight.&quot;    Though Turkey says it has no definitive evidence that chemical weapons were used, the horror of the refugee reports led the U.S. Senate to vote last Friday to impose economic sanctions against Iraq until it stops using poisonous gas and ceases its &quot;campaign of genocide&quot; against the Kurds. If enacted, the bill would cut $800 million in credits, ban the import of Iraqi oil and require the U.S. to vote against loans to Iraq by international agencies.    None of this, however, will ease the economic burden on Turkey. Its economy is already so strained that Prime Minister Ozal faces what some characterize as a vote of confidence this month. Housing and feeding perhaps 75,000 refugees, even temporarily, seems nearly impossible.    Then there is the political problem. For years, Turkey has been struggling to control its own Kurds, estimated at 18% of its population. The addition of the Iraqi Kurds, at least 20% of whom are Pesh Merga fighting for an independent Kurdistan, could pump new vigor into Turkey's indigenous Kurdish extremists.    At the moment, however, Turkey has little choice. The Kurds say their troubles now are the worst in their history as one of the world's most luckless peoples.    For 3,000 years, they have lived in the rugged corner where Turkey, Iran and Iraq now meet. They are Moslems, early converts who produced Saladin, Richard I's foe in the Crusades. While most are Sunni Moslems, a minority adhere to the Shiite sects predominant in Iran and Iraq. Not until the defeat of the Ottoman Empire in 1918 did an independent Kurdistan seem possible. A 1920 treaty promised independence, but the treaty and the promise were scuttled three years later.    In Iraq, the Kurds continued their war for independence, helped for a time by the late shah of Iran. But in a deal with Iraq, the shah agreed to cut off supplies to the Kurds in return for control over part of the Shatt al-Arab waterway between Iraq and Iran. Iraq and Turkey subsequently gave each other the right of &quot;hot pursuit&quot; of Kurdish terrorists into each other's territories. Turkey, which has exercised that right three times in the last four years, now has suspended the agreement.    Despite Turkey's help, many here fear that the Iraqi attacks will unite Kurdish factions and make them tougher to deal with. And without some Turkish concessions to Kurdish aspirations, it is feared, the Kurds may resort to the kind of organized terrorism sponsored by other Middle Eastern minorities.    Here in southeastern Turkey, where the largely Kurdish population is almost completely cut off from the rest of Turkey by mountain peaks some 13,200 feet high, no one yet whispers such threats. But frustration is growing.    &quot;Why is it,&quot; asks Naif Yildiz, a Kurdish shopkeeper in Bitlis, &quot;that the world wails over a Polish labor union but raises no voice when 50,000 Kurds are massacred?&quot; Late at night, in the Yueksekova refugee camp, Pesh Merga silently dab their tears when asked about their future. &quot;A dozen Palestinians are killed, and the world sees it on television and protests,&quot; says Vahit Mustafa, who has fought Iraqis for most of his 24 years. &quot;Our struggle is deeper than the Palestinians', but the world has turned its back on us.&quot;    An additional 15,000 refugees are expected in the camp soon, and supplies already are short. Today's menu is limited mostly to beans. Inside a dark tent, Kayitan Kavas, a county commissioner, shouts into a telephone for more help. On the other end of the line, a voice promises 8,400 more blankets. Not enough, says Mr. Kavas. &quot;The whole town has come to aid, but even that is insufficient,&quot; he says.    A long line, mostly of women carrying small children, stretches outside the medical tent. Heyva Saddik, a pretty 21-year-old whose first name means &quot;hope,&quot; carries medicine to her two surviving children. A third died in Iraq from the poison bombs, she says, rubbing her hands and holding her throat to describe the disintegrating body. Other than the pounding of tent stakes, the only sound is of a family wailing over a child who has just died.    Still, she is among the lucky ones who survived Iraqi attacks and the five-night walk to Cukurca, a Turkish village high in the mountains. From there, it took five hours, standing in the back of trucks, to travel the 60 miles to Yueksekova camp.    The road is tortuous, often little more than tracks and ditches. Attacks by Kurdish terrorists are common enough to dissuade even locals from traveling at night. The terrain makes it difficult for Turkish army patrols to maintain security. Last week, in nearby Uludere, four people were killed when militants from the extremist Kurdish Workers Party clashed with police. A day earlier, eight soldiers and two civilians in another Kurdish province were killed in a terrorist ambush.    &quot;Make sure you are out of here by dark,&quot; orders a soldier at the checkpoint near the turnoff to Cigli. Pointing to a spot in the mountains, he warns of a &quot;machine-gun nest&quot; with orders to fire on any headlights after dark.    Once the 60,000 refugees who crossed the border at Cukurca are relocated, the trucks will pull into the valley near Cigli to transfer the thousands waiting there. Sheepskins litter the ground where the animals the refugees brought were butchered. Branches woven into lean-tos and topped with blankets offer the only shelter. Doctors in the medical tent are too busy to talk. At least, says Mr. Beryari, the Pesh Merga, &quot;we are safe.&quot;    But soon there will be a new enemy, the Turkish winter that brings more than six feet of snow and temperatures of 20 degrees Fahrenheit. &quot;These people can live only another month in tents,&quot; says Mr. Seven in Hakkari. &quot;It will be a big problem, a very big problem, to feed and take care of them.&quot;    With Turkey's $38 billion in foreign debt, 78% inflation and 20% unemployment, the refugees could hardly arrive at a worse time. Prime Minister Ozal is putting the brakes on growth, a move that will increase hardship for Turks and erode his own popularity.    On Sept. 25, the country will vote in a referendum on whether to advance local elections to November from March. Mr. Ozal wants to get the elections out of the way as soon as possible, before he squeezes the economy more. A big loss in the local elections, whenever they are, could bring a shift in party alliances that would require early general elections.    Opponents have successfully cast the referendum issue as a vote of confidence in the Ozal government. Mr. Ozal appears resigned to losing the referendum, but will consider the defeat fixable if he matches the 36% popular vote that won him his second term last year.    Accepting the Iraqi refugees probably increased his support for the September vote, and his political opponents unanimously endorse the decision. But all wonder what will happen to the refugees after the election.    Erdal Inonu, leader of the biggest opposition party, says Turkey's decision to accept the refugees, &quot;was inescapable; some are relatives of Turks.&quot; But the financial repercussions could be significant, he adds, depending on how long they stay. &quot;Turkey is not a rich nation, but of course,&quot; he says, &quot;these things usually don't happen to rich countries, do they?&quot;    The political fallout could be as costly. Though Mr. Ozal himself is said to be of Kurdish origin, and many parliamentary deputies are Kurds, the Kurdish issue is extremely sensitive.    Turkish Kurds dominate the poor and rugged southeastern quarter of the country, where per capita annual income is about $650, half that of Turkey as a whole. Like their income, their civil rights lag behind most Turks'. Martial law was lifted in the area only a few years ago, and 30,000 Turkish soldiers and several thousand non-Kurdish police monitor all movement. Until recent years, Hakkari was Turkey's Siberia, geographic exile for officials who had fallen from favor. Kurds are officially forbidden from teaching their culture as well as speaking their language. Some of the &quot;leftist&quot; music popular in Istanbul is banned in Hakkari.    The West has widely applauded Mr. Ozal for his democratic reforms; but on Kurdish issues, Turkey drifts from democracy. Last June, after the newspaper Milliyet began publishing interviews with a leader of the outlawed Kurdish Workers Party, a public prosecutor in Istanbul stopped publication of the series. The journalist who conducted the interviews is on trial now, facing a possible 15-year sentence on charges of attempting to weaken national unity. </TEXT></DOC>