<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881104-0092 </DOCNO><HL> Speculator 'Sandy' Lewis, Firm Indicted </HL><AUTHOR> Steve Swartz and Tim Carrington (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> AXP JEFG </CO><IN> STK SCR </IN><G> JUS </G><TEXT>   A New York federal grand jury indicted well-known Wall Street takeover speculator Salim B. &quot;Sandy&quot; Lewis on charges that he manipulated the stock price of Fireman's Fund Corp. in 1986 to help American Express Co. sell part of its Fireman's Fund stake at a more advantageous price.    The 22-count indictment of Mr. Lewis and the four-count indictment of his trading firm, S.B. Lewis andamp; Co., alleges stock manipulation, conspiracy and related securities-law violations.    It follows the guilty plea last year of Boyd Jefferies, former head of the Los Angeles brokerage firm Jefferies andamp; Co. Mr. Jefferies confessed to his own role in the alleged manipulation and has been cooperating with the government's investigation. Mr. Jefferies had been implicated by convicted insider-trader Ivan F. Boesky in the government's wide investigation into takeover-related trading irregularities.    If convicted, Mr. Lewis, 49 years old, faces a maximum sentence of five years in prison per count and fines totaling $39.5 million. Mr. Lewis's lawyer, Stanley S. Arkin, said the charges were &quot;erroneous in fact and wrong in concept,&quot; and asserted that Mr. Lewis would be acquitted. &quot;The only crime here is the indictment,&quot; Mr. Arkin added.    Gandolfo V. DiBlasi, an attorney representing Mr. Lewis's firm, said, &quot;The firm believes it is innocent and will plead not guilty and vigorously contest the charges.&quot;    Mr. Lewis's firm faces $5.5 million in fines and an uncertain future if the government wins its case. Mr. Lewis is unquestionably the main signal-caller at the firm, which has about 50 employees.    The indictment, which was announced by Manhattan U.S. Attorney Rudolph Giuliani, left unanswered some major questions. But prosecutors said the government's investigation into the alleged manipulation is continuing.    The indictment didn't say why Mr. Lewis, who has close professional and personal ties to American Express and its chairman, James D. Robinson III, committed the alleged manipulation or how Mr. Lewis benefited from it. Indeed, the indictment alleged that the manipulation cost the Lewis firm $150,000 in payments it made to Jefferies as part of the illegal arrangement.    The indictment also left unanswered whether any role in the alleged manipulation was played by American Express, which would have benefited from any such a manipulation. The indictment states that American Express had a &quot;substantial investment&quot; in Mr. Lewis's firm at the time of the alleged manipulation, which the indictment said was aimed at maximizing the proceeds that American Express received from the sale of the Fireman's Fund stake.    The indictment also said that Mr. Lewis had &quot;a number of telephone conversations&quot; with &quot;certain officers of American Express&quot; on or about May 8, 1986, the day of the alleged manipulation.    People familiar with the investigation said that Mr. Lewis spoke with Mr. Robinson and Howard Clark Jr., American Express chief financial officer, on May 8.    An American Express spokesman declined to comment specifically about May 8. He said that Mr. Lewis phoned Mr. Robinson early in the morning almost daily and that Mr. Lewis would on occasion talk to other American Express officials. The spokesman said Mr. Lewis often had ideas for Mr. Robinson, most of which the spokesman termed impractical. He said the two never discussed the Fireman's Fund offering.    The American Express spokesman said both Mr. Robinson and Mr. Clark testified fully about the Fireman's Fund offering before the grand jury.    The company said it conducted its own internal investigation of the incident and that it has cooperated fully with the Securities and Exchange Commission and the U. S. attorney's office.    American Express, which wasn't charged in the indictment, said in a statement, &quot;We believe that neither American Express nor any of its affiliates or employees engaged in any of the alleged wrongdoings in connection with the 1986 sale of Fireman's Fund securities.&quot;    Mr. Lewis has had close links over the years with American Express and Mr. Robinson. In the 1970s, the two men worked together at White Weld andamp; Co., a prestigious investment bank later acquired by Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. After some abortive jobs with major Wall Street firms -- most ending in dismissals or stormy walkouts -- Mr. Lewis established his own firm with the help of a capital infusion from American Express.    Later it was American Express that helped put S.B. Lewis on the map as a player in the engineering of and speculation on corporate mergers: Mr. Lewis proposed and led the negotiations for the American Express acquisition of Shearson Loeb Rhoades Inc., a forerunner of the current Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc.    That merger, valued at about $1 billion, helped fuel a succession of financial marriages in which brokerage firms were absorbed by larger, diversified financial services companies. The merger also changed the industry perceptions of Mr. Lewis himself: having long been perceived as the intelligent but erratic son of the late Salim Lewis, the longtime chief of Bear, Stearns andamp; Co., Sandy Lewis became an influential Wall Street figure in his own right.    Ironically, Mr. Lewis often lectured other Wall Street professionals on the need to improve their ethics. He often castigated Mr. Boesky, for whom he worked briefly, and clashed with former Merrill Lynch Chairman Donald Regan over his plans to expand the market-making clout of the brokerage giant.    Limited partners in Mr. Lewis's firm have included two former Securities and Exchange Commission top officials: Roderick Hills and Harold Williams.    Even in the charged atmosphere of Wall Street trading rooms, Mr. Lewis stood out for his intensity. Often riveted to a telephone, Mr. Lewis was almost impossible to deter when he wanted to track down a source of information or an adviser. He once tracked down a lawyer taking a sauna in Scandinavia, and located an investment banker on vacation in the African bush. On a family camping trip in the West, Mr. Lewis was in regular touch with Wall Street via a radio telephone.    In the indictment, the government alleged that the manipulation took place when American Express was planning an offering of Fireman's Fund stock and warrants. American Express intended to sell part of its 41% stake in Fireman's Fund, an insurance company that was once a wholly owned subsidiary.    American Express's investment bankers from Shearson, and Salomon Brothers Inc., met on May 8 to decide the price at which to sell the stock and warrants, which were convertible into Fireman's Fund common.    A key element in the decision, the government said, was the price of Fireman's Fund stock on that day; the price of the shares had dropped in prior weeks. The lower the price of the stock, the less money for American Express.    The government alleged that this is where Mr. Lewis came in. The government said he directed two Jefferies employees to make large purchases of Fireman's Fund stock, and that he promised he would protect Jefferies from any losses on the transactions. The Jefferies employees weren't identified.    The indictment alleged that Jefferies late on May 8 bought a total of 410,000 Fireman's Fund shares in three separate purchases, causing the price of the stock to rise 12.5 cents to $38 at the close of trading.    On May 9, American Express began the sale of nine million Fireman's Fund stock and warrant units at $41.50 a share, or $373.5 million.    Mr. Lewis then began a cover-up of the manipulation, according to the indictment.    Since Jefferies did lose money on the purchase and eventual sale of the Fireman's Fund shares, Mr. Lewis instructed Jefferies to bill him for &quot;investment banking services,&quot; the government charged.    To further conceal his role, Mr. Lewis then told Jefferies to cancel its bill to him and to bill another small securities firm, R.D. Smith andamp; Co., the indictment charged. Smith paid Jefferies $150,000 in June 1986, the government alleged. In November 1986, Mr. Lewis repaid the Smith firm and recorded the transaction in the Lewis andamp; Co. books as an &quot;advisory fee,&quot; according to the indictment.    Officials of the Smith firm, which wasn't charged with wrongdoing, weren't available to comment.    Mr. Jefferies's agreement with prosecutors appears to protect his former firm and the employees involved from prosecution in this case, people familiar with the case said. </TEXT></DOC>