<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871116-0089 </DOCNO><HL> Lonely Struggle:Nicaraguan Rebels FailTo Win Much SupportIn Exile Community---Corruption Rumors, Poverty,Old Feuds Hurt Contras;Was Calero Gala Packed?---Sewing Beads to Pay the Rent---By Michael AllenStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM </IN><DATELINE> MIAMI  </DATELINE><TEXT>   It is a sultry night in early fall, and some 200 demonstrators have converged on a bay-side shrine to honor Nicaraguan rebels who have died in action and pray for a resumption of U.S. aid to the Contra movement.    Clutching crosses with the names of dead soldiers, they provide a touching image for the 11 o'clock television news shows. But one Contra official admits that half the demonstrators are Cuban-Americans, not Nicaraguans. The shrine itself honors Cuba's patron saint and stands 10 miles from this city's main Nicaraguan neighborhood. And the turnout represents only a tiny fraction of the Nicaraguan exile community here, which is now believed to number more than 70,000 people.    The rally illustrates a politically awkward fact: Most Nicaraguan exiles in the U.S. don't actively support the Contras, the guerrilla force that the Reagan administration is backing to oust the regime the exiles fled. &quot;The exile community is ferociously anti-Sandinista, but I can't necessarily say it's pro-Contra,&quot; says Mark Rosenberg, the director of the Latin American and Caribbean Center at Florida International University.    That complicates matters at what is emerging as a critical juncture in the six-year-old Contra war. A peace plan agreed to by the five Central American presidents in August has shown surprising progress, and it now appears likely that the Sandinistas and the Contras will soon begin cease-fire talks through an intermediary. But the Reagan administration worries that the Sandinistas will use the talks to persuade Congress to halt funding for the Contras. Without aid, some U.S. officials fear, the Contras might start to disband.    Contra leaders hope to mount a series of exile demonstrations around the world in coming weeks to embarrass the Sandinistas and strengthen their position diplomatically. But critics say that such organizing efforts may be too little, too late.    Adolfo Calero, one of the top six Contra directors, counters that there is &quot;much support&quot; for the movement among Nicaraguans in the U.S., and even more among those in Central America. &quot;Miami isn't the place of action,&quot; he adds, in a telephone interview from Honduras. &quot;Central America is where things are happening.&quot;    In fact, though, between 100,000 and 250,000 Nicaraguans are believed to be living in the U.S. now, congregating mostly here and in California. Many former Contra officials, and some current ones, say that most of the exiles remain aloof from the cause, donating neither time nor money.    &quot;This is the only movement in history that hasn't collected funds from its natural support base,&quot; says Antonio Ybarra-Rojas, a prominent Sandinista opponent who teaches ethnic and race relations at the University of Dubuque. &quot;This movement in a sense was crippled by the U.S. dollars it received.&quot;    The reasons for the lack of support are as varied as the Nicaraguan exiles themselves. Many are dirt poor and have little time for politics. Others, still caught up in the rivalries that fragmented Nicaraguan society before the 1979 Sandinista revolution, can't work together.    Some root for the peasant fighters but complain about the comfortable life styles of the leadership and the rumors of widespread corruption. Although congressional investigations into possible high-level malfeasance haven't yielded any conclusive proof, Contra officials concede that the rumors have been damaging. Despite recent efforts to trim costs -- such as the installation of electronic controls to limit long-distance personal phone calls -- many Nicaraguans view working at Contra headquarters, in a seedy office park near the international airport, as a boondoggle available only to the privileged few.    Estelbina, a waitress at a working-class Nicaraguan bar, says that she has as little faith in the Contras as she does in the Sandinistas. &quot;Both sides are the same,&quot; says the former agronomist, who came here four months ago to save her 12-year-old son from the military draft. &quot;They fill their stomachs while everybody else starves.&quot;    Sitting in the well-appointed condominium he rents on Key Biscayne, former Contra leader Arturo Cruz concedes that the pay he received -- about $6,500 a month for more than two years -- would appear quite high to the average Nicaraguan. But he notes that it is less than he would have earned if he had kept his job as a high-ranking Inter-American Development Bank official. Mr. Cruz, who resigned in March over his inability to consolidate civilian control over the military, also acknowledges a more fundamental image problem for the Contra leadership: &quot;None of my sons were in this war, and the peasants were.&quot;    In part, the Contras' problems attracting exile support stem from their origin as a clandestine army financed and nurtured by the Central Intelligence Agency. To preserve secrecy and CIA control, many potential collaborators were excluded. Later, when the rebels went public, leaders were chosen as much for their ability to impress Congress as their prestige among Nicaraguans.    Chafing under U.S. control, some of the more charismatic leaders have abandoned the movement. These days, few exiles can name all six members of the most recent directorate.    &quot;The problem with our leadership is that it has been handpicked by 26-year-old appointees of the State Department,&quot; says Roberto Arguello, a young Nicaraguan banker who came here a month before the fall of Dictator Anastasio Somoza in 1979.    Ivan de Jesus Pereira, a onetime student leader in Nicaragua, has left the movement. He charges that it lacks the political fire needed for a liberation struggle. &quot;It was structured like the office of a multinational or a 7-Eleven,&quot; he complains.    Efforts by Mr. Cruz and others to get exiles more involved through the election of neighborhood committees foundered, in part because some officials worried that Mr. Cruz, a onetime Sandinista supporter, was scheming to increase his personal power base. Others believed that priorities should be elsewhere. &quot;I cannot see us in the middle of a war being involved in electoral politics,&quot; says Leonardo Somarriba, the head of finances for the Nicaraguan Resistance, as the Contra umbrella group is now known.    Unity is also undermined by ancient feuds between the two parties that monopolized power in pre-revolutionary Nicaragua, the Conservatives and the Liberals, and by bad blood among some of the nation's oldest families. &quot;Not only is there the question of class divisions, but within the elite of Nicaragua there are family feuds that rival anything the Hatfields and McCoys had going,&quot; says a congressional investigator.    Thus, when friends of Mr. Calero, the former manager of the Coca-Cola bottler in Nicaragua, staged a large testimonial dinner for him recently in an expensive downtown hotel, political rivals spread the word -- denied by organizers -- that the audience was composed mostly of Cubans and Nicaraguans who had been given free tickets to flesh out the crowd.    One of the dinner's critics was Jose Francisco Cardenal, a founder of the main rebel army who left after a bitter feud with other leaders and now roams Nicaraguan hangouts here like an old pol, playing on discontent. &quot;When kids are losing their lives on the battlefield,&quot; he says, &quot;this isn't the time to be throwing parties.&quot;    Infighting isn't limited to political parties; in fact, it seems to be a fact of life among exiled Nicaraguans. Maritza Herrera, the head of the recently formed Nicaraguan-American Foundation, flew to Washington last spring to lobby Congress for more favorable immigration treatment of Nicaraguan exiles. Afterward, she says, she started receiving threatening phone calls from the arch-rival Committee of Poor Nicaraguans in Exile. In addition, she charges, members of the committee broke windows at her headquarters.    The committee's president, Cristobal Mendoza, a former campaign worker for President Somoza, strongly denies the accusations, adding that &quot;this woman must be crazy or having visions.&quot; He charges that Mrs. Herrera is jealous of his work, which includes flying 100 Nicaraguan children to lobby for work permits in front of the White House. Says Mrs. Herrera with a sigh, &quot;We're like crabs in a pot with no lid: As soon as one tries to leave, the others drag him back down.&quot;    Nevertheless, eight years of exile have smoothed out some old grudges. The Contras used to exclude Nicaragua's last U.S.-backed president, Francisco Urcuyo Maliano, because of his high-ranking membership in the Somoza Nationalist Liberal Party. While his wife baby-sat for a Cuban-American family and sewed beads on jean jackets to help pay the rent, the 72-year-old retired doctor, whose transitional term lasted just 43 hours, contented himself with penning scathing denunciations of the Sandinistas for Spanish-language newspapers.    But a Contra decree earlier this year forbidding discrimination against the Nationalist Liberals could pave the way for Mr. Urcuyo to participate. &quot;There were people who came to my door and shouted, 'Die, Urcuyo; die, Somoza'&quot; in Managua, he chuckles. &quot;And now we get together here at parties and toast each other with champagne.&quot;    Other Nicaraguan exiles aren't as quick to join the Contra melting pot. Bismarck Betanco, a 37-year-old parking-lot attendant at a Fuddruckers Restaurant, says that he is too busy supporting his wife and five children and learning English to mess with politics. Besides, until last year he was vice minister of the Nicaraguan social-security institute and a dedicated Sandinista. Although he says that fierce bureaucratic infighting, corruption and nepotism among Sandinista leaders soured him on the revolution, he doesn't think the Contras are any better. &quot;From what I've seen, those who compose the directorate aren't morally qualified to come to the Nicaraguan people and say, 'Look, I'm your alternative.'&quot;    The rigors of exile life probably present the greatest hurdle to popular participation in the rebel movement. Most Nicaraguans are far more concerned about feeding and clothing themselves than about winning a war in what has by now become a faraway land. Most of them still haven't resolved their immigration status, although the Justice Department eased their problems earlier this year by granting one-year work permits to Nicaraguans seeking political asylum. Scholars and immigration specialists believe that about half of the exiles would choose to stay here permanently even if the Sandinistas relinquished power.    While most are struggling, some exiles are doing well. But the luxuries of U.S. life can also take the fire out of would-be Contras. Eduardo Lainez, an up-and-coming young officer in the Somoza national guard at the time of the Sandinista takeover, sometimes dreams of rejoining the fight. But then the 26-year-old thinks of the $400 a week he earns, after taxes, as an aerospace technician and of his wife and baby daughter. There will be no more fighting, he says, with some regret: &quot;Unfortunately, I fell into the error of sentimentalism.&quot;    Many exiles have deserted the cause precisely as the Contra troops are enjoying some of their biggest successes of the war. One Saturday afternoon in Los Comales, a Nicaraguan restaurant in a shopping strip recently renamed Centro Comercial Managua, a visitor fresh from Nicaragua brings news of a major Contra offensive near his ranch. Waving a copy of La Prensa, the recently reopened opposition newspaper, he declares that &quot;the Sandinistas can't hold out much longer.&quot;    But around him, veteran exiles scarcely look up from their plates of &quot;baho&quot;, a steamed beef dish with cassava and plantains. One of them, an accountant, says that exiles have been hearing that line for nearly eight years now and don't believe it anymore. &quot;Without a direct intervention by the United States, the Contras will never win,&quot; he says, as he orders another beer. &quot;It's the United States' fault that we're here, and the United States has a moral obligation to fix things.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>