<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880621-0136 </DOCNO><HL> Bad Blood: A Kind of Cholesterol Shows a Special Link To Coronary Disease --- Called Lp(a), It Also Offers Tantalizing Hint of How Arteries May Get Clogged --- Is This the Smoking Gun? </HL><AUTHOR> Jerry E. Bishop (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> PHA </IN><TEXT>   John Moutoussamy is no stranger to heart disease. The 66-year-old Chicago architect has had two heart attacks in the past 12 years. A sister died of a heart attack at age 44, and another sister has had crippling chest pains. His two sons, like him, developed &quot;cholesterol problems.&quot;    But Mr. Moutoussamy holds another unwelcome distinction. He is among the first of what may be millions of Americans found to have a strange form of cholesterol circulating in their bloodstreams, a form that apparently makes them much more likely to develop heart disease.    It is called lipoprotein (a), or simply Lp(a). Scientists pronounce it &quot;el pee little a.&quot; It was spotted 25 years ago but long ignored by mainstream heart researchers. Now a series of discoveries has made it the focus of a new strategy to understand atherosclerosis, the artery-clogging disease that is the nation's leading killer.    People who have a good deal of the Lp(a) type of cholesterol run double the heart-attack risk of people with low Lp(a) -- even if their total cholesterol levels are low. If both Lp(a) and total cholesterol are high, the risk quintuples, researchers think. Some studies indicate that Lp(a) may be behind a quarter of all heart attacks in men under age 60. The tendency to produce dangerous levels of this variety of cholesterol is inherited.    No one is sure how many Americans possess significant amounts of the Lp(a) type of cholesterol, largely because there isn't yet a simple blood test to detect it. But researchers say that of all the &quot;bad&quot; forms of cholesterol, Lp(a) may be the most common.    &quot;Maybe 15%, 20% or even 25% of the general population&quot; has enough of it in the bloodstream to put these people at risk of an early heart attack, estimates Angelo Scanu, a University of Chicago physician and biochemist whose laboratory is delving into its mysteries. Mr. Moutoussamy, the architect who has had two heart attacks, learned that he was &quot;Lp(a) positive&quot; only because he was a patient at the University of Chicago.    Dr. Scanu is one of the reasons Lp(a) is suddenly being thrust to the forefront of heart-disease research. Last December he, his colleagues in Chicago and researchers at Genentech Inc. unraveled the molecular structure of a key part of it. The molecules revealed a path by which cholesterol might be pulled out of the bloodstream and jammed into the walls of arteries to clog them. The discovery, scientists are saying, may be a long-sought &quot;smoking gun&quot; linking cholesterol directly to the arterial deposits.    The Lp(a) work grows out of a broad shift in strategy in the battle against heart disease. Until recently, most research involved statistical studies with large groups of people or national populations. These studies have proved that diets high in animal fat can raise the amount of cholesterol in the blood and that high blood cholesterol can contribute to atherosclerosis.    Now scientists are turning to biochemistry to discover exactly how cholesterol clogs the arteries and why a few people suffer heart attacks in their 30s and many more in their 40s or 50s, while others reach their 80s and 90s without ever having a heart attack. They are finding the answers in the various forms in which cholesterol, a vital component of all cell membranes, circulates throughout the body.    Most cholesterol is made by the liver from raw materials supplied by fat from the diet. But neither cholesterol nor dietary fat can dissolve in the watery part of the blood. Thus, to move fat and cholesterol from the intestine to the liver and out to the cells, the body constantly wraps and rewraps fat-cholesterol globules in water-soluble proteins. The packages are called lipoproteins -- &quot;lipo&quot; being the prefix for lipid, or fat.    Biochemists and geneticists are finding, however, a variety of genetic defects that pervert the lipoproteins' handling of fat and cholesterol. For example, the population studies show that people with abnormally high levels of low-density lipoprotein, or LDL, tend to have badly clogged arteries and a high risk of heart attack.    It turns out that one inherited defect cripples the liver cells' ability to remove LDL particles from the blood. In another inherited defect, a protein attached to LDL disguises the lipoprotein so that the liver cells fail to recognize it and pull it out. In either case, the LDL particles back up in the bloodstream, some ultimately to be deposited in the walls of the arteries.    Few discoveries about the lipoproteins, however, have ignited the kind of excitement that is flaring around Lp(a). More than a newly recognized hazard, it is revealing a tantalizing clue to a major mystery of atherosclerosis.    Kare Berg, a medical geneticist at Norway's University of Oslo, first noticed Lp(a) in the blood of heart patients in 1963. By 1980 an impressive mound of evidence had built up linking it to atherosclerosis in Scandinavians and in Hawaiians of Japanese descent.    A more surprising finding came when biochemists in Houston and Chicago teased the Lp(a) particle apart into its constituent fats, cholesterol and proteins. Lp(a) turned out to be the notorious LDL with an extra protein -- protein (a) -- wrapped around it.    Dr. Scanu and Gunther Fless at the University of Chicago then recruited genetic engineers at Genentech in San Francisco to unravel protein (a)'s molecular structure and clone the gene that produced it.    When Dan Eaton, a 31-year-old Genentech protein chemist, first fed protein (a)'s molecular sequence into a computer to compare it with known proteins, a mystifying answer came back: Protein (a) was almost identical to a protein that had occupied Genentech scientists for years, one that -- far from contributing to clogged arteries -- is a dissolver of blood clots. That protein is plasminogen, the basis of Genentech's first commercial product, tissue plasminogen activator, or TPA.    &quot;At first we were really skeptical,&quot; Mr. Eaton says, fearing that plasminogen in the lab had somehow contaminated the protein (a). As research progressed, however, they began to realize that protein (a) and plasminogen were both chains of the same basic molecule. The only difference is that plasminogen has five &quot;repeats&quot; of this molecule while protein (a) has as many as 37 repeats. It is as though nature took a clot-dissolving protein, plasminogen, and photocopied it seven or eight times to make a protein to cart cholesterol around the body.    The discovery, published last December in Nature magazine, &quot;has absolutely floored everyone,&quot; says Jan Breslow, a Rockefeller University scientist who is among the many researchers following it up.    There is good reason for such excitement. For years scientists have wondered how cholesterol in the bloodstream promotes artery-clogging deposits. These deposits are garbage heaps of cholesterol, fat, fibrous scar tissue, fat-laden cells and other biological debris. The debris suggests there had been some past attempt to repair damage to the normally smooth artery walls. Researchers theorize that somehow cholesterol from the bloodstream gets dragged into the artery wall and causes the repair process to go haywire, resulting in a steady buildup of debris.    Researchers have several theories about how protein (a)'s remarkable resemblance to plasminogen results in the artery-clogging deposits. One is particularly intriguing.    During any repair process, blood clots are constantly being formed and dissolved. It is quite possible, scientists speculate, that during attempts to repair the artery wall, the body at some point tries to dissolve a blood clot. But it mistakenly grabs protein (a) instead of plasminogen, pulling it, with its bag of fat and cholesterol, into the artery wall. This thwarts the repair process and begins a vicious cycle drawing more and more cholesterol into the damaged area. And, in fact, microscopic blood clots and bits of Lp(a) are found in the mishmash of the deposits.    &quot;This is far from proven, but it's an attractive hypothesis,&quot; says Chicago's Dr. Scanu. Researchers quickly add that other lipoproteins may push cholesterol into artery walls in other ways.    Doctors increasingly check not just a patient's total level of cholesterol but also certain readily measurable lipoproteins, such as LDL. Now efforts are under way to devise an easy test for Lp(a) cholesterol.    Alas for patients like Mr. Moutoussamy. Some research hints that Lp(a) is resistant to even the newest cholesterol-lowering drugs. Like many other people with Lp(a), though, Mr. Moutoussamy also had a high level of LDL cholesterol, and that has responded to a low-fat diet and drug therapy. His total cholesterol has dropped to a near-normal 214 reading from a scary 425 a dozen years ago. </TEXT></DOC>