<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880825-0112 </DOCNO><HL> Pakistanis Preserve Tense Post-Zia Peace --- In Karachi, Religious Marches Pass Without Incident </HL><AUTHOR> Mary Williams Walsh (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> KARACHI, Pakistan  </DATELINE><TEXT>   This nation's diverse ethnic and religious groups, both those that loved and those that hated President Mohammed Zia-ul-Haq, have managed to keep the lid on communal violence in the week since the president died in a suspicious plane crash.    His death came on the eve of Muharram, the lunar month when Pakistan's minority Shiite Moslems parade through the streets, beating their chests and flagellating themselves with knives and chains, to remember the suffering of an ancient martyr. In any year, it is a time when the devout wear open wounds and bloodstained clothing as badges of honor, and when the air rings with the sound of knives being sharpened on foot-pedaled whetstones.    In Karachi this week, Pakistan's largest city, groups of Shiites march by for hours, some streaming with blood and sweat, others carrying replica coffins, all chanting historical poetry, and all protected by army troops on trucks with mounted machine guns.    In previous years, Muharram was marred by riots and murder. Last year in Karachi, provocateurs opened fire on Shiites as they paraded past a mosque of the Sunni sect, Pakistan's majority Moslem group. The year before that, someone on a balcony dumped a can of chili powder onto the raw, bleeding backs of Shiites below, sparking riots.    To be sure, this year's Muharram -- which coincided not only with the president's violent death but also that of one of Pakistan's most prominent Shiite leaders -- has been tense. But Muharram has passed so far without a killing in Karachi, a tinderbox city where even traffic accidents can provoke days of ethnic battling. The tense calm is testimony to the determination Pakistanis feel upon President Zia's death that nothing should impede their country's fleeting chance at stable, civilian government.    &quot;The Shia and Sunni leaders are aware that martial law can be imposed any time,&quot; says Shiite journalist Mazhar Abbas. &quot;So they are being more cautious now.&quot;    Pakistan is a country so deeply divided by religious and ethnic schisms that at times it seems more like a collection of enemy states than a unified nation. There are the Shiites, who may make up an estimated 12% of the population and who feel threatened by the majority Sunnis.    There are the four regional groups, Punjabis, Pathans, Sindis and Baluchis, each with its own language and provincial borders, and its own hang-ups about its neighbors.    And then there are the Mohajirs, people, and their offspring, who moved to Pakistan from what is now India when the two countries were created in 1947 out of British India. Mohajirs tend to feel they are the most deserving and committed Pakistanis, because they gave up everything to come build the new nation. The other regional groups resent them as elitist, usurping newcomers. Each group tells Pakistani history differently, and each interprets current events with its own spin.    In his 11 years as president and army chief of staff, Gen. Zia proved remarkably adept at juggling and wooing them all, keeping the nation intact. He promoted Mohajirs in the largely Punjabi army, for instance, and for a time made a Sindi his prime minister. Most important, he used the common Islamic faith as a glue to hold it all together.    He forbade banks to pay un-Islamic interest, and encouraged the public flogging of criminals. He might have amputated thieves' hands, if any doctors had been willing. He banned alcohol, and sent investigators to homes and offices to make sure people were praying on time. And he threw his support behind the jihad, or holy war, of Afghanistan's Moslem guerrillas against the Soviet-backed regime in Kabul.    Admirers said President Zia's Islamization was a brilliant exercise in building popular support in a troubled country. Critics said it was insincere manipulation. Whatever the case, the Islamic glue shone only on the surface, while underneath the tensions grew. Now that President Zia is gone, the new government must try to reunite the country's various antagonists. That won't be easy, as the current Shiite-Sunni tensions show.    The differences between the Moslem groups date to the murder of the grandson of the Prophet Mohammed 1,400 years ago. Shiites mourn the death by re-enacting the suffering, while Sunnis simply hold parades. Other theological differences exist, but in modern-day Pakistan, some of the biggest quarrels between the two groups are political.    For one thing, President Zia's Islamization included setting up Sunni legal structures. Shiites found themselves observing Sunni doctrines on inheritance and taxation. They protested -- but when they were granted exemptions, the Sunnis felt cheated.    &quot;We don't know where the money is going, but we abide by the law,&quot; says Sunni author Anwar Enayetullah. Further, he says, &quot;Shias feel Zia's concept of Islamization is something like Saudi Arabia, where the fundamentalists have the power.&quot;    Pakistani Shiites look toward Iran, not Saudi Arabia. As a corollary of that, they write off President Zia as a toady of the U.S. And because the Americans and the Saudis have supported the Afghan guerrillas, the Shiites also tend to see the Afghan resistance as an enemy. Amid all these cross-border allegiances and suspicions, Pakistan is often forgotten.    Support for the Afghan rebels brought some three million Afghan refugees and guerrillas to Pakistan, so there were bound to be problems. In recent months, there have been major riots between Shiites and Sunnis, Afghans and Pakistanis, in northwestern Pakistan, where most of the Afghans have settled. Everything from Soviet-style automatic rifles to anti-tank grenades were brought to the fray. Whole valleys filled with smoke as villages burned. Hundreds died. The Shiites blamed the Afghans, the Americans and the late President Zia for the killing.    Two weeks ago, when the top Shiite opponent of President Zia's Islamization was gunned down on his way to morning prayers, many Shiites were again suspicious that the Afghans, President Zia or the U.S. was to blame.    So when President Zia died, jubilant Shiites passed out handbills saying their leader's murder had been avenged. Some fired automatic rifles in the air to show their joy. That enraged Sunnis. Once again, fighting broke out in northwestern Pakistan. At least nine people were reported killed before the army sealed off the roads and clamped down a curfew.    Here in Karachi, one Shiite religious leader tried to keep the calm. He told a huge crowd gathered for a Muharram sermon that they should pray for the late president's soul, not rejoice at his death. The crowd rushed the makeshift stage where he had been giving his sermon and pelted his car with rocks as he made his escape.    For a while, it seemed as if only the army troops, riot squads and police stationed around the city would prevent bloodshed. But on Wednesday, Sunni clergymen appeared in the tense crowds. They began praying alongside the Shiite clergymen -- something that Pakistanis present said they had never seen before.    &quot;It's probably the first time in the history of Pakistan that they prayed together,&quot; says an impressed Mr. Abbas, the journalist. &quot;It's a very significant development. It could play an important role in keeping peace in the coming months.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>