<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880511-0055 </DOCNO><HL> Singapore's Closing Society </HL><AUTHOR> Francis T. Seow </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> SINGAPORE  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Prime Minister Lee Kuan Yew's audience at the American Society of Newspaper Editors' meeting in Washington last month reportedly was impressed by the eloquence and sang-froid that went into his justification of his government's restrictions on the foreign media. Mr. Lee expatiated on the horrendous consequences for a multicultural society of a U.S.-style free marketplace of ideas.    But in a speech to the Singapore Graduate Society last June, C.V. Devan Nair, former president of Singapore and an intimate comrade-in-arms of Mr. Lee's for more than 30 years, reminded Singaporeans that 24 years ago, their prime minister argued a far more convincing brief for an open society. Mr. Lee delivered that spellbinding oration in the Malaysian federal Parliament, where he was an opposition member from the constituent state of Singapore. This is what he said:   &quot;Let us get down to fundamentals. Is this an open or a closed society? Is it a society where men can preach ideas . . . where there is a constant contest for men's hearts and minds on the basis of what is right, of what is just, of what is in the national interest? Or is it a closed society where the mass media -- the newspapers, journals, publications, TV, radio -- either by sound or by sight, or both sound and sight, feed men's minds with a constant drone of sycophantic support for a particular orthodox philosophy? That is the first question we ask ourselves.    &quot;And let me preface my remarks with this: that it is not only in communist countries where the mass media is used to produce the closed mind, because the closed society must produce the closed mind. I believe that Malaysia was founded, if you read its constitution, as an open society, constituting peoples of various communities, of various languages, of varying political beliefs, in which the will of the majority will prevail, and in which a large dissenting minority will not be crushed and intimidated and silenced. . . . I am talking of the principle of the open society, the open debate; ideas, not intimidation; persuasion, not coercion.&quot;    Today, Singaporeans are no strangers to the closed society Mr. Lee so eloquently argued against in the Malaysian Parliament. Thoughtful Singaporeans are unimpressed by the positions Mr. Lee espouses now. Americans are not likely to be hoodwinked for long either by a well-argued but fundamentally flawed case. The flaws are excruciatingly clear.    Mr. Lee told his American audience: &quot;Singapore's domestic debate is a matter for Singaporeans.&quot; Irrefutable. Only, what domestic debate was Mr. Lee talking about? The &quot;constant drone of sycophantic support&quot; for the official line from the local media cannot by any stretch of the imagination be mistaken for public debate.    The rules of the democratic game have been systematically and drastically changed since independence to ensure, among other things, tightly controlled media. No branch of the media here can claim ownership and editorial direction independent of the powers-that-be. Government nominees oversee every newspaper to ensure that there is no departure from the official line.    Things are no better in the political arena, heavily mined with legal booby traps. Most U.S. congressmen and British or Indian MPs would be hauled up for contempt of Parliament if they were transposed to Singapore. Parliamentary proceedings, unless Mr. Lee is lecturing, serve the purpose of political sedation.    Mr. Lee's constant theme these days is that Singapore is not a Western society. Of course it isn't. He goes on to say that even among Asian societies it is unique. It most certainly is, and in very positive ways, all thanks to the highly successful social, educational, cultural and economic development policies implemented over 25 years by the founding fathers of Mr. Lee's People's Action Party.    We are the best-educated population in Asia after Japan, and are not far behind Japan in our standard of living. Above all, we have the distinction of being about the only heterogeneous society in Asia that has defused the inflammable issues of race, language, religion and culture. After Singapore was booted out of Malaysia in 1965, Singaporeans rallied round Mr. Lee when he declared that in Singapore there would be no majorities and minorities, only Singaporeans. A generation was brought up to believe that it was part of an egalitarian, multiracial society.    The 1960s and '70s saw the most intelligent and dynamic nation-building program in all Asia. But the '80s were to find Mr. Lee announcing new fundamentals that betrayed the credo he had started out with. Singaporeans heard with alarm his Eureka! when he discovered eugenics. From now on Singaporeans would be classified according to assessments of their genetic makeup. And we heard lectures about achievement-oriented East Asians and other more easygoing Asian cultures.    Then Eureka! again when Mr. Lee made his next earth-shaking discovery. This time it was poor old Confucius, disinterred from the cultural cemetery of feudal China and installed as the patron saint of Singapore in the technological age. Confucian social conformism and docile deference to the powers-that-be would free Mr. Lee's genetically superior breed of new Mandarins to pursue the creation of a Brave New World of science and technology, without distraction by un-Confucian rumbles of discontent.    Singaporeans are not amused. Nothing is better calculated to disturb the equilibrium of a hitherto stable multiracial society in Malay-speaking Southeast Asia than Mr. Lee's volatile mix of eugenics, Confucius, speak-Mandarin campaigns and the like. Recent constitutional changes to provide for minority representation in Parliament have served only to revive the minority syndrome that an earlier generation of leaders (with Mr. Lee as their captain) had succeeded in almost erasing.    But the aging captain has developed obsessions that increasingly threaten Singapore's hard-won social and political stability. Obsessive fixations, a political self-righteousness intolerant of dissent, the arrest and rearrest without trial of well-educated social activists whom most Singaporeans regard as anything but &quot;Marxist conspirators&quot; have all served to sour public opinion.    Singaporeans might take legitimate pride in Mr. Lee's international reputation as a cerebral Asian statesman if they did not also know his other face as a crude, visceral politician at home.    ---   Mr. Seow, a lawyer, is a former president of the Law Society of Singapore.    (A longer version of this article was delivered Friday to The Asian Wall Street Journal's Hong Kong office. That same day, Mr. Seow was arrested in Singapore under the Internal Security Act. The Singapore government says he has been detained &quot;for purposes of investigation into foreign interference in Singapore's internal affairs.&quot; As of yesterday, Mr. Seow was still in custody. A related editorial appears nearby. {See: &quot;REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Singapore's Panic&quot; -- WSJ May 11, 1988})</TEXT></DOC>