<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880111-0072 </DOCNO><HL> LAB NOTES </HL><AUTHOR> Jerry E. Bishop </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> CGNE DOW </CO><IN> CHM PHA </IN><TEXT>      Maybe Stradivari   Knew It All Along   HAS THE SECRET of the Stradivari and Guarneri violins finally been found?    A Texas Aandamp;M University scientist says it has. Moreover, he claims, it can be duplicated. The secret of the exquisite tone of these 17th century violins is in the varnish, not the wood or construction as had been assumed, says Joseph Nagyvary, professor of biophysics and biochemistry.    In research he's not yet published, Prof. Nagyvary says he's found the varnish &quot;loaded with submicroscopic mineral crystals,&quot; of which he has so far identified 22 kinds, including antimony and ruby. Modern chemists would call it a composite polymer or resin. The crystals make the varnish extremely hard, &quot;probably 100 times tougher&quot; than varnish used on violins for the last 150 years, and explain the mystery of the old violins' unique sheen, he says.    More important, &quot;we expect this varnish had a fundamental effect on tone,&quot; Prof. Nagyvary says. Until now, he says, experts &quot;had considered the varnish a necessary evil,&quot; detracting from tone. But that's because it was assumed the varnish was the same gummy substance used in later centuries.    To make such a varnish &quot;required enormous skill on the part of the chemists, who were probably the neighborhood druggists,&quot; he says. The ultrafine powders used would be quite toxic. As soon as all the mineral crystals are identified, it should be possible to duplicate the varnish and produce violins with the tone of instruments made by the Stradivari and Guarneri families, he believes.    As Temperatures Drop,   Cholesterol Counts Rise   CHOLESTEROL levels appear to rise in the winter and fall in the summer for no obvious reason.    Cholesterol levels in the blood were measured periodically for four years in more than 1,400 middle-aged men during a major research project to see if lowering cholesterol levels reduced the risk of heart attacks. The men, all of whom had high cholesterol levels, were in a control group and thus weren't treated for excess cholesterol. A new analysis finds that the average cholesterol level during December-January each year was 277.6 milligrams per deciliter of blood plasma, or 7.6 milligrams higher than in the June-July period.    Seasonal variations in weight also occurred, but this explained less than a third of the winter increase in cholesterol. It also was unlikely that differences in summer and winter diets could account for the difference in cholesterol levels, a team of federally sponsored researchers report in the journal Circulation. The winter increase in cholesterol isn't enough to cause any medical concern but &quot;many fundamental questions about its origin and mechanism remain unanswered,&quot; say the mystified researchers.    Naturally Blue Roses,   Carnations and Daisies   FLOWERS of a different color may soon emerge from genetic-engineering laboratories.    Genetic engineers at the Max Planck Institute in Tubingen, West Germany, report in the science journal Nature that they transplanted a gene from a corn plant into a petunia, changing the petunia's pigment-making chemistry. The process produced brick-red petunias instead of the usual pale pink ones.    The German experiment, done mainly as basic research, was good news to Calgene Inc., a Davis, Calif., genetic-engineering company. Calgene owns a third of an Australian horticulture firm that has cloned the gene that naturally produces blue petunias. Its scientists hope to transfer the gene to ornamental plants that don't ordinarily produce blue flowers, says Robert M. Goodman, Calgene's executive vice president for research. The German success shows that such gene transfer can be done, he notes. Top on the list for the Australian researchers are truly blue roses, carnations, gerbera daisies and chrysanthemums.    Chemical Might Help   Skin Grafts Survive   SURGICAL PATIENTS and heart disease victims could be the beneficiaries of a novel chemical.    The chemical is difluoromethylornithine, or DFMO, developed a decade ago by Dow Chemical Co.'s Merrell Dow subsidiary in Cincinnati. It slows down the division of cells and has been tested in cancer patients with mixed results. It currently is being tested in humans as a possible treatment for African sleeping sickness, which is caused by a rapidly multiplying, single-cell parasite.    To curb cell division, DFMO slows the metabolism of cells, reducing their oxygen needs. This feature caught the attention of plastic surgery researchers at Duke University Medical Center. In reconstructing damaged faces and other areas, surgeons often have to transplant large sections of tissue from one part of the body to another. If adequate blood circulation isn't restored quickly, some of the transplanted tissue will die for lack of oxygen.    The Duke scientists reasoned that if DFMO could reduce the tissue's oxygen needs, the grafts might survive longer, allowing for adequate blood circulation to be established. In experiments in rats, there was a 50% increase in the survival of skin grafts after DFMO treatment, the Duke researchers report in the Federation of American Societies for Experimental Biology Journal.    The next step is to test DFMO in pigs, whose skin is more humanlike than that of rats, says Bruce Klitzman, director of plastic surgery research at Duke. The drug might also be tested in dogs to reduce the amount of heart muscle that dies when a heart attack blocks off the flow of oxygen-carrying blood. </TEXT></DOC>