<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870121-0010 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 01/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN HAS MET with top aides to prepare an Iran-Contra chronology.    The White House said the president has held lengthy discussions with Chief of Staff Regan and counsel Peter Wallison on Reagan's recollection of events chronicling the covert sales of U.S. arms to Iran. A spokesman said Reagan would meet &quot;in the very near future&quot; with his special panel investigating National Security Council operations. In Jerusalem, Foreign Minister Peres said Israel's role in the sale of weapons to Tehran was &quot;highly exaggerated.&quot;    Peres told a news conference that the arms shipments weren't enough to affect the outcome of the Iran-Iraq war, saying sales in 1985 didn't exceed $6 million.    ---   HELMS OUSTED Lugar as ranking GOP member of the Foreign Relations panel.    Rejecting an earlier, unanimous vote in favor of Lugar by Republican members of the Senate panel, the chamber's GOP members voted 24-17 to make Helms the ranking member on the influential foreign-affairs committee. The move is likely to cause some problems for the Reagan administration since the North Carolina lawmaker has taken harder conservative stands than the White House on a wide range of issues.    Helms, who had portrayed his battle with the moderate Lugar as a defense of the Senate's seniority traditions, said &quot;the seniority system won.&quot;    ---   West Germany acknowledged a link between the kidnapping Saturday of a West German businessman in Beirut and the arrest last week of an Arab suspected in the 1985 hijacking of a TWA jetliner. Bonn's Foreign Ministry reportedly contacted Iran and Syria about freeing the businessman.    The U.S. formally asked West Germany to extradite the Lebanese hijacking suspect to stand trial in the U.S. for air piracy and murder. A Justice Department spokesman said the filing of the request likely would result in the extradition of Mohammad Ali Hamadi &quot;in the next week or two.&quot;    ---   Vice President Bush confirmed for the first time the death of hostage William Buckley, the U.S. Embassy official kidnapped in Beirut in 1984. He said Buckley had been tortured and killed. Bush also said that the U.S. would &quot;go the extra mile&quot; to see that remaining hostages are freed.    ---   Iran fired a missile at the Iraqi capital of Baghdad and said its troops were keeping pressure on Iraqi forces at the port city of Basra. U.S. officials, however, said Tehran was making little progress near Basra, and has turned to attacking Kuwaiti ships in the Persian Gulf in an effort to intimidate Iraq's Arab allies.    ---   The Supreme Court agreed to review the authority of public school officials to censor student newspapers published through high school journalism classes. The court will hear an appeal by school officials in Hazelwood, Mo., in a case filed by three ex-students over deletions made in an issue of a student newspaper.    ---   The FBI was ordered by the Justice Department's civil rights division to investigate &quot;assaults on demonstrators by Ku Klux Klansmen and others&quot; in Forsyth County, Ga. The inquiry was prompted by a racial attack Saturday on marchers. A return march, to be led by Coretta Scott King, is scheduled for this weekend.    ---   NASA announced plans to install a rudimentary crew-escape device in space shuttles, but didn't make a commitment to do so before the next flight. Space agency officials also haven't decided whether to include as part of the escape system a mechanism designed to pull the astronauts safely from the speeding orbiter.    ---   Lawmakers and federal regulators urged increased drug and alcohol testing for railroad employees and tougher penalties for train operators who tamper with safety devices. The call came at the first congressional hearing into the Jan. 4 collision of an Amtrak passenger train and a string of Conrail locomotives.    ---   Immigration officials issued preliminary rules requiring employers to obtain documents indicating the citizenship or immigration status of workers within 24 hours of hiring them. The rules, prompted by legislation passed last year, also would require certain record-keeping procedures for all types of employees.    ---   Ireland's coalition government collapsed in a dispute over cuts in social-welfare spending. Prime Minister Garret FitzGerald called a general election for Feb. 17. The budget, rejected by the Labor Party, called for a 5% cut in public spending to close a $3.1 billion budget deficit.    ---   Ecuador's Congress opened debate on a motion calling for the resignation of President Leon Febres Cordero, who was kidnapped last week and released after pardoning an imprisoned air force general. Prior to the session, police fired tear gas to disperse demonstrators urging impeachment.    ---   South Korea's president dismissed the country's interior minister and the national police chief following the Seoul government's admission that police tortured a student to death last week. The 21-year-old student died of suffocation during a police interrogation about communist activities.    ---   Police in Sweden arrested three men suspected of involvement in the Feb. 28 assassination in Stockholm of Prime Minister Olof Palme, but later released them for lack of evidence. The suspects were linked to the Kurdish Workers Party, a Marxist group.    ---   Gandhi faulted Punjab's moderate Sikh government for failing to control Sikh extremist violence. At least 30 people have been killed in Punjab this year. The Indian prime minister also said for the first time that he was prepared to negotiate peace with the largest Sikh militant group.    ---   Latin American diplomats met with Honduran President Jose Azcona Hoyo in an effort to win Tegucigalpa's support in reviving stalled Central American peace talks. The U.S., meanwhile, accused Nicaragua of rejecting the regional peace bid and said Central American peace won't be achieved until Managua holds free elections.    ---   A military plane collided with a private aircraft over an army munitions plant east of Kansas City, Mo. Authorities said the aircrafts' five passengers were killed.    ---   Philippine President Aquino said that democracy &quot;will crumble&quot; if voters reject the Manila government's proposed constitution in a Feb. 2 plebiscite. In Mindanao, as many as 10,000 villagers fled battles between two Moslem rebel groups. The fighting, which has escalated since last week, threatens Manila's bid to bring peace to the province.    ---   Black nationalist Oliver Tambo began a two-week tour of the U.S., holding private meetings in New York. The leader of South Africa's outlawed African National Congress is to meet Monday with Shultz.    ---   The Air Force destroyed an unarmed Minuteman nuclear missile after launch from Vandenberg Air Force Base, Calif., when it went out of control. The errant missile was part of a Pentagon program to develop new nose-tip and warhead designs. </TEXT></DOC>