<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870612-0016 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 06/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THATCHER WON a third consecutive term in British parliamentary elections.    Turning back a vigorous campaign by the Labor Party and nearly wrecking the Alliance of the Social Democrats and Liberals, incomplete returns showed the prime minister's Conservatives on course to build a majority in the House of Commons of about 100 seats. The majority is short of the 134-seat majority in the previous Parliament, but more than enough to carry Thatcher's policies. Both the Labor Party and the Alliance expressed disappointment at the election results.    Election officials said turnout was brisk among Britain's 43.2 million eligible voters despite generally rainy weather. Ballots are counted by hand.    ---   REAGAN SAID he saw an &quot;increased opportunity&quot; for a nuclear-arms accord.    The president, at a post-summit news conference in Venice, Italy, cited the possibility of &quot;actual reductions&quot; in superpower nuclear missiles this year and said the chances of a meeting with Soviet leader Gorbachev also were increasing. His remarks came as NATO foreign ministers met in Iceland to discuss a possible U.S.-Soviet arms pact. Reagan also said allied leaders at the seven-nation economic summit were fully behind U.S. efforts to keep open shipping lanes in the Persian Gulf.    About 20,000 anti-American demonstrators marched through West Berlin to protest today's visit by Reagan. Clashes with police were reported.    ---   PANAMA DECLARED a state of emergency in an effort to end civil unrest.    Troops in combat gear supported by low-flying helicopters took over the center of Panama City, where violent street protests erupted this week following allegations that the country's armed forces chief had been involved in election fraud and murder. Most offices, banks and shops were closed. The emergency was imposed by President Delvalle after five opposition political parties said they would coordinate their protests.    Pentagon officials said U.S. military personnel in Panama, currently totaling about 10,000 troops, were placed on a higher state of alert as a precaution.    ---   The Reagan administration withdrew its proposal to sell $360 million of Maverick missiles to Saudi Arabia. The move was in response to congressional opposition to the weapons sale and to apprehension over the administration's overall policy in the Persian Gulf following the recent Iraqi attack on the USS Stark.    ---   Air-traffic controllers voted overwhelmingly to form a new union, their first since Reagan fired 11,400 controllers in 1981 for staging an illegal strike. Separately, the FAA's new air-traffic control procedures are creating substantial delays in the nation's busiest skyways.    ---   Pope John Paul II met with Solidarity founder Lech Walesa in Gdansk. Details weren't disclosed. The pope, on a weeklong tour of his native Poland, also visited several Baltic cities, where he declared the outlawed Solidarity movement essential to the struggle for freedom, and praised the 1980 accords that led to the union.    ---   Hundreds of students occupied the compound of a Roman Catholic cathedral in Seoul, built barricades and battled police as violent anti-government protests continued in South Korea. Thousands of other protesters, demanding the ouster of President Chun, also clashed with riot police. Reports on injuries or arrests weren't available.    ---   Tamil separatists detonated buried explosives under a bus and military vehicles, killing 35 people, a Sri Lankan official reported. The attacks came as the majority Sinhalese celebrated a Buddhist holiday and a day after the Colombo government halted a military operation against Tamil rebel strongholds in the northern Jaffna peninsula.    ---   Violence flared in South Africa as the government tightened media censorship and placed security forces on high alert for anti-apartheid protests. In the black township of Soweto, a black was killed and two white police officers were wounded in a gunbattle near a suspected terrorist hideout.    ---   Libya is preparing to establish an embassy in Vanuatu and will provide security training to some of the South Pacific nation's police, Prime Minister Walter Lini told United Press International. Lini said some members of Vanuatu's police force would travel to Tripoli for the training.    ---   Closing arguments were completed in the case against Bernhard Goetz, with the prosecutor in the case urging jurors to convict Goetz for attempted murder in the 1984 shooting of four youths on a New York City subway. The defense attorney has portrayed the gunman as the victim of a robbery attempt. Goetz didn't testify.    ---   Afghan guerrillas downed a civilian airliner in Afghanistan, killing at least 53 of the 55 people aboard, Radio Kabul reported. Government officials said the plane was shot down by a U.S.-made Stinger missile while en route to Kabul from Qalat state.    ---   Spain's ruling Socialists pledged to push ahead with economic austerity measures despite setbacks in Wednesday's elections. Results showed that Prime Minister Gonzalez's party lost eight seats in European parliamentary voting, and lost ground in both municipal and regional balloting.    ---   Congressional sources said a security system installed at North's Virginia home was purchased with cash from a Swiss bank account that held profits from the U.S. arms sales to Iran. A former CIA employee supervised the purchase and installation of the system last June, the sources said.    ---   The U.S. delivered 10 helicopters to the Philippines. An American diplomat in Manila said the aircraft reflected support for President Aquino's government in its drive against communist insurgents. </TEXT></DOC>