<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870202-0070 </DOCNO><HL> False Negative:Medical Labs, TrustedAs Largely Error-Free,Are Far From Infallible---Haste, Misuse of Equipment,Specimen Mix-Ups AfflictEven Best Labs at Times---Regulation: Weak and Spotty---By Walt BogdanichStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ICLBPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA) </IN><TEXT>      {First of two articles}   It was 4:30 a.m. when cancer finally choked the last breath of life from Janice Johnson. She was 34 and a mother of two, and she died never knowing why her disease had been so unforgiving. An autopsy report called her abrupt decline &quot;quite unusual.&quot;    Later, an important clue would be discovered: A hospital laboratory in Arlington, Va., had erroneously reported two successive Pap tests as noncancerous. Undetected, the cancer spread rapidly through Mrs. Johnson's body.    &quot;The lab was never shut down or criticized,&quot; fumes Daniel Schultz, a Johnson-family lawyer who in 1984 settled a wrongful-death claim against the hospital and several doctors for $600,000. He asks: &quot;How many other Janice Johnsons are there?&quot;    No one knows. For in many states, including Virginia, the clinical laboratories that test body fluids and tissues aren't licensed -- and thus enjoy a freedom from regulatory scrutiny not accorded even to hairdressers. Some 20 years after Congress declared war on incompetent clinical labs, many researchers say that inaccurate and unreliable testing remains a serious health hazard, as well as a waste of millions of dollars.    In recent years, dazzling advances in computerized diagnostic testing have lent a comforting air of precision to the healing arts. Whether concerned about blood cholesterol, cancer, genetic flaws or diabetes, Americans spend an estimated $20 billion a year on clinical laboratory tests, often receiving impressively detailed printouts on the state of their health.    For the most part, such testing is a great boon to diagnosis and treatment. But along the way, patients have come to regard lab work as infallible -- a dangerous assumption, critics say. &quot;Every lab is producing some errors,&quot; warns Paul Fischer, an Augusta, Ga., physician and authority in the field. &quot;Human error is inherent in this process. . . . I don't think the public realizes that.&quot;    The problem affects not only fringe laboratories in inner cities but also prestigious hospitals, publicly traded laboratory companies and labs in doctors' offices, according to an analysis of thousands of pages of government reports, court records and previously unreleased test data. The recent surge of testing in doctors' offices is particularly troubling, critics say, because these small facilities are often entirely free of regulatory oversight.    While sloppy lab work isn't as obviously dangerous as incompetent surgery -- errors are often caught by a patient's physician -- it can do great harm. An Ohio baby developed mental retardation after a lab failed to detect a genetic condition that required a special diet. An Arizona man died after a biopsy slide of his malignant thyroid tumor was misread by two different labs. A California couple's marriage broke up after one spouse was mistakenly diagnosed as having syphilis.    Nor is health the only issue: A urinalysis that falsely tags someone as a drug abuser can sabotage the person's career.    Studies repeatedly have turned up substantial rates of laboratory error, as well as overworked or ill-trained technicians. But abuses are hard to prove, and accountability is scant. By the time an illness has progressed far enough to suggest earlier test error, the slide or specimen often has been discarded.    Government hasn't come to grips with the problem. Regulation is so weak and uneven that labs barred from one state can simply do business in another. In some cases, a federal agency has no choice but to reimburse certain labs for tests that it has found them incompetent to perform.    Concern over such problems prompted Congress to pass the Clinical Laboratories Improvement Act in 1967. Although the law covers only a fraction of the nation's labs -- those conducting interstate business, legislators hoped it would be a model for state regulation.    However, only about half of the states have enacted laboratory regulation, and most of it is feeble. In 1979 the Senate Labor and Human Resources Committee concluded that the public &quot;cannot have confidence in clinical laboratory testing, despite its critical relationship to good health.&quot;    Faulty tests can occur for many reasons: A machine loses its calibration; testing chemicals lose potency or get used improperly; human specimens are inadvertently switched. Even if a test is performed properly, it may be misinterpreted.    Over the years, the medical profession has developed standards to minimize such mishaps. Conscientious laboratories test chemicals and machine calibrations daily. They frequently test &quot;master&quot; specimens of known value to detect any glitches in equipment or procedures. But without oversight, adherence to these standards is left to the whim of the individual lab.    If, for example, Mrs. Johnson's Pap smears had been analyzed at a hospital in New York, where government standards are among the toughest, they would have been screened by workers who had faced proficiency tests and had to have 10% of their work checked by supervisors.    Such safeguards didn't exist at Northern Virginia Doctors Hospital, whose lab supervisor conceded, in a deposition filed in Virginia state court, that Mrs. Johnson's two Pap tests were reported incorrectly one year apart by the same lab worker. The supervisor also said quality-control reviews weren't routine. The hospital declines to comment on Mrs. Johnson's death or her family's suit.    Some researchers worry that Pap-test &quot;sweat shops&quot; impair accuracy by overworking technicians. &quot;I can't deny they are out there,&quot; says Thomas Bonfiglio, the president of the American Society of Cytology. &quot;I think you'd have to be crazy not to be concerned.&quot;    The society recommends that, in the case of Pap tests, a full-time screener review no more than 10,000 to 12,000 slides a year. But about one-third of labs responding to a survey some years ago exceeded that workload, and records show that screeners at a lab just outside New York City currently have workloads three times greater. The Johnson family lawyer asserted that the worker who called Mrs. Johnson's Pap tests benign had an excessive workload.    Technicians must scan dozens of cells on each slide for abnormalities. &quot;It's a very meticulous job,&quot; Dr. Bonfiglio says. &quot;The error rate goes up as people get fatigued.&quot;    Boston researchers studied 10 women with cervical cancer who had had negative Pap tests in the preceding two years. A reexamination of their slides found that five had been misinterpreted and two slides were too poorly done to read; only three were clearly negative. Researchers at Harvard Medical School and the Boston Hospital for Women did the study.    An even worse situation occurred in the late 1970s at a lab that had won a contract to screen Pap smears for the Air Force. An Air Force pathologist charged that screeners at the lab, Automated Medical Services of Ohio Inc., were overworked. When government doctors reexamined slides it had processed, they found 5,949 &quot;discrepancies&quot; or &quot;mistakes,&quot; says Patti Turner, a spokeswoman for the Air Force surgeon general. A search for women who had gotten false reports found most of them, though not all. The lab has closed, and its former officials couldn't be reached for comment.    Now and then labs have even reported on specimens without checking them at all -- &quot;sink testing,&quot; it is called. A Hempstead, N.Y., lab is alleged to have reported phony results for more than a year on blood tests for rheumatism, tuberculosis and various chronic infections. In September a state grand jury indicted the company, Reiss Health Laboratories Inc., on fraud-related charges. The lab, which has pleaded innocent, declines to comment.    Fraud, however, is much less pervasive than error. Nearly one in six labs tested recently by the Centers for Disease Control didn't properly identify several common strains of bacteria. One in seven failed to identify various fungal growths properly. &quot;So many things can go wrong, even in the best labs,&quot; says Josephine Bartola, the director of Pennsylvania's laboratory improvement division.    Nearly half of outpatient lab tests now are done in physicians' offices, because of cheaper test equipment and changes in hospital economics. There are estimated to be between 40,000 and 100,000 such small labs, compared with 13,000 hospital and independent labs. The trend alarms many experts, because only 13 states even attempt to regulate labs in doctors' offices.    As a result, in all but a handful of states, their personnel needn't meet any training standards. Dr. Fischer, the authority on office laboratories, says that in as many as two-thirds of small doctor's-office labs, work is done by employees lacking formal lab training, including medical secretaries and receptionists.    When Idaho officials tested unregulated doctor's-office labs in the 1970s, fully half of them submitted erroneous or unacceptable results on a simple pregnancy test. &quot;You'd get the same results throwing a coin in the air,&quot; Dr. Fischer remarks. (Their performances improved after they were instructed in the need for quality control and proficiency testing.)    Physicians with labs in their offices generally contend the new equipment is accurate and makes for faster diagnosis and better treatment. But David Yates, a pathologist in the Nashville, Tenn., area, says that &quot;doctors don't realize how difficult it is to consistently generate accurate test data. People think it's a computerized situation where you always get a 100% accurate result; that's simply not true.&quot;    Michael Kenney, a health-policy analyst, studied California clinical labs for the CDC in 1985 and found &quot;a systematic pattern&quot; of poorer accuracy by unregulated labs than by government-regulated ones. Another study, by Robert Grayson in 1984, reached a similar conclusion.    Even where office labs are regulated, the monitoring is usually superficial. California requires doctor's-office labs to submit proficiency-test scores -- but doesn't review them. &quot;We aren't advertising that,&quot; confides Ronald Harkey, of the state lab division. He says his office lacks the computers needed for the task.    Pennsylvania, which does review proficiency tests, recently found that nearly half of the doctors sampled had erred in analyzing a test for bacteria. The state has some of the nation's toughest rules for doctor's-office labs, but its officials say they have never disciplined a doctor for faulty testing.    Ms. Bartola, the director of the state's laboratory improvement division, says her office will order a lab to stop offering a procedure if it fails four consecutive proficiency tests. She says this has never occurred, so no stop orders have ever been issued. However, state records show multiple instances of doctor's-office labs failing four or more straight tests. For example, the lab of a doctor in Johnstown, Pa., Dinesh Mathur, failed 24 of 40 individual proficiency tests in 1984-85, including six in a row for blood glucose, yet the state didn't restrict his testing.    Asked about these records, Ms. Bartola says some failures may have escaped her attention because of a staff shortage. Besides, she adds, &quot;We don't police them; we work with them until they come up to snuff.&quot; Ms. Bartola also says that many doctor's-office labs aren't licensed, as required by state law, and that she hasn't the staff to do much about it.    Dr. Mathur, who recently did pass a glucose proficiency test, says that his is a small lab doing few tests and that the state has never told him to stop. He also says he uses the best available equipment.    The federal government is even more lenient. To get Medicare reimbursements, commercial or hospital labs must submit to proficiency testing and inspections. Not so doctors, if they confine their testing to their own patients.    New York state, employing about 170 medical doctors and Ph.D.s, runs probably the nation's most stringent program of laboratory proficiency testing. Yet it doesn't oversee those in doctors' offices.    As for the labs New York does oversee -- independent ones and those in hospitals -- when the state last February tested their ability to measure 18 parts of a standard blood-chemistry analysis, 11% of the results were either unacceptable or only marginally acceptable.    New York has issued more than 150 orders since July 1984 barring labs from testing in areas where they have failed to show proficiency. Many prominent labs, some with international reputations, have felt its regulatory sting, including the cytogenetics laboratory at Thomas Jefferson University Hospital in Philadelphia. That major referral center twice failed to pass New York's cytogenetics proficiency test in 1985, committing &quot;major errors,&quot; according to Ann Willey, a scientist who heads New York's Laboratory of Human Genetics. Although barred from testing New York residents, it can continue to process specimens from other states.    Laird Jackson, the director of Thomas Jefferson's lab, says New York's proficiency tests were flawed. Besides, he adds, cytogenetics testing is subjective, akin to &quot;judging ice skaters.&quot; Dr. Jackson says his lab has passed a proficiency test conducted by a major testing service outside New York.    Another lab that has sometimes failed New York tests is the nation's largest publicly traded company exclusively engaged in testing human specimens, International Clinical Laboratories Inc. The Nashville-based company's clients include 40 hospitals with 8,700 beds. In a recent two-year period, ICL's major referral lab failed New York state's proficiency tests for toxicology, which detects drugs subject to abuse, and mycology, which identifies molds sometimes associated with severe infections. Paul Ottaviano, an executive of ICL, says it passed proficiency tests administered by others, as well as government inspections, and has since passed New York's tests.    What are the consequences of laboratory error for patients? A cytogenetics test (for genetic abnormalities) may lead a woman to terminate a pregnancy. &quot;If that diagnosis was wrong, it's a wrongful death,&quot; Ms. Willey asserts.    Laboratory mistakes needn't be unusual to be devastating. Caroline Keklak, of Columbus, Ohio, says she suffered through two unnecessary operations because she was erroneously reported to be pregnant. According to a suit she filed in Ohio state court, the following occurred: Ohio State University Hospitals in Columbus admitted Mrs. Keklak with abdominal pain in January 1985 and a blood test determined that she was pregnant. When an ultrasound exam detected a pelvic mass, doctors, thinking she had a tubal pregnancy, performed emergency abdominal surgery. But instead of an embryo surgeons found a cyst, and they removed her right ovary.    Mrs. Keklak's suit says that as a result of the surgery, she later developed an abscess on a Fallopian tube and required a second operation to remove it. Except for the erroneous pregnancy test, the suit asserts, the cyst would have been treated with medicine and &quot;no surgery would ever have been performed.&quot;    The suit attributes the faulty pregnancy test to a mix-up of specimens. A spokesman for the hospital declines to comment.    The federal government tries to reduce errors by inspecting labs. But it is hampered by a surreal tangle of contradictory regulations.    Sharon Harris, of the federal Health Care Financing Administration (HCFA), says that if &quot;people's lives are in danger,&quot; her agency can revoke a lab's Medicare certification. But the effect is merely to halt reimbursements for tests on Medicare patients; the lab can continue testing other patients.    St. Clair Medical Laboratory in Belleville, Ill., for instance, remains open seven months after federal regulators called it a health hazard and revoked its Medicare certification. (An attorney for the lab says it has never been a health hazard and notes that it has remained licensed by the state.)    Another inconsistency: In 1985, after St. Ansgar Hospital Laboratory in Moorhead, Minn., failed proficiency tests, the HCFA barred it from doing a kidney-function test on specimens sent across state lines. Mrs. Harris says such a stop-test order indicates patient safety is at stake. But because failing to demonstrate competence on a single procedure isn't deemed serious enough under Medicare rules to warrant regulatory action, the HCFA can't stop St. Ansgar from performing that test on Medicare patients, nor can it stop reimbursing for the test.    St. Ansgar says the lab has passed Minnesota proficiency tests. It won't comment specifically on the federal agency's action.    Since January 1985, the HCFA has issued more than 90 orders prohibiting labs from doing certain tests on interstate specimens, according to records obtained under the federal Freedom of Information Act. Most of these labs participate in the Medicare programs, so many of them continue to get federal reimbursement for the prohibited tests.    &quot;It does seem very inconsistent,&quot; says the federal agency's Ms. Harris. &quot;I'll admit it's a problem.&quot;    The government has also drawn fire for ceding regulatory oversight to private medical groups that, critics say, are lax in policing laboratories. For example, it essentially exempts from Medicare regulation labs in more than 5,000 hospitals accredited by the Joint Commission on Accreditation of Hospitals, a trade group. California's chief of laboratory field services, Roderick Hamblin, says the commission &quot;doesn't always adequately identify deficiencies in performance or . . . get them corrected.&quot; A Joint Commission official calls that notion &quot;ridiculous.&quot;    Many states accept Joint Commission inspections in lieu of their own, but not New York. When a commission team inspected the Moses Ludington Hospital in Ticonderoga, N.Y., on Aug. 30, 1985, it reported nine laboratory deficiencies; New York state inspectors who checked the lab a few months later found 38. The Joint Commission won't comment on the case but says different inspections may emphasize different aspects of labs. Margaret Warden, the hospital's administrator, says hers is a small rural facility that is &quot;doing the very best we can.&quot;    Under current rules, if the Joint Commission wants to decertify a lab, it must revoke the accreditation of the entire hospital. The commission hasn't revoked any accreditation solely because of lab performance in recent years. &quot;We . . . don't see ourselves at all in a policeman's role,&quot; says Jack Coale, a Joint Commission spokesman.    This view is shared by the College of American Pathologists, which runs its own accreditation and proficiency-test program for labs. It has revoked the accreditation of just one of 3,800 labs since January 1985. &quot;The whole basis of our program is education and laboratory improvement,&quot; says John Duckworth, a doctor who heads its accreditation commission. &quot;Ours is not a regulatory program.&quot;    Since Congress passed its laboratory legislation 20 years ago, it has tried five times to strengthen the law. Each effort, opposed by organized medicine, failed. The HCFA would like to see states take a bigger role, but organized medicine makes its presence felt in state capitols, too. Its influence, along with the issue of costs (New York spends $2.2 million a year to oversee labs) has helped keep state laws limp.    Many doctors argue that technological advances make regulation less important. They note, for example, that new glucose-monitoring machines are so simple to operate that diabetics use them at home.    But the machines don't inspire universal confidence. In the past two years, the Food and Drug Administration has received about 1,200 reports of problems associated with glucose monitors. In one such report, a hospital complained that its machine wasn't working right; when the manufacturer checked, it found employees had apparently been using the device even though it was broken, dirty and held together with a rubber band. In dozens of other cases, technicians were found to be using the machines improperly. An FDA task force is investigating.    Growing evidence of testing abuses, along with fear of malpractice litigation, has begun to stir concern in some quarters of the medical establishment. Since late 1985, the Journal of the American Medical Association has been running a series of articles on office testing. Physicians, the authors have written, &quot;are unfamiliar with . . . the subtleties of testing, the idiosyncratic personalities of 'foolproof' electronic equipment, or even the basic concepts of quality control.&quot;    Observes Walter Johnson, the director of the cytogenetics lab at Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland: &quot;Most of us would prefer that regulation be on a voluntary basis. But frankly, voluntary systems don't work worth a damn in the long run.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>