<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880920-0111 </DOCNO><HL> Hopes Grow That Some U.S. Hostages In Lebanon Will Be Freed by Year End </HL><AUTHOR> John Walcott (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST </CO><G> EXE DEF </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Two intriguing messages from a Lebanese terrorist group, the recent release of a West German hostage, and an apparent political shift in Iran are kindling fresh hopes that some of the nine American hostages in Lebanon will be set free this year.    Iranian and Lebanese sources have hinted for months that some of the American captives might be freed, but U.S. analysts say the latest developments are the most hopeful signs yet that Iran and some of its Lebanese allies may release at least some of their 17 foreign hostages in a bid to improve relations with the West.    State Department, Pentagon and intelligence officials emphasize that nothing is certain and that the U.S. won't make concessions to terrorists. And even under the best of circumstances, U.S. officials say, it is unlikely that all nine American hostages will be liberated.    The Reagan administration is trying to walk a fine line between making concessions to terrorists and missing what some officials think is the most promising opportunity yet to secure the hostages' freedom. The release of even some of them this fall could prove a boon to Vice President George Bush's presidential campaign, but it also would remind voters of the Iran-Contra affair and raise questions with an already cynical electorate about whether the administration made a secret deal with terrorists to influence the election.    A group calling itself Islamic Jihad for the Liberation of Palestine last week released a photograph of two American hostages, educators Alann Steen and Jesse Turner, along with a statement hinting that the two might be freed if the U.S. publicly supported the Palestinian uprising against the Israeli occupation of the West Bank and Gaza.    The group, one of three Iranian-backed terrorist cells believed to be holding Americans hostage, repeated its statement Sunday, this time providing a photograph of Mr. Steen and Mr. Turner along with two other hostages, American Robert Polhill and Mithileshwar Singh, an Indian professor who previously lived in the U.S.    The three Americans and Mr. Singh were kidnapped from the campus of Beirut University College on Jan. 24, 1987, shortly after West German officials arrested suspected Lebanese terrorist Mohammed Ali Hamadi, who now is on trial in Germany for his role in the 1985 hijacking of TWA Flight 847 and for the murder of U.S. Navy diver Robert Stethem. U.S. analysts believe the kidnappers were relatives and comrades of Mr. Hamadi seeking to win his release and prevent his extradition to the U.S.    But their attitude seems to have changed. Two weeks ago, terrorists related to Mr. Hamadi freed Rudolf Cordes, a West German hostage who also had been seized after Mr. Hamadi's arrest. What's more, the terrorists' latest statements are strikingly different from their earlier threats to kill their captives if Mr. Hamadi were extradited or if 400 Lebanese Shiites imprisoned in Israel weren't set free.    Senior Pentagon and State Department officials denied the administration has made any concessions to the terrorists. But they called attention to several passages in a speech on Mideast policy last week by Secretary of State George Shultz that could be construed as a partial response to the kidnappers.    In the speech, which State Department officials insisted wasn't changed after the Lebanese terrorists' dropped their hints, Mr. Shultz rejected calls for an independent Palestinian state but repeated the administration's long-standing position that &quot;the legitimate rights of the Palestinian people -- including political rights -- must . . . be addressed.&quot;    While U.S. intelligence on Iran is sketchy, some officials are convinced that a change of heart in Tehran is behind the release of Mr. Cordes and the latest hints that other hostages may be freed. Central Intelligence Agency analysts remain suspicious that the apparent moderation is nothing more than a negotiating ploy.    But other officials say three powerful hard-liners recently had their wings clipped, probably by the country's more pragmatic parliament speaker and military commander, Hashemi Rafsanjani. The three are Prime Minister Mir Hussein Musavi, who recently tried to resign; Mohsen Rafiq-Doust, the minister for the radical Revolutionary Guard corps and a sponsor of the Lebanese terrorists, who had his post abolished; and Hosein Sheikholislam, the terrorists' benefactor in Iran's Foreign Ministry, who apparently has been given a more restricted portfolio.    Moreover, Iran has cut back its subsidies to its terrorist allies in Lebanon, U.S. intelligence sources say. Even one of the terrorists' spiritual mentors, Sheik Hussein Fadlallah, now talks &quot;seriously&quot; of freeing hostages, one U.S. analyst says.    Still, U.S. officials believe Iran and its allies may try to negotiate the release of three British and Irish hostages, perhaps including Church of England envoy Terry Waite, before turning to the Americans. The U.S. hostages held the longest, Associated Press correspondent Terry Anderson and educator Thomas Sutherland, both held more than three years, may be the hardest to free. Their captor continues to demand the release of his brother-in-law and 16 other convicted terrorists imprisoned in Kuwait.    American officials doubt that all the hostages will be set free for nothing. &quot;Some of these guys aren't going to get out without at least some money changing hands,&quot; says one. </TEXT></DOC>