<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870902-0106 </DOCNO><HL> Trade With Iran: Importing Trouble?---By Mark Hosenball</HL><DD> 09/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST GOVMTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)TEXTILES AND APPAREL (TEX)EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><TEXT>   President Reagan may have halted secret American arms sales to Iran, but his administration's relaxed policy on commerce with the Khomeini regime remains the subject of heated feuding among his cabinet departments. The interagency debate has disinterred all the old arguments about the value of trade as a strategic weapon: Defense officials maintain that Iran should be made to bleed through any means possible, while State Department and Commerce Department officials contend that embargoes are ineffective and only mean lost sales for American companies. But while administration officials bicker, Ayatollah Khomeini may be laughing all the way to the battlefield.    Although many Americans, even members of Congress, may have the impression that the U.S. has maintained a tight embargo on trade with Iran since the 1979-81 hostage crisis, this is far from the case. There are no restrictions on American imports of Iranian products, so each month the U.S. buys millions of dollars in Iranian oil, thus helping to finance Ayatollah Khomeini's war economy.    Last year, according to the Commerce Department, the U.S. imported $468.2 million of Iranian oil (as well as $51.7 million of Persian carpets and $14.1 million of Iranian pistachios). During the first five months of this year, daily American imports of Iranian oil averaged 45,000 barrels (or nearly $1 million a day at current prices). And this figure does not include 126,000 barrels of Iranian crude shipped daily to the Virgin Islands for refining into products for the American market. U.S. imports of all Iranian products for the first six months of 1987 totaled $567 million.    State Department and Commerce Department regulations are supposed to prohibit American companies from selling the Iranians off-the-shelf munitions and equipment such as advanced computers and electronic components that can be used in military systems. The Iranians nevertheless still may buy a broad assortment of American-made industrial, recreational and electronic hardware -- ranging from smaller and older computers to skin-diving suits (although the $34 million of direct American exports to Iran last year -- and more via nearby Dubai -- did not help much with the foreign-trade deficit). Some defense and intelligence officials believe that, despite their relative obsolescence or lack of sophistication, these U.S. exports still help the resourceful Khomeini regime to keep its economy and armed forces patched together.    U.S. commerce with Iran is exceeded many times over by some of America's closest allies, who arguably have much greater need for imported oil, and undoubtedly have fewer scruples about selling Iran weapons or anything else. Iran's most important arms-purchasing office in Europe for years has operated openly on London's Victoria Street, almost in the shadow of the British Foreign Office.    The fact that U.S. allies until recently have demonstrated little restraint in their commercial dealings with Iran is one argument that officials at State and Commerce have used to justify the present indulgent U.S.-Iran trade policy, in the face of demands from Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger for a total trade embargo (except for medicines and some food). Proponents of the current permissive policy also argue that the U.S. agreed to normalize commercial relations with Iran as part of the complex diplomatic and financial deal that led to the release of the American Embassy hostages in Tehran in 1981, and maintain that Washington must not be the first to renege on the agreement.    The Iranians have not hesitated to take advantage of American disarray. Last year, for example, the Commerce Department allowed the Iranians to take delivery of a General Electric apparatus capable of receiving signals from Landsat, a NASA satellite that takes electronic pictures of the earth for such civilian purposes as oil exploration and agricultural planning.    Pentagon officials had argued that the Iranians could use other computers to enhance the Landsat pictures and so could spy on Iraq and on U.S. military forces in the Middle East. But the Commerce Department approved the export license, finding the equipment had &quot;limited&quot; strategic applications. Iran had to hire a team of French engineers to set up the equipment after General Electric refused to send its own personnel to Tehran, fearing they might be taken hostage.    Earlier this year, the Commerce and State departments also tentatively approved export permits for the sale of relatively obsolete Digital Equipment Corp. computers to the Iranians for use by their electrical power system and national news agency. Mr. Weinberger unsucessfully petitioned the National Security Council to block the licenses, but the Iranians reportedly gave up on the deal and the equipment hasn't been delivered.    The State Department finally began to shift its position in the wake of an awkward discovery late last year by Canadian Customs inspectors. The Canadians became alarmed when they noticed that a consignment of 500 scuba-diving outfits, being shipped to the Iranian National Oil Co. via Canada by a Virginia trading company, lacked an American export license. But when they contacted U.S. authorities, the Canadians were told the scuba equipment didn't need such a license.    To State's discomfort, the Canadians' discovery surfaced just as Iraq was producing evidence that the Iranians were using American-made scuba equipment for military operations in the war zone near Basra. This evidence, coupled with Iran's recent threats against the American fleet in the gulf, now has convinced the State Department that it would not be wise for the scuba gear to be sent on to Iran.    The State Department now is preparing papers for President Reagan that would give the Canadians a pretext to hold up the scuba consignment indefinitely. The department also intends to ask the White House to revise U.S. regulations on trade with Iran to prohibit further shipments of U.S. scuba gear and other American equipment the Iranians could use for makeshift operations against the American fleet in the Persian Gulf, such as outboard motors and rubber dinghies.    The State Department still opposes Mr. Weinberger's demand for an all-out ban on U.S.-Iran trade. But the administration now faces wider political pressure for tighter trade restrictions, with American textile manufacturers using tension in the gulf as a pretext for demanding quotas on scant but growing Iranian textile imports. Recent experience suggests the president will favor a slight tightening of U.S. trade limits, which even State Department officials admit will amount to just another feel-good gesture. Even if Mr. Reagan confounds State and decides on a sweeping embargo, the evidence suggests the ayatollah already has had the best laugh.    ---   Mr. Hosenball reports from Washington for the London Sunday Times. </TEXT></DOC>