<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880502-0076 </DOCNO><HL> The Outlook: Will Mergers Help Or Hurt in Long Run? </HL><AUTHOR> Henry F. Myers </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> ECO TNM </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The merger mania has showered quick benefits on a lot of people: investment bankers, brokers, lawyers, stockholders. But will it prove beneficial to the economy in the long run?    In many ways, it's too soon to saybut hardly too soon to harbor doubts. Many mergers, cooked up hastily to take advantage of the Reagan administration's easygoing antitrust policy, may be ill-planned and eventually prove ill-starred.    The most immediate problem stemming from many mergers -- besides the pink slips going to employees -- is their staggering cost. Bidding wars tend to force winners to pay too much and borrow too much. Successful defenders against unwanted takeovers tend to end up in the same fix: buried in debt. And the danger is compounded by the scores of heavily indebted companies emerging from leveraged buy-outs. At far too many corporations, insolvency looms just as soon as the next recession trims sales.    The consequent need to quickly pay down debt reinforces a now-notorious vice of American managers, the pursuit of short-term goals at the expense of long-term competitiveness. Even those that don't come down with merger fever themselves are so surrounded by it that they tend to act like the afflicted: In a frantic effort to save money, improve profits and keep their jobs, they skimp on research and development.    Randamp;D expenditures may be jeopardized by the merger movement in other ways, too. Although bigger companies can, in theory, afford to spend more, they may, in practice, spend less. Feeling more secure amid less competition, they may cut back -- and one day get bushwhacked by competitors they didn't even know they had. An example from the past: American steelmakers.    The effects of mergers on the work force are complex. Although some executives who lose their jobs may be dead wood truly deserving the ax, the fear thus engendered even in able officials may encourage them to grab for excessive compensation. Cynical moves to rake in as much money as possible, regardless of how the company is faring, can create matching cynicism all down the corporate ladder.    Morale also is likely to suffer if companies, subsidiaries and employees are rapidly shifted around like pawns on investment bankers' chessboards. In deplorable numbers of companies, corporate loyalty has deteriorated from a badge of commitment to a ground for committal.    Further down the road, the decline in middle-management jobs -- a decline partly due to merger-related staff reductions -- could cause trouble. As the competition for managerial jobs gets tougher, more and more people could fail to land the positions for which their increasingly extended educations presumably qualify them. A possible upshot: a socially disruptive horde of highly educated, deeply frustrated people.    Also down the road, the surge in mergers could increase the concentration of industry -- a development whose ultimate impact isn't easily foretold. The administration's lenient antitrust policy seems largely based on the notion that the American government shouldn't be hassling American companies already beset by foreign competitors, that they should be allowed to grow bigger and stronger. A reasonable argument.    But does bigger make stronger? One reason for doubt: the success of the Japanese auto industry. In contrast to U.S. auto makers, it is fragmented, stricken with hell-for-leather competition at home -- and tough as a tiger abroad. Whether industrial concentration helps or hurts competitiveness is a question that cries out for case-by-case consideration rather than generalities.    As industrial concentration grows, however, it clearly sharpens several dangers:   It makes the economy more vulnerable to bad decisions by fewer and fewer top executives; bigger companies can make bigger, more costly mistakes. General Motors' bumpy ride in recent years rattled the economy far more than trouble at a smaller company could have.    It tends to enlarge the role of government, to the detriment of the economy. Corporate giants, by dint of their importance to so many people, often can worry the government into solving their problems. Witness the array of special favors to corporations sneaked into the current trade bill.    It strengthens the populist demand for regulation of the economy -- especially if the economy is hit by a serious recession, the kind that sparks congressional investigations into what went wrong. Concentrated industries make emotionally satisfying targets for people seeking scapegoats.    And it enables a foreign company buying into American industry to snap up a larger chunk at one crack: Note the slew of stores that Campeau Corp. of Canada will get by acquiring just one company, Federated Department Stores. Such threats from abroad, in turn, bolster protectionism by strengthening the desire to keep American companies in American hands.    For all the dangers, the surge in mergers may do some good. Many companies, forced to pay down debt rapidly, cut frills and become more efficient.    Many also shuck off peripheral businesses, frequently ones acquired in the conglomerate craze of the '60s and '70s. After acquiring IU International in March, Neoax, awash in debt, has already begun selling off units of the diversified company. As companies concentrate effort on fewer businesses, the economy may benefit.    And finally, some mergers are just fundamentally pointless exercises in rearranging the economic landscape. Well, there is one point: short-term gains for a few executives and investment bankers. </TEXT></DOC>