<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861217-0136 </DOCNO><HL> A New Wave of Environmental Laws Looms---By Lester Lave</HL><DD> 12/17/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ENVIRONMENT (ENV) </IN><TEXT>   Jan. 20, 1989 will mark the onset of a flood of new health, safety and environmental regulation that will swamp that of the early 1970s. Impossible? Didn't regulation dry up in 1980 with Ronald Reagan's mandate to &quot;get the government off our backs&quot;? To be sure, Watt, Burford andamp; Co. attempted to curtail regulation, or at least to cork the flow. But they soon departed as liabilities, leaving the agencies with &quot;technocrat&quot; administrators and instructions not to antagonize either the public or business.    For six years Mr. Reagan has focused on taxes, the budget deficit and defense expenditures. Inattention has not solved the health and environmental problems. Six years of accumulating pressure is about to explode: The majority of Americans continue to want something done about toxic waste dumps, water quality, air pollution and occupational hazards.    No one should doubt the political appeal of these issues. Congress delayed adjournment and campaigning for reelection to pass the Superfund and Drinking Water Acts. Overwhelming majorities voted for laws that will impose major costs, that could be used to halt industry and that will do little to improve health or the environment. The bills focus on unrealistic worst cases and hypothetical risks, and embody unattainable goals; they divert attention from pressing environmental problems such as radon in homes. Just before an election, Mr. Reagan could have tested his 1980 mandate, vetoing burdensome, unsound legislation. If he had, the Republican Senate was ready to override.    Separately, he did veto an egregious pork-barrel &quot;clean water&quot; bill that included sewer projects. It's a good bet Congress will put that one over the top when it reconvenes.    Looking ahead to 1988, will presidential candidates tell the voters in New Hampshire that Mr. Reagan was right to do nothing about acid rain except some ill-focused research? Who will say that the Reagan regulatory agencies have done such a good job that no further action need be taken on air pollution, drinking water, waste dumps, occupational health and safety, and nuclear power?    No presidential candidate could win without attending to the environmental-safety issues that have been ignored by President Reagan. Candidates will vie to be responsive to perceived needs, widening the rift between business and the public.    The day will have passed when relatively inexpensive controls on sulfur emissions, which could have been tried but haven't, will buy time for understanding acid rain. The slowness in setting occupational carcinogen standards will prompt bans or impossibly stringent standards. The failure to develop a program on toxic chemicals in the environment has led to wasting billions of dollars and given rise to Superfund and California's Prop. 65, an even harsher measure that passed with 63% of the vote last month. Chlorofluorocarbon refrigerants may be banned immediately to protect stratospheric ozone, rather than via a five-year phase-out that would allow development of environmentally benign substitutes.    Not taking timely action shifts the debate to motives and trust, away from how to accomplish near-term goals effectively. By 1989 a thoughtful approach will be precluded by the perceived need to act.    The nation is about to repeat the mistakes of the 1970s with legislation and regulation that are inefficient and ineffective. The scientific basis of the 1970s decisions was slim and often reflected outmoded or even incorrect science. Billions of dollars were wasted on sewage-treatment plants that were never operated, tall stacks to diffuse air pollution over a larger area, and jerry-rigged auto-emissions control. In the haste to be responsive to public demands, Congress and the regulators guessed rather than wait for facts and analysis to guide multibillion dollar decisions. Officials failed to inform the public about what was possible.    A repeat binge in 1989 will result in partial paralysis, more markets lost to foreign producers, and an environment not appreciably cleaner nor Americans appreciably safer.    If the scenario seems pessimistic or cynical, look at the extent to which the foundation for decision-making has been improved. Scientific advances in the past decade have done little to resolve the debate about the health effects of sulfur oxides and ozone in the air or trace amounts of chemicals in water. Of the 70,000 commonly used chemicals, only a tiny portion has been tested for toxicity. Our ignorance has actually increased since the size of the problem has grown more rapidly than scientific understanding.    A more promising scenario is possible. We aren't lemmings and can see the cliff. The Reagan administration and business have two more years &quot;at bat&quot; to demonstrate that health-environmental programs can be effective and efficient in meeting the public's goals, as many hoped would occur in 1981. Twenty-five months remain to show that air and water quality can be improved without needless expenditures or disruption, that the most important occupational health and product-safety issues can be handled, and that a policy can be developed to handle the pressing toxics problems, despite the controversy about the ultimate solutions. Even if the White House doesn't act, business and the agencies can work cooperatively to shore up the scientific foundation, learn about the basis of public fears and desires, and learn how to initiate a dialogue with the public to decide how safe is safe enough and how clean is clean enough.    Twenty-five months is not sufficient time to complete this foundation, but beginning now is far less costly than daydreaming until 1989. Anyone with the courage to look will see the Phoenix stirring in the ashes of environmental policy.    ---   Mr. Lave is Higgins professor of economics at Carnegie-Mellon's Graduate School of Industrial Administration and a consultant to the Environmental Protection Agency. </TEXT></DOC>