<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871103-0164 </DOCNO><HL> Deng's Reform-Minded Protege, Zhao,Is Chosen Head of Chinese Communists---By Adi IgnatiusStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> HONG KONG  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Zhao Ziyang assumed the leadership of China's Communist Party in a sweeping power shuffle that is likely to strengthen the nation's reformists.    Mr. Zhao, a 68-year-old technocrat, was confirmed yesterday as the party's general secretary, a post he has held on an acting basis since January. In addition, Mr. Zhao was named first vice chairman of the powerful Central Military Commission.    The two appointments solidify the power base of Mr. Zhao, whom China's paramount leader, Deng Xiaoping, has designated as his heir apparent. While the appointments don't guarantee that Mr. Zhao can successfully run the country when Mr. Deng passes from the scene, they indicate that Mr. Zhao already has won crucial support from the top party and military brass.    &quot;Zhao's appointment to the military job significantly strengthens his position in China's succession,&quot; said Kenneth Lieberthal, a China scholar at the University of Michigan. &quot;To secure succession, one has to have the support of the military.&quot;    But even that might not be enough. Though Messrs. Deng and Zhao have scored significant victories in influencing the makeup of the new party leadership, Mr. Zhao has a long way to go to acquire the experience and network of support he will need to fill Mr. Deng's shoes.    For now, Mr. Zhao also retains the premiership, which he has held since 1980. He told reporters yesterday, however, that he would relinquish the post next month at a special meeting of the National People's Congress, China's national legislature. His successor is likely to be Vice Premier Li Peng, a Soviet-trained engineer.    Yesterday marked the first meeting of the new Central Committee, whose 175 members were selected at the eight-day Communist Party Congress that ended Sunday. Committee members immediately elected a 17-man Politburo, China's quasi-cabinet, that is weighted heavily in favor of reformists. Several younger leaders won seats, including Li Tieying, 51, head of the commission on economic reform; Li Ruihuan, 53, the liberal Tianjin mayor; and Tian Jiyun, 58, a vice premier and close ally of Mr. Zhao.    The Central Committee also elected the Politburo's five-member Standing Committee, the country's most elite policy-making organ. Mr. Zhao was the only member reappointed to that committee. The new electees are Vice Premiers Li Peng, 59; Qiao Shi, 63; and Yao Yilin, 70, and propaganda chief Hu Qili, 58.    In a surprise move, Hu Yaobang, the disgraced former party chief, was reelected to the Politburo, though he didn't retain his seat on the Standing Committee. Mr. Hu had been forced to resign as party secretary general in January in the wake of widespread student demonstrations.    The lineup of the Standing Committee represents a compromise among the competing views and interests of China's leadership. Among the five, Messrs. Zhao and Hu possess the most liberal attitudes toward economic reform. Messrs. Li and Yao are more cautious and believe that state planning should continue to play the dominant role in the economy. Mr. Qiao presides over China's extensive legal and security apparatus.    &quot;The lineup suggests that we are entering a period of collective leadership,&quot; said a Western diplomat. &quot;Nearly everyone's interests are represented here.&quot;    With the exception of the elderly Mr. Yao, the new Standing Committee comprises the fastest-rising stars of China's new generation of officials. The group symbolizes China's efforts to bring relatively young people into positions of power. The standing committee's average age is about 64 years, compared with about 75 for the previous committee.    Following their election yesterday, the new Standing Committee members met with about 400 local and foreign journalists at Beijing's Great Hall of the People. The five worked the crowd like professionals, fielding questions, making jokes and frequently raising their glasses in toasts.    Dressed in a handsome double-breasted suit that he stressed was made in China, Mr. Zhao told reporters that there is no split among China's leaders. &quot;There were more than 1,900 deputies to the party congress,&quot; he said. &quot;Every one voted in favor of the political report I made. Can you say there is a reform faction and a conservative faction? In that case, the two factions already have merged into one.&quot;    Despite its flashy debut, the new Standing Committee isn't likely to wield as much authority as the departing one, whose members, besides Mr. Zhao, were Mr. Deng, 83; economist Chen Yun, 82; President Li Xiannian, 78, and former Party chief Hu Yaobang, 72.    Moreover, some of the elder officials who retired at the close of the party congress are likely to continue to wield considerable clout. &quot;In China, retirement doesn't bring an automatic loss of power,&quot; said Mr. Lieberthal. &quot;The elders will continue to be a force as long as they are physically active.&quot; That could cause problems for Mr. Zhao.    The Central Advisory Commission, the party's council of elders, may provide a formal base for resistance to certain aspects of reform. Chen Yun, an ailing conservative economist, was named chairman of the commission yesterday.    At the same time, the reformist Mr. Deng won't leave the scene. Though he officially retired Sunday from Central Committee membership and as head of the Central Advisory Commission, he retained the chairmanship of the Central Military Commission. His presence atop the Party's most important military body indicates that he will remain China's paramount leader, at least until Mr. Zhao and other younger officials are ready to take over.    In another important personnel decision, Qiao Shi was selected to head the Commission for Discipline Inspection, an intraparty watchdog. Mr. Qiao, a teetotaling jogging fanatic, currently heads the party's political and legal commission and supervises China's security organs. &quot;If he keeps all of these posts, he will become one of China's most powerful men,&quot; said a Western diplomat. </TEXT></DOC>