<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861201-0075 </DOCNO><HL> Speedier Justice: Summary TrialsHelp Courts to Hasten Settlements---By Linda WilliamsStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/01/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> CLEVELAND  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Scattered amid some half-dozen attorneys from two of this city's best law firms are drawings of little girls in strawberry-pattern bonnets, along with huge evidence books and piles of paper. Federal Judge Thomas D. Lambros begins an unusual trial -- one with a time limit and no witnesses present.    When the dust settles about 36 hours later, the jury's findings aren't legally binding. The parties can continue their battle -- over who created the character Strawberry Shortcake and who is entitled to profit from the sale of rights to use the character's image on children's clothes, toys and the like -- in a conventional trial.    But the 56-year-old jurist is confident that the summary jury trial, as this proceeding is called, brought two stubborn litigants closer to settling their grudges.    Subsequent events prove him right. An eventual settlement clears one more case from his docket without consuming more of the court's time and money.    To reduce costly court backlogs, many judges are trying harder to induce out-of-court settlements in civil cases. Among several methods for doing this, the summary jury trial is one of the most effective, judges say. And the foremost pioneer of the summary trial is Judge Lambros, a 19-year veteran of the federal bench who invented the proceeding, in 1980.    Unlike other settlement techniques, including &quot;minitrials&quot; held out of court before neutral parties, summary jury trials are held in courtrooms, before juries. A summary trial, though abbreviated, thus simulates a full trial -- a main reason, supporters say, that it induces settlements.    Since Judge Lambros's initial experiment, in a personal-injury case, the summary-trial concept has won the endorsement of the Judicial Conference of the U.S., the policy-making body for the federal courts. Summary jury trials are being ordered increasingly by both federal and state judges, and an estimated 50 judges now use summary jury trials.    There has been no definitive study comparing settlement rates for cases assigned to summary jury trials with rates for cases scheduled for normal trials or assigned to other alternative forms of dispute resolution. But some judges and lawyers say summary trials are remarkably effective in encouraging settlements and predicting how an actual jury would decide a case.    In Oklahoma City, a 10-year-old antitrust suit that would have taken an estimated two months to try was settled in 1983 after a half-day summary jury trial. Here in Cleveland, 10 complex asbestos-injury claims against 24 defendants were settled last year, two weeks after Judge Lambros conducted an eight-day consolidated summary trial.    In a Washington, D.C. Superior Court medical malpractice suit, the parties couldn't reach a settlement after a summary jury in June recommended $3 million for the plaintiff. The actual jury trial, in a case still pending appeals, awarded $2.5 million to the plaintiff.    Of the more than 150 cases that he has assigned to summary jury trial, Judge Lambros says, only five later went to a full-fledged trial, and &quot;four of those resulted in virtually the identical verdict as the summary jury verdict.&quot; And in an analysis of 60 cases assigned to summary trial, the judge concluded his court would save $20,000 a day in jury costs alone by avoiding full trials.    Although sometimes confused with minitrials, the summary jury trial is court-directed and retains the major characteristics of a conventional trial. Lawyers must summarize their cases in a few hours (summary jury trials typically last about a day), before a panel of six people formally summoned for jury duty.    Rules may vary slightly. Lawyers generally are not allowed to call witnesses, but they may quote testimony from affidavits or depositions and cite any physical evidence that would be admissible in a full-fledged trial. Control over the proceedings by a judge or a magistrate is important -- to prevent mistakes that might skew the results and drive the litigants further apart, says Eric Green, a professor of law at Boston University and a student of dispute-resolution alternatives to conventional trials.    Judges usually require the litigants to attend the summary jury trial. Their presence is necessary, Mr. Green says, &quot;or the lawyers will find a dozen ways to rationalize the results&quot; to them. Indeed, the client's ability to see how well his case and lawyer hold up under fire is one reason for the effectiveness of the summary jury trial, judges and attorneys say.    The summary jury trial provides an objective &quot;risk analysis&quot; in cases stymied by good-faith disagreements between lawyers about how a case will play before a jury, the judges and lawyers say. And Judge Lambros says summary trials satisfy such emotional barriers to settlement as the &quot;need for combat&quot; to vent hostilities and the need to have a &quot;day in court.&quot;    The three-year-old, $100 million Strawberry Shortcake suit was a classic &quot;durable case&quot; that probably would have taken at least three weeks to try in a conventional proceeding, compared with the 36-hour summary trial last November, Judge Lambros says. The plaintiff, free-lance artist Barbara Sargent of Olmstead Falls, Ohio, alleged that work she had performed under contract for American Greetings Corp. was the basis for Strawberry Shortcake. But the company insisted that her charges of copyright infringement and misappropriation had no merit.    Strawberry Shortcake, a red-headed, freckled-faced ragdoll wearing a floppy bonnet adorned with strawberries, was created in 1979. She is one of several characters that together brought in $17.6 million in licensing fees to American Greetings in its fiscal 1986, ended last Feb. 28.    The summary-trial jury decided for American Greetings in finding that there had been no intention for Mrs. Sargent to have commercial rights to the work she did for the company and that her 1977 work on so-called leader cards, which were part of the process of developing the Strawberry Shortcake line of greeting cards, wasn't original. But the jury also found that Mrs. Sargent in 1973 had created -- for American Greetings -- a painting of a little girl wearing a bonnet with a similar strawberry pattern.    The summary trial &quot;enabled us to re-examine our case and make changes,&quot; says Christopher B. Fagan, Mrs. Sargent's lawyer. The trial included a discussion of the verdict between the jury, the judge and the attorneys, and that discussion, in Mr. Fagan's view, proved that the jury had misunderstood the copyright law. &quot;I was ready to go to trial,&quot; Mr. Fagan says.    But George Moscarino, a lawyer who represented American Greetings, says he emerged from the summary trial with a strong feeling that the company could win a full-fledged trial.    Still, the case was settled before a full-fledged trial was held. Mrs. Sargent gave up copyright claims, in exchange for an undisclosed amount of money. Although the settlement talks took several months after the summary jury trial, Judge Lambros says he wasn't disappointed. The parties settled, he says, because the summary jury trial demonstrated that there were &quot;risks for both sides.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>