<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870107-0051 </DOCNO><HL> City on the Move:Nashville Is Booming,And a Little WorriedHow It Will Turn Out---Residents Fear That Growth,Unless Carefully Planned,Presages Another Atlanta---Cars, Guitars and Nobel Prizes---By Timothy K. SmithStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GM AMRREAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON) </IN><DATELINE> NASHVILLE, Tenn.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The line between tacky and urbane is called Broadway here, and it runs right through the middle of town.    On its south side are the Music Valley Wax Museum of the Stars, Conway Twitty's Country Store and Record Shop, and a score of other institutions for converting stardom to income. On its north side a new convention center rises, the symphony performs, and the Hermitage Hotel, in its brochure, solemnly assures guests that &quot;the local voltage is 110 volts.&quot;    For generations, Nashville has been a small town with a big reputation. And while it is true that people here still are too polite to honk in traffic jams, Nashville has the unmistakable signs of a maturing city -- bag ladies, a skyline, a shop that sells nothing but coffee. While nobody was looking, Nashville has moved into position as the South's next boom town.    &quot;Nashville,&quot; says Tennessee Gov. Lamar Alexander, &quot;is hot as a firecracker.&quot;    To many Americans, Nashville is a dusty place somewhere south of New Jersey that is full of guitars. To Americans who read the financial pages, it is the center of a lucky section of the Sun Belt that is getting an injection of serious industry thanks to Nissan and General Motors.    But something else is going on here, a confluence of urban trends that is likely to transform the city, alter the region and, possibly, set the standard for the American boom town of the 1980s. With industrial ties to Japan, an aversion to organized labor, low taxes and a strong social conservatism, Nashville has the potential to become the quintessential city of the Reagan age.    It also has the potential to become a mess. Like other Southern cities, Nashville has little or no tradition of planning, because it has had little or nothing to plan for. Residents fear that uncontrolled growth will turn their city into another Atlanta, an archipelago of shopping malls and condominiums with an atrophied downtown, snarled traffic and a fading sense of community.    Some early signs have appeared. In Nashville's fast-growing West End, condominiums have been built so close to the main road that widening it someday will be a nightmare. On Second Avenue downtown, a fight is raging over a proposed 21-story office building that would rise directly across the street from a stretch of restored Victorian warehouse buildings.    &quot;There's not a single business leader I know who's not scared to death of what could happen,&quot; says John Seigenthaler, the publisher of the Nashville Tennessean and editorial director of USA Today. Edward Bates, a body-stamping worker at the new Nissan Motor Co. plant in Smyrna, 15 miles south of here, also is worried. &quot;How do you grow and keep it clean?&quot; he asks. &quot;It's almost impossible.&quot;    Orderly growth may be especially difficult in Nashville's case because this is a city with multiple personalities that don't always get along. Vanderbilt University, with its second Nobel Prize freshly in the bag (won this year by biochemist Stanley Cohen), is the center of a powerful academic elite. A business gentry inhabits the Belle Meade section to the west, where fox hunting and debutante parties aren't yet extinct. But to the faint embarrassment of these groups, Nashville's public face has always had a country singer's cowboy hat above it.    Mention music and many Nashvillians will tell you all about their new symphony orchestra, or about the time Fisk University's Jubilee Singers performed for Queen Elizabeth. The Grand Ole Opry may have put Nashville on the map, but residents have a hard time identifying with it.    Perhaps that is because country musicians, with their sequined jackets and $800 boots, are caricatures of country people. In any case, the upshot has been an ambivalent feeling about what Nashville stands for, and therefore about what it wants to be.    &quot;I don't think Nashville falls into any of the molds,&quot; says Wayne Whitt, the Tennessean's managing editor. &quot;It just isn't one city.&quot;    But it does have one image; the Nashville Sound has twanged around the world. Gov. Alexander says &quot;When I go into a bar in Tokyo, all the Japanese people can sing 'The Tennessee Waltz' -- in English.&quot; For the Chamber of Commerce, that is a mixed blessing. &quot;Country music gives an identity to this city, which isn't always an asset when you're dealing with someone with an east-of-the-Hudson mentality,&quot; says Edward F. Jones, the chamber's executive vice president.    And despite the money brought by legions of tourists, who come to worship the wax statue of Jimmie Rodgers or peek over the fence at Webb Pierce's guitar-shaped pool, much of Nashville has regarded its rhinestone aristocracy with a bilious eye. &quot;When I first came to Nashville, if you had country music on the radio, when you pulled up to a stoplight you'd roll your window up,&quot; says Buddy Killen, president of Tree International, a big music-publishing company.    Now Nashville is becoming something other than -- or in addition to -- Music City, and its metamorphosis is already well under way. The city issued $1.02 billion of building permits in 1985, quadruple the $246 million of permits it issued in 1980. The population of Nashville and its bedroom communities, currently about a million, is expected to grow by some 40% in the next 15 years. (The population of Nashville proper is about 500,000.) Single-family home prices are rising faster here than in any other city.    Nashville owes much of its growth to Gov. Alexander's successful courtship of businesses. He persuaded Nissan in 1980 to build its first U.S. assembly plant in Smyrna, a coup that made other corporations take notice. Tennessee now has 41 Japanese companies, mostly around Nashville, accounting for about 10% of Japan's total investment in the U.S.    Citicorp set up an insurance-services division here last year. General Motors Corp. is building its mammoth Saturn plant in Spring Hill, 30 miles south of town. And, perhaps most significant, American Airlines is planning to open a regional hub at Nashville's airport next September, promising to give the city a commercial artery no less important to it than the Cumberland River was in the last century.    &quot;Nashville right now is about at the takeoff point that Atlanta and Houston were a decade ago,&quot; says John Costonis, the dean of Vanderbilt's law school.    Nashville has had some help from demographics. As Americans migrated to the Sun Belt, the geographic center of the nation's population moved south and west (from St. Clair County, Ill., in 1970 to De Soto, Mo., in 1980). Half the U.S. population now is within 600 miles of Nashville, making the city a sensible place to put distribution centers.    As the population moved to meet Nashville, so, in a sense, did the nation's values. Government spending on social programs came to be questioned; Nashville already was the home base of the country's biggest for-profit hospital chain, Hospital Corp. of America. Organized labor found itself on the defensive; Tennessee has had a &quot;right-to-work&quot; law prohibiting compulsory union membership since 1947. Piety made a comeback; Greater Nashville has some 750 churches in 533 square miles, and a Baptist publishing house so big it has its own ZIP code. By the time President Reagan plucked the national string, Nashville already was humming in tune.    Today Nashville is growing as quickly as an adolescent. &quot;When I first came here {in 1970}, there were hardly any restaurants with carpets on the floor,&quot; says George Gruhn, the owner of Gruhn Guitars Inc. &quot;Now you can buy a Lamborghini. It's a qualitative change.&quot;    But, like most adolescents, Nashville doesn't yet have a clear idea of what it wants to be when it grows up. And some of the forces driving the city's growth are ill suited to controlling it.    The seed of the current boom was planted in 1963, when Nashville and Davidson County combined their governments and established countywide management of two critical fluids, sewage and liquor. The &quot;Metro Government&quot; extended Nashville's sewer system beyond the city limits, making dense suburban settlements possible. It also legalized the sale of liquor by the drink, attracting decent restaurants and some convention trade.    But when the city council became the Metro council, it grew to 40 members. And through a practice called &quot;councilmanic courtesy,&quot; zoning decisions for each district are left to the district's representative. That makes broad zoning regulations almost impossible to achieve.    A related concern, perhaps inevitable during boom years, is that Nashville's contours are being shaped by outsiders. National Life andamp; Accident Co., the owner of the Grand Ole Opry, was bought in 1982 by American General Corp. of Houston and then resold to Gaylord Broadcasting Co. of Dallas. Third National Corp., Nashville's biggest bank, agreed last year to be acquired by SunTrust Banks Inc. of Atlanta. At least 25 Texas developers are building commercial projects here, up from none five years ago.    Political control, too, is changing hands. Gov. Alexander, a Republican who has served the maximum two terms, is stepping down this month. He will be succeeded by Democrat Ned McWherter, who has pledged to continue pursuing more business for the state. Mayor Richard Fulton will complete his maximum two terms this year.    The result is that Nashville residents are having trouble choosing a direction. They agree on the modern urban catechism: revive downtown areas, try to keep traffic under control, think about developing the waterfront. Still, &quot;the community has to articulate what it wants to be,&quot; says T. Jeff Browning, the executive director of the Metro Planning Commission.    About the closest anyone has come is Gov. Alexander, who coined the slogan &quot;Yesterday's Values, Tomorrow's Jobs&quot; as a watchword for integrating the Saturn plant with the community. That alone won't suffice, of course, because many of yesterday's values aren't limited to charm and good manners. A recent poll, for instance, found that 24% of Nashville's men and 28% of its women think interracial marriage should be outlawed.    Nevertheless, the governor's slogan has touched a chord, and Nashville residents speak hopefully of clinging to a small-town ethic even as their city mushrooms around them. &quot;Most of the men here are gentlemen, and most of the ladies are ladies,&quot; says Mr. Killen of Tree International. &quot;I don't think growth will change attitudes that much.&quot;    If Nashville manages to get ahead of its growth, it may well avoid the afflictions suffered by Sun Belt boom towns before it. &quot;We've watched other cities make mistakes,&quot; Mr. Killen says. &quot;I think we're too smart for that.&quot;    And on McGavock Street downtown, amid new construction and car dealerships, people still leave their umbrellas outside their front doors. </TEXT></DOC>