<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870123-0141 </DOCNO><HL> Future Flights: Jetliners May OfferMore Exotic, but Costly, Features---By Eileen WhiteStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AEROSPACE (ARO)AIRLINES (AIR) </IN><TEXT>   Sometime in the not-too-distant future, airline passengers will board their flights and may be able to:    Choose their snacks and beverages from on-board vending machines.    Watch movies and TV programs or play video games on screens mounted on the seat in front of them.    Operate individual computer programs, send telexes and make hotel and rental-car reservations from an on-board computer.    Such features are what aircraft designers envision for passenger jets of the 1990s. Their plans, of course, may not be realized until much further in the future -- if ever. But the ideas reflect the industry's hopes for the next decade. If fare wars diminish and ticket prices stabilize, aircraft makers believe that many passengers will begin choosing carriers based on comfort -- not cost.    Airlines, says a Boeing Co. executive, should consider offering customers a &quot;cabin environment so attractive . . . that lowest fare will not always be the primary decider in the travel selection process.&quot;    But before service wars replace fare wars, designers and airlines acknowledge that several obstacles exist. Devices like computers, video screens and more elaborate kitchens add weight to aircraft and, thus, consume more fuel. And it is still far from certain whether passengers will be willing to pay the higher ticket prices that the added luxuries will bring.    Still, some carriers are already studying ways to use the new services to generate revenue, particularly in the area of commercial-supported or pay-per-use video entertainment.    &quot;They are expensive, but we think that with competition and with improved technology, the price will come down to a point that we can afford them,&quot; says John Courtright, who is in charge of in-flight entertainment for United Airlines.    Not all of the designers' ideas are exotic or years away from completion. Planes are already being built with changes sought by passengers, including larger overhead storage bins, hand rails above seats, more on-board telephones and fresher air in cabins. Northwest Airlines, for example, has purchased the European consortium Airbus's new A-320, which will carry seats one inch wider in economy class than comparable planes and will have 20% more storage room in overhead compartments.    Beyond that, the features become more attractive -- and costly. McDonnell Douglas Corp.'s MD-11 wide-body jet, which is scheduled to begin service in 1990, will be offered with refrigerators to hold fresh food, aisles wide enough so that passengers can pass a serving cart, and high-resolution video monitors for every 10 rows. With advances in satellite technology, the company expects that its planes will be able to pick up TV programs via satellite.    Boeing plans to go even further with its narrow-body 7J7 jet, scheduled for delivery in the 1990s. Along with a group of small high-tech companies, Boeing is working on a plan that would give each passenger a video screen and a range of computer-controlled programs. The company is also looking at designs for food and beverage vending machines for short flights and baggage containers that would encourage passengers to put some of their carry-on baggage in the cargo hold as they step on the plane.    Part of the impetus for these changes are technological advances that will allow add-ons to be smaller and lighter. Lockheed Corp.'s Avicom International unit has designed a small on-board computer, operated by flight attendants, that can control video programming at each seat, take passengers' meal orders and allow them to pay for drinks and headsets with credit cards.    Buying planes with such innovations, however, adds to airlines' costs. Providing each passenger with a video screen, for example, would triple the price of a seat -- not including the cost of the on-board computer.    &quot;Right now, in a deregulated environment, it's hard to justify (the) cost,&quot; says Thomas Badyna, who is in charge of inflight entertainment for American Airlines. Still, American is planning to &quot;outfit a couple of airplanes with samples&quot; of individual video screens, he says.    Weight is another concern. With current technology, the individual screens would increase each seat's weight by five pounds, although advances in liquid-crystal displays should soon cut that to two pounds. Thus, the addition of such devices partially depends on airline makers' ability to reduce plane weight and to use more fuel-efficient engines.    It also depends on airlines' reactions to competitors' pricing tactics. McDonnell Douglas's new MD-11, for example, will offer optional seating arrangements that include lounges, bars and facing seats. The company sold similar arrangements on its DC-10 -- but airlines replaced them with wall-to-wall seats when heavy discounting began.    &quot;Oftentimes an airline, to get the market started, will put (options) in, and in six months they come out,&quot; says John Satterthwaite, branch manager for cabin interiors of McDonnell Douglas's commercial aircraft unit.    Because of the cost, the high-tech offerings will likely be found only in business and first-class sections initially. And because retrofitting older planes is expensive, the new services probably won't find their way onto most planes flown today. In fact, many airlines are still flying planes that have super-8 movie projectors, even though 8-mm projectors and video monitors, offering higher resolution, have been available for several years.    Still, some airlines are already competing for passengers by offering more comfort and convenience. Although most luxury airlines initially failed after deregulation, the philosophy is being revived by closely held McClain Airlines, which recently began flying between Los Angeles and Chicago. McClain offers refurbished Boeing 727s with first-class-sized seats and meals cooked on board -- all at coach prices. This spring, investor Kirk Kerkorian plans to launch MGM Grand Air, which would fly first-class-only planes between Los Angeles and New York.    Other airlines are improving their entertainment offerings. In the spring, Continental Air Lines will begin a &quot;sneak preview&quot; program offering new films, TV shows and videos.    Airlines traditionally offered video and audio entertainment only on wide-body jets during flights lasting more than four hours. But Northwest now shows video programs on its narrow-body Boeing 757s. With the length of airline flights increasing, several airlines are starting to add audio services on the smaller Boeing 737 plane, which traditionally wasn't wired for entertainment. And US Air recently equipped its 737s with audio and video programs. Other carriers are expected to follow suit. </TEXT></DOC>