<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870313-0037 </DOCNO><HL> In the Pits:Merc's Trading CrushIn Its Financial FuturesRaises Call for Reforms---One Target: Rule That LetsBrokers Trade for ClientsAnd Themselves at Once---The Influence of Wall Street---By Scott McMurrayStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)STOCK INDEXES (NDX) </IN><TEXT>   Trading in the booming stock-index futures market is seldom a picnic, but for William Breck on one especially volatile day, it was a horror.    Mr. Breck, a senior vice president of Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., was relying on the telephone to get up-to-the-minute price quotes from clerks in a Chicago Mercantile Exchange futures pit because the electronic system was lagging far behind in quoting prices. Suddenly, a Shearson clerk, fearing that he was having a heart attack, fled his post in the teeming pit where the Standard andamp; Poor's 500 stock-index futures are traded.    Left without prices from a market crucial to Shearson's multimillion-dollar securities business, and not knowing why, Mr. Breck was furious. The clerk soon recovered, he says, but he adds, &quot;I guarantee you he will have a heart attack when I catch up with him.&quot;    Problems in Chicago's financial-futures pits are increasingly hounding Wall Street traders, and the traders are increasingly demanding reforms. Stirrings of reform action, in fact, are in the wind.    The explosion of trading in stock-index futures -- in effect, bets on where the Sandamp;P and other market indexes will stand in coming months -- has stretched the exchanges' century-old trading systems to the limit.    When one trader erroneously shouted &quot;Sell!&quot; instead of &quot;Buy!&quot; recently, he made a $1 million mistake.    The frantic activity also helps mask a rise in questionable dealings; Merc members say an illicit trading ring in the Sandamp;P pit registered more than $500,000 in profit before it was broken up.    For decades, Chicago's tradition-bound exchanges have resisted periodic attempts by regulators and politicians to change their freewheeling auction-style method of trading in commodities and other futures. But now they may have met their match in major Wall Street securities firms that are quietly pressing for reforms. The firms are threatening to take much of their business elsewhere if trading isn't facilitated by improved pricing, policing and other procedures.    &quot;The futures markets have to start conforming to the needs of the securities industry,&quot; says Jeffrey Miller, managing partner of Miller, Tabak, Hirsch andamp; Co., a New York securities firm.    The Merc's five-year-old stock-index market is drawing most of the heat, largely because of its immense popularity. More than 500 Sandamp;P traders fight for space some days in a terraced pit half the size of a tennis court, elbowing and gouging one another for position. As volume soars to as much as $12 billion a day, abuses, mismatched trades and other problems have multiplied. Three days after Mr. Breck's clerk fled the pit Jan. 23, brokers on the Merc floor were still trying to sort out mismatched trades from that session.    The chaos that has fostered pit abuses has also made them more difficult to detect, traders say. The futures exchanges &quot;have been neglecting their responsibility to the public&quot; to improve order execution and policing of the pits, especially during hectic periods, says Jack Lehman, the chairman of the Futures Industry Association and a senior executive vice president of Shearson, which is a subsidiary of American Express Co.    Deregulation and the explosion in volume in stock and bond markets have loosened the Chicago exchanges' hammerlock on the most popular financial contracts, including stock-index futures. New financial contracts are cropping up on options exchanges and over-the-counter markets, threatening to lure traders away.    In the Jan. 23 fiasco, some traders switched their business from the Merc's Sandamp;P 500 futures to the Sandamp;P 100 stock-index options pit on the archrival Chicago Board Options Exchange, where automation helps orders flow more smoothly on busy days.    The Merc now is considering steps to reduce the congestion and abuse. Although details haven't been worked out, the exchange intends to propose a form of block trading of futures later this year as part of a plan to meet over-the-counter competition, says Leo Melamed, the Merc's special counsel and founder of its 15-year-old financial-futures division.    The Merc's system of pit trading &quot;doesn't allow for everything customers would like to do,&quot; Mr. Melamed concedes.    Under the futures exchanges' ancient rules of battle, traders meet face to face to shout bids and offers so everyone can compete openly for trades. That differs from the New York Stock Exchange, where a single specialist is granted the right to make a market in an individual issue. The futures exchanges also allow the pit brokers to trade simultaneously for their own and customers' accounts. The system permits rapid growth of new markets, but critics say it also creates an inherent conflict of interest.    The Chicago Board of Trade and the Merc, which account for 80% of U.S. futures-trading volume, are both considering installing electronic order-routing and execution systems that could alleviate snafus that develop in the current system of hand signals and order-slip passing between clerks and pit traders.    From the Merc's glass-enclosed gallery overlooking its cavernous trading floor, visitors can view the kaleidoscopic spectacle of hundreds of brightly clad traders milling about the Sandamp;P pits -- the largest and busiest of the 20 or so pits. It looks much the same as futures pits have for decades. Up close in the Sandamp;P pit, however, the pressures on the system are evident.    Disputes between traders regularly flare into shoving matches. Last month, the Merc fined two Sandamp;P 500 traders a total of $600 for pushing and spitting at each other. In a separate incident, the Merc fined Gerald Israelite $300 for pushing Linda Lombardo in the Sandamp;P pit, and fined Ms. Lombardo $500 for hitting Mr. Israelite back.    &quot;You'd think you were reading a playground report,&quot; a Merc clerk says as he reads posted accounts of the disciplinary actions on the Merc trading floor.    Often, Sandamp;P prices fly about so wildly that orders can't be filled near the customer's target price. Even Mr. Melamed complains about the handling of transactions in the trading Jan. 23, the day the Dow Jones Industrial Average plummeted 115 points in a single hour before rebounding sharply. The official says he put an order in to buy 50 contracts about as stock-index prices hit bottom. But &quot;I didn't get a 'fill' until 200 points higher,&quot; he says. The delay cost Mr. Melamed $50,000 in profit.    Broker errors rise rapidly in the crush, with drastic consequences. Patrick Shannon, an Sandamp;P 500 trader, misread a customer order during the frenzied session. Instead of buying 200 Sandamp;P contracts valued at roughly $25 million, he sold 200 contracts.    Purely by chance, Mr. Shannon sold near the highest price of the day and was able to buy the contracts back later for the customer at a sharply lower price. (In the futures markets, traders can take &quot;sell&quot; contracts they don't own, then buy offsetting contracts later in an attempt to profit on price declines.) Mr. Shannon reaped a profit of nearly $1 million, which he split with the customer, Merc officials say. Had it been a loss, it would have been Mr. Shannon's alone, the exchange says. Mr. Shannon declines comment on the trade.    Other customers aren't so lucky. Traders say another Sandamp;P 500 broker made a $700,000 profit on a mismatched trade, or &quot;out trade,&quot; he had tried to execute for a customer Jan. 23. But the trader pocketed the money and lied to the customer about the price he had been able to get, pit traders say.    The Merc has stepped up its disciplinary actions in response to complaints. After receiving reports about the illicit trading ring operating in stock-index futures, the Merc late last month expelled and fined traders Jeffrey G. Donnelly and John D. Riss a total of $150,000. An exchange committee found the two guilty of improper trading and charged Mr. Donnelly with noncompetitive trading on customer orders. Mr. Donnelly's attorney disputes the finding and says his client may appeal the ruling to the Commodity Futures Trading Commission. Mr. Riss couldn't be reached for comment.    But spotting abuses is difficult in the pits, where no exact electronic record of transactions exists. &quot;I could be standing right next to those guys,&quot; says one trader about the two Merc members who were fined, &quot;and not be able to prove what they were doing.&quot;    Another trader, looking over the Sandamp;P pit recently, pointed out three different groups of traders he said were believed to trade actively among themselves without offering orders to other traders, although this would be a violation of exchange rules.    Trading in the Sandamp;P 500 pit &quot;is chaos,&quot; says John Troelstrup, a futures-industry attorney and former head of compliance at the Merc. &quot;Rules are broken with regularity.&quot;    More than 300 of the Merc's Sandamp;P traders, worried about the effect of the abuses on their reputations, have signed a petition urging the Merc to abolish brokers' right to trade simultaneously for themselves and customers.    The raucous pits won't become museum pieces, of course. Despite all the complaints, the brokers like things pretty much the way they are, and the exchanges' leadership is certain to guard their interests.    Nor is major change likely to spread quickly beyond the Merc's stock-index and foreign-currency markets. Pricing problems are most common in those futures contracts because they are &quot;shadow markets,&quot; in which prices sometimes jump about wildly as traders try to track the trend-setting stock and interbank currency markets. (Some other major futures markets, such as grain and Treasury bonds, are primary markets that move more independently.)    Nevertheless, the planned moves by the Merc would entail the most fundamental change in the pits in memory. Mr. Melamed likens the proposals to the New York Stock Exchange's adoption of block trading in stocks 20 years ago, when the Big Board survived a surge in trading volume by embracing automation and other new measures. The pressure Wall Street is applying to the Merc is &quot;giving birth to a new business,&quot; Mr. Melamed says, referring to the changes expected in futures trading.    A proposal to begin block trading could be sent to regulators in as short a time as six months, Mr. Melamed says. The intent is to make it easier for securities firms to make large trades in the pits without local traders running up the price when large buy orders appear.    Pilot programs in automated order routing and small-order execution will begin within 12 to 18 months, Mr. Melamed adds. Mr. Troelstrup, a frequent critic of the exchange, says both measures could help reduce trading abuses by reducing the congestion in the pit.    Separately, federal regulators are pressing the Merc and the Board of Trade to implement a computerized &quot;audit trail&quot; system aimed at developing records of trades in sequence, an aid to regulators in pinpointing abuses; the systems are currently being tested and are expected to be fully deployed by July 1.    Critics say the system won't work when it is needed most -- during many &quot;fast&quot; markets when traders are most inclined to break the rules. But exchange officials maintain that the system is the best available and should be able to spot most abusive trades.    The proposals are controversial among futures traders, who have been shrugging off criticism ever since Illinois jailed seven Board of Trade members in 1867 for trading futures at a time when such trading was illegal. Throughout decades of periodic attacks by congressmen and regulators and street parades by angry farmers, the futures exchanges have insisted that their trading system is efficient and fair.    Mr. Melamed still vigorously defends the futures markets, saying they are effectively regulated and efficient. &quot;The view that regulation of the pits is worse than in stocks is misconstrued,&quot; he says. But &quot;this isn't Utopia,&quot; he acknowledges. &quot;I can't produce that.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>