<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871027-0015 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Reagan for President</HL><DD> 10/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   By now Ronald Reagan should understand fully that he is standing in the middle of a panic. As of yesterday, the panic was unstopped, with another large sell-off in stock markets at home and abroad. And when fright pries the hinges off rational minds, big mistakes can be made -- not only in the markets but in chanceries.    Early last week, scared officials in the administration had talked briefly of closing the stock exchanges. By week's end, Howard Baker and Jim Baker were pushing the sudden necessity of a presidential tax compromise with an ardor that startled the President. The simultaneous loss of both the Bork nomination and the INF treaty enlarges the sense among onlookers of a political system falling off its hinges. Under these conditions, the first task of a President is clear: Stop the panic, starting by bucking up the spirits and calming the nerves of his own lieutenants.    In a market panic, of course, the first-order concern is the viability of the financial system. Though the market has declined, volumes have been huge, suggesting that many participants are sorting through information and making decisions to protect their assets. However painful this process is to watch, these asset-holders must have confidence in the financial system's willingness to honor and support their decisions. The Hong Kong fiasco described below suggests the costs borne when public officials panic and withhold support {See: &quot;REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Lesson From Hong Kong&quot; -- WSJ Oct. 27, 1987}.    In the U.S., the Federal Reserve's assurance of adequate liquidity last Tuesday was a necessary initial response. Now, the President should seek assurances that banks won't abandon brokers as they attempt to re-establish stability between sellers and buyers. To prevent a Luddite assault on computers, which would only damage the U.S. securities market, the President can press the investigation he has authorized of such technical concerns as program trading and margin requirements, discussed in George Melloan's column nearby (See: &quot;Business World: The Market Meltdown Made Phelan a Prophet&quot; -- WSJ Oct. 27, 1987).    These technical steps alone, however, won't stop the panic -- a lot of which stems from the feeling that the political system has spun out of control, that no one could implement a coherent policy even if everyone agreed on what it should be. &quot;None of this would have happened if Reagan were still President,&quot; is one quip heard on and around Wall Street. A distinguished European visitor, an admirer of the President, suggested that in the absence of White House leadership, he wished the speedy arrival of Election Day 1988. These harsh appraisals, from usually sympathetic viewers, point directly at the missing ingredient: presidential credibility.    Not Beltway credibility. Presidential credibility. The distinction is important. It is evident that the instinctive advice of the President's shaken advisers, a Reagan-Rostenkowski-Byrd-Bentsen-Wright Budget Summit, can't calm the markets. Yesterday the President's Sherpas met Congress's summiteers, and the market dropped 156 points. The markets surely understand what Mr. Reagan has known for years -- the odds are that Congress will welch on any spending-reduction deal it strikes with the Executive, and that so long as this reality persists little can be gained by giving on taxes.    Congress's paralysis, however, doesn't mean the President can withdraw from the fields. To judge by the questioning at the President's news conference, many in Washington can't distinguish between the verbs &quot;negotiate&quot; and &quot;capitulate.&quot; But this needn't be true. The President has every right to make his own demands on the Congress, including line-item veto and rescission authority to make budget cuts stick. Certainly he can demand that Congress stop fooling with protectionism and market-busting and revenue-losing taxes. The sight of the President selling out what everyone knows to be his beliefs will be anything but reassuring to the markets.    The market's view, though, transcends economic policy. There are issues of style; the world now needs more than televised images of the President waving and smiling to shouting reporters. There are issues of personnel; while change for change's sake will scarcely help, the administration needs more energy and fight. There are issues of other policies, for example, the Gorbachev INF sellout. That treaty isn't George Shultz's creature; it's Ronald Reagan's leadership. The world wants to see what anyone would want to see -- the President himself standing up to Gorbachev.    On the technical side, the Fed and market managers seem to be coping well enough, and the slide will not go on forever simply on its own momentum. The fear is that it will be fed by panic and further mistakes from the political side. To allay this concern, the markets want to see Ronald Reagan take a position, defend it and fight for it. The Founding Fathers invested great political authority in the presidency for times such as these. They hoped that when others panic, a President would still steer a stable course by calling on his own personal reserves. </TEXT></DOC>