<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880819-0060 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88: GOP Searches Its Ranks for Next Generation of National Leaders </HL><AUTHOR> Joe Davidson and John E. Yang (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE CNG </G><DATELINE> NEW ORLEANS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Even as George Bush steps up to bat for the Republicans this year, the GOP is looking to its farm system for future players in the presidential leagues.    &quot;Regardless of who wins this election, there's going to be a major generational shift in the Republican Party,&quot; says Mitch Daniels, the former political director of the Reagan White House.    President Reagan has dominated the party for eight years and may prove to be the most significant Republican leader of this century. But Mr. Reagan has so overshadowed other Republicans that it has been difficult to develop any new potential presidential contenders.    The growth of newcomers was stunted even more, Republican political analyst Kevin Phillips says, by the Watergate scandal of the Nixon years. That, he says, &quot;put a cloud over the Republicans' human capital-formation process.&quot; Between 1972 and 1978, Mr. Phillips says, &quot;the Democrats basically got the talent pool.&quot;    As a result, Mr. Daniels says, &quot;the Democratic farm system has been stronger than ours through the '80s.&quot; Looking beyond this election, the Republicans don't appear to have anyone with the stature of Democratic Sens. Bill Bradley of New Jersey and Sam Nunn of Georgia or Gov. Mario Cuomo of New York.    Of course, if Mr. Bush wins the November election and has a successful presidency, the issue will be moot until the mid-1990s.    Win or lose, the politician who has the most at stake clearly is Indiana's Sen. Dan Quayle, Mr. Bush's 41-year-old choice to be vice president. If Mr. Quayle can get past the swirl of questions raised about his National Guard service during the Vietnam War and becomes an asset to the GOP ticket, he could well become a major political figure. On the other hand, the way he handles the flap over his service record may determine whether he is truly ready for the big leagues.    In addition, some of Mr. Bush's rivals in this year's primary-election campaign may still harbor presidential ambitions -- especially if the Democrats win the White House this year. Sen. Robert Dole of Kansas will be 69 years old in 1992 -- Mr. Reagan's age when he was first elected president. Rep. Jack Kemp of New York, who is 53, is retiring from the House this year and will need to find a new forum, but he retains the loyalty of many conservatives. Former Delaware Gov. Pierre du Pont, unsuccessful this year, clearly also has an eye on 1992. Just two weeks after he lost in the Iowa caucuses, he was back in the state visiting journalists at the influential Des Moines Register.    There are dark horses to speculate about, too. No one is more respected in the party than Rep. Dick Cheney of Wyoming, but he seems to lack the burning ambition needed to run for president. William Bennett, a former education secretary, and Peter Ueberroth, the commissioner of baseball, might look good on paper, but they have never faced a voter.    The GOP stars most likely to rise to the major leagues of presidential politics are senators and governors in their 40s or early 50s who got their political seasoning in the late 1970s and early '80s.    They differ among themselves on social issues, on civil rights, on economics and foreign policy. But a striking thing about them is how much their views reflect President Reagan's remarkable ability to close earlier schisms in the party. Among these Republicans is a solid consensus on major questions such as lower taxes, economic growth and a strong defense, including support for the strategic defense initiative.    Here is a look at five of these potential future stars, most of whom were on display at this week's convention:   John McCain   Like Barry Goldwater, his predecessor in the Senate, John McCain of Arizona is proud of his independence.    He criticizes his party's weak record on minority involvement and has opposed his Senate leaders on key legislative battles, such as South African sanctions. Though no dove, he faults his president on Central American and Persian Gulf policies. And before coming to Congress, he was a beer distributor in a heavily Mormon area.    Personable and pragmatic, Mr. McCain, 51, has enjoyed a rapid rise in Congress. He was elected to the Senate in 1986 after four years in the House. He works well with lawmakers in both parties through friendships forged when he was the Navy's lobbyist. He also is an important voice of support for President Reagan on defense and foreign-policy issues.    &quot;He's a compelling, attractive personality, willing to take positions that are a little unpredictable,&quot; says Douglas Bailey, a GOP media consultant.    Part of Mr. McCain's allure is his personal history. The son and grandson of admirals, he was a Navy fighter pilot in Vietnam. In 1967, he was shot down -- breaking both arms and his right knee when he ejected from his A-4 jet -- and spent nearly six years in prison camps in and around Hanoi. He now favors improved relations with Vietnam.    Mr. McCain wants to rise within the party, seeking to head the GOP Senate campaign committee for the 1990 elections. Some complain that he is brazenly ambitious. &quot;He looks like he wants it real bad,&quot; says GOP pollster Lance Tarrance. Others say he has been too strident in attacking Democratic nominee Michael Dukakis when campaigning around the country for George Bush.    The Arizona senator's strengths and weaknesses as a politician were on display during his speech to the GOP convention Monday night. He had some of the sharpest anti-Dukakis cracks -- &quot;He thinks the Midgetman is anyone shorter than he is.&quot; -- and a powerfully poignant story about his life as a POW. But he delivered his talk in a high-pitched voice and a dull style that detracted from his message.    Carroll Campbell   Carroll Campbell is only the second Republican governor of South Carolina in more than a century. That distinction clearly makes the 48-year-old former businessman a political phenomenon worth watching.    He is a &quot;New South governor, conservative but with real sensitivity on issues like education and the environment,&quot; says GOP strategist Roger Stone. Any Republican who can win in the South, Mr. Stone adds, could be strong nationally.    &quot;I don't conform to the mold,&quot; Gov. Campbell says. But he passes the litmus test on issues important to the party's right wing. He is anti-abortion, pro-school-prayer, believes in supply-side economics and backs the strategic defense initiative.    Yet, he believes his party must be pragmatic in order to deal with changing circumstances. For example, he says GOP economic policies are bringing more women into a growing economy, which means the government may have to encourage more child-care services.    Following conservative dictates may also mean breaking with tradition, he says, as he did when he submitted his own state budget plan, with a strong education emphasis. Previously, such plans had been the province of a five-member state panel.    A political impediment, for the moment, is that Mr. Campbell isn't known nationally. A bigger problem may be that he is a &quot;regionally focused person&quot; with &quot;no national agenda,&quot; says Paul Weyrich, the president of the conservative Free Congress Research and Education Foundation. Mr. Campbell says he plans to run for re-election in 1990.    The South Carolina governor also tends to project a bland image. But he has a political plus: He isn't a silver-spoon Republican. He worked his way through college. &quot;I couldn't go directly to college because I didn't have enough money. I had to go to school part time, I went at night.&quot;    Phil Gramm   Texas Sen. Phil Gramm has been in Congress fewer than 10 years, but in that short time he has been very influential in shaping the nation's fiscal policy.    In 1981, as a second-term House Democrat, he co-sponsored the Reagan budget cuts. Four years later, after switching to the Republican Party and moving up to the Senate, came Gramm-Rudman, the automatic deficit-cutting measure. With characteristic self-satisfaction, Mr. Gramm says his accomplishments &quot;changed America for the better.&quot; Mr. Gramm, 46, combines strong views with an abrasive style. A former economics professor and an ardent believer in the free market, Mr. Gramm calls himself &quot;a red-neck Republican.&quot;    &quot;He talks the language that people understand,&quot; says Mr. Daniels, the former Reagan political director.    The ambitious Mr. Gramm isn't popular in the Senate. The certitude of his convictions comes across as arrogance. He is seen as more faithful to his ideology than to his word; as a House Democrat he attended party strategy meetings and reported to the Reagan White House. A member of the Senate Armed Services Committee, Mr. Gramm has been a consistent backer of the Reagan defense buildup.    The hard edge to his politics could limit his appeal as a national candidate. &quot;He doesn't have the kind of political personality that would attract Republicans in the East and the Middle West,&quot; says A. James Reichley, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution.    Mr. Gramm also could face a strong re-election challenge in 1990, and thus is likely to tread lightly until then. But he had a moment in the national spotlight Wednesday night when he placed George Bush's name in nomination.    Mr. Gramm leaves no doubt that his eyes are on the White House. &quot;I'm very ambitious,&quot; he says. &quot;Anybody who's ever been elected to the city council thinks about being president.&quot;    William Armstrong   Colorado Sen. William Armstrong is one of the few politicians able to bridge the gap between elected officials and the religious right.    His opposition to government regulation and his support for a strong defense appeal to traditional Republicans. His stands on social issues, rooted in his own Lutheran religious faith, earn him a following among Christian activists. &quot;He combines all of the elements of the 1980 Reagan coalition,&quot; says Richard Viguerie, a conservative activist and fund-raiser.    The 51-year-old Mr. Armstrong wanted even deeper spending cuts than those in Mr. Reagan's first budget. But he presses hard-line positions in a soft-spoken way and takes unyielding positions without irritating his colleagues. Republicans have twice elected him to a Senate leadership post.    &quot;He's a promising figure,&quot; says Mr. Reichley of Brookings. &quot;He obviously has a strong constituency among conservatives.&quot; Sen. Armstrong, who is not a college graduate, briefly considered the entreaties of conservative leaders that he run for president this year.    Mr. Stone, the political consultant, worries that Mr. Armstrong's hard line on social issues, including his opposition to abortion, could hurt him. Others question his staying power. &quot;He's not the sort of guy who's wedded to public service,&quot; says Mr. Daniels. &quot;He may not stick around.&quot;    Though Mr. Armstrong has been in public office since the age of 25, he doesn't consider himself a professional politician. &quot;I have the thoughts and habits of a businessman,&quot; he says. &quot;I've just never been politically ambitious.&quot;    Thomas Kean   Thomas Kean, whose hard-hitting keynote speech at this week's GOP convention was well received by delegates, is an unusual Republican. He won 60% of the black vote and much of the labor vote during his 1985 landslide re-election victory in a largely Democratic Northeastern state.    Yet, New Jersey's governor is praised by GOP conservatives for his use of supply-side tools to stimulate his state's economy and for his support of a strong national defense.    But Gov. Kean, 53, also pushes policies that are anathema to the party's powerful right wing. He backs state-financed abortions for poor women, supports the Equal Rights Amendment, reappointed and fought for the liberal chief justice of the New Jersey supreme court. He campaigned seriously among black voters by promoting &quot;very Republican&quot; solutions to unemployment, crime and poor schools.    Mr. Kean says he &quot;just totally rejected&quot; advice not to &quot;stir them up&quot; and &quot;stick around the suburbs and campaign there.&quot;    The Democratic governor of Arkansas, William Clinton, calls Mr. Kean a &quot;very effective . . . gifted man. He's been ahead of the curve. And he's got a good heart, too. It's not just a job to him. His feelings are real and deep.&quot;    Mr. Kean's term expires in 1990, and state law precludes his running again. But conservative activists insist he won't be able to move into the national limelight. &quot;He has no future in the Republican Party unless he changes his views and becomes a conservative,&quot; argues Mr. Viguerie. &quot;He might do well in the Democratic Party.&quot;    Such criticism suggests the sorts of hurdles Mr. Kean would face in trying to take his successful state act on the road to national office. Mr. Kean's smooth style, even his patrician accent, also could hurt, says Republican pollster Linda Divall: &quot;The biggest obstacle he has is his Yankee elite image.&quot;    But Mr. Bailey, the GOP consultant, argues: &quot;His achievements -- education, state pride and the economy -- are extraordinary. He and his people aren't done yet.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>