<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870514-0024 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:U.S. Oil Prices Close at 16-Month HighsAmid Signs of Tighter Gasoline Supplies---By Michael SiconolfiStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PETROLEUM (PET)MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN) </IN><TEXT>   U.S. oil prices rose to 16-month highs amid signs of tightening domestic gasoline and distillate supplies although the gains were trimmed in late trading.    The American Petroleum Institute, in a report released after the market closed Tuesday, said gasoline inventories dropped 4.8 million barrels, or about 2%, in the week ended last Friday. Light fuel oil stockpiles fell 2.5 million barrels, or 2.5%, in the same period, the industry group said. A barrel is equal to 42 gallons.    The inventory decline, coupled with a seasonal surge in gasoline demand, triggered a spurt in gasoline futures prices on the New York Mercantile Exchange that lifted the rest of the energy market for most of the session.    &quot;The gasoline market provided the leadership,&quot; said Nauman Barakat, energy futures analyst at Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co. in New York.    Oil company selling late in the day trimmed the gains, however, leading some market participants to predict softer prices in the coming days.    &quot;Even with the bullish (inventory) numbers, we sold off, which could indicate short-term weakness,&quot; said Eric Bolling, vice president, futures and options, at Geldermann Inc. in New York.    At the New York Merc, June unleaded gasoline jumped 0.55 cent a gallon to 54.38 cents. Heating oil prices also gained. Meanwhile, June crude oil rose 14 cents a barrel to $19.41. The last time prices closed higher was Jan. 31, 1986, when they stood at $19.66.    The spot, or non-contract, market also posted gains. The spot price of West Texas Intermediate, the bellwether U.S. crude oil, rose 15 cents a barrel to $19.40. Spot North Sea Brent, the widely traded European blend, surged 25 cents to $18.90 in late trading.    Chart-guided technical selling and profit-taking accounted for part of the later easing in prices, some analysts said.    The sell-off aside, however, several analysts and brokers expect gasoline prices to continue firming in the weeks ahead as seasonal demand increases and the surplus is whittled away.    &quot;There's been a pickup in pre-season hype, and we're finally seeing some decent (inventory) drawdowns,&quot; said Richard Kane, an energy broker at Merrill Lynch Futures Inc. in New York.    Still, few analysts expect sharp price rises with U.S. gasoline supplied standing almost 15% above year-ago levels, despite last week's drop in inventories.    &quot;Stronger demand is going to make inroads into gasoline stockpiles, but the relatively high inventories will be a moderating influence on prices,&quot; said Peter Beutel, assistant director of the energy group at Elders Futures Inc. in New York.    In other futures markets yesterday:    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: A forecast of hot, dry weather next week in some growing regions sparked a late rally in soybeans. Although the buying spilled over into other trading pits, corn and wheat still closed lower following fairly sharp losses in early trading. Many traders expect recent declines in certain government-computed cash-market prices to encourage increased sales of corn and wheat by farmers. Under certain subsidy programs, farmers receive higher subsidies when government cash-market prices fall.    LIVESTOCK AND MEATS: Concern that consumers will balk at the meat counter if high wholesale prices are passed on to them helped sink cattle, hog and pork belly prices. Traders also speculated that unusually heavy participation in cattle futures, as gauged by the number of contracts outstanding, may signal a plunge in prices when positions are closed out. Increasing hog slaughter helped spur the decline in the hog and belly markets. Another factor pushing down pork belly prices was a report late Tuesday by the Chicago Mercantile Exchange that showed a two million pound increase in the past week in supplies on hand in warehouses outside Chicago. That may signal an easing of tight supplies, analysts said.    COPPER: Prices ended lower after a drop of 0.90 cent from the day's high. The July contract at the Commodity Exchange in New York slipped 0.30 cent a pound on the day to 66.65 cents. Prices hit the day's highs just after the opening amid continued demand influenced by tightness in supplies for near-term delivery. The market didn't break above the 67.65 cents level established Tuesday, though, and near the close slid sharply -- partly because of a decline in precious metals, an analyst said. Also contributing to the copper sell-off was the feeling the market may have been overbought, along with the latest 10-day report of automobile sales, which showed a sharp decline. Despite the setback in copper prices, though, supply worries persisted, and the premium of nearer months over more deferred ones increased. The May contract's premium over December grew 0.25 cent a pound from Tuesday, to 1.75 cents, and July's premium over December rose 0.20 cent to 0.65 cent.    COTTON: Prices rebounded from Tuesday's selling to hit life-of-contract highs amid expectation that demand will remain strong and inventories will shrink. An Agriculture Department cotton crop report, released after the close of trading Monday, forecast that U.S. supplies at the end of the 1987-88 season, which starts Aug. 1, will amount to 4.3 million bales, compared with its revised estimate of 5.2 million for the current season. World-wide, the report said, supplies at the end of 1987-88 season will shrink to 30.8 million bales from the 34 million estimated this season. At the end of the 1985-86 crop year, global supplies totaled 46 million bales. The report, which sparked demand in the market Tuesday before it succumbed to the broad sell-off in commodities, was a factor as well in cotton's resurgence yesterday, said Judy Weissman, an analyst at Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. in New York. </TEXT></DOC>