<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870717-0121 </DOCNO><HL> Japanese MoveTo Appease U.S.In Toshiba Case---Tokyo Pledges to IncreaseFees to Export Agency,Double Licensing Staff---By Eduardo Lachica and Walter S. MossbergStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPANELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Japan, in a gesture intended to stave off potential U.S. sanctions against Toshiba Corp., offered to double the size of its export-licensing staff and increase its financial contributions to a multilateral export-control agency.    Hajime Tamura, Japan's minister of international trade and industry, delivered those pledges to Commerce Secretary Malcolm Baldrige in a two-hour meeting that raised U.S. hopes of stronger Japanese cooperation in stemming the illegal flow of sensitive technology to the Soviet Union.    However, Mr. Baldrige told reporters before the meeting that even if Japan accedes to U.S. demands for better export controls, Toshiba should still be punished, preferably by the Japanese government rather than through American sanctions such as the Senate recently approved.    &quot;I think there's a need to give Toshiba a punishment that's severe enough to deter other companies that are thinking about doing that in the future,&quot; the secretary said, referring to Toshiba's role in shipping to the Soviets machinery that could be used to make quieter submarines.    Mr. Tamura also said Japan intends to toughen its penalties for export-control violations. Specifically, Mr. Tamura is proposing to increase prison terms for such violations to five years from the current three years, and to extend the statute of limitations for such crimes to five years from the present three.    The U.S. has complained for years that the Japanese penal code doesn't have enough teeth to discourage illicit technology trade.    Mr. Tamura also repeated a Japanese invitation to U.S. export-control experts to help his agency construct a more effective system for screening some 200,000 export-license applications a year. The offer was quickly accepted. Commerce Department spokesman B.J. Cooper said the U.S. and Japan will exchange teams of visiting experts to help raise the quality of the Japanese system &quot;to a level proportionate&quot; to that of the U.S.    Mr. Cooper said that except for some &quot;fine tuning,&quot; the two governments generally are in agreement with the proposed Japanese steps. A senior Japanese official suggested that Mr. Baldrige promised to work hard to soften possible U.S. sanctions against Toshiba if Tokyo achieves what it pledges.    However, Japan still has to convince Congress that it's doing enough to atone for the Toshiba diversion. Rep. Duncan Hunter (R., Calif.), who introduced a House bill to ban Toshiba permanently from the U.S. market, charged that some of the Japanese actions are just &quot;cosmetic.&quot; Mr. Duncan and other conservative House members have demanded that Japan compensate the U.S. for the cost of developing countermeasures against the quieter Soviet submarines.    In offering to double the size of MITI's Security Export Control Office to 80 full-time officers, Mr. Tamura broke a longstanding Tokyo policy of reducing rather than increasing the bureaucracy. However, even such an enlarged staff would have trouble checking with care the mound of export-license applications that the agency processes every year. &quot;We sometimes have to work until midnight,&quot; admitted an officer of the unit.    The expanded MITI office would still be dwarfed by the Commerce Department's equivalent force of 488. In addition to those officials, a hundred or more other American bureaucrats are engaged in similar functions at the Defense, State and Energy Departments. However, unlike their Japanese counterparts, the U.S. bureaucrats also are engaged in enforcing laws controlling arms exports.    While vowing to increase Japan's contribution to the Coordinating Committee for Multilateral Export Controls, or Cocom, to a level &quot;proportionate&quot; to what the U.S. spends, Mr. Tamura gave no specific figures. However, his aides claimed that U.S. officials have grossly underestimated Japan's current contributions in recent statements to Congress and the U.S. press.    &quot;It's not just $40,000&quot; a year, a senior MITI official asserted. &quot;It now amounts to $200,000, considering the recent exchange rates.&quot; The official said future Japanese contributions will have to be negotiated with other members of Cocom, a Paris-based body made up of the U.S., Japan, and 15 members of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization.    Cocom doesn't disclose its finances, but it's believed the U.S. contributes about 25% of the organization's estimated $3 million annual budget.    In a meeting with the House Armed Services Committee, Mr. Tamura disclosed that MITI intends to extend to three years an already announced one-year ban on shipments by Toshiba Machine Co. to Communist countries. Toshiba Machine is the Toshiba subsidiary that shipped four sophisticated milling machines to a Soviet submarine yard in Leningrad.    But although Mr. Baldrige and other U.S. officials have suggested that the parent company also should be punished, Mr. Tamura didn't disclose any sanctions on Toshiba Corp. and refused to concede that it is criminally liable.    Mr. Tamura's aides said the parent has been &quot;implicitly&quot; cleared from such liability by Tokyo authorities. However, they claimed that the recent resignation of Toshiba's two highest officers signaled to the entire Japanese business community that the firm is taking &quot;moral responsibility&quot; for what its subsidiary did.    Mr. Tamura also assured U.S. officials that the Japanese government will see to it that the entire Toshiba group adopts a program to improve its compliance with Cocom regulations. Commerce Department aides confirmed that Toshiba will receive technical advice from both U.S. and Japanese officials on how to set up that program. This is the first known instance of a major Japanese firm accepting such assistance from the U.S. government.    ---   STOCKHOLM, Sweden -- Norway's defense minister, Johan Jorgen Holst, said Norway may buy fighter planes from France or Sweden, rather than continuing to rely on U.S.-made planes, as it has done almost exclusively since World War II.    Mr. Holst, speaking in an interview with Norwegian radio, said the North Atlantic Treaty Organization country may turn away from U.S. planes because they are expensive and possibly not the best-suited planes for Norwegian conditions. Norway is seeking to replace by the mid-1990s 20 F5 planes purchased nearly 20 years ago from General Dynamics Corp.    Gunnar Angeltvit, senior executive officer in the Defense Ministry, denied that Mr. Holst's comments were aimed at retaliating against the U.S. Senate approving earlier this month a measure that would impose trade sanctions on Norway's state-owned arms maker Kongsberg Vaapenfabrikk. Kongsberg is under investigation in Norway for having sold to the Soviet Union sophisticated computer-controlled equipment used in making ultra-quiet submarine propellers. </TEXT></DOC>