<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880506-0182 </DOCNO><HL> Yes, But After Noriega, Then What? </HL><AUTHOR> Vermont Royster </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><TEXT>   It may seem a little naive, or at least overly optimistic, to be thinking about what will happen in the Republic of Panama after Gen. Manuel Noriega is gone. The general has so far declined all invitations to step aside and resisted all efforts to force him out.    But sooner or later, I suppose, he will be gone. The strongest strong men don't last forever. But then what?    That's not a question to be brushed aside. We have helped, or at least acquiesced, in the pushing aside of a good many &quot;strong men&quot; in a number of places, only to find afterward something no better or even worse.    No doubt you remember Fulgencio Batista, the strong man of Cuba who used terrorist methods to rule the island, jailing his opponents and sometimes killing them. Meanwhile, up in the hills was Fidel Castro leading a ragtag band bent on ousting Batista. Since Batista was definitely a &quot;bad man&quot; and we were told by the New York Times and others that Castro was an anticommunist democratic leader, the U.S. naturally helped Batista out and Castro in.    After the turnover, Castro even made a whirlwind goodwill trip here, where he was the guest of American newspaper editors, spoke to many groups and was even received at the United Nations.    It was after his return to Cuba that the liquidations started, killings far exceeding in number those of Batista. At one point Castro lined up a number of his critics alongside a ditch, shot them down and then buried them -- alive or dead. We even saw pictures of it.    So much for Castro, and I take it I don't need to review his subsequent dealings with the Soviet Union or the terror he imposed on Cuba, resulting in the wholesale flight of Cubans, many of whom now live in Florida. Batista meanwhile retired to live comfortably in Portugal and in Spain, where he died peacefully in 1973.    Of course, this isn't the only example of our disappointment in working for the disappearance of a dictator only to find that what came after was as bad or even worse. Francois (Papa Doc) Duvalier held Haiti as his fief for 14 years until his death in 1971. Then his son, Jean-Claude, took over as president-for-life. He proved no less dictatorial, though much less effective. Anyway, by cutting off U.S. aid and other moves we sent &quot;Baby Doc&quot; fleeing. Today it's hard to argue that Haiti is much better off in the ensuing chaos.    Then there was Ngo Diem in Vietnam, an autocratic leader to say the least, who imprisoned or killed hundreds of Buddhists who opposed him. There's irony here in our part of getting his government overthrown. For one, it was the U.S. that installed him as head of the government in 1954. For another, he did at least wage vigorous war against the invading Communists. Then, in 1963, public opinion turned against him and we contrived, or at least acquiesced in, a coup d'etat that overthrew and killed him. Thereafter, the war in Vietnam went worse and worse for us until finally we were defeated.    Other examples come to mind. We were pleased when the dictatorial Anastasio Somozo was overthrown in Nicaragua by the Sandinistas, who have proved equally dictatorial. Now we are aiding the Contras, who want to overthrow the Sandinistas.    Then there's Iran. We didn't contrive in the overthrow of the shah; in fact, for a long time we helped prop him up. But when he finally fled there was no weeping at the bar -- and there was much hope of a return to democracy. What returned to power was the Ayatollah Khomeini, who has proved far more dictatorial and has led Iran into a war.    But why go on? The common thread in all of this is belief (hope) that if a strong man, a dictator, can just be pushed aside then the country he ruled with his iron hand will turn into a democracy. It's taken us a long time to learn, if we have, that it ain't necessarily so.    It might not be so with the disappearance of Gen. Noriega, either. Panama, like many Latin American countries, has long had the trappings of democracy without the reality of it. There, the army (or the National Defense Force) has long been the only durable institution capable of governing the country. Sometimes the army has been restrained and allowed good government, sometimes not. It all depends on who within the army got control of it.    It was a general, Omar Torrijos, who as Panama's head of state in 1978 signed the treaty with President Carter to turn over the canal to Panama in 1999. Torrijos seemed like a reasonable man, although he did threaten to seize the canal by force if the U.S. didn't yield voluntarily. Gen. Noriega is altogether different; he not only rules Panama with an iron hand but he is enriching himself as a dope dealer.    Panama does have the trappings of democracy, including a president. The present U.S.-recognized holder of that office, as both head of state and head of government, is Eric Delvalle. But when he tried to exercise his presidential powers to dismiss Gen. Noriega, the Assembly dismissed President Delvalle instead. So much for the trappings.    Thus the Panamanian army remains the true governing body. When, as, or if Gen. Noriega departs, he will be succeeded by another general and there will be a struggle to see who that will be. Already there are signs of much jockeying for that post and power. Our government cannot be sure who will be the victor because the army itself isn't sure; it could well be some lieutenant colonel who has forehandedly made his alliances.    In any event, there is no assurance whatever that the next army head will be any better from our point of view than Gen. Noriega. Maybe so. Maybe not. Or the next one may be somewhat better (more like Torrijos) only to be pushed out later by another Noriega type.    All of which cannot help but make you wonder about the wisdom of Jimmy Carter's 1978 treaty, which will turn over control of the canal to Gen. Noriega (or whomever) in less than a dozen years. And since the canal is not only a major waterway, but vital to our own defense, a future U.S. president will have another problem not of his making.    The moral of all this, if there is one, is: we need a little less naive confidence that getting rid of some foreign dictator will set the world aright.    ---   Mr. Royster is editor emeritus of the Journal. </TEXT></DOC>