<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880719-0142 </DOCNO><HL> Jesse's Class Act Will Transform Theater of the Dull </HL><AUTHOR> Albert R. Hunt </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><DATELINE> ATLANTA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The nation's eyes aren't exactly riveted on the Democratic convention here; as Vermont Royster reminded us last week, these quadrennial political conventions have become boring.    But a lot of television sets, including Mr. Royster's, will be tuned in shortly after 10 tonight. That's when Jesse Louis Jackson ascends to the huge, futuristic platform to address the 4,162 delegates and, more important, the millions of television viewers across the country. It'll be a moment of high theater, even drama.    Even with yesterday's apparent rapprochement between Mr. Jackson and Michael Dukakis and Lloyd Bentsen, the TV networks will offer a big buildup tonight, focusing on the tone and tenor of the Jackson speech. Mr. Jackson, who has alternated between his good-cop/bad-cop roles the past week, relishes the speculation about what he may or may not do.    He almost certainly will play the unifier role tonight. But whatever he does, it'll be an occasion long remembered.    For Jesse Jackson, tonight's speech culminates a difficult journey down from the political mountaintop. His presidential quest this year was much more impressive than his machinations over the vice presidency and over his role in any Dukakis administration. When Mr. Jackson talks about an &quot;equal partnership&quot; in a Dukakis administration or projects himself as an international &quot;crisis negotiator,&quot; it's a triumph of ego over judgment.    If Michael Dukakis were to succumb to such pressure -- yesterday, it seemed highly likely he would not -- George Bush will occupy the White House the next four years. A Bush victory still would leave Mr. Jackson the single most dominant figure in the Democratic Party. But he would be bitterly denounced by many Democrats for costing them the election.    On the other hand, what if Mr. Dukakis wins? Mr. Jackson still sits pretty: The only bigger mistake a President Dukakis could make than pandering to Jesse Jackson would be ignoring him. Mr. Jackson commands a loyal cadre of Democratic voters; a Jackson challenge in 1992 could doom Mr. Dukakis.    In short, Jesse Jackson no doubt will remain a major player in American politics. It's unlikely he'll be president five or 10 years from now. But then, five or 10 years ago it seemed unlikely the nation would be waiting to hear what he says tonight; along with Martin Luther King Jr., he may be the most important American black leader in the last half of this century.    Mr. Jackson shows a continuing capacity to grow. To be sure, some of his rhetoric this year was foolish. On foreign policy, his Third-World-can-do-no-wrong posture, calls for cutting the Pentagon budget more than 10% and suggestions we can pressure allies such as South Korea to expand workers' rights are bad ideas.    Some of his ideas on domestic policies were clinkers, too -- such as expanding governmental benefits for married couples, like health insurance to cover gay and lesbian couples who are federal employees.    But unlike 1984, when the Jackson campaign consisted almost completely of this sort of ideological Pablum, he offered more serious propositions this time. The Jackson proposal to pool billions of dollars of public pension funds and use the money to issue federally backed securities for do-good purposes has some obvious flaws, but it may be the genesis of some interesting Democratic policy initiatives.    No candidate offered as detailed a plan on drugs as Mr. Jackson, who even spelled out a specific budget. On foreign policy, his calls for greater attention to the economic importance of developing nations is gaining wider acceptance.    The civil-rights leader also displayed political discipline that was absent four years earlier. For example, he carefully steered clear of controversies such as New York's Tawana Brawley case, where some rabble-rousing lawyers are charging that a young black woman was assaulted and raped by whites. In 1984, such a situation would have proved an irresistible magnet to Mr. Jackson.    A lot of whites continue to view Jesse Jackson as a radical. The view within the black community is different. In April, this newspaper's Michel McQueen spent 10 days in a black New York neighborhood. She found that his messages on drugs and family values, and his argument that blacks can work within the system, were to these voters as mainstream, even conservative, as they were powerful.    Unfortunately, the maturity Mr. Jackson showed during much of this long campaign has been absent in recent weeks, and a lot of Americans are no doubt starting to get fed up with some of his antics. But the guess here is that once again he will rise to the occasion tonight like he did at the San Francisco convention four years ago and dazzle even some of his critics.    And to anyone who suggests we're making too much of Jesse Jackson, there are two good bets. One is that 20 years from now he'll be a more memorable figure than whichever of the presidential aspirants, Michael Dukakis or George Bush, loses the November election. The other is that 20 years from now, we'll still be talking about the speech Jesse Jackson gives tonight.    ---   Mr. Hunt is chief of the Journal's Washington bureau. </TEXT></DOC>