<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870506-0183 </DOCNO><HL> Split Society:Belief That ChangeIs Inevitable PolarizesSouth Africa's Whites---Fearing Violence, Some PleaFor Black Vote; OthersVow to Die for Apartheid---Conflict at the Dinner Table---By Roger ThurowStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AFRIC </IN><DATELINE> PRETORIA, South Africa  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Dirk Venter usually doesn't talk with strangers about politics or religion; &quot;It'll only cause trouble,&quot; he says. But something is bothering him -- namely, the future of his country -- so, just this once, he makes an exception.    &quot;The Bible warns there will come a time when brother will rise up against brother, son against father, neighbor against neighbor,&quot; he says. The Old Testament prophet was talking about an ancient land, but Mr. Venter worries that it could be today's South Africa. &quot;I don't want to see it happen. But who in South Africa, which politician, which party, can change things?&quot;    This cry -- how will things change? -- has long been echoing through the disenfranchised black townships of this troubled land. But as the crisis in South Africa deepens -- as violence leads to a state of emergency, which leads to curbs on press freedoms, which lead to limits on public dissent, which lead to restrictions on T-shirts and bumper stickers -- so does the anguish of the country's five million whites. No longer can they easily shut out the events wrenching their country nor ignore the increasingly totalitarian response of their government.    As a result, such unshakable Afrikaner institutions as the Dutch Reformed Church and Stellenbosch University -- the spiritual and the intellectual molds of this nation's elite -- are being rent by debate and doubt about the wisdom of apartheid.    &quot;There is a growing realization that something has to give,&quot; says Harald Pakendorf, a political commentator and former editor of the Afrikaans newspaper Die Vaderland. &quot;People are now saying when there is a change, not if.&quot;    The debate over which way this change will go is leading to greater polarization of white society. In recent years, South Africa has been wracked by black-white and black-black violence. Now, the specter of white-white violence looms, too.    Today's whites-only parliamentary elections here have become a catalyst for polarization. Although the ruling National Party is likely to maintain its big parliamentary majority, it has responded to heavy criticism from both left and right with highly charged rhetoric that clearly draws the battle lines among the whites.    The government often identifies the liberal opposition with communists and left-wing terrorists; likewise, the conservative opposition is equated with hate-mongering white supremacists. These opponents have hit back with equally vituperative attacks on the National Party. Behind all this emotion is a deep fear that the time of reckoning for the country's apartheid policy of racial separation -- which excludes 24 million South Africans from the election -- is drawing nigh.    Those whites who fear violent revolution are becoming more fervent in their pleas for the abolition of apartheid and the adoption of one-man, one-vote. Those who fear black-majority rule are becoming more determined to fight to the finish to resist it. In the middle is a cowering mass of both Afrikaans- and English-speaking whites, who know that something must be done but are afraid to do it. Some are emigrating. But most have no desire to leave.    Small wonder. South Africa is a rich and beautiful land of fertile farms, well-manicured cities, wealthy mineral deposits and scenic holiday resorts. Both urban and rural whites usually enjoy the services of one or more black workers to help with the children, the cooking and other chores. The government provides secure employment to half of all the Afrikaners.    But these days, the surface tranquillity can't mask the underlying agony. &quot;I'm pessimistic,&quot; says Koeks Terblanche, a retired farmer in Louis Trichardt, a rural town in the northernmost corner of South Africa. &quot;If the blacks don't get one-man, one-vote, what will happen? War. If they do get it, what will happen? War. Who will start it? Us.&quot;    Mr. Terblanche is one of the supporters of the Conservative Party, which, with other right-wing organizations, strongly believes that the races should be kept separate and that whites must be allowed to rule themselves. The notion of black-majority rule sends him, and those like him, to the ammunition depot. Their forefathers, they figure, didn't fight the British colonists and the Zulus just to have the country given away later through negotiation. Black rule, Mr. Terblanche says, would mean the end of Afrikaners.    &quot;I'd rather die on the battlefield than wait in my house for a week, six weeks, six months for them to come and slit my throat,&quot; he says.    But suddenly he looks up from his lunch of pork chops and mashed potatoes, troubled by what he has just said. &quot;This makes me sad, very much so,&quot; he says softly. &quot;Look, my life is almost over, at least the best part of it is. I care for my grandchildren. I love them very much. But I don't see much of a future for them.&quot;    He pauses. &quot;I've investigated emigration for them, I've looked around,&quot; he admits. &quot;But I've come to the conclusion that I have to stay and face the problems, and they must also face it. I can't leave the country. It's mine. I say it's better to fight, and if I die, I die.&quot;    Beyers Naude understands this kind of thinking. His father was one of the few Afrikaner leaders who rejected the British terms of settlement after the Boer War in 1902 and wanted to continue fighting to the bitter end. &quot;I understand the position of my people better than anyone else,&quot; he says sadly.    In the 1960s, Mr. Naude, a Dutch Reformed minister, was ostracized from his congregation and the entire Afrikaner community when he began to oppose apartheid and all the institutions that maintained it. By 1977, the government had prohibited him from attending public meetings and from being quoted in any publication.    Since that ban was lifted in 1984, he has been working, with increasing zeal, to convert his fellow whites. He says: &quot;I ask them, 'For God's sake, tell me, how do you justify what's happening in this country with your conscience and your Christian beliefs?'&quot;    Sitting in his Johannesburg office, the 71-year-old Mr. Naude, who is the outgoing general secretary of the South African Council of Churches, is truly troubled. &quot;My agony, my concern over what they will have to face is deepening. Will they be able to handle the inevitable, fundamental change to a new society, a change that will be stormy, difficult, and, I'm afraid, violent?&quot; His face is lined with frustration. &quot;Because I'm considered a traitor, they don't accept my advice, they don't listen to me.&quot;    But change itself can be agonizing. Wynand Malan took 43 years to change, and he recalls the conversion with emotion. It happened in January, when he told State President P.W. Botha he was leaving the National Party and would defend his seat in Parliament as an independent. The emotional meeting lasted 90 minutes; when it was over, Mr. Malan says, &quot;my eyes were filled with tears.&quot; He told the president he would pray for him and then left the party for good.    It was a traumatic moment. One of Mr. Malan's early memories is of election night in 1948 -- he was only five then -- when the Nationalists gained control of the government. &quot;I remember my father listening to the results on the radio,&quot; he recalls over a cup of coffee in a fancy Johannesburg hotel. &quot;Every time a {Parliament} seat in the Transvaal went to the National Party he would sing the Transvaal anthem. And every time the Nats won a seat in the Orange Free State he would sing the Free State anthem. It was really something.&quot;    Wynand Malan rose through the ranks of the party, leading its youth movement in his area and then becoming a parliamentarian and a disciple of President Botha. But, as the country's crisis deepened, he found it difficult to reconcile many of the government's actions with his devout Christian beliefs.    The state of emergency resulted in the detention of many black leaders, some of whom were his friends. &quot;Seeing the faces of my friends being detained, that was a most moving experience,&quot; he says. Then, when it became clear several months ago that the party was wedded to the notion of defining the population by race groups, he asked for a separation.    &quot;It was like a divorce where you still love your wife,&quot; he says. &quot;It was very difficult.&quot; But, when his meeting with the president was over, he says, &quot;I was a foot off the ground when I left the office. It was a relief.&quot;    Dirk Venter and his wife, Ria, are anything but relieved when they consider the uncertain future facing their two sons, aged 11 and 15. &quot;What really bothers me is what is going to happen to our kids,&quot; he says. &quot;I tell my sons, 'Do unto others as you would want them to do unto you.' I teach them we are a number of groups in this country who have to live together. You can't fight with each other.&quot;    He is sad, and somewhat incredulous, that not everyone agrees with him on this point. &quot;Everyone has started shouting, 'Do this, do that.' I don't think they really want to understand each other,&quot; he says with a sigh.    He says his own understanding increased immeasurably one night when he was on duty as a police reservist and he was called to the scene of a traffic accident. A black man was dead. &quot;I realized that the next day someone would miss him and wonder where he is. I realized that he is human, too,&quot; he remembers.    Still, he's not sure he wants to be governed by blacks. Mr. Venter is a driver's-license tester, a civil servant. He comes from strong Afrikaner stock. He is proud of his large Pretoria house, which he says he renovated &quot;with my own sweat and blood.&quot; As much as he wants his country to be in peace, he is wary of quick solutions -- like overnight majority rule -- that could jeopardize all of this.    &quot;If I must,&quot; Mr. Venter says, &quot;I'll protect my country on the borders, but I don't want to have to protect it inside the borders. I don't want to fight my own people, white or black.&quot; But he knows this may be only wishful thinking. &quot;There's only one place you can really get peace -- in the life hereafter,&quot; he says.    Ben Schoeman, 23 years old, still believes peace can be attained in this life, but only when the Afrikaners step out of the laager into which they were born. He knows how difficult this is, for he is the grandson and namesake of Ben Schoeman, who was a colleague of the architect of apartheid, Hendrik Verwoerd.    &quot;I used to hate being Ben Schoeman,&quot; he says. Every time he traveled from Pretoria to Johannesburg on the Ben Schoeman Highway, he was reminded about what was expected of him.    Naturally, it was expected that he eagerly serve his obligatory stint in the army. First he was on border patrol in Namibia and Angola, where he was told, &quot;These people are our enemies.&quot; Then he was stationed in one of the country's black townships, lining up against fellow South Africans who were also called the enemy. He left the army confused and angry.    &quot;I saw the hostility they {the township blacks} had toward us,&quot; he says. &quot;When I got back to Pretoria I wanted to talk to people about all of this. But there was no one to talk to. They thought I was a hero, they didn't understand.&quot;    So he found people who did and in the process shed the conservative and nationalist burden of his name. Now he is a student at Stellenbosch University and involved in several liberal organizations, including the End Conscription Campaign, which opposes the military draft. An anti-war button is pinned to his rucksack.    Mr. Schoeman acknowledges that his activities cause some strain with his parents, who worry about him being detained. He says he avoids talking politics at the dinner table &quot;because it usually leads to conflict.&quot;    He expresses frustration with other students who refuse to take a stand on issues because they are afraid of challenging the traditions of their families and their country. Until they do, he worries, South Africa will continue to slide toward disaster.    &quot;I ask myself, how do you get to these people?&quot; he says. &quot;You can't appeal to their liberal conscience, because they don't have one. You can't get them in the pocketbook, because they don't care. It'll take another 20, 30, 40 years to get to them. Things will get worse before they give in.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>