<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880912-0129 </DOCNO><HL> Merchant Armada Sinks Ocean of Money </HL><AUTHOR> Doug Bandow </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> CSX APS </CO><IN> TRA MON FIN </IN><G> CNG DEF EXE </G><TEXT>   The Sea-Land Corp., which has long opposed federal maritime subsidies, is working on a deal that will make the company, a subsidiary of CSX Corp., eligible for an estimated $48 million a year in public funds. &quot;Sea-Land has gone from a strong position of government hands-off to government handout,&quot; observes Gerald Seifert, the general counsel for maritime policy of the House Committee on Merchant Marine and Fisheries.    That Sea-Land has been seduced by the ready availability of federal cash should come as no surprise. For this year the government is spending an estimated $224 million for so-called operating differential subsidies to underwrite high-cost American flag vessels; these outlays are expected to increase to $250 million in 1989.    Nor is this the full extent of the maritime dole. This year there's also $9 million on research and development and $77 million for state maritime academies, technical studies, and the like. Moreover, the Maritime Administration (Marad) expects to drop some $63 million on bad loans to shipping companies -- down, however, from the $417 million of losses in 1987.    And until passage of the Omnibus Budget Reconciliation Act in 1981, the government provided construction differential subsidies to cover half the cost difference of building a ship in the U.S. and building one abroad. In 1980 the government spent $265 million on this program.    Though construction differential subsidies have disappeared, the government is still responsible for $3.8 billion of mortgage guarantees for U.S.-built vessels. Moreover, Marad's direct-loan portfolio has jumped $249 million this year as a result of new credit advanced to financially strapped operators to forestall their default on the government's guarantees, as well as delinquencies that turned federal guarantees into direct loans.    So-called cargo preference laws provide an even more important, though largely hidden, subsidy. As of next year three-fourths of Food for Peace crops and grain sold under the Agriculture Department's export promotion program will have to be shipped on U.S.-flag carriers. In fact, all military equipment and three-fourths of other ocean cargo generated directly or indirectly by the government, including oil for the Energy Department's Strategic Petroleum Reserve, weapons sold through the Pentagon's Foreign Military Sales program, and buses purchased with the help of the Urban Mass Transit Administration, must be hauled on American-flag vessels. Further, half the products subsidized by the Export-Import Bank must go in U.S. ships. These requirements cost the government as much as $500 million annually, though no one knows exactly how much.    Consumers as well as taxpayers pay to keep the merchant marine afloat. The Jones Act allows only U.S. companies to ply the cargo trade between American ports, which is why the maritime industry has fought so hard to block the export of Alaskan crude oil. There is a similar act for passenger vessels. Five years ago the Congressional Budget Office estimated that the Jones Act alone cost the economy $1.3 billion a year.    The Reagan White House has had some success in reducing maritime spending, killing the construction-differential-subsidies program and reducing direct outlays, which ran $652 million in 1980, to a decade-low $420 million last year. Unfortunately, however, these subsidies seem destined to increase. The administration has, for instance, proposed a $123 million increase (a 50% rise) in budget authority for oceanshipping programs in fiscal 1989. Sea-Land's venture will reshuffle some existing payments but ultimately will hike total outlays by $13 million to $15 million annually. As more shippers default on their guaranteed loans, Marad expects its loan total to climb $90 million a year, exceeding $2.1 billion by 1991. The administration is even pushing a &quot;reform&quot; proposal that would lower the operating-differential-subsidies payment per ship but increase the number of vessels eligible for support, raising outlays next year about $25 million.    Moreover, Sen. John Breaux (D., La.), chairman of the Commerce Committee's Merchant Marine Subcommittee, has long supported new subsidy legislation and held hearings on maritime policy earlier this year. Finally, the Commission on Merchant Marine and Defense, a standing panel created by Congress and filled by the president, has recommended a wide-ranging program to &quot;revitalize&quot; the merchant marine, including expanded operating-differential-subsidies eligibility, procurement of civilian commercial ships in U.S. yards, new subsidies for American vessels engaged in the international trade, and expansion of the cargo preference acts.    The real concern of the maritime industry -- unions and companies, liners and shipyards -- is, of course, its financial well-being. U.S. seamen are the highest-paid mariners in the world, collecting twice the wages of Japanese crewmen and six times the money paid to Taiwanese seamen. American shipyard workers also make above-market wages, forcing companies to charge three times foreign rates. The only way such an uncompetitive industry can stay afloat is through generous government subsidies.    But the maritime industry is not so crass as to justify its dole on the basis of naked self-interest. Here, as in other areas, patriotism is the last refuge of the scoundrel. Federal maritime subsidies, it is routinely claimed, are a matter of national security.    It is true that the merchant marine would have an important role to play in a global war, but the past flood of subsidies -- $7.2 billion in operating-differential-subsidies payments and $3.4 billion in construction-differential-subsidies payments since 1961 alone -- has not prevented the number of U.S. flag carriers from dwindling. In fact, even with a variety of cargo preference laws the American-flag share of total U.S. ocean commerce has fallen from 30% in 1936, when Congress began directly underwriting the U.S. civilian fleet, to about 4%. Nothing short of massive new federal expenditures could overcome cost differentials that range up to sixfold.    Indeed, subsidies make the domestic industry even less competitive by encouraging waste. Operating-differential-subsidies payments, for instance, cover $4 out of every $5 paid to U.S. crewmen; operators feel little pressure to hold down costs. The old construction subsidies resulted in the same perverse incentives for American shipyards.    Anyway, there are other ways to meet legitimate security needs. Instead of trying to keep hopelessly costly companies in operation, the government should concentrate on buying -- cheaply, in foreign markets -- ships for its Military Sealift Command and National Defense Reserve Fleet. Instead of enriching seamen now serving on commercial boats, the government should intensify its use of the U.S. Merchant Marine Academy and the Merchant Marine Reserve and U.S. Naval Reserve to create a small cadre of trained merchantmen to be available in an emergency.    Finally, to supplement that force, the Pentagon should place the primary burden for providing merchant vessels in war on America's alliance partners. The U.S. has built a 600-ship Navy capable of guarding convoys; let economic powerhouses such as Japan provide the commercial fleet necessary for America to defend them.    The federal government spends far too much to underwrite one of this nation's least competitive industries. Marad should reject Sea-Land's efforts to get on the federal dole, but that is not enough; Congress should begin dismantling the subsidy program and looking for other ways to ensure U.S. security. It's time Uncle Sam stopped enriching private business and labor interests in the name of defense.    ---   Mr. Bandow, an early assistant to President Reagan, is a Cato Institute fellow. </TEXT></DOC>