<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890911-0068 </DOCNO><DD> = 890911 </DD><AN> 890911-0068. </AN><HL> Board of Contributors:@  End Game of the Welfare State@  ----@  By Irving Kristol </HL><DD> 09/11/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> TAXES </CO><IN> INSURANCE (INS) </IN><GV> CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE)FEDERAL GOVERNMENT (FDL) </GV><TEXT>   President Reagan did not have a Machiavellian bone in his body, but if he had, one can imagine him smiling smugly as he signed the bill that so generously increased the insurance of Medicare patients against hospital costs for catastrophic illness. It was an ideal piece of legislation from a conservative point of view, and this for three reasons:    First, it would benefit the elderly who are, from a conservative point of view, the ideal recipients of welfare-state benefits. They are our parents or grandparents, after all, to whom we feel a natural obligation. Moreover, they are beyond all social pathologies, are not likely to be corrupted by welfare entitlements, and in any case would not be corrupted for very long.    Second, the expense of this bill -- which would balloon in the &quot;out years&quot; -- would pre-empt other, less desirable welfare-state expenditures.    Third, the bill was to be financed, at least in part, by a progressive tax on the elderly, in the form of an increase in Medicare premiums, scaling up with income. This was a neat little time bomb that liberals, who admire progressive taxation, would be quite blind to.    That bomb has now exploded. The opposition to the tax increase is so intense that the Democratic congressional leaders are rattled. They are also exceedingly annoyed, and, openly or covertly, are accusing the middle-class elderly of selfish ingratitude. They point out that some 60% of the elderly, with low incomes, will pay no increase at all. And the progressive tax on the remaining 40% is not all that severe, averaging just a few hundred dollars for households in the $40,000 to $50,000 bracket. Surely they can afford it, can't they?    But what anyone can or cannot afford turns out to be a very subjective matter, with little connection to tables of income statistics. One would have thought that congressmen, who complain of the difficulty of making ends meet on an income of $89,500 a year -- which puts them deep into the top 5% of the population -- could appreciate this. But the egalitarian and redistributive ethos is so strong in contemporary liberalism that these same congressmen are astonished at this mini-tax rebellion they now confront.    The basic sociological, psychological and political truth is that it is very expensive to lead a &quot;decent&quot; middle-class existence these days. Taxes -- federal income tax, state income tax, property tax, sales tax, et al. -- probably absorb a good 40% of the income of a $50,000 senior-citizen household. True, such households don't have the expenses involved in a working life, or in raising and educating a family. But they may have assumed other expenses that represent gratifying commitments -- like helping their children buy a home, or helping their grandchildren get a college education.    Grown children often resent having to help support their parents, but elderly parents with a &quot;comfortable&quot; income positively enjoy helping their children and grandchildren. The ego-satisfaction is immense -- and, besides, they worked all of their lives for this money, didn't they? Even a few hundred dollars, at the margin, is not such a trivial sum to surrender. And if, instead of making gifts to their children, they enjoy an annual summer cruise -- well, for such postponed pleasures it is now or never.    Just how this situation will work itself out remains to be seen. Presumably the Democratic Congress will reduce the tax while arbitrarily revising downward the estimated cost of the program. The administration will oppose such a reduction, on the ground of fiscal responsibility, but one cannot really see Republicans in Congress endorsing such opposition, or President Bush actually vetoing such legislation.    To focus on these tactical maneuvers, however, is to miss the main point: We are witnessing the end game of welfare-state politics. It's not simply that fiscal constraints are taking their toll. More important, welfare-state politics is being drained of its political energy.    There is no way to finance new, ambitious programs without taxing the middle classes -- which, in current circumstances, means households with incomes in the $40,000 to $100,000 bracket. (In New York City where private schools are deemed to be necessary $150,000 is still experienced as a middle-class income.) These middle classes are not, statistically, a majority of the population, whose median household income is $32,000. But they are the politically articulate and politically active majority. And, much as they may casually and blandly approve of new welfare-state programs in the abstract, they are now making it as clear as can be that, beneficiaries or no, they don't want to pay for them.    To be sure, the interest groups behind an ever-expanding welfare state still exist and have a disproportionate specific gravity within the Democratic Party. These include the so-called &quot;helping professions&quot; -- social workers, nurses, nutritionists, psychologists, teachers, etc. -- who stand to benefit directly. Their major and strongest ally in this entrepreneurial activity, however, has been the trade unions, which used to be able to mobilize working-class support for this essentially professional-middle-class agenda. But no more.    The unions are weaker today than at any time in the post-World War II era, and are steadily growing weaker. They are losing battle after battle, on the industrial front and the legislative front. As a result, the welfare-state coalition, though influential, is no longer the political force it once was. Nor is there any reason to think it will regain its lost virility.    Neither Democrats nor Republicans have as yet come to grips with this sea change. The Democrats (most of them, anyhow) persist in believing that an expansion of the welfare state broadens and strengthens their political base. Republicans persist in believing that fiscal responsibility must take priority over welfare-state entitlements, and that the electorate will, in the long run, appreciate this posture. But just watch the congressional races next year.    Except in a few places -- New York and San Francisco, for example -- candidates will not be making a fuss about either the need for new government programs to enhance the general welfare or the fiscal difficulty in financing such programs. One will have to eavesdrop on smaller, select meetings to hear earnest rhetoric about spending more or less money on AIDS, public housing, welfare families, or the homeless. To the constituency as a whole, the favorite themes will be drugs, crime, environmentalism, the American flag and &quot;unfair&quot; Japanese competition. Education will also be receiving much attention, but the issue will be defined more in terms of &quot;educational reform&quot; than simply spending more money.    In this end game of the welfare state, Republicans have an advantage. But they nullify it with a narrow-minded focus on &quot;fiscal responsibility.&quot; A dose of Machiavellian shrewdness would do them a world of good in coping with those welfare-state issues that will remain on the agenda.    A case in point is provided by the current legislative proposals involving day care. The Democrats, inevitably, insist on a federally funded program of day-care centers to serve primarily working women. This creates jobs for their &quot;helping professions,&quot; expands the federal regulatory bureaucracy, and pleases the militant feminists who regard house-bound mothers as dropouts from the feminist crusade. The Bush administration, in response, has come up with a simple increase in the tax exemption for dependent children, plus a &quot;rebate&quot; for those with incomes so low that they pay no taxes. Let the family then make its own provision for day care.    The administration's proposal is superior from every point of view. It addresses an inequity -- the fact that inflation, over the years, has radically depreciated the tax allowance for dependent children. It does not involve the creation of a new regulatory bureaucracy. Above all, it does not discriminate against those mothers -- and they are about half of the total -- who prefer to stay home with their preschoolers. But it is not gaining the popular support it ought to have, even in Congress, because its terms are insufficiently generous.    Another few billion dollars a year would make the proposal irresistible, but the Office of Management and Budget and the Treasury insist that &quot;we can't afford it.&quot; So some modified version of the Democratic bill is more likely to pass, and the money that OMB and the Treasury have saved on paper will be spent, in fact, in the wrong way. And the Democrats will claim a political victory, which the media will duly celebrate.    Another, more remote, case in point is some version of national health insurance. Already the corporate world is signaling its receptivity to this traditional, &quot;progressive&quot; idea. But it is not the progressive idea that will have triumphed with the advent of such a program. It will be medical technology, whose steady advance has resulted in an equally steady increase in medical costs of some 10% to 15% a year. Corporate medical insurance cannot cope with this phenomenon.    Only government can slow down the growth of this financial burden by coercing -- yes, coercing -- consumers into accepting inferior service, and doctors and hospitals into accepting lower fees. Only government can ration medical technology. Only government can coerce the legal profession into retreating on the medical malpractice front. It would make sense, therefore, for a conservative administration to do some positive thinking on this issue. If it's going to happen, why not take the credit? But any such suggestion is dismissed as unthinkable.    It's too bad that Republicans are so inept at playing this end game of the welfare state. The merits of pre-emptive spending seem destined to remain forever incomprehensible to the conservative cast of mind. The result is that we shall end up with a large, more inefficient, more intrusive, and probably more corrupt welfare state than we should have.    ---   Mr. Kristol, an American Enterprise Institute fellow, co-edits The Public Interest and publishes The National Interest. </TEXT></DOC>