<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880314-0107 </DOCNO><HL> Impasse Risks U.S. Retaliation on Japan --- Neither Side Will Bend On Beef, Construction Issues </HL><AUTHOR> Elisabeth Rubinfein and Damon Darlin (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN </CO><IN> MON CON CMD </IN><G> EXE CNG </G><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   At a time that both sides had thought would be marked by calmer relations, trade friction between Japan and the U.S. is again nearing a flashpoint.    Negotiations on foreign access to Japan's beef and construction markets are deadlocked, and the U.S. has threatened Japan with trade sanctions if it doesn't give in. Japan says it can't.    The U.S. may retaliate by the end of this month. As usual, Tokyo wouldn't like that, but this time there is an additional risk for Japan. Because the two issues have come to an impasse just as U.S. politicians are testing a tough trade stance with voters, they could stimulate U.S. protectionism by feeding the perception that Japan doesn't play fair.    The issues also have converged just as Congress considers a trade bill into which some members want to insert punitive measures against Japan. Last week in Tokyo, Sen. Max Baucus (D., Mont.) warned that failure to resolve the beef issue could toughen the trade bill.    Prime Minister Noboru Takeshita has pledged to the U.S. that his government can resolve the problems. Failure to do so could cause him to lose political influence in the U.S. and at home. &quot;It might be detrimental to Takeshita for two reasons,&quot; says Seizaburo Sato, political science professor at Tokyo University. &quot;Those who would like to stick to protectionist measures in Japan will be critical of concessions, and to those who want quicker liberalization, Mr. Takeshita might seem too indecisive and weak.&quot; Yet he thinks the prime minister will weather the storm.    The intensity of the trade disputes wasn't fully expected. Diplomats had thought trade talks would be smoother because the lame-duck Reagan administration would be reluctant to pick new battles. Further, Japan's huge trade surplus continues to narrow as the country imports more. Japan said Thursday its trade surplus shrank 26.5% in February from a year earlier, continuing a 10-month trend.    Both countries' diplomats link the hardening of the U.S. position to Rep. Richard Gephardt's brief success last month in the presidential primaries, when he zeroed in on trade problems. It isn't clear if his more recent lack of success will change the administration's hard line with the trade bill still looming. But beyond politics and the trade vote, the tougher stance reflects American frustration and Reagan administration zeal to end world barriers to agricultural trade.    On the construction issue, each side has all but accused the other of negotiating in bad faith. The stalemate has driven some U.S. administration officials to urge the president to invoke trade sanctions against Japan under the 1974 trade act. The U.S. Economic Planning Council, a cabinet-level panel chaired by Treasury Secretary James Baker III, will consider that step this week. But few expect the administration to risk an upheaval in U.S.-Japan relations.    The latest round of construction talks broke down in Washington last week with each side accusing the other of inflexibility. U.S. negotiators say the Japanese line hardened after Yoshiyasu Sato, the foreign minister's new director-general of economic affairs, took over Japan's negotiating team this year.    Japan last month presented a list of six public-works projects in which unprecedented access would be given to companies from countries that give Japanese builders full access. The offer would be a one-time dispensation to enable foreign companies to gain enough experience in Japan to become eligible for future projects.    But the talks collapsed when the U.S. called the proposals inadequate. For example, the U.S. wants access to almost all aspects of the expansion of Tokyo's Haneda airport, while Japan excludes terminal buildings from its offer because it considers them private-sector assets.    Japan returned to the table in Washington in early March with new assurances from the private sector and the government that U.S. companies would be treated fairly. It also increased the number of special projects to seven from six. But the U.S. said the moves still weren't enough.    Japanese officials are frustrated by a sense that the U.S. doesn't understand construction projects in Japan, refuses to accept Japanese alternatives and raises new issues at the last minute. &quot;We've done all we can do,&quot; says one Japanese government official. &quot;The ball is now in the U.S. court.&quot;    Similar problems nag the beef issue, which must be resolved before the current agreement expires at the end of March. The U.S. has threatened to invoke trade sanctions or complain to the international trade tribunal in Geneva. The U.S. is glued to its position that Japan must liberalize its market for imported beef. Japan refuses, offering instead to increase imports under existing quotas.    Japanese government officials are planning to visit the U.S. this week and next to give the U.S. a chance to start the beef talks. U.S. government officials in Tokyo sense the time may be right for Washington to talk because the Japanese now see the U.S. won't budge.    Some powerful ruling-party politicians in Japan favor beef-import liberalization. But strong voices against beef imports are still coming from the Agriculture Ministry, the powerful farm lobby commonly known as Zenchu or Nokyo, and the politicians tied to those farm interests. Some government sectors have been releasing trial balloons in the Japanese press saying liberalization will occur, but they are quickly shot down because consensus still isn't solidified. Zenchu, which has large agribusiness operations in the U.S., also has a powerful lobby there.    No one can say if the current trade friction will inflict long-term damage to the U.S-Japan relationship in defense or other economic matters. Despite decades of trade battles, Japan remains one of Washington's most cooperative allies.    Still some U.S. diplomats here worry that pushing Japan hard, as the U.S. did last year with retaliatory tariffs against Japanese semiconductors, only makes it harder to get future cooperation from Japanese bureaucrats, especially when it comes to implementing an agreement Japan is forced to accept.    ---   Eduardo Lachica in Washington contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>