<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870824-0004 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 08/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. DISCOUNTED a report that Gorbachev will visit America next month.    The White House said it had &quot;no knowledge&quot; of such plans. The report said that if an arms-control agreement were reached by the time of the late-September visit, it could be signed then. The report, in the Los Angeles Times, said that the Soviet leader will attend a U.N. session and visit Reagan in Washington. Meanwhile, thousands of demonstrators in the Baltic states braved police barricades to protest the 1939 Hitler-Stalin pact that allowed the Soviets to take over Latvia, Lithuania and Estonia.    The Soviet news agency Tass termed a demonstration by 300 people in the Lithuanian capital of Vilnius a &quot;hate rally&quot; engineered by the CIA.    ---   A TANKER CONVOY MOVED down the Persian Gulf under Navy escort.    Four Kuwaiti tankers flying the U.S. flag and four U.S. warships were steaming toward the Strait of Hormuz, the U.S. said. Shipping sources said one of the tankers, the mine-damaged Bridgeton, may be headed for Bahrain for repairs. Iran denied earlier reports by its official news agency that a U.S. helicopter carrying five journalists had crashed in the gulf. Meanwhile, the secretary-general of the Arab League, which is meeting in Tunis, called on Iran to observe a U.N. cease-fire in its war with Iraq.    Assistant Secretary of State Murphy said the U.S. does not believe the gulf war will go on much longer, but U.S. forces will stay as long as needed.    ---   Latin American foreign ministers ended a two-day conference in Caracas, Venezuela, after forming a 15-member commission to verify compliance with a Central American peace plan. The plan, signed by five of the region's leaders two weeks ago, calls for a cease-fire in three months, but conference delegates indicated it may be delayed.    ---   Marine Sgt. Clayton Lonetree faces a possible life sentence when a jury of eight Marine officers meets today. Lonetree was convicted of espionage Friday after the jury decided he revealed the identities of CIA agents and turned over the floor plans of U.S. embassies in Moscow and Vienna to the KGB. His lawyers said they will appeal.    ---   South Korean workers battled police after seizing a factory owned by the nation's second-largest shipbuilding company yesterday following a worker's death Saturday in a clash with police. Meanwhile, analysts view Hyundai's acceptance of a labor pact last week as a turning point in management-labor relations.    ---   About 20,000 black miners face dismissal today as a nationwide strike by South Africa's National Union of Mineworkers enters its third week, the union said. About 9,000 gold and coal miners have already been dismissed. Meanwhile, a nonstriking miner died Friday after being hospitalized Aug. 13, when he ate a meal laced with pesticide.    ---   FAA chief McArtor said he is worried about what he called a drop in &quot;routine professionalism&quot; among airline crews, adding that public confidence in airline safety must be recaptured following last week's crash of a Northwest Air jet outside Detroit. Federal investigators wound up their on-site inquiry into the crash over the weekend.    ---   The Church of England said it was skeptical of a Lebanese magazine report that hostage Anglican envoy Terry Waite would be ransomed for $5 million. It also denied seeking to arrange Waite's release with Libyan leader Gadhafi. Meanwhile, France's foreign minister said he would not bow to &quot;blackmail&quot; to free five hostages.    ---   The House Armed Services panel said in a report that the MX missile's guidance system has had so many problems that there are &quot;serious questions&quot; about the weapons that have been deployed. The report criticized the Air Force and Northrop Corp., maker of the system. The Air Force said there were no problems with the system.    ---   A hijacking trial was delayed in Pakistan by a protest fast by four of the five Palestinian suspects and a defense challenge to a judge's powers. The judge is to rule today on whether the trial of the five, accused of the hijacking last year of a Pan Am jet to Karachi, will proceed. The hijacking ended in a gun battle in which 22 people died.    ---   The U.S. plans to boycott a high-level U.N. conference opening today on the benefits of disarmament for Third World development, the U.S. mission to the U.N. said. The three-week conference, expected to be attended by senior delegates from 160 nations, will focus on gaining more development funds by slowing the arms race.    ---   Bavarian officials banned funeral rallies in honor of former Nazi deputy fuehrer Rudolf Hess, who died last week. Police over the weekend arrested 93 demonstrators, some wearing swastikas. Funeral services for Hess are to be held tomorrow or Wednesday in Wunsiedel, West Germany.    ---   Died: Joseph Lash, 77, Pulitzer Prize-winning biographer, Saturday, in Boston, of complications from a heart ailment. </TEXT></DOC>