<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880603-0158 </DOCNO><HL> Welcome OPEC to the U.S. Oil Patch </HL><AUTHOR> Mohammed Akacem </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST EUROP LATAM </CO><IN> PET MON </IN><TEXT>   The same fear that has fed the debate over the need to protect the U.S. from the &quot;invasion&quot; of foreign goods could very well feed the momentum to limit energy investments here by members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries. If the U.S. were to limit direct foreign investment in its oil sector, the money would simply go somewhere else, probably Europe -- with the U.S. ending up as the ultimate loser.    By contrast, continuing to let foreign oil producers buy equity in U.S. refineries would help the U.S. economy by allowing these plants to operate at closer to maximum capacity and encouraging additional capital to flow into the U.S. This would guarantee the U.S. oil industry access to foreign supplies for many years to come and lessen the drainage of U.S. reserves.    Much more important, however, would be the recognition by the foreign oil producers that invest in this country that the return on their investments is tied to the health of the U.S. economy. They would be ill advised to jeopardize their own investments. The countries that welcome OPEC members' investments would be insuring themselves against the kind of oil shocks that characterized the 1970s.    In general, the oil-producing nations that invest (or want to invest) in operations abroad do so to find marketing outlets. This helps them avoid wide swings in their daily oil production and assure themselves of stable oil revenue in the long term. However, there are clear differences between the oil-producing countries' approaches to foreign acquisitions.    Kuwait favors the full acquisition of refineries and gasoline stations. It made its first move in 1983 with the purchase of two refineries and close to 2,000 gas stations in Europe from Gulf Oil Corp. It has expanded its operations since then and operates the gas stations under the Q8 logo. For Kuwait, these expansions outside its borders represent more than just a clear desire to safeguard stable outlets for its large reserves; they are part of a savvy investment strategy unequaled by any of Kuwait's Arab Gulf neighbors.    The second type of investment is characterized by the Venezuelan approach. Unlike Kuwait, Venezuela opts for 50-50 joint ventures. In the U.S., Venezuela purchased a 50% stake in Citgo in 1986, and in Champlin Petroleum last year. Both deals call for Venezuela to supply about 400,000 barrels of oil a day to its U.S. partners.    Other oil producers are also engaged in Venezuela-like expansions. Non-OPEC members Mexico and Norway are both active abroad. Among OPEC members, Libya and Abu Dhabi have some foreign stakes, while Nigeria and Saudi Arabia are looking for prospects.    By allowing such investments, host countries in effect weaken the oil cartel, since the members' objectives will differ depending on their distribution networks and the size of their equity positions in foreign refineries.    Eventually, there will be competition among oil producers at several levels. First, there will be competition among those members that have begun international refining and marketing operations as each tries to maximize the amount of oil it sells to its refining partner. Second, OPEC members that do not have international refining and marketing outlets will find themselves competing with other OPEC members and in some instances selling oil to the very refineries that are wholly or partly owned by fellow producers. It is important to note that OPEC agreements do not extend to the sale of petroleum products, which leaves these producers free to price them according to prevailing market conditions.    A recent development in Britain has highlighted the issue of limits on foreign investment. The British government formally moved last month to examine Kuwait's 22.5% stake in British Petroleum by asking the Monopolies and Mergers Commission to find out if British public interest might be jeopardized and to advise the government on a proper course of action.    The move underscores the sensitivity of the British government to the possibility that a foreign oil producer -- effectively a competitor -- might control British Petroleum. Britain is said to be worried about the possibility that Kuwait may sell its stake to a &quot;hostile&quot; party. But Britain has no cause for alarm. The Kuwaitis are sharp investors, and as such are unlikely to put themselves in a position that would threaten their holdings in Britain -- or anywhere else in the world, for that matter.    The government also has cited Kuwait's membership in OPEC as a cause for concern. Is it? Keeping OPEC members like Kuwait from expanding their oil industry outside their borders would have the unwanted effect of lessening their interest in the well-being of the consuming markets' economies. It would do nothing but emphasize the Us-against-Them mentality that prevailed in much of the 1970s. If, however, OPEC producers continue to be allowed to buy equity stakes in American or British refineries, the producers would have to respond to market signals generated in the West -- not to a group decision made in Vienna.    Second, the growth of foreign investment would result in healthy competition, which should translate into lower prices for petroleum products. While there could be some price volatility initially as competition increases between refiners and they approach full capacity utilization, in the long run there would be more price stability as Western refiners wholly owned or in joint ventures with OPEC producers adjust to a steady stream of oil from their new partners.    Finally, the most important impact on the consuming countries would be the long-desired security of supply. Continued access to oil would be guaranteed, since oil producers would be tied in a business arrangement and not want to do anything to jeopardize their production levels and profits from their foreign stakes. Since these refineries and distribution networks would be located in the U.S. or Britain or wherever, foreign investors could not just pack them up and go home.    If there are losers in this process, they will be those producers that are unable to engage in refining and marketing operations outside their own borders. For OPEC, this will no doubt increase the tensions inside the already fragile organization as more members attempt to go it alone and lock in guaranteed markets for their oil. In the end, the producers that do move abroad will see their interests converge with those of the multinational oil companies, as well as with those of the consuming countries. They will have less in common with their brethren that did not acquire marketing outlets for their oil.    The policy implications for the U.S. are straightforward. Instead of overreacting to or resisting the attempts by some oil producers to secure refining and marketing outlets within its borders, a la Britain, it should welcome them. This would enhance the long-term energy security of this country by slowing the drainage of U.S. oil reserves. An oil-import fee, for example -- effectively an OPEC tax -- is the last thing the U.S. needs.    ---   Mr. Akacem, a visiting fellow at the International Research Center for Energy and Economic Development in Boulder, Colo., was an economist at the Saudi Fund for Development in Riyadh, 1985-87. </TEXT></DOC>