<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861211-0135 </DOCNO><HL> The Plague of Insider Non-Trading---By William A. Kelly Jr.</HL><DD> 12/11/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><TEXT>   The recent outbreak of illegal insider-trading cases has led to an outcry for increased regulation of this insidious practice. Investors in such places as Pocatello, Idaho, and Clemson, S.C., have allegedly suffered losses -- in the form of missed opportunities for profitable investments -- as the result of the unethical behavior of those privy to inside information.    Investment bankers, corporate executives, stock brokers and even reporters have been able to reap substantial profits by trading stocks or selling information to traders prior to the information becoming available to the general public. If the same information had been made available in Pocatello or Clemson, investors residing in those cities presumably could have avoided large losses or made large gains by taking appropriate action.    The Securities and Exchange Commission, in a heroic attempt to make the rules equal for all traders, has stepped up surveillance to combat insider trading. In doing so, however, it has ignored a potentially far more serious problem. During any given trading period, only a tiny fraction of outside issues are actually traded; the rest are not traded. In other words, the volume of non-trading vastly exceeds the volume of trading. As Henry Manne (a longtime critic of SEC restrictions on insider trading) has pointed out, insiders may use nonpublic information to profit from not trading as well as from trading. The preponderance of non-trading in the market implies the SEC, in its efforts to stop insider trading, is neglecting what may be a much larger problem: insider non-trading.    Although Mr. Manne and others have mentioned insider non-trading (and the potential profits involved), the practice is largely unknown to outsiders. It can be described with hypothetical case studies.    Consider the case of Ms. B., a highly placed corporate executive at ABD Inc. Ms. B. has substantial holdings of ABD stock and, before a mid-morning meeting, she had planned to sell some of her holdings to take profits on a recent rise to $40 a share. At the meeting, she learns of a friendly takeover bid from KNW Inc. at $60. Ms. B., acting on information not yet in the public domain, holds on to her stock after the meeting. Later, she sells out for $60, reaping a hefty profit from her earlier non-trade. Now, if she had purchased more shares in ABD prior to the public disclosure of the takeover, she would have violated existing codes. Although she did not violate any codes, by not going through with a planned sale she clearly used inside information for personal gain. Had she sold at $40, the purchasers would have reaped the gain from the stock's rise.    Next, there is Lloyd R., a broker who recently lost several clients to a discount brokerage house. Lloyd gets advance information on the bid for ABD. He also discovered (more inside information) that his biggest client is about to desert him for a discount broker. He tells the client who has large ABD holdings not to sell. The client holds, makes a huge gain, and, seeing the benefits of a full-service broker, decides not to take her business to the discount broker. Both Lloyd and his client have gained by not trading based on inside information.    These sorts of scandalous situations should compel the protectors of market purity to action. To combat the crime of insider non-trading we urge the SEC to implement the following reforms:    1.All individuals having potential access to inside information must file periodic reports (we suggest monthly) on what trades they did not engage in and why.    2.Attorneys for the SEC should be given power to subpoena records on nontrading activity.    3.Appropriate fines or prison sentences should be levied on individuals who profit from inside information by not trading.    No doubt these reforms will be costly. A many-fold increase in the budget and staff of the SEC will be required. The added cost can be justified on the grounds that the failure to regulate non-trading is as harmful to the public as the failure to regulate trading. The SEC should move quickly before this legal loophole grows any larger. The investors of Pocatello and Clemson deserve no less.    ---   Mr. Kelly is a professor of finance at Clemson University, where he commiserates with colleagues Clark Nardinelli and Myles S. Wallace over staggering losses from outsider non-trading. </TEXT></DOC>