<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880408-0153 </DOCNO><HL> Textile Gripes Are Made of Whole Cloth </HL><AUTHOR> Richard B. McKenzie </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> TEX MON </IN><TEXT>   The textile industry, already one of the most protected industries in the U.S., once again is looking to Washington for more restrictions on imports.    This time the industry is seeking passage of the Textile and Apparel Trade Bill, which would limit the growth of imports beyond 1986 levels to 1% a year. Because imports have risen by an annual rate of more than 1% since 1986, this means that imports might need to be reduced by as much as 10% from current levels.    Under the auspices of the Fiber, Fabric and Apparel Coalition for Trade, the industry is fortifying its extensive lobbying efforts in Washington with an intensive television advertising campaign focused on the textile-producing states of Georgia, Alabama and North and South Carolina. What the PR campaign fails to mention, however, is that output in the industry and profits of many textile firms are at record highs and that the industry is operating at more than 90% of capacity, a performance rate well above the national average for all industries. The textile coalition also does not mention that in 1987 textile and apparel exports (as measured in constant dollars) were 36% above their 1985 levels (although still 25% below their 1980 peaks), that unemployment rates in many textile states have been falling, and that employment in the textile industry actually increased in 1987.    The TV ads claim that between 1980 and 1986 1,000 U.S. textile and apparel plants were closed and 350,000 textile and apparel jobs were lost to imports. These statistics do not bear up under scrutiny. My own research, for the Center for the Study of American Business in St. Louis, shows that more protection for the textile industry will not bring back more than 10% of the lost textile jobs. Most of those jobs were eliminated not because of imports but because of the installation of more efficient and less labor-intensive equipment. (Employment in the apparel industry, in which opportunities for productivity increases are somewhat limited, was hurt by imports.)    Between 1973 and 1984 employment in the textile industry decreased by 270,000to 710,000 from 980,000. Over the same period, worker productivity (measured in real dollar shipments per worker) rose 49%. Productivity advancements have been even more dramatic over the past three years due to record investment levels, according to textile educators and executives.    Measured in output, productivity in various processes increased several hundred percent between 1970 and 1985, thanks to new, often computerized equipment. For example, productivity in fiber extrusion (the process of forming man-made fibers) increased by 300%. Air-jet looms -- the emerging norm for production of some long-run fabrics used to make, for example, sheets and curtains -- are more than 300% more productive than the looms they replaced.    My research indicates that productivity increases alone could account for the loss of approximately 225,000 jobs, or 83% of the total decrease in employment, in the textile industry between 1973 and 1984. In addition, other jobs were lost -- and an untold number of textile and apparel plants were closed -- because some firms couldn't keep up with the competition for labor and other resources from expanding non-textile firms in growing local economies.    Amid all the clamor for more protection from imports, it is refreshing to remember that employment and wages have risen in many states where the textile industry is heavily concentrated. Employment in North and South Carolina rose 2.6% last year from the 1986 level, while total U.S. employment rose 1.6%. Between 1980 and 1987, the average wages of textile-production workers rose in real terms and increased to 82% from 78% of the average wage of all production workers in the country.    The protection the textile and apparel industry seeks would not, on balance, save American jobs, nor would it come cheap. Economist Laura Baughman, in a study for International Business andamp; Economic Research Corp., a private consulting firm in Washington, estimates that the Textile and Apparel Trade Bill would wipe out at least as many jobs in other American industries -- most notably in the retail trade. It would also force consumers to spend an average of $8 billion more a year over the next decade on imported and domestic textile products. This means that each textile job saved (worth an average of $17,000 in annual wages to textile workers) might cost American consumers as much as $262,000 a year.    The industry tests the public's credulity when it suggests that every textile and apparel plant that has closed in this decade did so solely because of imports. The public is asked to believe that none of the plants in question was mismanaged, had excessive costs, or was simply outmoded in an era of tremendous technological advancements in the textile industry.    The truth -- as evidenced by recently expanding exports -- is that there are U.S. textile firms that can compete with the best producers in the world, especially now that the dollar is weaker. American producers have been responsible for the closing of American plants -- their own plants and ones that couldn't keep pace -- when they introduced new and more productive machinery. Contrary to what the industry suggests in its PR campaign, the count of lost textile jobs is a tribute to a revitalized and aggressive American industry. The elimination of jobs is one of the most difficult tasks of any economy, and the textile industry should be proud of its achievements in reducing employment.    By tying its economic future to government protection, the industry may well be worsening its competitive problems. Many young people may be understandably reluctant to go to work for an industry that is constantly poor-mouthing its ability to compete. Indeed, the constant talk of gloom and doom appears to be discouraging university students from considering textiles as a career. In the nation's principal textile programs, the number of students majoring in technical fields (textile engineering or textile chemistry, for example) fell 25% -- to 1,050 majors in 1987 from 1,409 in 1983.    Officials at one major Southeastern university recently decided to lower admission standards for prospective textile majors, due to the difficulty of attracting more qualified students to the program. This development should be discouraging to the textile industry in an era in which the industry faces a mounting shortage of technically trained graduates to manage high-tech production environments.    Wilbur Newcomb, editor of the American Textile International, a trade magazine, took a courageous stand last year when he acknowledged in an editorial that additional textile protection may do nothing more than insulate from competition domestic producers who continue to operate with &quot;50-year-old fly shuttle looms.&quot;    He added: &quot;The screaming and yelling for a new textile bill can only fall on deaf ears right now, especially if the screamers really only want to 'protect' their totally outmoded plants. Now is the time to buy and build. Sales and profits are high. Stock values are higher. Consumers want to 'buy American.' Let's give them the best products at the best prices. But that can only be done with the latest technology. We can't keep crying 'imports' to cover large pockets of inefficiency remaining. Instead we need to make ours one of the most modern manufacturing industries in the nation-modern throughout.&quot;    Protecting the industry from competition is not likely to make it more competitive any more than forcing rival players to wear ankle weights would make a basketball team more competitive. On the contrary, protectionism can only lessen the market pressures that helped spur the industry to improve its productivity. It is ironic that the industry imports half its machinery, presumably because foreign machinery is cheaper and of better quality. Consumers should also have the right to purchase the best textile products, without being encumbered by trade restrictions.    ---   Mr. McKenzie, a professor of economics at Clemson University, is author of &quot;The American Job Machine,&quot; which will be published by Universe Books and the Cato Institute in May. </TEXT></DOC>