<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871204-0081 </DOCNO><HL> Washington Wire:A Special Weekly Report FromThe Wall Street Journal'sCapital Bureau---Compiled by Ronald G. Shafer</HL><DD> 12/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST JAPAN LATAM MDESTNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)CONGRESS (CNG)SUPREME COURT (SUP) </IN><TEXT>   SUMMIT HOPES are high, though caution is still urged.    U.S. officials say Gorbachev's public admission that the Soviets have their own strategic-defense plan opens the door to realistic discussion of the issue. They hint at the possibility of new &quot;instructions to negotiators&quot; that would spell out areas of agreement that might lead to a strategic-arms pact. Some expect a new Soviet proposal to cut conventional forces in Europe.    But U.S. aides warn against overoptimism. One notes that verification problems in a strategic-arms accord would be &quot;an order of magnitude greater&quot; than in the intermediate-missiles pact. And a Rand Corp. study warns that the Warsaw Pact would have to cut five to eight times more than the West to balance conventional forces in Europe.    Reagan doesn't want to stretch the summit beyond the planned three days, despite apparent Soviet willingness to do so.    BAKER FACES a tough road to a new international monetary deal.    The Treasury chief is under pressure to set a meeting with allies this month aimed at halting the dollar's fall. But substantial gains will be difficult. Germany must settle internal rifts to adopt stimulus measures that go beyond this week's modest package. Japan's new leadership, worried about inflation, may be reluctant to expand an already-large stimulus drive.    Foreigners will try to move Baker toward a U.S. commitment to defend the dollar, but he wants to leave the Fed freedom to keep interest rates low so as to fend off recession. Above all, Baker is determined to avoid a meeting that yields too little. U.S. officials worry that a pact seen as too weak could set off another market tailspin.    DUKAKIS HANGS TOUGH as Democrats vie to move ahead of the pack.    He tops the field in a new Wall Street Journal/NBC News national poll; state polls show him with surprising strength in Iowa and in Southern states. He is expected to increase his fund-raising lead among Democrats, allowing him to mount the biggest media blitz in the South for Super Tuesday. But his drive is threatened by disarray and lack of expertise among his staff.    Gore beefs up his Texas organization to challenge Dukakis there. Babbitt and Gephardt plan to escalate their attacks on Simon's spending proposals. Jackson is bloodied in the Chicago political infighting. Some experts warn that nearly two dozen debates slated for the next two months could hurt Democrats.    The debates are &quot;making candidates pander and forcing them to attack each other,&quot; says political scientist Thomas Mann.    PESSIMISM GROWS about the economy. In the Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll, more Americans than at any time since 1981 think the economy will get worse in the coming year. Some 67% believe a major downturn is at least somewhat likely, up a bit from a poll conducted just after October's stock-market crash.    WALSH OFFERS immunity to Khashoggi and Ghorbanifar, the two key middlemen in the Iran arms deal, in return for their cooperation in the Iran-Contra investigation. The independent counsel hopes to wrap up his nearly yearlong probe soon, but indictments aren't likely until mid-January or February.    EYEWITNESS NEWS: Arms control chief Kenneth Adelman plans to start &quot;Inside the Summit&quot; articles on Dec. 13, the day after he leaves to become a columnist. He sees no conflict since details will be publicly disclosed. But press critic Ben Bagdikian contends, &quot;You can't represent the U.S. government and a publication syndicate at the same time.&quot;    WIMPSKI FACTOR? Despite Gorbachev's strong image in America, some Russians view him as weak for two reasons: his anti-vodka campaign and his strong-willed wife. Both go against Soviet male traditions. Views about his wife may be why Soviet TV altered NBC's interview to delete Gorbachev's reference to the substantive discussions he has with her.    JUSTICES DELAYED: Some high-court cases are held for a ninth member.    The current justices defer decisions on whether to hear arguments in more than a dozen cases in which the court is closely divided. If Judge Kennedy is confirmed, he will have a chance to cast the deciding vote on what cases to review. With the court's argument schedule filling up rapidly, some cases probably will be held until next term.    Among those apparently deferred is a challenge to a Customs Service requirement for drug-testing of employees. Another tests whether a community can ban picketing in residential neighborhoods, as a Wisconsin town did to keep anti-abortionists away from a local doctor. A third involves an important separation-of-powers dispute over government contracts.    Even if Congress confirms Kennedy soon after it returns in late January, he wouldn't participate in cases until late February, after a court recess.    MINOR MEMOS: Former congressmen Jenrette of South Carolina and Hansen of Idaho, both fresh out of prison, mull runs to regain their old seats. . . . A button sold at Republican rallies says simply, &quot;not Bush.&quot; . . . Haig made pro-football predictions for a Lebanon, N.H., newspaper last weekend and picked the winners in just six of 12 games. </TEXT></DOC>