<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870202-0080 </DOCNO><HL> Deep in Hock:Debt Keeps Growing,With the Major RiskIn the Private Sector---Many Analysts See DefaultsSoaring in Any Recession;Balance Sheets Weaken---Households Are Under Strain---By Lindley H. Clark Jr. and Alfred L. Malabre Jr.Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><TEXT>   Debt is bulking ever larger in the U.S. economy, and more and more business analysts are getting jittery.    Although the record-shattering budget deficits and consequent pileup in federal debt have stirred the most public discussion, many economists are even more disturbed by the growth and deteriorating quality of private debt. Unlike the federal government, which enjoys the singular capacity to create the money it needs, private borrowers can and do fail.    &quot;We may pay an especially high price for the debt binge within the private sector,&quot; warns A. Gilbert Heebner, the chief economist at CoreStates Financial Corp. in Philadelphia. He says &quot;defaults could soar&quot; in any new recession.    Even though most economists still don't consider a recession imminent, some of them are shortening their odds. Partly out of concern that the new tax law may crimp business activity in coming months, Norman Robertson, an economist at Mellon Bank in Pittsburgh, sees a 40% chance of a slump soon, up from 20% only a few weeks ago. And, with the buildup in private debt, he cautions, &quot;A new recession now could really put us in the soup.&quot;    The U.S. can stay out of the soup, most analysts agree, so long as it avoids a recession. However, Henry Kaufman, the chief economist at Salomon Brothers Inc. in New York, worries that if the U.S. does fall into a slump, the huge budget deficits would deprive policy makers of the fiscal flexibility needed to fight it -- by cutting taxes, for instance. At a congressional hearing Friday, Sen. William Proxmire, the Banking Committee chairman, forecast a $300 billion to $400 billion deficit when the next recession hits.    Mr. Kaufman also cautions that the monetary stimulus that could be applied would also be limited by fears that lower interest rates would further depress the U.S. dollar in world currency markets. Although Mr. Kaufman expects no recession this year, he says that &quot;a couple of years out, things could be difficult.&quot;    Just how difficult things could get is suggested by Alexander P. Paris, an economic consultant based in Barrington, Ill. In the current economic expansion, he says, &quot;we've been seeing loan defaults, bankruptcies, bank failures and savings and loan closings worse than during previous recessions; so think how bad they will be during the next recession.&quot;    The magnitude of the overall debt buildup can be illustrated by a few statistics. Last year, total debt -- federal plus other borrowing -- topped $7 trillion, up nearly $1 trillion in a single year. The federal government accounted for about one-quarter of the total, a slightly smaller share than two decades earlier. All the debt outstanding at that time was about equal to last year's increase.    The surge in debt, moreover, is outstripping general economic growth. Debt now totals about 1.7 times gross national product. That's the highest such ratio since the worst years of the Depression, when the nation's output of goods and services shrank and bankruptcies soared. From 1965 to 1981, debt and GNP rose approximately in tandem, and the ratio remained about flat, just below 1.4.    &quot;We have a credit bomb on our doorstep. We must find a way to defuse it,&quot; Lowell L. Bryan, a director of the McKinsey andamp; Co. consulting firm, declares in a recent study for the Harvard Business School. He adds, &quot;The stakes are far too high for us to continue to ignore it.&quot;    Even with no recession in sight, the growing debt is causing increasing signs of strain, analysts say.    &quot;In past economic expansions, after coming out of recessions, corporate balance sheets generally showed marked improvement,&quot; recalls John E. Silvia, a financial economist at Kemper Financial Services Inc. in Chicago. &quot;But so far in this expansion, which is now in its fifth year, most balance sheets have weakened.&quot;    One sign of strain within the corporate sector, analysts say, is business failures. In terms of debt due within one year, they have recently averaged roughly $3 billion a month, more than twice the level near the bottom of the last recession, just over four years ago. By comparison, this gauge of failures fell to about $200 million from $400 million in the first four years of the 1975-80 expansion, which, like the current upswing, followed a severe recession. Moreover, corporate cash and cash-type assets, in terms of debt due within a year, are lower now than some four years ago.    &quot;The quality of credit is crumbling at the very moment in the business cycle when it's supposed to be getting better,&quot; declares James Grant, the editor of a New York-based newsletter on credit trends.    Corporations with top-drawer credit ratings are getting scarce. Salomon Brothers' Mr. Kaufman notes that the number of AAA-rated industrial and utility corporations has dwindled to 27 from 56 in the past decade, while the number of corporate bond issues rated by Standard andamp; Poor's Corp. below BBB -- categories deemed speculative and less than investment grade -- has swelled to 21% of the corporates market from 9%. Three years ago, Sandamp;P dropped its AAA utility-bond average; there weren't enough such issues around.    While declining in quality, debt has assumed a much larger role in overall corporate finances. In a recent three-year period, corporations raised $483.4 billion through various sorts of borrowing, but their equity financing fell $226.1 billion. A recent Federal Reserve Board study warns that &quot;many firms now are highly leveraged and would be vulnerable to adverse economic or financial developments.&quot;    One threat to highly leveraged corporations is cited by Benjamin M. Friedman, a Harvard economist. &quot;You can always decide to lower dividend rates for a while,&quot; he says, &quot;but you can't do that with interest owed, for example, on a bond issue unless you also plan to go bankrupt.&quot; And Robert H. Parks, an economic consultant in New York, sees the &quot;perilous combination of debt explosion and equity implosion&quot; setting the stage for &quot;widespread bankruptcy in the next recession.&quot;    Arnold X. Moskowitz, an economist at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. in New York, remarks that the rising corporate bankruptcies are being &quot;fed back into the financial system through rising defaults of banks and other thrift institutions.&quot; Last year, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. closed 138 banks, the most since the 1930s and up from 116 closings in 1985 and only 42 in 1982, a recession year.    Even without a recession this year, L. William Seidman, the FDIC chairman, expects more than 150 banks to fail. Besides the mounting failures, he adds, &quot;there are about 1,500 problem banks on our list,&quot; up from 1,150 a year ago. Salomon's Mr. Kaufman adds that only one &quot;large bank holding company -- J.P. Morgan andamp; Co. -- is rated AAA,&quot; down from 14 a decade ago.    The growth of low-quality debt may be slowed this year, analysts say, by the recent insider-trading scandals, which often involved and may put a blight on low-rated &quot;junk&quot; bonds. But with so much risky corporate debt already outstanding, &quot;we must avoid a new recession&quot; any time soon, Mr. Kaufman says.    Like corporations, households are under rising strain.    &quot;A leveraging of the household sector is emerging which is almost as worrisome as that in the corporate sector,&quot; declares Alan Greenspan, a New York consultant and former presidential economic adviser. Since 1980, a period spanning two recessions and two recoveries, household liabilities have risen faster than household assets, he says. He adds that servicing this burden absorbs about one-third of after-tax income, up from less than one-quarter near the end of the last recession.    Another sign of strain: Bankruptcies among individuals jumped nearly 35% in the year ended last June 30, the latest period for which figures are available.    Lucinda S. Mezey, a vice president at PNC Financial Corp. in Philadelphia, comments that &quot;the consumer is now more extended than at any other time&quot; since World War II -- despite longer maturities on both mortgage and installment loans and generally lower interest rates.    Delinquency rates on consumer installment loans don't indicate an epidemic of failure to pay, however. Recently, only 2.3% of such loans were at least 30 days past due. But this rate tops that at the bottom of the last recession -- an atypical pattern suggesting that loan delinquencies could soar in a new recession. In the first four years of the 1975-80 expansion, in contrast, they fell sharply.    In agriculture, of course, delinquencies are already spreading like weeds. Some 36% of the 261,000 borrowers from the Farmers Home Administration are behind in their payments, according to a recent government estimate, and about 80% of these troubled farmers have been delinquent for more than 36 months.    Another worrisome development, economists say, is that the percentage of home loans being foreclosed, at close to 1% of the total outstanding, has nearly doubled in four years to a postwar high. Such a rise also is unusual in an expansion. Four years into the 1975-80 upturn, the foreclosure rate had dropped sharply to only about one-third the current level.    And although consumer spending has continued to rise moderately, many forecasters expect the debt load, at the least, to slow such gains in coming months. &quot;Consumption won't grow as fast in 1987,&quot; Mr. Kaufman predicts. Because consumer outlays perennially account for about two-thirds of overall business activity, any such slowdown could significantly crimp the economic expansion as a whole.    Evidence of strain from the federal debt is less clear, analysts say. The economy's persistent growth, along with moderating inflation and lower interest rates, surprises many forecasters, who assumed that the huge budget deficits ruled out such gains. Robert J. Barro, a University of Rochester economist, sardonically calls the deficits &quot;a crisis of minor proportions.&quot;    However, servicing the rapidly mounting federal debt -- now roughly $2 trillion -- is eating up ever larger shares of federal spending. Nearly 14% of the fiscal 1986 budget went to pay interest, up from about 9% in the early 1980s.    Last year, the government spent more on debt service than on all its major health programs, and, for every two dollars going into defense, one was spent on debt. This pattern can't continue indefinitely without seriously straining the economy, analysts warn, but they can't say precisely where the danger point lies. At the moment, the federal debt burden is being eased by an enormous inflow of foreign capital, but few economists see this as an unending infusion, especially if Americans curb their big appetite for foreign goods and services.    A substantial reduction in the budgetary red ink could, of course, help end the diversion of ever larger shares of federal spending to debt service. This is the aim of such measures as the Gramm-Rudman act, which calls for slashing the deficit to $144 billion in the current fiscal year from last year's record $221 billion. The law calls for further steep reductions until 1991, when the budget is to be in balance.    Economists warn, however, that reductions remotely approaching those called for in Gramm-Rudman could require spending cuts and/or tax increases that could throw the economy into the recession that, with private-sector debt so high, must be avoided. Thus, big budget deficits are generally expected to continue.    Delos Smith, an economist at the nonprofit Conference Board in New York, sees the fiscal 1987 deficit approaching $220 billion. The government will spend more and collect less in taxes than federal planners anticipate, he says. Like many economists, he believes that the new tax law will, on balance, tend to widen the budget gap. The law, says Edward S. Hyman, the chief economist of C.J. Lawrence andamp; Co. in New York, &quot;could produce an unexpected tax cut because companies may figure out how to pay less taxes than the bill-writers intended.&quot; Mr. Hyman adds, &quot;A $300 billion federal deficit is plausible.&quot;    The tax law also persuaded state and local governments to go deeper into debt last year because it now limits the purposes for which they can sell tax-exempt bonds. In the past two years, state and local debt has grown more than $200 billion, with the total exceeding $700 billion by last fall. However, more than 95% of that debt goes to finance schools, roads and other physical facilities, and state and local borrowing doesn't worry analysts as much as federal, private and foreign debt does.    Signs of strain from the nation's swiftly mounting international indebtedness are also difficult to document. In just the past three years, the U.S. has gone from being the world's largest creditor to its largest debtor, owing foreigners some $200 billion more than they owe here. Many economists expect this shortfall to reach $1 trillion by the early 1990s.    Although this abrupt turnaround has been painless so far, analysts warn that the foreign-debt burden, like the federal debt, will increasingly hurt the economy as foreign investors lay claim to more and more of what is earned in the U.S. David D. Hale, Kemper's chief economist, reckons that by the early 1990s, America's annual foreign-debt burden could approach $80 billion.    &quot;The U.S. must begin to lower its propensity to borrow,&quot; says Aubrey H. Zaffuto, an economist at Schroder Economic Research in New York. &quot;There are limits to the buildup of debt, and we are approaching them. The country has been living beyond its means.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>