<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870324-0116 </DOCNO><HL> Poverty Prevalent in Both---The Lebanese and the Aztecs---By Roger CohenStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAMMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><TEXT>   Mexico and Brazil, which account for more than half of Latin America's 400 million people, have many things in common: human misery, fast-growing populations, huge foreign debts, overcrowded cities, inefficient bureaucracies, great mineral wealth. But their attitudes differ strikingly.    Bullish Brazil confidently appropriates the Divinity. &quot;God is Brazilian&quot; is a popular expression there. Mexico, in the much-quoted words of a former president, resigns itself to being &quot;so close to the United States, so far from God.&quot; Brazil is obsessed by its future, which it sees as that of a major industrial power. Mexico seems haunted, even imprisoned, by its past.    Its agonizing is summed up by an inscription above the Aztec ruins in gloomy Zocalo square in Mexico City. &quot;Where do we come from,&quot; it asks, &quot;and where are we going?&quot;    Such questioning doesn't exist in Brazil -- &quot;a country with no memory,&quot; banker Andre Lara Resende calls it. John Bruton, the vice president of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce in Mexico City, puts it this way: &quot;Every negotiation here begins with a history lesson. In Brazil, which is sloppy, multiracial and hard-working like the U.S., only tomorrow matters.&quot;    These attitudes are pervasive, reflecting each nation's character and heritage, and tend to persist despite any immediate rise or fall in concern. Right now, there is a feeling among some people in Mexico -- exporters, government officials, some foreign bankers -- that the bottom may have been reached, that Mexico may be on the mend. And in Brazil, the resignation of the planning minister and indications of a tougher stance by creditors have increased uncertainty over the government's future economic course. Yet Brazil remains essentially buoyant, Mexico essentially dispirited, about tomorrow.    A better tomorrow, however, is elusive in both lands.    In a pool of sewage north of Mexico City floats an empty tequila bottle. Nearby, some new pipes lie on a pile of garbage, gathering dust. Mud shacks, indistinguishable from the general decay, straggle along the hillside. This is Tlalnepantla, an industrial enclave in the sprawl of the world's largest city.    Miguel Trujillo, accompanied by some hens and dogs, contemplates the scene. Jobless at 19, he is seated on a child's bicycle, doing nothing. He kicks one of the unused pipes. &quot;The municipal workers came six months ago to install these and close off the sewage,&quot; he says. &quot;But they left and never came back.&quot;    His tone says: This is the way things were, are and always will be in Tlalnepantla. &quot;We don't protest,&quot; says Isidoro Mendoza, 23, a friend who is also unemployed, &quot;because we don't believe Mexico can change.&quot;    Several thousand miles away, there is the same stench from open sewage in a Rio de Janeiro slum. But the 15,000 people in this shantytown, or favela, seem less cowed, less morose. Joana Ana Jesus has lived here for 40 of her 67 years. Her one room has a television set but no water. The favela has scarcely changed in four decades, she says, but she insists that &quot;one day Brazil will be better.&quot;    Her neighbor Jose Carlos de Almeida, 31, recently emerged from prison after serving six years for selling marijuana. He wears ragged shorts, a quartz watch, a silver chain, five rings. &quot;Sure I steal,&quot; he says. &quot;Most of us here steal, but we don't do it for fun. We do it because we're hungry.&quot;    These inhabitants of the slums have tens of millions of counterparts throughout Latin America. According to Joseph Ramos, an assistant director of the Latin American Economic Council, or Cepal, about 80 million of Latin America's inhabitants live in extreme poverty. &quot;By that,&quot; he says, &quot;we mean they may earn just enough to eat.&quot;    Since the debt crisis broke almost five years ago, their condition has become more hopeless as more and more money goes to pay off foreign debts and less and less of it goes into the domestic economies.    During this period, Latin America's per-capita income has fallen about 10%, investment has plunged by one-third, real wages have dropped and unemployment in many countries has soared about 50%. Meanwhile, over 35% of export earnings, or more than one-third of domestic savings, have gone to pay interest on Latin America's foreign debt of $360 billion, a sum equivalent to 60% of its gross national product.    This prolonged slump has created extreme tensions in both Mexico and Brazil, which each owe more than $100 billion of that $360 billion. Both countries must balance the need to create more than a million jobs a year -- so as to absorb their growing populations -- with the obligation to devote more than 4% of GNP to the interest payments on the debt. Last month, Brazil gave up. President Jose Sarney declared, &quot;We won't pay debt with hunger,&quot; and announced a moratorium on interest payments on $67 billion of medium- and long-term foreign-bank debt.    Mexico applauded. For the moment, however, President Miguel de la Madrid has taken a more cautious path, winning a $12 billion loan package. But in the view of one government official, this is merely a palliative. &quot;U.S. banks made a bet with us on oil, and it was a bad bet,&quot; he says. &quot;Now they must share the losses. What's needed is a mechanism for banks to recognize they have lost 30% to 40% of their debt.&quot;    This view reflects the fact that although they have had bright moments, neither Brazil nor Mexico has been able to break the stranglehold of debt. In 1984 and 1985, when oil prices were high, Mexico seemed to be doing well. And last year, in the midst of a miniboom, some predicted that Brazil could grow its way out of the debt crisis and attract more lending. But in both cases, constraints and errors ultimately left the economy in a mess.    This failure can be linked to some chronic Latin American ills. In both countries, government spending, often on inefficient state industries, subsidies or populist political measures, has generally proved uncontrollable. In Mexico, government spending now accounts for about 53% of GNP; in Brazil, over one-third. As a result, deficits in both countries have risen, and with them inflation. With inflation have come uncertainty and a reluctance to invest.    There has also been a serious decline in the two countries' terms of trade. The plunge in oil prices cost Mexico $8.7 billion in export earnings last year, and Brazil, like other South American countries, has suffered from the fall in the price of coffee and other commodity exports. Says a senior officer at a U.S. money-center bank:    &quot;When oil prices were up we all loved Mexico, and when they were down we loved Brazil. Now we have nobody.&quot;    To Patricio Meller, a senior economist at Cieplan, the Santiago-based Center for Latin American Economic Studies, the overriding problem is the foreign debt. The current level of debt payments, Mr. Meller says, condemns Latin America to stagnation.    &quot;Quite simply,&quot; he says, &quot;either we pay or we grow. To grow you must invest, and to invest we must stop savings from going out. Otherwise the region's social and economic problems can only fester.&quot;    This is the challenge Brazil has now taken up with its moratorium. Finance Minister Dilson Funaro hopes the step will help persuade foreign banks to accept the idea that they, as well as debtor countries, must pay for the debt crisis. In many ways, Brazil seems more strongly placed than Mexico -- the only other country in the region with potentially decisive political and economic clout -- to take up this challenge.    Brazil's vigor and Mexico's uncertainty in the face of such problems are tied to a number of factors:    --The 58-year domination by Mexico's Institutional Revolutionary Party (PRI) has created a pervasive moral exhaustion. People talk wearily of the impossibility of change under the current system, and many predict that it must crumble because the resources that allowed the PRI to thrive are exhausted. A senior member of the party concedes that its main problem now &quot;is getting people to believe what we say.&quot; In contrast, Brazil's politics, although turbulent, are open and permeated by the energy of change from a military to a democratic system.    --Mexico's business class is wary of its country's leadership. The 1982 nationalization of banks was, in the words of economist Rogelio Ramirez de la O, &quot;the sort of trauma that takes 40 years to forget.&quot; As a result of this and the impenetrability of PRI methods, says one businessman, &quot;private entrepreneurs no longer believe in the legal system.&quot; They have therefore become the chief perpetrators of what one Mexico City department-store executive, Carlos Sanchez, estimates as $40 billion in capital flight. In Brazil, businessmen still tend to plow their profits back into the country. Even in the current crisis, with inflation at over 600% a year, industrialist Jose Mindlin says: &quot;We may worry about the end of the month, but we never worry about the future.&quot;    --Mexico's capital flight, the grip of the PRI and widely perceived corruption have led to what psychologist Federico San Roman calls &quot;a collective depression and cynicism, a belief that the future holds nothing better.&quot; In contrast, Brazilians tend to believe what their government tells them, while the country's long tradition of change through compromise rather than conflict has forged a sense that difficulties can be overcome. This has been reinforced by the conspicuous success of such large immigrant groups as the Lebanese, Italians and Japanese. Their easy integration into Brazilian society contrasts with Mexico's agonizing over its mestizo-Spanish and Indian-past.    --While the overwhelming presence of the U.S. on its northern border seems to sap Mexico's confidence, Brazil, which is bigger than the 48 mainland U.S. states, dominates its South American neighbors. Mexico seems to feel economically hemmed in and unable to compete and to fear that its fate may ultimately be beyond its own control, while Brazil looks restlessly to the South American market. Its growth has been such over the past 30 years that the economy of Sao Paulo state now is bigger than that of any other South American nation. There has been no significant brain drain, and the country's foreign borrowings, unlike Mexico's, have generally been invested productively.    --Whereas the Mexican economy has been &quot;petrolized,&quot; Brazil is industrially diversified and its products, on the whole, are more sophisticated and internationally competitive. &quot;Industrially,&quot; says Mexican banker Tomas Penaloza of Banca Serfin S.N.C., &quot;Brazil has taken a lead we won't be able to catch for 25 or 30 years.&quot;    All this leads most U.S. bankers to be ultimately more optimistic about Brazil than about Mexico, even though Brazil's economic plight is more acute right now. &quot;In the end,&quot; says Robert Hormats, a vice president at Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co., &quot;Brazil is just a more dynamic and promising place. On the other hand, Mexico is the only case where, if it really deteriorates badly, the U.S. probably has to provide the resources.&quot;    Even Mexicans seem ready to accord Brazil the leader's role in Latin America. Sitting in an office full of Japanese works of art, Enrique Madero Bracho, a leading industrialist, fingers a large pearl tiepin. &quot;I've no doubt,&quot; he says wearily, &quot;that Brazil will be one of the world's major industrial powers in the 21st century while Mexico will be struggling to get over its present situation. They will beat the debt crisis before us.&quot;    Visits to both countries, however, leave no doubt that the struggle will be long. For debt, in Brazil as in Mexico, is only one side of the equation. The other is finding the resources and the will to overcome a mire of poverty and ignorance. And in both countries, this mire could ultimately prove politically explosive.    In Mexico City's poor and earthquake-ravaged Colonia de los Doctores, Josefina Iruz shows off the small house that the church (&quot;the government does nothing&quot;) is building for her and her mother. For over a year she has been living in a shack by the roadside. Her fatherless one-year-old twins, often left alone in the nearly completed house, are already learning to fend for themselves.    Across the continent, in a Rio slum, Maria da Silva sits on a step, heavily pregnant. She is 21. The child will be her second and, like the first, will never know its father. &quot;I don't know where they {the fathers} are,&quot; she says. &quot;They left.&quot; Her smile is wan and uncertain as she adds, &quot;I would have aborted this one, but I didn't have the money.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>