<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880203-0138 </DOCNO><HL> Hollywood Gets in the Family Way </HL><AUTHOR> Michael Medved </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> FLX </IN><TEXT>   Preachers and politicians used to moralize in public against Hollywood's shameless exploitation of scandalous sex. In 1987, however, preachers and politicians led the way in sex scandals while big-studio movies took care of the moralizing.    The success of &quot;Fatal Attraction&quot; is the most spectacular manifestation of this amazing trend. A cautionary tale of adultery and its consequences that struck the fantasy life of the married American male with the sobering force of a cold shower, it nonetheless proved to be the second-biggest money maker among all movies released in 1987 (next to &quot;Beverly Hills Cop II&quot;). Glenn Close, the deranged villainess of &quot;Fatal Attraction,&quot; is a glamorous, sexually adventurous, conspicuously successful, single career woman -- precisely the sort of figure that had been touted for years as an appropriate female role model.    Even more surprising, the picture's heroine (Anne Archer) is an attractive but thoroughly conventional wife and mother who previously might have been viewed with pity or contempt; she is, after all, preoccupied through the course of the film with moving her family to a new home in the suburbs.    Many more of the year's most popular movies similarly turned against the freewheeling sexuality that since the 1960s had so often been glorified as a life-affirming alternative to the restrictions of marriage.    The smash-hit police pictures &quot;Lethal Weapon&quot; and &quot;The Untouchables&quot; both featured heroes (Danny Glover and Kevin Costner) whose tender devotion to their wives and children placed them light years away from rootless cop crusaders of the past such as Dirty Harry Callahan and Popeye Doyle. In &quot;Dragnet,&quot; meanwhile, the comically square hero (Dan Aykroyd) goes even further in asserting the claims of tradition: He refuses to become involved with a woman unless she proves to be a virgin. When he finally discovers a suitably unsullied maiden, she isn't in the least bit prudish or laughable. In this movie, at least, it's possible to find an L.A. virgin in her mid-20s who's gorgeous and athletic, smart and sweet.    Above all, 1987 may be remembered for the turning point in movie history marked by release of &quot;The Living Daylights&quot; -- the picture in which even James Bond turned monogamous. The world's most durable lothario, who once frolicked with the likes of &quot;Pussy Galore,&quot; this time confines his attentions to a demure and mousy Czechoslovakian cellist. What's more, the object of his exclusive affections remains fully (and rather conservatively) clothed as she accompanies Bond on his adventures.    Finally, as last year drew to a close, came the year's most celebrated romantic triangle -- with William Hurt and Albert Brooks competing for the attention of Holly Hunter in the much-praised &quot;Broadcast News.&quot; Despite endless flirtation and even some outright declarations of love, none of these presumably sophisticated network news people ever go to bed with one another.    The facile explanation for this current tendency to de-emphasize screen sexuality centers on the impact of the Big AIDS Scare. By now, everyone accepts the notion that the dangers of this dread disease have stripped promiscuity of much of its old spontaneity and appeal.    But when considered in its broader context, the rejection of sexual adventurism reflects far more than a fear of infection.    A few months ago, a number of medical reports indicated that the risks of heterosexual transmission of AIDS have been overstated, and that the actual chances of such transmission remain remote. By all logic, this news should have produced widespread relief and celebration. Single heterosexuals in particular might have been expected to seize upon even the flimsiest medical evidence as a welcome reprieve and to use it as justification for a return to the carefree ways of old.    Instead, the public remained skeptical, refusing to accept the reassurance of the experts. Many people seemed irrationally offended at the very notion that they might not, after all, be at risk.    This curious behavior leads to the conclusion that the fear of AIDS is actually an excuse for, rather than a cause of, the new sexual conservatism. The big AIDS Scare provided a convenient cover for a massive shift in the national mood that had already begun even before the disease was perceived as threatening the heterosexual population.    Developments in Hollywood certainly support this notion, since recent hit films reflect not only a rejection of promiscuity, but also a fresh emphasis on responsibility and the joys of child-rearing.    In &quot;Raising Arizona,&quot; an infertile man and wife are so desperate for offspring that they kidnap a baby from a set of famous quintuplets. Diane Keaton in &quot;Baby Boom&quot; and Tom Selleck, Steve Guttenberg and Ted Danson in &quot;Three Men and a Baby&quot; all learn that formula and diapers bring greater satisfaction than even the most high-powered careers. The new year is still fresh, but already we have the chance to watch Molly Ringwald (of all people) becoming a mother in &quot;For Keeps,&quot; and to see other infant films such as &quot;She's Having a Baby&quot; and &quot;Baby Maybe.&quot;    Last year, &quot;Made in Heaven&quot; at one point showed the two sexy stars (Kelly McGillis and Timothy Hutton) reincarnated as wailing babies for less than 90 seconds' screen time. Nevertheless, in promoting the film, MGM used a misleading photo of two plump and adorable infants sitting together in the clouds -- an image that never appears in the picture. When studio publicists decide they can sell more tickets with a picture of two smiling infants than with Kelly McGillis showing breasts or legs, then you know you're looking at a major trend.    That trend reflects the belated maturation of the baby-boom generation. After so many years of delay and indecision we are finally getting down to the serious and normal business of procreation and parenting. Even without the threat of AIDS, the draw of recreational sex would have begun to seem less powerful to that huge bulge in the population curve that hovers today around the frightening age of 40. Since there are disproportionately so many of us, we of course exert a disproportionate influence on the thinking of the society and the content of its popular entertainments. My own situation is not atypical: Last year I became a father for the first time at the age of 38, and I will readily confess that I now find celluloid sex fantasies notably less seductive than I have in the past.    For the past several decades, we indulged ourselves in the most extended adolescence in the history of humanity -- persisting in defining ourselves as fun-loving &quot;kids&quot; even as we pushed into our 30s. Our own carefully nurtured childishness contributed to the immaturity of the Hollywood product. All those movies of recent years about nervous teen-agers scoring with gorgeous girls or standing up to snobbish class bullies, appealed not only to the 14-year-olds in the so-called core audience, they also were accepted by many baby boomers who found it much easier to identify with slam-bang stories about high schoolers than with movies that focused on the sort of grown-up challenges and responsibilities that so many of us managed to avoid.    All that has begun to change so drastically that even film maker John Hughes, poet laureate of the troubled teen (&quot;Sixteen Candles,&quot; &quot;The Breakfast Club,&quot; &quot;Pretty in Pink,&quot; etc.) has turned for the first time to a picture that concentrates on adults. &quot;Planes, Trains and Automobiles&quot; may not be Chekhov, but it is a very funny comedy about a harried advertising man (Steve Martin) who endures one mishap after another while trying to return from a New York business trip to his wife and children in a Chicago suburb.    After nearly two hours of slapstick, the movie delivers a surprisingly touching reunion scene and becomes for a few moments a warm-hearted celebration of family. Steve Martin hugs his kids, kisses his wife, greets his in-laws and settles down at last to an orderly, idyllic Thanksgiving meal. If Hollywood ahead continues to provide evidence of new maturity, then we all may have reason to give thanks.    ---   Mr. Medved is co-host of the national movie review show &quot;Sneak Previews&quot; and author of seven non-fiction books. </TEXT></DOC>