<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870102-0173 </DOCNO><HL> New York BanksPressing to MoveInto Securities---Firms Backing Plan to AllowBrokerage, UnderwritingBy Delaware Subsidiaries---By Phillip L. ZweigStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JPM BT CCI CMBBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   In another bid for expanded markets, several major New York banks are pressing for legislation to allow their Delaware-based units to operate full-service securities subsidiaries in the state, industry sources said.    Under the banks' plan, the securities units would be empowered to do brokerage and underwrite corporate equity, debt and other issues.    The drive in Delaware is seen as adding to the mounting pressure on the Federal Reserve Board and Congress to drop barriers restricting bank underwriting activities.    Banking sources said that J.P. Morgan andamp; Co. and Bankers Trust New York Corp. are spearheading this effort, which also is said to include Citicorp, Chase Manhattan Corp. and perhaps other big New York banking companies. They indicated that these institutions have for some time considered using their Delaware units to expand their investment banking activities, but have accelerated this drive lately as part of a frontal assault on laws separating commercial banking and securities activities.    Legislation advocated by the banks would enable them to establish subsidiaries of their state-chartered Delaware banks that would enjoy full securities powers. However, no more than 25% of a Delaware bank's capital could be allocated to the securities subsidiary. One industry source said the banks expected a bill to be introduced in the Delaware legislature early this year.    J. P. Morgan, Bankers Trust and Citicorp, which are bank holding companies, all operate Delaware-chartered banks that aren't members of the Federal Reserve System. If the Fed chose to challenge activities of the Delaware units, it would have to exercise its authority as the regulator of bank holding companies.    A spokesman for Chase Manhattan acknowledged that &quot;there have been conversations among money-center banks concerning expanded powers through Delaware banking units.&quot; Chase Manhattan operates a nationally chartered, Fed member bank in Delaware that would likely have to switch to a state charter and drop its Fed membership to benefit from such legislation there.    Officials at the Fed said they aren't aware of details of the Delaware situation and declined to comment until they had an opportunity to study the matter.    A spokesman for Delaware Gov. Michael Castle said state officials couldn't be reached for comment over the New Year's holiday.    Bankers Trust declined comment, and Morgan and Citicorp officials couldn't be reached.    Officials of the Securities Industry Association, a trade group that has mounted legal challenges to efforts by banks to widen their powers, also couldn't be reached for comment.    Industry sources view the possible Delaware legislation as providing an alternative for banks in case the Fed doesn't approve pending applications from major New York-based banks for new securities powers. Bankers Trust, Morgan, Citicorp and others have sought approval to underwrite commercial paper, municipal revenue bonds, mortgage-backed securities and consumer-related receivables through subsidiaries that currently underwrite government securities. In these applications, the banking companies have argued that these activities wouldn't violate provisions of the Glass-Steagall Act prohibiting banks from being &quot;engaged principally&quot; in such lines. The 53-year-old act generally separates commercial banking and securities activities.    In a decision last week allowing Bankers Trust to distribute commercial paper through a lending subsidiary, the Fed directed that the unit's gross revenue from commercial paper activities can't exceed 5% of the unit's gross revenue, and that its share of the total dealer-placed commercial paper market can't exceed 5%. The Fed said Wednesday it intends to hold public hearings Feb. 3 on the remaining requests by Bankers Trust, Morgan and Citicorp. It has said it plans to decide these issues by the end of April.    Delaware's banking laws, which include attractive tax incentives for banks, have lured many out-of-state institutions. Last July, for example, Delaware enacted a law offering inducements to foreign-based banks planning to expand on the mid-Atlantic Coast.    The banks' Delaware lobbying effort comes amid a spate of developments in the past two weeks that appear to point the way to a possible breakthrough in 1987 for banks to move into securities markets.    The Fed's approval of Bankers Trust's commercial paper activities through a lending subsidiary came just one day after a federal appeals court ratified an earlier Fed decision allowing the company's banking unit to distribute commercial paper for clients.    Earlier this week, New York said it would allow state-chartered banks, which include Morgan Guaranty Trust Co., a unit of J. P. Morgan, and Bankers Trust to set up units to underwrite corporate and other securities currently off limits to banks. </TEXT></DOC>