<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870319-0132 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint:Israel's Pollard Scandal: Arrogance, Not 'Dual Loyalty'---By Alexander Cockburn</HL><DD> 03/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST </IN><TEXT>   With the Pollards now behind bars, convicted of spying for Israel, the sky is dark with chickens coming home to roost.    American Jews nervously ponder the fact that other spies for Israel may be brought to book and fear the revival of old charges of &quot;dual loyalty.&quot; They have sent a high-level delegation to Israel to impress upon that country's government the delicacy of the situation and the damage inflicted on U.S.-Israeli relations. They and others have asked how it is that the Israeli government could have acted with such careless arrogance, first to enter into such a relationship with Pollard when he volunteered his services, and finally to promote the two men identified as Pollard's senior Israeli handlers, Messrs. Eitan and Sella.    The answer is simple enough. Israel, as represented by its recent governments, has acted with careless arrogance because it had every reason to believe that its carelessness would remain unchecked and its arrogance unchallenged. All the talk about &quot;dual loyalty,&quot; with that phrase's undoubted anti-Semitic resonance, is something of a red herring. Anti-Semitism and McCarthyism make the accusation of &quot;dual loyalty&quot; as a matter of taste, inflicted on persons by reasons of their ancestry, or the kinds of thoughts in their heads or books on their shelves.    But the Pollards did not go to prison for something vaguely designated as &quot;dual loyalty.&quot; They agreed they had broken laws relating to espionage. There is a substantive difference, even if it is true that during outbreaks of anti-semitism or McCarthyism, Jews, communists and fellow travelers are likely to be framed on trumped-up charges of espionage on behalf of their presumed foreign masters.    So it has nothing to do with the loaded phrase &quot;dual loyalty&quot; to say that the furious resistance among many of Israel's admirers in this country to any criticism of any act of any Israeli governments in recent times has inevitably fostered in the minds of many Israeli officials the notion that they can get away with anything. When it comes to reality checks, yes men are not much use. Fortified by their yes men here, Israeli officials no doubt conceived they would remain immune to sanction concerning such activities as the bombing of the U.S. intelligence ship Liberty, continued occupation of the territories, illegal settlements, sabotage of any realistic peace process, invasion of Lebanon, bombing of Tunis and so forth.    The depth of the arrogance thus produced was well illustrated by a &quot;Letter to an American Friend&quot; published in the March 10 Jerusalem Post and written by Shlomo Avineri, a well-known Israeli academic. Prof. Avineri asserted that although American Jews maintain that their position in U.S. society is now secure, their distress over the Pollard affair and concomitant charges of dual loyalty shows that their true position is in fact tenuous and they are still in need of emancipation. This is the ultimate parody of the Zionist argument: The more Zionism messes you up (by recruiting Pollard and thus provoking the charges of dual loyalty), the more this proves, says Mr. Avineri, that America is not the &quot;promised land!&quot;    The success of the yes men has produced the ridiculous situation whereby serious scrutiny and criticism of various actions of Israeli governments often can be found only in the Hebrew-language press in Israel. Here may be found even devoted yes men speaking with frankness.    In the Dec. 11 Ha'aretz, for example, the executive director of the American Jewish Congress, Henry Siegman, spoke candidly about the consequences for Israel's interests in the U.S. of the arms-for-Iran affair, saying: &quot;Israel has always claimed that its security will be badly damaged by American arms sales to Jordan and other Arab states. What argument will Israel now have to oppose such arms sales? If there are arguments to justify arms sales to a country like Iran, which refuses to recognize Israel and promises to destroy it, what objection can be made to the armaments for Saudi Arabia or a truly moderate state such as Jordan. . . . If Israel can arm the Iranians, claiming that it might help to moderate them, then why should not other countries at least talk -- not sell arms -- to the PLO, in the hope that such talks will have a moderating effect on this organization?&quot;    In the Hebrew-language press one can find such frank talk, as well as candid acknowledgment of PLO peace overtures -- all regarded as a matter best kept from the U.S. public. Two decades of success at this kind of manipulation of news and opinion and one easily gets to the point where the Pollard affair looks like something easily brushed under the rug.    So the sooner the yes men see that critical support can be more constructive than blind enthusiasm, the better off Israel and everyone else will be -- particularly those on the receiving end of scandalous treatment by the present Israeli government, which might sit up and take heed if the yes men dared open their mouths.    To take some recent cases, Israel shut down, amid practically no public commotion in this country, two Arab papers in East Jerusalem: Al Mithaq and Al-Ahd. The charge, based on undisclosed evidence, was one of association with &quot;terrorist groups.&quot; Then Akram Haniyeh, editor of another Arab paper, A-Sha'ab, was expelled from Israel on undisclosed charges. An Israeli citizen, Mordecai Vanunu, charged with spying, was kidnapped in Rome and is now being tried in secret. Imagine the shouts that would have risen from the yes men if the Soviet Union or Nicaragua had perpetrated such deeds.    More recently, in another case that left the yes men unmoved, Israeli authorities have for the first time used the Prevention of Terror Ordinance of 1948 -- in origin a piece of characteristically outrageous British emergency legislation held over from the Mandate -- against an Israeli Jew. On Feb. 16, Israeli police closed the offices of the Alternative Information Center in West Jerusalem. (The offices are within Israel proper, and therefore not under military regulations pertaining to occupied territory.) The center offers news, typesetting and translating services to Western journalists, consulates and groups on the West Bank. Authorities are charging that by some unspecified means the center has been promoting propaganda of the Popular Front for the Liberation of Palestine.    To this day the center stays closed. Its leading organizer, Michael Warschawsky, was jailed for a month and reportedly released on bail Monday. In the time-scarred argot of repression, an Israeli policeman has claimed that secretly, Mr. Warschawsky and the others were planning to use the office to provide the left with instruments for advancing its objective.    It is the sort of exercise of state repression that would be headline news if it occurred in Moscow or Managua. In Israel it has caused some alarm, since the emergency laws have often been used against Israeli Arabs but not, until now, against Israeli Jews. Thus Mr. Warschawsky's persecution is seen as a harbinger of a more general crackdown. The people who ordered the closing of the center and Mr. Warschawsky's arrest are those who nurtured the Pollards. Who is to call them most effectively to account for such behavior if not the yes men who helped imbue them with the illusion that they would forever escape reproach or sanction.?    (See: Correction -- WSJ March 23, 1977)    ---   Mr. Cockburn is a columnist for The Nation. </TEXT></DOC>