<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870105-0030 </DOCNO><HL> Desperate Straits:Burgeoning Caseloads,Cuts in Funding BesetPublic Social Workers---Other Problems Include LossOf Status, Low Salaries;More Leave the Profession---'Society Just Doesn't Care'---By Clare AnsberryStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> LORAIN, Ohio  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Pablo Pagan stands outside the apartment of an elderly woman who is deliberately starving herself and begs her to let him in. &quot;Go away,&quot; she whispers, her pale, thin face peeking around the door. Shaking his head in frustration, Mr. Pagan moves on to the next name on his lengthy list.    Mr. Pagan (pronounced pay-GON) is a social worker at the Family Service Association of Lorain County, a private, nonprofit agency here. With just one other colleague, he is assigned to handle every crisis in 1,600 units of public housing. Today he must visit a single mother whose needs include counseling help for her withdrawn daughter, a school for her deaf son and diapers for her 10-month-old baby.    There are also the elderly couple upset about noisy neighbors, a 13-year-old who has been caught shoplifting and a 52-year-old suicidal man whom Mr. Pagan finds huddled under a blanket on the couch in his apartment; Mr. Pagan stays in the man's apartment long enough to make sure a butcher knife on a nearby table is being used only to open a box.    &quot;We have to spread ourselves so thin,&quot; laments 27-year-old Mr. Pagan. &quot;We have to be everything for these people.&quot;    He and his fellow social workers could use a few champions of their own. Their standing has fallen sharply since the Great Society era 20 years ago when they helped lead the war against poverty. In the decade between 1960 and 1970, their numbers more than doubled as prestige and a crusading sense of mission permeated the profession. Today, by contrast, &quot;The status of public social workers has been subtly eroded and disparaged,&quot; says Robert Cohen, an official of the 100,000-member National Association of Social Workers.    In the past five years, some $60 billion of federal-funding cuts aimed at programs for the poor have forced social-service agencies to eliminate services and pare their staffs. Surviving social workers must handle huge caseloads, while their salaries lag far behind those of teachers, police and even office clerks. One local agency advertises for a social worker with five years experience. The pay: $13,500.    Funding cutbacks also have lowered federal standards. Master's-degree requirements for certain mental-health directors have been removed, and there are fewer opportunities for advancement.    Yet more people than ever need social workers. What is happening here in Lorain, an aging industrial center of about 76,000, is typical of hundreds of inner cities across the country. The new poor, displaced from dying industries and struggling to get by on low-paying jobs or welfare, have joined the ranks of those who have been poor for generations.    With them are the growing numbers of the homeless, including the mentally ill released by states moving to clear mental institutions. A settlement house here sheltered 500 homeless in 1985, 15 times the number aided in 1981.    Perhaps heavy caseloads and low salaries wouldn't be such issues if the profession still garnered respect. But that has all but evaporated, social workers say. &quot;I'm viewed as an intruder, interfering with people's lives,&quot; says Judith Arroyo, a caseworker with Lorain County Human Services.    On New Year's Eve a few years ago, Ms. Arroyo was asked to investigate an older woman who was living on her front porch. The social worker found the woman sitting on a kerosene heater, a dozen purring cats rubbing against her swollen, scratched and bare feet. The woman had deserted her house because there wasn't any heat, electricity or water, and the roof was riddled with holes.    Cat and human feces littered the porch. It made Ms. Arroyo sick. She spent hours in the cold trying to convince the woman to go to the hospital, but the woman refused; finally, police came to take her to the emergency room.    That night on television, a news bulletin announced: &quot;Social worker drags woman from home.&quot;    &quot;That was my thanks,&quot; says a frustrated Ms. Arroyo. She became a social worker about 10 years ago for one simple reason -- &quot;to help people solve their problems.&quot; But the daily frustration and wear coupled with public disrespect of her profession have taken their toll. Once when a client called her at home, she said it was the wrong number. &quot;Maybe we {social workers} just aren't as committed&quot; as those practicing in the 1960s and '70s, she worries. &quot;We aren't the veterans like Paul.&quot;    She is referring to Paul Kuestner, who sits in an adjacent office, munching graham crackers at his small desk. He has been a social worker for 18 years and remembers how those in the field used to see that their clients had food and shelter, that their bills were paid and that their children had shoes to wear. At times, he begged money from a local church so clients waiting for their Social Security checks could pay their rent and avoid eviction.    Now his agency won't even allow him to drive clients to the store or a doctor's office because it fears a lawsuit if an accident occurs. (At other agencies, caseworkers have been sued for taking children from homes they considered dangerous and also for not removing some children from homes soon enough.)    Until a few years ago, Mr. Kuestner handled all the mentally unstable clients referred to the agency. Now, because of funding cutbacks, he is restricted to caring for the elderly -- a group that must be given priority under state law. But who makes sure the schizophrenic young man, who would often barricade himself in his room, has paid his rent and not been evicted? &quot;Not a damn soul,&quot; Mr. Kuestner says quietly.    At Lorain's Neighborhood House, whose founder Sina K. Evans studied at Chicago's famed Hull House, funding cuts have taken an even deeper toll. A professional staff of 15 social workers tries to serve 500 clients. The van that once delivered meals to shutins is gone, and so is the preschool program.    Anxious to keep Neighborhood House programs intact, director Paul Buccino now spends much of his time soliciting support from private foundations. But charity can't fill the gap. &quot;To even suggest that is a joke, a cruel joke,&quot; he says. &quot;The fact is society just doesn't care anymore.&quot;    Eugene Rivera shares that feeling. Mr. Rivera helped found an agency called El Centro de Servicios Sociales in 1975 to serve the burgeoning Puerto Rican community here. Himself an immigrant, Mr. Rivera organized English classes and housing assistance and started a free health clinic. But he also felt it was his job to organize people to address social problems. He held meetings on utility shut-offs with representatives of the state utility commission and got involved in lawsuits charging police brutality.    But two years ago, Mr. Rivera suddenly resigned as director of El Centro. His outspoken ways, he says, alienated conservative funding sources so much that they planted a woman at the agency who claimed she was hungry and had no money for food. When she was given a bag of groceries without her income status being checked, Mr. Rivera was reprimanded for not following procedures.    Now president of Lorain's school board, Mr. Rivera also has some harsh words for social workers. Many of his colleagues, he feels, have abandoned the precepts of the profession. &quot;Instead of improving the quality of life, they try to teach people how to stretch a piece of bologna into five meals,&quot; he says.    The system is also a source of frustration for Nathaniel James, a Cleveland social worker who was formerly with Lorain's El Centro agency. To illustrate the effects of declining social services, Mr. James tells the story of Willie.    Mr. James found Willie several years ago living in the streets, his mind stunted in an institution by 10 years of neglect and the tranquilizer Thorazine. Mr. James got Willie on disability and into public housing. He paid his bills because Willie, 36, can't read or write. And he saw that Willie's rotted teeth were replaced with dentures.    But Mr. James lost his job in Lorain because of funding cuts, which is why he now works in Cleveland. He says he can't find anyone else to refer Willie to, so he does his best to watch over him in the evenings and on weekends. When Willie gets arrested for jaywalking because he can't negotiate traffic, or for drinking and picking a fight, he waits for Mr. James to get home from work to bail him out. &quot;No one else wants him. But he's a human being. What else can I do?&quot; Mr. James asks.    In the future, there may be fewer Mr. Jameses -- and more Willies -- as a growing number of social workers desert jobs in public agencies and the profession altogether. After five years as a caseworker, Mr. Pagan says he is overwhelmed and often at a loss with his clients. He recalls the helplessness he felt when a 63-year-old woman dying of cancer asked him to marry her. &quot;I'm wasting my time and my talents,&quot; he says, adding that he may seek a job in business.    A decade ago, 56% of social workers were employed in the public sector; today that figure has dropped to 46%. &quot;Most everyone I worked with has gone,&quot; says Kathi Martin, formerly a caseworker at a mental-health agency here and now an assistant to a private psychologist. At the same time, fewer students are entering the field. The number who received master's and doctoral degrees in social work nationwide dropped 10% between 1980 and 1985.    Concerned about a possible shortage of public-sector social workers, schools such as Case Western Reserve University in Cleveland have recently revamped their graduate programs to concentrate on public housing, education and welfare. So far, the signs are promising. The social-work program at Case Western Reserve, which doubled its enrollment in the last two years, is attracting employed social workers who hope to upgrade their status with graduate degrees.    But whatever the hopeful signs, Mr. Rivera, the former social worker, isn't brimming with optimism. Social work is &quot;the only hope for the poor,&quot; he maintains. &quot;I still believe that, but I am afraid for the future.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>