<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870602-0110 </DOCNO><HL> What Ronald Reagan and Gary Hart Have in Common---By Rachel Flick</HL><DD> 06/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MDESTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   The Reagan administration's mangling of the Iranscam crisis found its perfect expression in an exchange in the White House briefing room one day last month.    The immediate subject of the exchange was the dispute over the Boland amendment, which is just a corner of the larger Iranscam scandal. Boland was a sensitive and ill-understood law that banned the U.S. from supplying military aid to the Nicaraguan Contras during fiscal 1985. The law struck precisely at the critical, troubled intersection of the legislative and executive branches. Lawyers legitimately differed over its reach and constitutionality.    Revelations at the congressional Iranscam hearings in early May concerning a Saudi Arabian donation to the Contras provoked just such a difference -- and angry accusations that the law had been violated. By May 14, the dispute had come to this: Did the president &quot;solicit&quot; Contra aid from Saudi Arabia's King Fahd at a private meeting at the White House in February 1985? And if he did, did he break the Boland amendment?    Mr. Reagan supports the Contras, so the White House had to answer without seeming to condemn the donation. The first explanation, from former White House aide Robert McFarlane, was that the president &quot;acknowledged&quot; the donation after the fact and was pleased by it. Next, the White House said that Mr. Reagan and King Fahd &quot;discussed&quot; the donation, but that Mr. Reagan did not &quot;solicit&quot; it.    At length, presidential spokesman Marlin Fitzwater delivered the final answer: Mr. Reagan did not ask King Fahd to help the Contras, but it would have been &quot;perfectly proper&quot; for him to have done so. The president &quot;complied with the law.&quot;    And then came the inevitable question. A reporter demanded: &quot;If it was perfectly proper, why didn't you?&quot;    Why indeed? This absurdity marked the apotheosis of the administration's mismanagement of the Boland dispute -- and of the Iranscam crisis itself.    The immediate cause of the debacle on May 14 was the White House's failure to state its real position on the Boland amendment, free of clutter, at the proper time. President Reagan's real point about Boland -- which he finally did spell out, two days after the moment of truth in the briefing room had been etched into the minds of all present -- is not that he &quot;complied&quot; with the law. It is that the law doesn't apply to him. His position is that Congress may not, under the separation of powers, restrict his authority to make foreign policy (or control the National Security Council, which is his staff).    This is at least as valid as any other interpretation of what is a genuinely controversial law. But it is the sort of point that must be made from the start and then stuck to, if it is to be made at all. Denying the law applied to him after he said he obeyed it put Mr. Reagan in the position of fallen presidential candidate Gary Hart, who first denied he committed adultery with Donna Rice, and then said his marital fidelity was no one's business but his own. The disjunction discredited both claims -- and the man who made them. As soon as you explain where you stand within the controversy, you surrender your prerogative to put yourself outside it.    As with the Boland fracas, so with the scandal itself. By its earliest reactions to the scandal, the White House abdicated the authority of the executive branch to make foreign policy and surrendered the right of the executive to privacy. It did so because it was in a panic to dissociate Ronald Reagan from the diversion of Iranian arms profits to the Contras. But if you choose to surrender your prerogatives when that is convenient, you have surrendered them permanently and will not be credible if you try to call upon them when you need them again.    The White House surrendered the president's prerogatives mostly from political cowardice. When the scandal broke, the public was genuinely disturbed to learn that its avowedly anti-terrorist president had in fact negotiated with terrorists. The White House knew it had some explaining to do. But a weak staff -- reeling from a disastrous congressional campaign and stunned by the intensity of Iranscam's impact -- feared handling the explanation itself. The Iranian arms sales would be tough to justify under any circumstances, and this primary difficulty was aggravated by the White House's understandable anxiety not to add the charge of a cover-up -- so redolent of Watergate -- to the accusations already oppressing it.    Consequently, the administration handed the task of explaining over to others. Mr. Reagan and his staff turned the Tower Commission loose on the White House files. They delivered his personal diary to Congress. They pledged to cooperate with Select Committees and declared that they were as interested as the congressmen themselves were in seeing what a round of hearings might turn up.    Yet with the burden of explanation, the White House also relinquished Mr. Reagan's control over the direction of the scandal and his resources for staying clear of it thereafter. The price has been the erosion of his dignity.    Nowhere is this more apparent than in the congressional Iranscam hearings, where the administration's misjudgment has turned a trivial stream of innuendos into a relentless and obscurely damning drip, drip, drip of accusation. The Iranscam committees represent themselves as investigative, but in fact they are controlled by people who've long opposed the president's policies and whose transparent purpose is to ruin them. It is a reprehensible fixation for the nation's lawmaking body. The hearings have turned up very little and the public response has been mixed. Nevertheless, White House clumsiness has prevented Congress's failure from becoming the president's success. Mr. Reagan's early endorsement of &quot;the investigative process&quot; means he cannot now shrug off a single caprice Congress throws his way.    The president and his staff set themselves up for the attack they are now experiencing. They did so by their failure to state clearly and from the start what does not require either apology or explanation. And they sealed their fate by failing to handle what does, by themselves.    What the White House should have said, when Congress requested cooperation with hearings designed to destroy the president, was &quot;To the minimum extent required by the law.&quot; This was the correct answer, as surely as the answer to &quot;May I read your diary&quot; was &quot;No&quot; and the answer to &quot;Did you ask King Fahd for Contra aid?&quot; was &quot;None of your business.&quot; But these are answers that must be made the first time the questions are asked, and they were not.    ---   Ms. Flick is a reporter in the Washington bureau of the New York Post. </TEXT></DOC>