<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871116-0163 </DOCNO><HL> INF Pact LimitsOur Conventional'Smarts' as Well---By Seymour Weiss</HL><DD> 11/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTAEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   Now that Mikhail Gorbachev has condescended to meet at the summit, we shall finally be permitted to sign another very bad arms-control agreement.    We shall soon be faced with an agreement on INF (intermediate-range nuclear forces) that, contrary to administration claims, will not be highly verifiable and that will be politically disruptive and strategically unsound. Were that not bad enough, this agreement purportedly designed to limit nuclear forces -- thus having the effect of reducing the deterrent to Soviet conventional aggression -- will also, as incredible as it may sound, impair Western conventional defenses.    How did this come about? In a supremely illogically logical decision, it was decided to make an agreement of inherently low verifiability slightly more verifiable by banning conventional warheads for ground-launched cruise missiles (on the grounds that it is not possible to tell nuclear warheads from conventional ones). Why illogical? Because in taking this step we once again placed the value of an arms-control agreement with the Soviets, as an end in itself, above U.S. security interests. And there is good reason to believe that the Russians laid a trap into which the administration fell.    For some time now the Soviets have evidenced great discomfort over strides being made in the West in advanced conventional-weapons systems. These systems of so-called &quot;smart weapons&quot; hold promise of delivering conventional warheads at great distances with incredible accuracy. Should the promise be fulfilled, then the brute-force approach used by the Soviets of throwing vast numbers of men and tanks into battle will be neutralized.    Soviet literature has provided ample evidence that the Soviets understand this revolution in warfare and fear its consequences. They know they cannot match the West in developing and fielding advanced technology (much of it dependent upon computers, where the Soviets lag far behind the West), so what better way to meet the threat to their existing conventional military dominance than to constrain the West through arms control. Enter the INF pact, ostensibly designed to limit nuclear systems but in fact limiting conventional, ground-launched cruise missiles as well.    How serious is this development? If the president paid attention to his own words he might conclude it is very serious. In a little noted passage in his March 1983 address that first laid out the advantages of a strategic nuclear defense, Mr. Reagan also noted that: &quot;America does possess, now, the technologies to attain very significant improvements in the effectiveness of our conventional, non-nuclear forces. Proceeding boldly with these technologies, we can significantly reduce any incentive . . . to threaten attack against the United States and its allies.&quot;    The Defense Science Board, a prestigious group of experts that advises the Defense Department on a wide range of scientific and technological issues, recently reported that the promise of this new technology was very high, that it might help to deter war and that should war come, it might help to inhibit rapid escalation to nuclear war. The board did not claim that dependence on this new technology could solve all our security problems, but surely deterrence of war or, failing that, inhibiting its escalation to the use of nuclear weapons are not trivial benefits to the nation. Thus the board cautioned against this new conventional technology being &quot;captured&quot; in arms-control agreements designed to limit nuclear, even strategic nuclear, weapons.    According to press reports, then Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger tried valiantly to get the point across to the White House but failed. Apparently nothing was to be permitted to interfere with an arms-control agreement with the Soviets even if it tended to foreclose technologies that might reduce incentives to &quot;attack against the United States and its allies,&quot; to quote Mr. Reagan.    There is no justification for our having been caught off guard. In a book co-authored in 1981 with recently retired Secretary of the Navy John Lehman, I wrote: &quot;. . . most important of all, the Soviets would have us severely restrain the cruise missile. This system with its potential for creating a more stable military balance in Europe is a major target of Soviet arms-control strategy. Precisely because they understand its theater potential would they like to limit if not preclude it. Moreover, they recognize full well that to do so would also have a major political impact: it would, through bilateral U.S.-Soviet agreement, foreclose or substantially impair the utility of a system that our allies are increasingly comprehending could be of great importance to their own security.&quot;    That was in 1981 and the book was a critique of Carter administration Salt II arms-control policy. At the time it would have defied credulity to believe that the Reagan administration would go the Carter administration one better!    One might hope that an agreement &quot;flawed&quot; in so many respects -- of questionable verifiability, imperiling the nuclear deterrent, politically disruptive with our allies and one that even impairs our conventional defense -- would not be ratified by the Senate. It is difficult, however, to imagine a Senate dominated by pro-arms-control Democrats rejecting any arms-control agreement, and it is equally difficult for Senate Republicans to abandon their president. Or is it? It will not be easy for the Senate to ignore the fundamental deficiencies in this agreement if the Oct. 28 debate among GOP presidential aspirants is any guide: Only one such aspirant was unequivocal in his support for INF, Vice President George Bush. Senate majority leader Robert Dole was cautious and the other four were outspokenly opposed. Perhaps we will be saved from ourselves.    ---   Mr. Weiss, a retired ambassador, directed the State Department's Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs in 1973. </TEXT></DOC>