<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881012-0086 </DOCNO><HL> It's High Time To Withdraw From ABM Treaty </HL><AUTHOR> Caspar W. Weinberger </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><IN> NUK ARO </IN><G> DEF CNG EXE </G><TEXT>   In spite of all the progress, the Strategic Defense Initiative is in danger of slow strangulation by a combination of inadequate congressional funding and blind submission to a treaty, the ABM Treaty, that has never served the national interest of the U.S. but has become a kind of totem to which all are supposed to offer continued support.    Now is the time to continue full speed ahead to develop, test and deploy strategic defenses. The presidential election should be a national referendum on the necessity to deploy strategic defenses. The critical question is whether the U.S. will be able to defend itself and its allies against Soviet offensive missiles, or whether it will give up and let the Soviets win the race for defenses against missiles while maintaining their lead in building modern and accurate offensive weapons.    The 1972 ABM Treaty is a prime example of a flawed strategic concept that its supporters hoped would enhance nuclear stability between the U.S. and the Soviet Union. But the treaty was based on two assumptions that were not borne out: that there would soon be deep reductions in offensive weapons, and that both parties would give up defenses (except for one not very effective system).    The Soviets upset both assumptions. They never stopped their buildup and modernization of offensive arms, and they never abandoned defensive strategies. In fact, immediately after signing the ABM Treaty they began to develop the same strategic defenses they so violently object to when pursued by the U.S. They also deployed, and then modernized, all of the defensive systems permitted under the ABM Treaty, and they violated that treaty by constructing the huge radar at Krasnoyarsk. These developments undermine and make obsolete the ABM Treaty, and it is time that the U.S. acknowledges this by withdrawing from the treaty.    There has been continuing debate -- arcane and largely irrelevant -- about what the ABM Treaty allows and does not allow with respect to testing and development of defensive systems. We know it does not permit deployment. The primary purpose of most Americans who urge &quot;strict construction&quot; of the treaty is to kill SDI. The real ABM debate should be on whether it is in the national interest of the U.S. to exercise the withdrawal clause and pull out of the treaty.    The U.S. does not have to violate the treaty to deploy SDI; under the provisions of Article XV, it has a right to withdraw by giving six months' notice. The U.S. would not violate the treaty by exercising its rights under that treaty; that is why withdrawal clauses exist.    The critics of SDI say that a perfect defense cannot exist and therefore SDI is a waste of technical and financial resources. But the value of SDI must be viewed in phases. Deterrence, strategic stability, and arms reductions all would benefit from a first phase that is an integral part of the full system. SDI would offer an important element of protection for all the West, and would reduce the possibility that the Soviets would launch an attack in the first place. By deploying SDI, the U.S. would greatly complicate the calculations of Soviet planners.    Above all, SDI opens the way to deep reductions in offensive nuclear weapons with a margin of safety. If the U.S. and the Soviet Union agreed to destroy a portion of their ballistic missiles as they deployed defensive systems, they would be sending each other signals that neither side was seeking a strategic advantage. That opportunity could be lost if the U.S. continues to adhere to a treaty that bans deployment of SDI while the Soviet Union continues to violate it by pursuing its own strategic defense program.    If the U.S. withdraws from the ABM Treaty and if Congress funds SDI adequately, the U.S. could begin deployment in the mid-1990s. The U.S. already has made enormous progress on strategic defense:   --In an industry, university and Strategic Defense Initiative Office experiment, a rocket payload was launched last December into the upper atmosphere, proving that electrical conductors can operate in space without insulation. This breakthrough means that it is possible to reduce the design weight of SDI space platforms by one-quarter or more. Such a weight-saving measure means in turn that SDI platforms can be placed into orbit more cheaply and efficiently than previously imagined.    --The U.S. also has had substantial success in developing a capability to find, track and precisely point a high-energy laser beam at a target hundreds of miles away. Work on the control and stabilization of the laser beam continues, while the prototype target sensor and computer have successfully tracked a thrusting missile.    --Perhaps most exciting of all are the results of a study, sponsored by the SDI Office, of ways to improve the space-based interceptor missile. The foremost goal of any space-based defensive system is, of course, military effectiveness, and in the past, cost models of space-based interceptors have shown that system to be expensive. Thus, the SDI Office needed to slash costs, while retaining real military capability.    Efforts to cut costs have succeeded. Lt. Gen. James Abrahamson, director of the SDI Office, believes the cost of space-based interceptors can be reduced dramatically, to $20 billion from a previous estimate of $75 billion. This could be accomplished by redesigning the craft that houses the interceptor missiles, applying new, lightweight technologies, and adopting innovative production and manufacturing techniques.    In the end, the only question is whether the U.S. has the will and clarity of vision necessary to provide the security that SDI brings. If it does, the next steps are for Congress to fund the program adequately and for the U.S. to withdraw from the ABM Treaty.    ---   Mr. Weinberger, defense secretary January 1981 through November 1987, becomes publisher of Forbes in January. </TEXT></DOC>