<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870721-0122 </DOCNO><HL> UAW Stance in Coming Talks Counters Market Forces---Achieving Job-Security PriorityMay Further Erode Union Solidarity---By Jacob W. SchlesingerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR F GMAUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT) </IN><DATELINE> DETROIT  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The United Auto Workers says job security will be its top priority in the national contract negotiations that begin this month. But there are signs that the ultimate price for achieving that goal may be very high: further cracks in the union's long-cherished solidarity.    The UAW is to open talks for a new three-year contract for 350,000 General Motors Corp. workers next Monday, and for 104,000 Ford Motor Co. workers the following day. Its main goal is to preserve its members' jobs, which have been dwindling in recent years. It will ask for limits on attrition, job guarantees for workers affected by a drop in sales, and restrictions on the transfer of work to lower-wage, non-UAW producers -- called &quot;outsourcing.&quot; It also will try to increase employment by limiting overtime.    Union leaders insist they will, as they have for decades, push for generally similar contract provisions for all workers of similar skill, no matter what those workers do or where they work. But that traditional industrial union principle runs counter to market forces, and the next three years promise to be particularly brutal for the auto industry.    &quot;This could be the year when a policy that will work for one company won't work for the other,&quot; says Stanley Marshall, a UAW regional director from Flint, Mich. George Smith, a UAW regional director from Maryland and a member of the union's executive board, says, &quot;If we can address specific needs, I don't think we should be tied into a pattern.&quot;    Indeed, the competitive climate threatens solidarity on several fronts in this year's talks. Ford is doing better financially than GM right now. The UAW may reach a strong job-guarantee contract at Ford that GM couldn't accept, or a rich contract at Ford that, if accepted, could force GM to lay off more workers. The companies, in separately negotiated local contracts, are pressuring plants to compete with each other for dwindling work, and the union may be forced to accept differences between assembly-plant workers and workers in parts plants, where most future job losses are likely to take place.    So far, the UAW has withstood recent economic pressures better than organized labor as a whole. While other unions have been forced to accept sharp pay cuts, the UAW's concessions consisted of losing or deferring raises and losing holidays. While some unions have been forced to negotiate wages and other traditionally national issues plant by plant, the UAW still has strong companywide contracts. Last year, the United Steelworkers abandoned the principle of pattern bargaining and negotiated six separate pacts with the major steelmakers.    But even the UAW has accepted growing divergences in recent years. It allowed Chrysler Corp. to slip out of the regular bargaining timetable in 1980 during its brush with bankruptcy. The Chrysler contract -- which differs in many areas from those at the other two companies -- doesn't expire until next year, while Ford's and GM's pacts expire Sept 14.    And the union's Canadian wing, which split away from the UAW in 1984, is negotiating on its own for the first time this year for its 64,000 members. Differences have always existed between U.S. and Canadian contracts, but because of the Canadians' orientation against non-financial issues such as job security -- and a more favorable economic climate -- workers there may get an even better financial agreement than their U.S. counterparts in this round.    Rhetoric from both sides in this round of talks will be similar to that in 1984. The UAW argues that the companies have sufficiently recovered from the crisis that forced concessions in 1982. It wants back the roughly 3% annual raises it gave up in 1984 for lump-sum payments that don't affect the base wage. And it still calls cost-of-living adjustments &quot;untouchable,&quot; even though other unions abandoned them in recent years and the Big Three auto makers eliminated them for white-collar workers. Health-care costs and absenteeism also are expected to be topics.    But the union says the issue of job security will dominate. &quot;Pay is important,&quot; says Stephen P. Yokich, the UAW vice president handling the negotiations with Ford. &quot;But it isn't important unless you have a job.&quot; The union has lost nearly 30% of its membership -- now about 1.1 million -- since 1979, and anticipates further erosion of as much as 25% by 1990 at Big Three plants if current trends continue. GM underscored that fear with its announcements of more than a dozen total or partial plant closings affecting more than 30,000 workers over the next three years.    In 1984, the companies and the union had apparently reached an ingenious solution. The union accepted the erosion of jobs through technology and productivity improvements and &quot;outsourcing.&quot; The companies, in turn, agreed to keep workers affected by those forces on the payroll in a &quot;job bank.&quot; Laid-off workers also have access to extensive retraining and relocation programs, and income insurance plans for some workers provide 95% of their pay for as long as two years, and as much as 75% until retirement age.    But that safety net still hasn't eliminated the fear of unemployment. &quot;I guess it's a psychological thing,&quot; says Michael J. Legg, a tool and die maker with 22 years' experience at GM's parts plant in Anderson, Ind. &quot;A lot of people feel they're really laid off, even though they're still drawing a paycheck.&quot;    And the outlook for workers now is grimmer than it was in 1984. Additional Japanese non-union plants soon will be building cars in North America, even more foreign countries will be exporting vehicles into the U.S., and low-wage countries such as Mexico probably will be gaining a bigger share of the U.S. auto parts market.    There is evidence of growing militance over job security. In the past year, GM and Ford have had five local strikes -- as many as in the previous four years combined. In each of the recent walkouts, &quot;outsourcing&quot; was a key issue, even though union contracts officially permitted it.    This time, the UAW will push for a more direct approach than the jobs bank, asking for actual limits on the erosion of jobs. Union officials point to a growing number of contracts in recent years offering outright job guarantees -- including some reached by the UAW at farm equipment manufacturers.    Company officials privately concede they will have to strengthen job security provisions, but say they can't offer guarantees. The sharp rise in the value of the yen against the dollar since 1984 has brought Japanese auto wages roughly in line with U.S. wages, reducing the competitive pressure somewhat. But productivity at Ford and GM is far below the Japanese rate, most analysts agree, and some GM plants may have as little as half the output-per-man-hour of Japanese competitors.    The companies say that unless they can significantly increase market share, they will have to cut employment in order to compete. &quot;I don't think there's any job security other than being competitive,&quot; says Alfred S. Warren Jr., GM's top bargainer.    If any major productivity improvements emerge this fall, they probably will have to come from the 200-odd local negotiations taking place around the country simultaneously with the main-table talks in Detroit. In local talks, the companies can reorganize the factory floor, increase flexibility and scrap restrictive work rules. GM has begun that process unusually early, and already has almost a dozen revised local contracts extending through 1990.    Some workers brand those changes as concessions eliminating important workplace protections, and they argue that the companies are using local contracts to force plants to bid against each other for diminishing work. The companies say they want the international union to encourage more experimentation at the local level.    Another area where the issue of job security and union solidarity could arise is in the parts plants. Big Three hourly labor costs for parts workers range from $24 to $27 -- roughly the same as for assembly workers. Other U.S. parts companies pay less than $10 an hour in wages in addition to benefits, and Mexico and South Korea pay less than $2. &quot;We have many plants that belong in another industry,&quot; complains Stanley J. Surma, Ford's chief negotiator.    The union will resist changes in wages for parts workers, says Donald F. Ephlin, the UAW vice president leading the GM negotiations. But even he notes that parts plants historically had lower pay than assembly plants -- albeit slight -- and that the union in 1984 accepted a small widening of that gap. One GM executive says the company will only push the UAW for components wage changes as a last resort, but the company may seek more drastic productivity increases than in the assembly plants.    The cost gap in parts plants poses a bigger problem for GM than for Ford, because GM makes between 60% and 70% of its parts in-house, compared with Ford's 40% to 50%. In addition to Ford's better financial performance, that could force some divergences between the contracts. Ford, for example, could more easily agree to strong language against &quot;outsourcing,&quot; because it has already done more.    Contract differences between the two did crop up in 1984. Because Ford had already slimmed down, it agreed to a ban on plant closings that GM couldn't have accepted. That pact also gave Ford workers a higher de facto wage. Because of profit sharing, Ford will pay each of its workers an average of $2,100 more than a GM worker will get this year, in part because Ford had a higher profit and in part because it had fewer workers sharing in it.    If the union accepts wider cracks in its contracts, that could make it tough to get the needed approval from workers who feel they got a worse agreement than others. Chrysler workers in the 1985 contract got the return of a base-wage increase, so Ford and GM workers may be disappointed if they don't get the same. Similarly, Canadian auto workers could make things difficult by striking a richer pact than the UAW can.    Ratification, in fact, has already gotten difficult in recent years, particularly at GM. In the 1982 and 1984 talks, when job security emerged as a priority, the GM contracts drew historically low ratification margins. And last week, workers at Ford's troubled Rouge Steel Co. complex ratified a new contract, which promises job security, by only seven votes out of more than 2,600 cast, even though rejection could have meant the facility's closing.    &quot;There's no such thing as job security,&quot; says Larry Franklin, a 36-year-old metal finisher at GM's Hamilton, Ohio, plant, which is scheduled to be closed next year. &quot;It looks good to the eye but you can pick it apart. I'd like to see us regain stuff we gave up in past negotiations.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>