<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871229-0009 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-wide</HL><DD> 12/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   TOKYO PLANS to increase defense spending and buy new arms from the U.S.    The Japanese cabinet approved a national budget for the year beginning April 1 that includes an increase in defense spending of 5.2%, to almost $30 billion. The planned defense outlays, which include purchases of Aegis warships and anti-submarine helicopters from the U.S., also entail Tokyo shouldering a bigger portion of the expenses of the estimated 47,600 U.S. troops stationed in Japan. The defense outlays will represent 1.013% of Japan's estimated gross national product.    U.S. defense vendors predicted that the expected arms purchases will help reduce the Japanese trade surplus with the U.S. over the next several years.    ---   HART'S CAMPAIGN QUALIFIED to receive federal matching funds.    The Federal Election Commission certified that the former Colorado senator is eligible for the funds and instructed the Treasury Department to issue his 1988 presidential campaign an initial check for $100,000. Hart, who re-entered the race for the Democratic presidential nomination earlier this month, may qualify for nearly $1 million in matching funds. The decision also ensures that Hart will be awarded spots on primary ballots in some states.    Hart's 1984 presidential campaign remains $1 million in debt, and it is unresolved whether he can use his 1988 matching funds to repay creditors.    ---   The U.S. denied having any military advisers in Afghanistan, and said the Soviet Union appears to have mounted a winter offensive in that country rather than moving toward withdrawal of its troops. The Soviet news agency Tass reported that an American adviser had been killed in recent fighting near the eastern Afghan city of Khost.    Afghan rebels disputed the Soviet-backed Kabul government's claims that it had broken a Moslem guerrilla siege of Khost, and said Soviet reinforcements sent to the garrison city were trapped there. The Afghan government said 1,600 rebels had been killed in the three-week offensive.    ---   Israeli military tribunals were held throughout the West Bank and Gaza Strip for Palestinians detained on rioting charges related to recent protests in the occupied lands. Israeli officials said they hadn't yet decided whether to deport ringleaders, and the U.S. urged that &quot;international standards of due process&quot; be maintained.    ---   Pope John Paul II named a Palestinian born in Nazareth as the Catholic patriarch of Jerusalem. The Vatican denied that the appointment of the Arab clergyman was politically motivated or linked to recent anti-Israeli violence in the Holy Land.    ---   A winter storm rolled across the Midwest, disrupting mass transit, snarling highways and halting air travel as it dropped as much as a foot of snow. The slow-moving storm is part of a massive weather system that unleashed holiday rain in the South, and sleet and snow in the western Plains.    ---   A man wielding two pistols killed two people, wounded four others and briefly took a hostage in a 45-minute shooting spree in Russellville, Ark., police said. Five more bodies were later found at his house. The man, identified as R. Gene Simmons Sr., was arrested at the offices of a trucking firm where he once worked.    ---   Persian Gulf Arab leaders approved a pact to boost security cooperation, Saudi Arabia's foreign minister said. The six-state Gulf Cooperation Council is to issue a summit communique today in Riyadh. It is expected to contain a common defense strategy against escalating Iranian threats to gulf shores and shipping routes.    ---   Two Navy warships left the Spanish port of Barcelona, where a U.S. sailor was killed Saturday in a grenade attack on a USO club. Police said a witness heard an assailant shout &quot;long live Lebanon&quot; before lobbing two hand grenades into the facility.    ---   A judicial official in Haiti said six former Duvalier officials and two other people have registered so far as candidates in next month's government-organized presidential election. While the country's new constitution bars Duvalier supporters from seeking office, the government's electoral council isn't expected to disqualify them.    ---   Seoul's main opposition party issued a report on fraud in South Korea's Dec. 16 presidential election, and accused the government of stealing two million votes to ensure President-elect Roh's victory over opposition leader Kim Young Sam. Meanwhile, police raided a dissident group's offices and confiscated 2,000 copies of the report.    ---   Kenya and Uganda agreed to reduce security forces at their border, where at least 15 people were killed earlier this month when clashes erupted between Kenyan police and Ugandan troops. The agreement came after a two-hour meeting between the presidents of both countries.    ---   Lynette &quot;Squeaky&quot; Fromme faces indictment by a federal grand jury, perhaps as early as next week, on charges tied to her aborted escape last week from a U.S. prison in West Virginia. Fromme, serving a life sentence for the attempted assassination of President Ford in 1975, is in solitary confinement and under 24-hour guard.    ---   A Philippine shipping official said an inter-island ferry that sank Dec. 20 was safe, and he denied it was overloaded with passengers. The company executive didn't provide any evidence to support his claims. More than 1,600 people were killed when the vessel collided with an oil tanker. </TEXT></DOC>