<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870818-0100 </DOCNO><HL> A Whale of a Red-Tape Tale---By Sidney Lees</HL><DD> 08/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   In my research on the properties of bone it is necessary to obtain specimens with the widest range of density. We don't understand why, but the densest bones are associated with the middle and inner ear, the otic bones -- and the otic bones of sea mammals, such as whales, are the densest. Scientists have studied the otic bones of some whales, thanks to the kind help of museum curators. But one particular bone had never been studied: that of the finback whale. Old documents indicated that this bone might be the densest in existence.    Accordingly, I arranged to visit Iceland last summer to extract the bone from a freshly caught whale. (Icelanders hunt whales for food.) Fearlessly, I also set forth on a more treacherous mission: to engage the U.S. bureaucracy. Since finback whales are an endangered species, the National Marine Fisheries Service must issue a permit to import their bones. In response to my initial inquiry, the NMFS sent me an inch-thick set of documents, including statements of the law and a format for the application. I responded in mid-May 1986, assuming that permission would be granted in time to bring back the specimens from Iceland when I returned at the end of July.    I next discovered that my application had to be entered into the Federal Register. Its appearance in the July 8, 1986, issue was a signal to Greenpeace, representing nine environmental organizations, to demand an open hearing.    By this time I was in Iceland securing my bone specimens, which I packaged and put into the freezer to be sent when the permit was issued. Upon my return, I responded to the objections of the societies, and at last, at the end of August, the NMFS issued a permit with an expiration date of Dec. 31.    Could I now import the bones? No way. Just as the NMFS permit was about to be issued I was informed that I also needed one from the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service in accordance with the Convention on International Trade in Endangered Species. This is called a CITES permit.    Time slipped by. September dissolved into November and the CITES permit failed to appear. In December I got an extension of three months for the NMFS permit, but still no CITES permit. Finally, at noon on Dec. 23, the permit arrived, just as everything was shutting down for the holidays.    I read the instructions carefully. There was a question as to whether the nearest Fish and Wildlife Service Law Enforcement Office must be notified 72 hours prior to import. After calls to four offices, I finally reached an official who informed me that I did not need to notify the nearest Law Enforcement Office provided all paper work was in order. Did I have a permit from the National Marine Fisheries Service? Yes. Did I have a CITES permit? Yes. And did I have a CITES permit from the exporting country? Well . . . no.    I now faced a major hurdle, since Iceland is not a member of the CITES. Fortunately, the Icelandic Ministry for Culture and Education was willing to issue a permit, which the Fish and Wildlife Service was willing to accept.    Permits in hand, I now faced the even more daunting problem of getting the bones from their freezer in Iceland to my laboratory in Boston without their thawing. The week before the bones were delivered was more hectic than the previous year. I phoned Iceland daily to learn when the shipment would be made. I called the National Marine Fisheries Service to ensure that its agent would be available. And I made many calls to the Fish and Wildlife Service to determine when and how its inspection would be carried out. After lengthy discussions, we worked out a procedure so that the bones, which would arrive on Saturday when no inspection services would be available, would be stored in a freezer until they could be cleared by U.S. Customs on Monday, Jan. 19.    The only way I could make sure that the precious documents would be at hand (photocopies were not acceptable) was by doing so in person, and so I went to Kennedy Airport in New York.    At Kennedy, it took more than three hours to comply with the final rites. The delay here was due to Customs, which required me to give a value for the bones before the inspector would release the shipment. How could I value them? They had no value to anyone but me, and for me they were more valuable than the Hope diamond. I said they had no value, but the inspector in his wisdom insisted that everything had a value. In desperation, I cited $20. The bones were turned over to me.    Why, you may ask, am I relating this litany of woe? What makes it more than just one man's frustration?    My experience is only one example of a modern Luddite movement in the U.S. A powerful anti-science movement has succeeded in increasing the regulation of animal experiments with the ultimate aim of eliminating all such work. I don't question the wisdom of protecting endangered species, but I do protest the bureaucratic hurdles that are placed in the path of researchers, like myself, after we have obtained permission to pursue our work. The red tape associated with even the simplest scientific procedures is increasing the cost and the frustration at a time when funds for research are shrinking.    The regulatory web that now enmeshes scientific programs is growing denser each year. My experience in importing whale bones is little different from that of many other scientists in every field who waste too much time on nonproductive chores. American prosperity depends in part on the speed of our advances in science. Based on my experience, I'd say our national symbol should be changed from the eagle to the inchworm.    ---   Mr. Lees heads the bioengineering department at Forsyth Dental Center in Boston. His research to date has shown that porpoises, not finback whales, have the densest bones. </TEXT></DOC>