<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870918-0012 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 09/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. AND SOVIETS REACHED an accord to scrap intermediate-range arms.    The agreement in principle, reached by Shultz and Shevardnadze during three days of arms-control talks, calls for the elimination of medium- and shorter-range missiles. A senior U.S. official said &quot;technical details&quot; still had to be worked out, and a formal announcement is expected today. Washington and Moscow also announced agreement to begin full-scale talks before Dec. 1 aimed at ending nuclear tests. On Capitol Hill, the Senate voted to make it harder for the Pentagon to award contracts to foreign firms for Reagan's space-based anti-missile system.    Despite a threatened veto by the president, the Senate approved an amendment to restrict testing and development of the missile-shield project.    ---   BORK ASSERTED that his antitrust views serve consumer interests.    During the third day of Senate Judiciary Committee confirmation hearings, the Supreme Court nominee said his stance on antitrust law fully considers the interests of consumers, but he argued that some forms of antitrust regulation don't promote competition. Consumer groups have been critical of the judge's views, arguing that they often promote business interests at the expense of consumers.    Bork complained of &quot;unfair&quot; characterizations of his positions, and denied an accusation that he advocates unlimited presidential authority.    ---   Philippine President Aquino dismissed her top adviser, Executive Secretary Joker Arroyo, in the second stage of a cabinet shuffle. Aquino also dropped from the cabinet another close adviser, Presidential Counsel Teodoro Locsin, although she asked him to remain in government as a consultant.    ---   Sen. Biden of Delaware admitted that he committed plagiarism in law school 23 years ago, but dismissed the controversy over his failure to attribute the words of others in his speeches as &quot;much ado about nothing.&quot; He said that despite the issue, he would continue to seek the Democratic presidential nomination.    ---   Reagan marked the 200th anniversary of the signing of the Constitution, saying the document is &quot;the single greatest work of government the world has ever seen.&quot; In a speech at Independence Hall in Philadelphia, the president called the Constitution &quot;a triumph of human liberty.&quot;    ---   The Justice Department announced that a Lebanese man indicted for masterminding a 1985 hijacking of a Jordanian airliner with four Americans aboard was seized by the FBI. The agency said the man, who faces charges of hostage-taking and conspiracy, was brought to the U.S. after being plucked from a small boat in the Mediterranean.    ---   A U.S. soldier was wounded in East Germany when a military liaison team encountered a group of Soviet soldiers and was fired on by at least one of them, the Pentagon said. It didn't specify when or exactly where the incident happened. The soldier was hit in the arm by a bullet fragment.    ---   Nicaraguan President Ortega opened a meeting of five Central American foreign ministers and called on the U.S. to &quot;once and for all&quot; stop aiding the Contra rebels. The officials are to discuss a regional peace plan. In Washington, House Speaker Wright raised the possibility that a truce could be implemented before a Nov. 7 deadline.    ---   Iran told the U.N. secretary-general it would be willing to cease fighting Iraq if the U.N. determines quickly who started the conflict in the Persian Gulf seven years ago, diplomatic sources said. In the gulf region, Iraq said its forces repulsed an Iranian attack in an 18-hour battle, and Tehran said its jets bombarded Iraqi cities.    ---   Pope John Paul II told a group of AIDS patients in San Francisco that &quot;God loves you all without distinction, without limit.&quot; Earlier, at a Mass in Monterey, Calif., the pope urged landowners and growers &quot;to respect the just claims&quot; of migrant farmworkers. The pontiff is to travel today to Detroit, the last stop on his U.S. tour.    ---   A South African panel recommended that the government liberalize legislation regulating where people of the various races can live, but it stopped short of calling for the abolition of the practice. The report by President Botha's advisory committee was faulted by both supporters and opponents of apartheid.    ---   South Korean riot police battled hundreds of students in Seoul and stormed a university in Kwangju to disperse thousands of others during anti-government demonstrations on campuses across the country. The protests came exactly a year before the Olympic Games are to begin in Seoul.    ---   Weinberger ordered a special task force to develop a plan to eliminate sexual discrimination throughout the military. The defense secretary's move followed the release of a Pentagon report concluding that Navy and Marine women stationed in the Pacific faced extensive sexual harassment.    ---   A prosecutor in Sweden said he would seek access to Swiss bank records as part of Stockholm's inquiry into allegations that arms maker AB Bofors paid bribes to win a $1.3 billion artillery order from India. The prosecutor said Bofors may have paid as much as $47 million into the accounts as part of the 1986 sale.    ---   Britain's Liberal Party voted to merge with the Social Democrats in an attempt to create a centrist political party. Earlier this month the SDP approved a merger with the opposition Liberals. The parties have been informal electoral partners since 1981.    ---   Chad dismissed an apparent peace overture from Libyan leader Gadhafi as a ploy to keep control of the disputed Aouzou Strip border territory. The rejection came as Moslem militia sources said Libya had recruited about 1,000 Druze fighters from Lebanon's Bekaa Valley to fight Chad.    ---   Soviet bus drivers staged a strike earlier this month to protest changes in an evaluation system that they feared would lead to pay cuts, the weekly Moscow News said. The newspaper said the report was intended to avert additional labor strife, which is rarely reported in the Soviet Union. </TEXT></DOC>