<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870303-0148 </DOCNO><HL> Business World:Corporations Grow Weary of the Dollar's Capers---By George Melloan</HL><DD> 03/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGNMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX) </IN><TEXT>   John A. Young, president of Hewlett-Packard Co. and chairman of the President's Commission on Industrial Competitiveness, shares the concerns of many of his fellow industrialists about the U.S. trade deficit. But even if exchange-rate realignment offered a cure -- something not yet evident after two years of dollar decline -- Mr. Young would prefer remedies less disruptive.    Running a big international corporation becomes very difficult when exchange rates are fluctuating wildly, he complains. The dollar decline helped H-P price its products more competitively in Europe and Japan last year. But it hurt an important group of H-P customers, Japanese export industries. It also increased exchange risks. Hedging against such risks has become &quot;too expensive,&quot; says Mr. Young.    He testified before the Senate Finance Committee earlier this year on behalf of &quot;some kind of multilateral adjustment mechanism&quot; to reconcile the fiscal and monetary policies of national governments. His position reflects the fact that American industry increasingly identifies its interests with the international economy, not merely the national one.    U.S. policy makers are not unaware of this broader concern. The Tokyo economic summit last May paid lip service to greater coordination of national economic policies. Of course, a long-running disagreement followed, with America's Paul Volcker and James Baker urging the Germans and Japanese to adopt more stimulative policies so as to share with the U.S. some of the burden for sustaining world demand for goods and services. The rift finally was mended two weekends ago in Paris when the Germans and Japanese promised more stimulation. Greater official efforts will be made as well, through intervention in currency markets, to stabilize exchange rates within certain bands.    That will, of course, take some doing. International capital flows are enormous. Intervention by central banks in currency markets is not powerful enough, in and of itself, to stabilize exchange rates. Basic monetary policies of the major trading nations must also address that task.    The experience of the past two years surely has been sobering for those policy makers who thought currency-rate manipulation offered possibilities for national advantage. Japan and Germany are not pleased with the results of their war of nerves with Messrs. Volcker and Baker. The sharp change in dollar-yen and dollar-mark ratios has hurt industry in both countries. U.S. industry, for its part, has not reaped sweeping benefits from the dollar decline. The U.S. trade deficit remains large, in part because many trading partners of the U.S. chose to keep their currencies on a par with the dollar even while it was falling against the mark and yen. A further dollar fall could reignite inflation.    That doesn't mean the dramatic exchange-rate fluctuations of the past two years have had no effects. Japanese companies -- in banking, insurance and autos, for example -- have taken advantage of the strong yen to invest directly in the U.S., a pattern not unlike that just after World War II when American companies, armed with practically the only hard currency extant, set about, in the words of one banker, to &quot;buy up the world.&quot;    Treasurers' offices in some American companies -- Union Carbide, for example -- have developed sophisticated trading operations to hedge against currency swings and even make money from them. Some companies now regard their treasuries as &quot;profit centers.&quot; Other corporations regard this as speculation and don't want any part of it. But when the dollar was falling steadily, the risks seemed small.    The dollar-yen market had become so predictable that when the Japanese Finance Ministry was intervening in exchange markets early this year it asked Japanese insurance companies to stop selling dollars forward. That practice was interfering with the government's efforts to stop the yen's rise.    American financial intermediaries, inventive as always, have attempted to serve their industrial customers by offering them new hedging &quot;products.&quot; Salomon Bros. late last year introduced a vehicle called &quot;Participating Forward,&quot; which it advertised as offering unlimited &quot;upside potential but limited downside risk.&quot;    American companies have seen costs of imported materials and components rise, which is the reverse of the Japanese experience of falling import costs. Caterpillar Inc., for example, said in its third-quarter report last year that &quot;the significant weakening of the U.S. dollar, while improving price realization, adversely affected manufacturing and selling, general and administrative costs at many non-U.S. facilities as local currency costs translated into more U.S. dollars. The weaker dollar also increased U.S. plants' costs for materials purchased overseas.&quot; In other words, the weakened dollar was a very mixed blessing.    Some overseas companies have worse problems. Henri Martre, chairman of Aerospatiale, the state-owned aerospace company of France, says the rapid movements of the dollar cause serious problems for any non-U.S. company entering into dollar contracts with long lead times. It is impossible to know what such a contract will yield in French francs after a period of, say, five years. And it is very costly to hedge by buying a futures contract for so long a period. An American company that is paying its workers and buying its supplies in dollars has no such problem, of course. So a foreign company such as Aerospatiale, which would like to compete for contracts to supply components for aerospace projects in the U.S., is at a considerable disadvantage.    Some Americans might say that's the whole point, to put foreign companies at a disadvantage. But when you turn the tables, it becomes the American company that loses because it cannot anticipate the yield from a long-term contract to supply goods or components abroad. In short, uncertainties about currency risks cut both ways and have an overall depressive effect on international trade. Hedging against exchange risks becomes a wasteful addition to transaction costs.    There is yet another factor. Corporations adjust their income statements and balance sheets for currency losses or gains. They may be dealing with real losses and gains. But if they are not actually moving funds from one country to another, the adjustments may simply be accounting identities. That being the case, the adjustments can unintentionally distort what these reports tell investors.    Coopers and Lybrand, the big accounting firm, had in its &quot;1986 Annual Report on the Worldwide Economic and Business Climate&quot; the following comments: &quot;Regardless of whether or not the Japanese decide to maintain a firmer yen, the point is that currency rates, even among the two largest industrial countries in the world, can swing dramatically over a very short period and have far more impact on ultimate corporate profits than any other factor.&quot;    It can't be a very healthy thing for the world when the perceived performance of corporations and economies is constantly being viewed through a prism distorted by changing currency relationships. For two years, that distortion has been treated by U.S. policy makers with something approaching benign neglect. But if enough corporate leaders join Mr. Young in expressing discontent with that approach it could encourage greater efforts to end the dollar's gyrations. </TEXT></DOC>