<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880422-0156 </DOCNO><HL> Veto Trade Bill, but for Right Reasons </HL><AUTHOR> Jagdish Bhagwati </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FORGN </CO><IN> MON </IN><G> CNG EXE </G><TEXT>   The appearance of Republican Sen. John Danforth and Democratic Rep. Dan Rostenkowski on television Sunday, congratulating each other on the handsomely crafted trade bill and lamenting the prospect of a presidential veto, sent me down memory lane. An equally striking show of bipartisan solidarity over U.S. trade policy occurred in 1930 when Sen. Smoot and Rep. Hawley gave us the most infamous tariff in history.    The bipartisan consensus on the trade bill, which the House passed yesterday, is no guarantee of its virtue. The three years of labor of nearly 200 legislators in 17 subcommittees over a draft exceeding 1,000 pages call to mind the old witticism: There are two things you don't want to see made, laws and sausage. But while sausages please the palate, this bill is disagreeable and an affront to the good sense that has informed U.S. trade policies for half a century.    The Reagan administration has put undue importance on provisions that would require advance notice of plant layoffs and require foreigners to disclose U.S. investment, when the real veto bait in the bill ought to be the remainder, which the president's aides have said he can live with.    To see what is wrong with the bill, it is necessary to go back to its origins. The bill didn't start off as a cool, reasoned response to the need to restructure American institutions to withstand the assault of protectionist sentiments world-wide and the rise of nontariff barriers to free trade. Nor did it reflect a coherent view of the now highly interdependent world economy and its implications for managing an open trading system.    Instead, the bill was born in panic and petulance. The panic was over our trade deficit and our declining share in world production and trade. The deficit was a reflection of the overvalued dollar and the budget deficit. The decline was a result of the rise of the Asian economies, which threatens to make the 21st the Pacific century just as the 20th was ours. The consequence was the petulant, indeed absurd, view that American difficulties are the product of unfair trade by foreign rivals.    The central thrust of the trade bill, therefore, has been to get tough:   -- first, by turning the screws on foreign suppliers in regard to unfair trade practices such as dumping and subsidies from their governments;   -- second, by using the threat of punitive &quot;retaliatory&quot; tariffs to pry open markets closed to us &quot;unreasonably&quot;; and   --finally, by reducing the president's discretion in trade policy so as to ensure that the tougher trade-policy posture is not diluted by the executive branch.    All this translates readily into protectionism.    Take the matter of making dumping and foreign-import subsidies more difficult. It is common knowledge that filing complaints on dumping and import subsidies has become a way to harrass efficient foreign suppliers. In the 1980s, both here and in the European Community, there has been a sharp increase in such attempts at restricting import competition. Evidence also exists that some of these actions were initiated against minuscule subsidies and tiny dumping margins. Moreover, the fair selling prices that foreign companies must charge are often judged unfairly in anti-dumping cases: For instance, while a foreign company's &quot;fair&quot; price must include an 8% profit margin, the corresponding profit margin in our manufacturing and trade sector in 1986 was only 5%.    The trade bill moves in the direction of making protectionist misuse of the fair-trade procedures even easier. Some outrageous proposals -- such as Sen. Ernest Hollings's amendment, which would have introduced new bias in assessing foreign companies' fair price -- have been dropped in conference. Others survive, however, promising certain protectionist mischief. For instance, the bill would authorize the Commerce Department to ask foreign governments to initiate anti-dumping against third countries. This would open a Pandora's box of mutual allegations that can only aid the protectionists.    On the export side of the bill, the fair-trade provisions are no less disturbing, though the dangers are more subtle. Congress has rejected the Gephardt amendment, whose folly in targeting surplus countries with mandatory retaliation was easy to see. But the conference has embraced the Senate version of Gephardt, which has been hailed as more moderate but in fact is even more dangerous.    It would put more bite into Section 301 of the 1974 Trade Act. As it stands now, Section 301, which is invoked to retaliate against closed foreign markets, is aimed at specific sectors and doesn't carry the ballast of deadlines and mandatory actions. The trade bill would toughen 301 by challenging a country's entire trading practices instead of picking on specific industries. It also would shift authority for action more from the president to the trade negotiator. (Evidently, it is easier to browbeat him into tougher action.)    The essential problem, however, is that since Section 301 represents a bilateral approach to the problem of opening foreign markets, it has protectionist fallout. If we take on a weak country, it usually ends up accommodating us but feeling unfairly treated. If we confront the strong, they can resist and retaliate. The Europeans, who are strong, have not yielded meekly. In response to U.S. allegations of unfair practices, they even have begun compiling lists of unfair trading practices by us, building a climate that can only suit protectionist forces.    The bilateral approach to opening foreign markets has the added demerit of becoming a form of &quot;export protectionism.&quot; Faced with U.S. demands, our weaker trade partners are likely to react by simply taking trade away from others and giving it to us. To illustrate: A year ago South Korea announced a plan to divert more than a billion dollars in imports from traditional cheaper suppliers to the U.S. This is not opening markets. It is increasing U.S. exports by forcing others to divert trade to us and away from efficient suppliers with less political clout.    The bill is thus fatally flawed in conception. Congress needs to go back to the drawing board and ask how our national and international institutions need to be changed so as to ensure open markets. The answers point toward a very different bill. We need to reduce reliance on bilateral methods that are open to misuse. Instead, we must shift support to a strengthened General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, seeking to develop more adequate multilateral approaches to handling trade complaints.    At the same time, the increasingly interdependent world economy suggests that the provisions on plant layoffs and registration of foreign investors have a good rationale. Open markets cannot be sustained politically without institutions to soften the social impact of dramatic changes resulting from foreign trade and investments. If better integration into the world economy means that large corporations can leave small communities and that changes in competition can result in social-adjustment problems, political prudence -- if not humanity -- requires that we help American workers cope with the consequences. It also means the U.S., like most industrialized nations, should agree to measures such as plant-layoff notices. This is part of the grease that must be provided to let the wheel of capitalist fortune operate.    So is the need to be informed about foreign-investment inflows. Most nations collect such information. The U.S. has been relaxed because until recently it has mostly lent, not borrowed. With our changed role, we have simply rejoined the human race. If political concerns about inflows are with us today, it surely makes sense to require registration, gather information, and show that it is puerile to be hysterical about this inflow. Information and illumination will soothe unfounded fears; their suppression will only exacerbate worries and invite restrictions.    Ironically, however, as the bill moves to the Senate floor and the president's desk, it is likely to assume an exactly contrary form. The registration requirement was dropped on Tuesday; the plant-layoff notices may yet go the same way as the Senate seeks to avoid a veto. The president may then accept the rest, persuaded that the bill now does less damage than earlier versions, permitting the worst to be a friend of the bad. That would indeed be tragic.    ---   Mr. Bhagwati, Lehman professor of economics at Columbia University, is the author of &quot;Protectionism,&quot; which will be published by MIT Press this spring. </TEXT></DOC>