<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881025-0114 </DOCNO><HL> Business World: It's Time to Put FSLIC Out of Its Misery </HL><AUTHOR> George Melloan </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT TAXES </CO><IN> TNM BNK </IN><G> CNG </G><TEXT>   Hardly a week goes by without this newspaper describing yet another scheme by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp. to bail out yet another red-ink-drenched savings institution. The latest, announced last week, will fold 11 insolvent Texas thrifts into a merged firm controlled by a real-estate and cable-TV tycoon. He will put up $80 million; FSLIC's potential contribution is estimated at $1.3 billion.    Deals like this raise a question: Is FSLIC bailing the savings industry out of a hole, or is it just digging the hole deeper? All the evidence suggests the latter. FSLIC has committed $25 billion for consolidating or merging 114 troubled thrifts and closing 21 others. Danny Wall, chairman of the Federal Home Loan Bank Board (FHLBB), which supervises FSLIC and the industry, has just raised his bailout cost estimate to as much as $50 billion from $30.9 billion last summer. Some estimates now go as high as $100 billion.    FSLIC has tripled the insurance premium it charges member institutions to 21 cents for each $100 in deposits, raising fears among healthy thrifts that this rising burden will put them in the soup as well. There is more serious talk of merging FSLIC with the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. (FDIC), but banks, quite understandably, don't like that idea. Since a year ago, FSLIC has had limited authority to borrow against future premium collections, but those collections can't match the bailout task it faces. Which means the taxpayer will be the last resort.    FSLIC has demonstrated that federal deposit insurance is a flawed concept. FDIC chairman William Seidman, ever the realist, has remarked that &quot;when you are using someone else's credit, someone has to keep an eye on you.&quot; FSLIC, although technically financed by premiums, ultimately underwrites savings deposits with the credit of the United States government. Surely, it is abundantly clear by now that it has done a terrible job of &quot;keeping an eye on&quot; the thrift managers who have gathered insured deposits.    Gillian Garcia, a General Accounting Office analyst, writes in the Winter 1988 issue of the Cato Journal that FSLIC's most important error was to allow large numbers of insolvent and low-capital thrifts to keep operating. That exposes it to &quot;moral hazard and the Sandamp;L inudustry to adverse selection as the owners and managers of insolvent insured thrifts are given the opportunity to enjoy any benefits from the gambles they undertake with the depositors' funds while passing the losses to their insurer, healthy thrifts, or the taxpayer.&quot;    Which raises the key question: Why should taxpayers be liable for the debts of private businesses? Is it really fair to tax auto workers and waitresses to pay for the excesses of Texas developers and financial opportunists?    The answer most often given is that the point isn't to protect the people who run and own savings institutions but to guard the savings that the waitress and auto worker might invest in them. The larger social benefit, in theory, is public confidence that allows access to personal savings for institutions set up to undertake the large risks of long-term lending to build houses and apartments.    But that of course assumes that none of these good things would happen in the absence of federal agencies. Certainly nothing would stop banks and Sandamp;Ls from insuring themselves privately if they felt it was useful for attracting depositors. Insurance has a cost, but many customers would be willing to pay for it. Savers would bear the responsibility for protecting themselves.    One part of the problem is that the laws that created thrift institutions are almost certainly obsolete. Savers who want absolute safety can find it elsewhere, in government securities for example. Why put the government behind private financial intermediaries when savers can go directly to the government with their money? As to long-term borrowers, the financial-services industry has been moving steadily toward securitization, converting loans to securities that can be traded over time. Indeed, one of the problems the thrift industry faces is its difficulty in competing with such instruments.    Would private deposit insurance offer adequate saver protection? It depends on what is meant by &quot;protection.&quot; With the government facing a $100 billion obligation, the appropriate question is, would you rather lose your money in a failed thrift -- an avoidable risk -- or to the unavoidable tax collector? In the absence of government compulsion, private insurers would be far more circumspect that federal insurers have been. They would not accept some institutions and they would most likely charge premiums based on some evaluation of the quality of management and existing portfolios.    As surely everyone knows by now, savings-institution regulation became politicized. Edwin Gray, former chairman of the FHLBB, has made it clear that he came under heavy pressure from House Speaker Jim Wright on behalf of Texas developers and savings-and-loan tycoons. The speaker, as chief keeper of the federal purse, has large powers over federal agencies and Mr. Gray asserts that the FHLBB's funding was held up during the time Mr. Wright was demanding that a Texas bank examiner take it easier on his Texas friends. The examiner was being accused of &quot;Gestapo&quot; tactics by Mr. Wright's friends and was in fact finally transferred from his job.    When the facts about how the institutions actually were being run finally became public it was clear that federal regulation should have been far tougher than it was. Some of the worst had no assets worth the name. That can hardly be counted as a triumph of federal supervision on behalf of depositors, the public or the men and women who are managing savings institutions safely and honestly, paying premiums to FSLIC to cover deposit-insurance losses.    Of course, the big objection to taking the government out of deposit insurance lies in the question: How would you do it? One way would be to start wedging down FSLIC coverage from the present $100,000 level. One source of all the problems has been the tendency of free-wheeling Sandamp;L managers to offer depositors high yields, thereby attracting funds from big money managers looking for high-yield, no-risk investments. Some thrifts were paying more for money than they were making on it, which is why they were tempted to take higher and higher risks. The fact that big money has relied on FSLIC insurance of course itself complicates the task of disengaging FSLIC from the insurance business. But wedging coverage down over time and allowing healthy thrifts to opt for some other kind of coverage would allow professional money managers and individual investors alike to make the necessary adjustments. It doesn't seem beyond the scope of human imagination to figure out how to phase FSLIC out of its worsening predicament.    Of course, that is fundamentally a political question, since it would be up to that same Congress that has turned Sandamp;L regulation into a mare's nest to take the government out of deposit insurance. Obviously, the politics would have to be compelling. On the other hand, the prospect of spending $100 billion of voter money to bail out irresponsible bankers is not the least compelling issue a congressman has ever faced. </TEXT></DOC>