<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881104-0105 </DOCNO><HL> Zia's Killing Haunts Afghan 'Peace' </HL><AUTHOR> Claudia Rosett </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST </CO><G> EXE </G><DATELINE> ISLAMABAD, Pakistan  </DATELINE><TEXT>   To wreck a conversation in this city of diplomats takes just one question. Who killed President Zia Ul-Haq? &quot;I can't touch it,&quot; says one Western intelligence officer. &quot;We can't discuss that,&quot; says a Pakistan government spokesman. &quot;There's no point in speculating,&quot; says the new U.S. ambassador, Robert Oakley. His predecessor, Ambassador Arnold Raphel, died along with Zia and 28 others in the Aug. 17 crash of the president's personal army plane. With a shrug, Mr. Oakley adds, &quot;Nobody is covering anything up.&quot;    Maybe not. But for a country that lost its ambassador and his top military adviser to what the Pakistanis have concluded was a carefully planned act of sabotage, the U.S. has been modest in pressing for answers. American experts are serving only as advisers to the Pakistani investigators. The State Department has said there will be no separate U.S. report, and just after the crash it refused the FBI permission to join a Defense Department team at the crash site. It starts to look as though the U.S. is reluctant to concede that the primary suspect is the same Soviet Union with which the U.S. has just signed an accord guaranteeing the Afghan &quot;peace.&quot;    It wouldn't be the first time. Apparently it was too traumatic for the U.S. to link the Soviets to the attempt to kill the pope or to consider the possibility that Soviet intelligence, working through Cuba, played a role in Kennedy's assassination in 1963. Plus, so many still deny &quot;yellow rain.&quot;    There is no shortage of theories as to who might be responsible for Zia's death. Such authoritarian rulers generate enemies. But the fact is, the Soviet Union is the one clear beneficiary of his death. Zia was the most important backer of the Afghan mujahideen, who may become the first resistance fighters anywhere to liberate their country from Soviet occupation.    Less than two weeks before Zia's plane crashed, the Soviet foreign minister, Eduard Shevardnadze, told Pakistan its continued support for the mujahideen would &quot;not go unpunished.&quot; Two days before Zia's death, the Soviets warned in an official statement that unspecified &quot;measures&quot; might be taken against Pakistan. And shortly after the crash, the Washington Post's Lally Weymouth reported the recollections of a U.S. official, who told her that before Zia's death, &quot;We went to the Soviets and warned them against bombing Pakistan because we were so concerned.&quot; Ms. Weymouth recounts that &quot;the Soviets replied, in effect: 'We won't bomb, but we will teach him a lesson.'&quot;    In a recent interview at the late president's Rawalpindi home, Zia's eldest son, Ijaz Ul-Haq, said he believes his father's death is &quot;only one link in the chain&quot; of Soviet-backed sabotage. For years the Kremlin has supported an escalating campaign of terrorist acts by Afghan secret agents working inside Pakistan.    In Pakistan, the investigation has become low-priority news, partly because the authorities are saying little, partly because the country is looking ahead to the Nov. 16 parliamentary elections and a new administration after 11 years under Zia. According to a former interior minister, Roedad Khan, rival Pakistani intelligence agencies are working on the case. Coordinating their efforts is the minister for states and frontier regions, F.K. Bandial, who is doing this work on top of his regular cabinet duties and may be replaced when a new administration comes in later this year. It would be all too easy for Zia's murder case, like a number of previous, politically controversial investigations in Pakistan -- the one into responsibility for the slaughter of the Bengalis, for example -- to fade away unresolved.    The few revelations so far have been blurred by leaks and carefully hedged comments. On Oct. 14, U.S. administration officials leaked a story to the New York Times that the crash was due to a malfunction, which might imply an accident. Two days later, the Pakistan government announced that by process of elimination it had ruled out accident and was blaming the crash on a &quot;highly sophisticated form of sabotage&quot; -- as yet unidentified. On Oct. 17, White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said that &quot;after a preliminary review we have no reason to question the findings&quot; of the Pakistan government. He qualified this, however, saying there would be further reviews, including one by the FBI -- which is only now getting called in.    Much credit is due to the Carter administration for beginning and the Reagan administration for continuing the arming of the mujahideen. But the new priorities lean heavily toward preserving the facade of the Geneva Accords -- the set of agreements on Afghanistan that would go down in history as a tragic farce if it turned out the Russians had gone on to kill Zia. The accords were signed by Pakistan and the communist Afghan regime this past April, and &quot;guaranteed&quot; by America and the Soviet Union.    There's a catch, however. The Soviets aren't gone yet. They may or may not have withdrawn half their troops as of Aug. 15, as promised. But since Zia was killed, two days after that first deadline, the rest of the troops seem somehow bogged down. True, the deadline in the accords for complete withdrawal is Feb. 15. But when the accords were signed, Mr. Shultz said that Foreign Minister Shevardnadze had &quot;informed us that they expect to have completed this troop withdrawal by the end of 1988, and we will push for that and expect that.&quot; Somehow that expectation has lapsed.    In the Pakistan border town of Peshawar, mujahideen politicians talk with elation of the Soviets leaving Afghanistan. Abdul Haq, a mujahideen commander who actually does much of the fighting around Kabul, is less sure. &quot;I am not convinced 100% the Soviets are going,&quot; he says. Why not? &quot;They always lie.&quot; As an example, he cites a claim by his underground sources in Kabul that some 15,000 Tadzhik tribesmen from Soviet Central Asia were rotated into Kabul in July, wearing not Russian but Afghan uniforms. Such information is hard to verify, but this was a claim with which Zia concurred at the time.    There's also the matter of Soviet-sponsored attacks on Pakistan, aimed at eroding Pakistan's support for the mujahideen. Between the time the accords took effect, on May 14, and the death of Zia Ul-Haq, in mid-August, the Pakistan government recorded 295 ground violations and 92 air violations by Afghan forces, resulting in combined totals of 40 people dead and 114 injured. Pakistan even captured a Soviet pilot -- shot down on Pakistan's side of the border. The Soviets had been protesting all this time that Pakistan was violating the accords by continuing to supply arms to the mujahideen. Yet it took until late August before the U.S. administration publicly charged the Soviets and their Kabul regime with violating the accords.    There's also the record of what is emerging as a major Soviet-backed campaign of terror in Pakistan. This campaign is on a scale not seen since the attacks on Turkey in the 1970s. It is carried out under supervision of the Soviet KGB by agents of the Afghan secret police, or WAD, formerly infamous as the KHAD. It typically involves bomb explosions in crowded places such as bus stations and bazaars, and according to Pakistan government statistics, such explosions have killed some 1,000 people since 1982. As shown in the accompanying chart, the frequency of these terrorist acts began increasing dramatically around 1985, when the U.S. began supplying large amounts of military aid to the mujahideen, via Pakistan (see accompanying illustration -- WSJ November 4, 1988).    The goal of this terrorism has been to end Pakistan's support for the mujahideen. In the months just before the signing of the Geneva Accords, when Zia was resisting such an accommodation, Pakistan suffered an average of 1.5 terrorist acts a day, according to government sources in Islamabad. The monthly number of sabotage incidents dropped markedly just after the accords. Since Zia's death, the rate of terrorist incidents is again on the rise. In a 1987 State Department report, the U.S. noted Pakistan is the world's leading target for terrorism. That didn't stop State from skirting the horrors of this KGB/WAD terrorist campaign, the misgivings of Zia and the protests of the mujahideen to reach an agreement with Mr. Gorbachev.    Under Islamabad's caretaker government of Ghulam Ishaq Khan, Pakistan seems to be sticking to Zia's policy of support for the Afghan resistance -- despite the increased terrorism. This seems due largely to a bureaucratic momentum that may not survive the Nov. 16 elections.    For the Soviet Union, expansion through Afghanistan and across Pakistan to the warm-water ports and oil-shipping lanes of the Arabian Sea has never been a short-term project. As Roseanne Klass of Freedom House reminds us in her recent book, &quot;Afghanistan: The Great Game Revisited,&quot; this is an ambition inherited from the days of the Czars and sped along by the relatively unhampered military apparatus of a communist state. For the Soviets it would be a clever move indeed to soothe the West by signing the Geneva Accords, and then murder Zia, the man who might actually force Moscow to comply.    ---   Miss Rosett is editorial page editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal. </TEXT></DOC>