<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870413-0121 </DOCNO><HL> Purpose of the Pershings---By John Train</HL><DD> 04/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP FRESTAEROSPACE (ARO)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> PARIS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Gen. Pierre Gallois, retired from the French air force after helping to design his nation's independent nuclear force, hasn't been reassured about the Soviet threat in Europe in the more than three years since his concerns in this area were presented on these pages.    Indeed, a return visit to his office near the National Assembly finds him profoundly worried over the Reykjavik initiative: the U.S. offer, and Mikhail Gorbachev's acceptance in principle, of the withdrawal of the Soviet SS-20s along with America's European-based Pershing and cruise missiles. The trouble, he says, is that while many in the West believe that such a mutual move will bring the military balance back to where it was in 1979, when the SS-20s were introduced, that's not true at all.    A generation of hyper-accurate Soviet missiles -- the SS-21s, 22s and 23s -- has been introduced since then, and these missiles are not subject to the mutual withdrawal proposal. They are accurate enough to destroy the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's conventional war-making power using extremely low-yield warheads -- as little as one kiloton -- or even disrupt it by delivering &quot;improved conventional&quot; and chemical munitions. If they avoided the U.S. zone, they could disembowel key NATO facilities with air bursts without killing a significant number of American soldiers or causing major civilian damage or fallout.    But could the general imagine conditions under which such a Soviet attack really could occur?    &quot;The Soviets themselves clearly do, since they have made a vast effort to build that capability. It would be all over in about six minutes, unless it was at a moment of extreme international tension, with headquarters dispersed in the field, planes on auxiliary fields, submarines deployed at sea, and so forth. But Soviet doctrine demands a surprise attack accompanied by strategic deception. They would never attack during a period of maximum alert. A 'bolt out of the blue' is the way, and the only way, they would go to war.    &quot;And I remind you that we must also consider the edges of Europe: Norway and Turkey, for example. Turkey can be completely immobilized by the 500-kilometer {310-mile} range of the SS-23s now deployed in southern Russia.&quot;    What could the West do after such a surgical attack?    &quot;Faced by the loss of our conventional power, and with no riposte available except an attack on their strategic missiles or the Soviet homeland, it is most unlikely that any American president would continue the war. To do so would almost certainly result immediately in his own death and the destruction of his country.    &quot;The key military strategy question in Europe today is how to counter the threat of a single disarming strike against conventional targets. The Pershings, which are accurate and mobile and cannot be intercepted, give you a plausible counter. The cruise missiles no longer are. The Soviet Union is far ahead of the U.S. in strategic defense and already has the capability of shooting them down in flight. So the Pershings are the key.&quot;    Couldn't the U.S. carry out a tit-for-tat attack against Soviet conventional targets in Europe even without the Pershings, using submarine-launched missiles, or whatever?    &quot;Submarines have neither the volume of missiles nor the accuracy for the job. And surface ships are vulnerable. You also sometimes hear that the U.S. could retaliate against Eastern European targets using intercontinental missiles from U.S. soil, but to the Soviets that would look like an attack on Russia itself, and could very well trigger a general war.&quot;    But would all this be different from the situation before the Pershings and cruises were installed?    &quot;Completely. The public -- and indeed apparently our own President Mitterrand -- believes that if the Reykjavik proposal comes about, we could get back to the situation in 1979. Quite false! The SS-20 was conceived at the end of the 1960s, and was deployed after 1976. However, the Soviets discovered that in practice they could not use their earlier generations of missiles, including their SS-18s. Even the much smaller SS-20 warheads equal four Hiroshimas. The jet stream blows from west to east, and those huge missiles -- which have to be huge because they are inaccurate -- would create massive fallout, which would blow back over Eastern Europe and the Soviet Union. It would be like a hundred Chernobyls. But their latest generation of missiles, the SS-21s, 22s and 23s, similar to your Pershings, have, on the contrary, pinpoint accuracy, and can do the same job with as little as one kiloton, instead of, say, 150 kilotons. In other words, they really can be used.    &quot;So if President Reagan agrees to swap weapons that the Soviets can't use, because they would create such widespread destruction they would invite a strategic response, and because the Soviets would be among the victims themselves, for U.S. weapons that are at the start of their useful life and can be used, it would be a catastrophe.&quot;    Could a European SDI defend against these missiles?    &quot;Very difficult. It's not like your SDI. America would have 30 minutes of warning, with automatic weapons in space as well as on the ground to do the job. Europe would have five or six minutes, with ground-based radar and ground-based defensive weapons. So a defense would have to be based on technology that is not now available. Without the Pershings, there will be a period of years -- maybe many years -- in which the initiative will pass to the Soviets.&quot;    If a Reykjavik deal took place, would Europe have to increase its conventional strength?    &quot;That wouldn't help. Why build more airfields and add more divisions when for the price of a warhead or two each can be neutralized? In a spending race, if one power is adding divisions while the other is adding warheads, the former will soon go bankrupt.    &quot;The basic question the United States should ask itself is whether it wants to maintain its alliance with Europe. Our fear is that America is becoming bored with Europe, with all its problems and internal divisions. The Soviet Union, however, will know just how to dominate Western Europe if it gets the chance, the way it dominates Eastern Europe. After that, the United States will become a regional power, and the Soviets will acquire Europe's strength. The U.S. will slowly be squeezed out of the world scene.&quot;    What about the suggestion that the American missiles in Europe should be turned over to European command?    &quot;If the United States would yield its Pershings and cruises to the Europeans, Europe would be secure. But the U.S. won't do that, because the Soviet Union will protest. The U.S. isn't prepared to let the Europeans have the same weapons that our common enemy possesses.&quot;    Wouldn't turning over these weapons to various European countries exacerbate what Herman Kahn called the &quot;N-country&quot; problem? That is, wouldn't there be ever-increasing, and finally unmanageable, instability as more and more countries threatened each other?    &quot;No, no, not at all. On the contrary, it would create stability. If Pakistan obtains a nuclear capability, there will be stability in that area. Even in the Middle East, while Gadhafi is crazy, the other national leaders are not. They would not bring about their own destruction by the use of nuclear weapons.&quot;    And what of the latest statement by Viktor Karpov, head of the Soviet Foreign Ministry's arms-control office, that it doesn't look as though the U.S. really wants the &quot;zero option&quot; after all, since we're trying to avoid removing the Pershings completely?    &quot;I hope that's true, of course. And the U.S. did well to propose including short-range missiles in the deal. Those that the Soviets have in Europe are an organic part of the Red Army. Thus, that negotiation could go on for years . . . like the Vienna talks. Why be in a hurry to exchange stability, a valid deterrent, for instability?&quot;    And the talk of an early deployment of the general population protection version of the American SDI?    &quot;The U.S. is 20 years behind the Soviet Union, and won't be able to deploy a general-population defense before 2010, if then. It can, of course, attempt such a defense, but in the meanwhile it needs to build the instruments, test them, construct them and deploy them.&quot;    Why, then, is President Reagan talking about it?    &quot;He needs to get the appropriations. If he says that the possibility exists that a general-population defense will be available in five years, then maybe he'll get the money. And indeed, the U.S. might well be able to defend its missile silos within five or 10 years. It would be a great step forward.    &quot;I must say that making these criticisms distresses me greatly, since we regard this administration as particularly concerned with maintaining an adequate defense. Still, I believe that for political reasons President Reagan needs a success, and exposing Europe may be the price the Soviets will make him pay.&quot;    ---   Mr. Train is a New York-based investment counselor and writer. </TEXT></DOC>