<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870807-0143 </DOCNO><HL> King Fahd's Options on Iran---By Dilip Hiro</HL><DD> 08/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDESTPETROLEUM (PET) </IN><TEXT>   Last Friday's bloody episode in Mecca has further exacerbated an already explosive situation in the Persian Gulf. Against the background of the seven-year-old war between Tehran and Baghdad and the heightened tension between Iran and the U.S., a ferocious war of words has broken out between Iran and Saudi Arabia.    The incident took most observers by surprise. For, after several years of acrimony and tension, Tehran and Riyadh had reached an uneasy compromise on the thorny issue of the Iranian pilgrims' behavior during the annual pilgrimage to the holy shrines of Mecca and Medina, which are in Saudi Arabia.    Beginning with the 1984 pilgrimage, Saudi authorities allowed Iranians to demonstrate peacefully about a mile away from the shrines. In return, the Iranians were forbidden to display any posters, pictures or banners or to distribute any literature. This arrangement worked well for three years.    Relations improved in other aspects as well. In May 1985 the Saudi foreign minister visited Tehran, and the two countries established a communication channel at the highest level. Following the Iranian foreign minister's return visit to Riyadh later in the year, the two governments discontinued hostile radio broadcasts. Then, last October, King Fahd of Saudi Arabia sacked Sheik Ahmed Zaki Yamani, the pro-American oil minister, for his lack of enthusiasm for the Iranian strategy of raising oil prices by curtailing output.    King Fahd also made a symbolic, yet highly significant, ideological concession to Tehran. As a gesture of good will to revolutionary, fundamentalist Iran -- which regards the institution of monarchy as un-Islamic -- King Fahd ordered that instead of &quot;His Majesty,&quot; he should henceforth be addressed as &quot;the Custodian of the Holy Shrines.&quot;    In the week since the events of &quot;Black Friday&quot; in Mecca, in which several hundred people died, Iran and Saudi Arabia are engaged in diplomatic warfare, trying to sell their respective versions of the Mecca tragedy to other Moslem countries. By immediately releasing the videotapes of the early stages of the riot, which showed rampaging pilgrims and baton-wielding riot police, Saudi Arabia apparently won the first round. But Iran has the advantage of displaying the dead and injured bodies of its citizens, thus disproving Saudi Arabia's claim that no gunshots had been fired by its security forces.    Iran has gone on the offensive. Arguing that the massacre makes the House of Saud unfit to be the guardians of the holy shrines, it has proposed that the custody of the shrines should be assigned to an international body of Moslem nations. This idea has only a slim chance, if any, of being adopted. Nonetheless, by mounting this campaign Iran has put the Saudi royal family on the defensive.    Not surprisingly, King Fahd has taken a low profile in the Mecca controversy and adopted a non-aggressive posture summarized by his statement: &quot;We respond to evil with goodness.&quot;    The Saudi monarch must worry about the impact of the Mecca killings on the Shiite minority in his kingdom. Though only half a million strong in a total population of about six million, the Saudi Shiites are concentrated in the oil-rich eastern province of Hasa on the Persian Gulf, where they make up 55% of the province's population. In many of Saudi Arabia's main oil fields and installations, Saudi Shiites account for one-third of the work force. Thus, Saudi Arabia's oil region is a receptive ground for the message of Ayatollah Khomeini, who is much revered by Shiites throughout the world.    Externally, Saudi offshore installations and wells are vulnerable to Iranian attack. Whether Iran will attact depends primarily on how Iraq behaves. For the past several weeks, Iraqi planes have not attacked Iranian tankers or the Kharg Island oil terminal. Were Baghdad to resume such raids, Iran would almost certainly implement its threats of hitting Saudi and Kuwaiti oil targets. How Riyadh would react is anybody's guess.    Saudi Arabia may decide to move closer militarily to the U.S. -- by, say, allowing American mine-sweeping helicopters access to land facilities. Were it to do so, it would provide further propaganda ammunition to Tehran that it is an &quot;agent of American imperialism.&quot; The U.S. State Department's statement that Saudi Arabia &quot;acted responsibly to restore law and order&quot; in Mecca has been held up by Iran as a proof of U.S.-Saudi complicity.    Religious considerations weigh heavily on the minds of the Saudi royal family. King Fahd prides himself on being the guardian of Islam's two holiest shrines. He knows that however badly Iran behaves abroad, it is an Islamic state, and that to ally with a non-Islamic entity such as the U.S. against an Islamic neighbor would irreparably damage his standing in the Moslem world.    He is therefore likely to find it prudent to cool tempers in the region. He can help achieve this by urging Iraq to pursue its current policy of an undeclared cease-fire in the gulf tanker war. Saudi Arabia has powerful levers with which to pressure Baghdad. It can withhold valuable intelligence culled from U.S.-supplied AWACs that it has been supplying Iraq for many years. It can stop selling oil on Baghdad's behalf and subsidizing the Iraqi war effort. And it can curtail Iraq's oil exports by denying Baghdad the use of the Saudi pipeline to the Red Sea.    Riyadh also has the power to hurt Iran economically. All it has to do is to flood the world market with oil and depress prices. This is what it -- and Kuwait -- did in the first half of 1986 with disastrous impact on the Iranian economy. Such a strategy would take many months to become effective, however, and would be greeted with unanimous hostility by the other members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.    The tragedy in Mecca has dramatically revived the long quiescent struggle between two Islamic giants -- Iran and Saudi Arabia -- for the hearts and minds of the 950-million-strong Islamic community living in more than 112 countries. Its end result will be no less significant for humankind than the outcome of the bloody war between Iran and Iraq.    ---   Mr. Hiro is a London-based journalist who writes frequently on Iran. </TEXT></DOC>