<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870917-0003 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 09/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   BORK DEFENDED his record on free-speech and civil-rights issues.    Reagan's nominee for the Supreme Court denied holding a &quot;narrow view&quot; of the First Amendment's free-speech guarantee and maintained that his record on civil rights for minorities and women is a &quot;good&quot; one. During the second day of Senate Judiciary panel confirmation hearings, several moderate senators who say they are undecided about Bork's nomination told him they were troubled by his views on those matters and on the issue of privacy.    Bork insisted that he didn't act illegally in 1973 when, as acting attorney general, he carried out Nixon's order to fire Watergate special prosecutor Cox.    ---   ONGPIN WAS REPLACED as Manila's finance chief and Laurel resigned a post.    President Aquino, continuing to grapple with divisions within her government, dismissed the finance secretary, who tried to give new economic direction to the post-Marcos Philippines. She also accepted the resignation of Vice President Laurel as foreign affairs secretary. He cited &quot;fundamental differences&quot; with Aquino. She vowed that a further shake-up of her 26-member cabinet would come soon.    The latest moves signal the further disintegration of the coalition of humanrights advocates, old-time politicians and others that surrounded Aquino.    ---   Sen. Biden of Delaware called a news conference for today at which he is expected to deal with allegations of plagiarism. Biden told Senate colleagues that he was accused of plagiarism in law school. He also has been cited for borrowing campaign rhetoric from politicians in the U.S. and Britain without attribution.    ---   Gorbachev said that a treaty eliminating intermediate-range nuclear missiles could be drafted by year end and that an accord on strategic weapons is possible early next year. The Kremlin leader, in an article to be published in the Soviet press, also called for the creation of a U.N. mechanism to monitor compliance with arms agreements.    Shultz and Shevardnadze reported progress toward an arms-control pact during the second day of their presummit talks. The secretary of state and the Soviet foreign minister reportedly also discussed a timetable for the Soviet Union's withdrawal of about 115,000 troops from Afghanistan.    ---   House leaders tentatively agreed on a proposal that will include about $3.5 million in nonlethal aid for Nicaragua's rebels. The aid would be included in a spending bill to come before the chamber next week. House Speaker Wright, who had opposed renewed Contra aid during implementation of a regional peace plan, agreed to the request.    ---   Iraqi jets bombed Iranian oil centers and a ship in the Persian Gulf. Baghdad said the air raids, ending a weeklong informal truce, were carried out because Iran had spurned &quot;all peace efforts.&quot; Tehran vowed to retaliate. In New York, the U.N. secretary-general briefed the Security Council on his apparently unsuccessful gulf peace mission.    ---   An international accord was signed by representatives of 24 countries that is aimed at protecting the Earth's ozone layer. The agreement, approved at a meeting in Montreal, calls for the reduction of world production of certain chlorofluorocarbons, which scientists believe attack the protective ozone layer.    ---   Pope John Paul II told American bishops that dissent from church law was &quot;a grave error&quot; and incompatible with being a good Catholic. He also affirmed the church's stand against women priests, divorce and homosexuality. But the bishops, gathered in Los Angeles, said &quot;an uncritical application&quot; of old solutions isn't good enough.    ---   The Justice Department joined attorneys for three former officials of the agency and urged a federal appeals court in Washington to nullify court appointment of special prosecutors to investigate alleged wrongdoing in the executive branch. The department said such appointments undermine the constitutional &quot;separation of powers.&quot;    ---   Taiwan's ruling party approved the lifting of a 38-year ban on visits to China by Taiwanese residents. The party's policy-making Central Standing Committee, which voted unanimously on the resolution, urged that the new policy be adopted &quot;at an early date,&quot; a member of the panel said.    ---   Rival parties in South Korea agreed on a method to revise the constitution and announced plans to submit a draft document to parliament this week. Under the plan, a direct presidential election will be held Dec. 20 and a new National Assembly would be elected by April of next year.    ---   Argentine President Alfonsin named replacements for five of the eight members of his cabinet. Alfonsin had accepted their resignations in the wake of losses by the ruling Radical Civic Union Party in last week's congressional and gubernatorial elections.    ---   Israel will impose sanctions limiting trade, cultural, scientific and sports links with South Africa, a Foreign Ministry official in Jerusalem said. In Vienna, members of the International Atomic Energy Agency threatened to suspend South Africa because it practices apartheid and refuses to permit certain on-site nuclear plant inspections.    ---   The PLO asserted that a State Department order to close the group's Washington office was &quot;hypocritical.&quot; The organization, which said the office was protected by the First Amendment, said it may fight the action in court. The department, citing concern over terrorism, on Tuesday ordered the office closed within 30 days.    ---   Pakistan's government proposed measures to quell a wave of bombings, including checks on weapons and increased police. The move followed a car bomb attack in Peshawar in which at least eight people were killed and 36 others wounded. The blast apparently was aimed at an Afghan guerrilla leader, who wasn't hurt. </TEXT></DOC>