<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870605-0090 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Blacks and the GOP</HL><DD> 06/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Nov. 2, 1988, will mark an important anniversary for black Americans. It will be 40 years since their mass defection from the party of Abraham Lincoln. In the watershed presidential election of 1948, Democrats won the support of two-thirds of black voters. In 1944 and 1940, blacks had been about evenly split between the parties.    In ensuing years, the gulf between blacks and Republicans has grown wider. Some 40% of blacks identified themselves as Republicans in 1944, but by 1984 only 10% did so. Republican Party leaders have tried from time to time to repair relations but their efforts have been largely unsuccessful, partly, no doubt, because their party has too often projected an elitist, &quot;country club&quot; image to blacks.    Some party officials have been inclined to write off the black vote, but last fall's congressional elections revealed how unwise that course of action is. Black votes made the difference in at least six hotly contested Senate races. If Republican candidates had held their own among black voters in Alabama, California, Florida, Georgia, Louisiana and North Carolina, the GOP would still control the Senate.    Stronger ties between Republicans and blacks would, we think, yield benefits going well beyond partisan considerations. Blacks could not be taken for granted by the Democrats and would have more influence over Republican policies. Political pluralism would be enhanced.    While a rapprochement doesn't appear to be in the immediate offing, several trends are favorable to Republicans:    --Waning liberalism. Assorted polls suggest that blacks are growing increasingly moderate to conservative in political temperament. Blacks are more in concert with Republicans than Democrats on such issues as school prayer, abortion, busing and criminal sentencing. While Democrats maintain that blacks have lost ground during the Reagan presidency, most blacks don't feel that way. A 1985 sampling by the University of Michigan's Institute for Survey Research indicated that more than half of blacks felt their families were somewhat or much better off than in 1981. This may explain the dramatic run-up in Ronald Reagan's approval rating among blacks in recent years.    --Blacks' declining loyalty to the Democratic Party. A Gallup survey last year commissioned by the Joint Center for Political Studies (a black, Washington-based public-policy organization) showed a 6% drop in the number of blacks identifying themselves as &quot;strong Democrats&quot; between 1984 and 1986. While black defectors don't necessarily become Republicans, they are potential recruits.    --Blacks' growing impatience with traditional Democratic social policy, and increasing willingness to consider Republican alternatives. Many blacks have begun to question aloud the efficacy of poverty programs. The self-help prescriptions first espoused by the black conservatives are gaining appeal. Many blacks have been enthusiastic about GOP-backed reforms in taxation, welfare and education, as well as policies to strengthen families and communities.    --Blacks' growing resentment toward their old-style liberal leaders. Three prominent black political figures lost recent elections. Kenneth Gibson lost his bid for a fifth term as mayor of Newark, N.J. Civil-rights hero Julian Bond was upset in his quest for a U.S. House seat. And earlier this month the five-term mayor of Gary, Ind., Richard Hatcher, was ousted from office, ending the longest reign of any black mayor.    The challenge for Republicans is to make their party more appealing to disaffected blacks. The Republicans' failure to measurably improve their standing, we suspect, is largely the result of an unwillingness to compete. Democrats enthusiastically register and organize black voters. If Republicans began a black recruitment drive now with 1988 in mind, it would signal to blacks that the party truly wants their support.    The importance of such signals was borne out by the warm reception given President Reagan's recent address at Tuskegee Institute in Alabama. Blacks were pleased that the president lent his prestige to an institution that is so important to them.    The party also can advance its cause by better utilizing the black conservatives within its ranks. Black conservatives are among the most rigorous thinkers and articulate speakers in American politics today.    If Republicans do more than make token appeals to the black electorate they might be surprised to find blacks more receptive to invitations to join the party. Forty years is long enough for blacks and one of America's two major political parties to be at odds. </TEXT></DOC>