<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870514-0145 </DOCNO><HL> State Takeover Laws: Constitutional but Dumb---By Roberta Romano</HL><DD> 05/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)SUPREME COURT (SUP) </IN><TEXT>   The Supreme Court recently upheld Indiana's state takeover statute. Such legislation may be constitutional, but is it wise? State takeover statutes are controversial because there are serious questions whether these laws benefit shareholders. These new provisions might increase the premium shareholders receive in a takeover bid, but that effect could be swamped by a decrease in the likelihood of an offer being made. The statutes could thus be a lever for preserving management's jobs while reducing shareholder wealth.    In promoting state regulation of takeovers, managers often claim to be furthering shareholders' interests. They also suggest that the interests of workers and local communities are served by these statutes. One way to gauge better who benefits from takeover laws is to examine the politics of the legislation -- to investigate, for instance, who initiates the bills and who lobbies for their adoption. If the broad-based constituency to which proponents of the legislation refer were truly benefited, we would expect to see the supposed beneficiaries, who have their own powerful lobbying organizations, at the forefront in the making of takeover statutes. The politics of takeover statutes does not, however, fit such a scenario.    The Connecticut experience provides a case study of who is behind the move for takeover legislation and, correspondingly, who most likely is the beneficiary. In the spring of 1984, Connecticut enacted a fair price statute, which regulates the second step in a two-tier acquisition, where one price is paid for the shares tendered and another potentially lower price is paid for the rest. In the absence of the statute, as in many states, a merger would be subject to only majority approval. A bidder's successful tender offer for control typically means that it has the votes to approve a second-step merger of the target into a bidder-owned entity, thereby &quot;cashing out&quot; the remaining public shareholders of the target. By requiring instead a supermajority vote, board approval or a specified minimum price equal to the price in the first step, a fair-price statute can make success more expensive for an acquirer seeking 100% control of a target firm.    Connecticut's fair-price statute became law a few months after its introduction. It was drafted and promoted by a prominent local corporation, Aetna Life andamp; Casualty Insurance Corp., aided by the Connecticut Business and Industry Association. Aetna was performing poorly at the time, and presumably feared it might become a takeover target. Having missed -- intentionally or not -- the expiration of the session's filing date, the proponents of the fair-price statute had their proposal attached as an amendment to an inconsequential bill on reserving corporation names. An additional benefit of this artful-if-intentional maneuver was that the bill's proponents were able to avoid the statutory requirement of a public hearing because the mandated hearing on the bill on corporation names had already been held.    The conventional role of the executive committee of the corporate law section of the state bar association is to suggest revisions to the state corporation code. Yet this group was not even aware of the fair-price bill's existence until a floor vote was scheduled. The committee opposed the bill, but it sailed through both houses anyway and went into effect immediately upon the governor's signing, June 4, rather than on the usual Oct. 1 date. No group besides the corporate bar and the business community expressed an interest in the provision.    The recent experience in other states with takeover statutes closely tracks Connecticut's. The statutes are expeditiously enacted with near unanimous, bipartisan support, most often at the behest of the nervous management of a local firm. Two of the more conspicuous examples occurred in Kentucky and Missouri. The Kentucky Legislature amended its takeover statute virtually overnight to enable Ashland Oil to fend off a hostile bid by the Belzbergs. Similarly, Missouri passed emergency legislation extending its takeover statute to out-of-state corporations &quot;that are common carriers that have benefited from physical facilities financed by Missouri subdivisions and that have over 7,500 employees in Missouri.&quot; Trans World Airlines, the only corporation known to meet the statutory requirements, was then contesting Carl Icahn's takeover bid.    The supposed beneficiaries of takeover bills either oppose the legislation or are neutral. The shareholder groups that do lobby, such as T. Boone Pickens's United Shareholders Association, oppose most legislation regulating takeovers. Nor do unions and community-based groups actively initiate or lobby for takeover laws. Unions, for instance, are far more concerned with regulating plant closings, and other matters that directly affect their members, than with takeover statutes that give managers tools with which to impede hostile acquisitions.    Delaware, a consistent leader in corporate-law innovations and the incorporation state of about half of the Fortune 500 firms, has been slow to legislate in this area. There are good reasons. Delaware's corporate constituency is far more numerous and diverse than that of other states, which have fewer firms that engage in acquisitions. This appears to create a different political equilibrium in Delaware when it comes to takeover statutes. Delaware's strategy emphasizes self-help, in which shareholders vote for the defensive tactic, rather than mandated statutory solutions. So long as Delaware maintains this policy, the Supreme Court's decision will have a limited effect on the market for corporate control.    What's wrong with anti-takeover statutes? The fair-price component of Connecticut's statute is often endorsed by distinguished legal scholars as protecting shareholders who would otherwise be coerced into tendering their shares at an undesirable price because they fear an even lower price will be paid in a second-step merger. Such a concern appears to motivate the Supreme Court's decision to uphold the constitutionality of Indiana's control share acquisition statute. But firms can, and do, voluntarily adopt changes in their charter provisions affecting possible takeovers. For instance, about one-third of the Connecticut firms traded on the New York Stock Exchange had a fair-price charter provision at the time the fair-price statute was enacted. When such provisions are added to a charter, shareholders must vote to approve them.    Given the ready availability of self-help, what need is there for a statute? While a statute certainly saves the cost of a shareholder vote for firms that would otherwise voluntarily adopt such a provision, one cannot help but suspect that managers gripped by fear of losing their jobs lobby for legislation because they worry that a majority of their firm's shareholders would not approve a charter amendment.    Justice Antonin Scalia, in his concurring opinion on state takeover statutes, noted that a law can be both constitutional and foolish. Takeover statutes, while constitutional, are troublesome because they can undermine the shareholder sovereignty on which all of corporate law is premised. For it is most plausible that the principal beneficiaries of this regulation are its prime promoters -- managers seeking to circumvent a shareholders vote because they fear the loss of their jobs.    ---   Ms. Romano is a professor at the Yale Law School. </TEXT></DOC>