<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871203-0103 </DOCNO><HL> Despite Critics and Scandal, StoltenbergWields Undiminished Policy Influence---By Victoria PopeStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP </IN><DATELINE> BONN  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Finance Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg, the man who shaped West Germany's long-awaited plan for economic expansion, has had a turbulent year.    His long reluctance to stimulate the West German economy has exasperated other Western leaders. At home, his determination to push through a tax on interest income from investments has nettled businessmen. In addition, he has suffered criticism of his handling of an election scandal in his home province of Schleswig-Holstein.    Despite his travails, associates say, Mr. Stoltenberg still stands head and shoulders above any other senior German policy maker. An example of the respect he commands came yesterday when he had to leave the news conference on Germany's stimulus package early. Although Martin Bangemann, the economics minister, remained to continue answering questions, the hall quickly emptied of reporters, who saw little point in staying with Mr. Stoltenberg gone.    The program announced yesterday represents a victory for the 59-year-old Mr. Stoltenberg, who fought to keep new tax cuts out of the plan and wanted to stimulate growth without risking a bloated deficit. It proved again his determination to fight rising deficits, inflation and government spending.    A year ago, the stately Mr. Stoltenberg was the most popular politician in Germany, according to polls. The voters liked the straightforward way he spoke his mind, even though his remarks were often biting. He was seen as a politician of the old school -- well-spoken, well-educated and old-fashioned; a fanatic for duty, self-discipline and punctuality.    Those virtues were strong cards at a time when Chancellor Helmut Kohl had been drawn into a kickback scandal surrounding the Flick industrial group. Insiders from the chancellor's own Christian Democratic party talked freely about grooming Mr. Stoltenberg, a longtime party stalwart, to step in should Mr. Kohl have been forced to resign.    Instead, Mr. Kohl survived the Flick scandal, and it was Mr. Stoltenberg's prestige that took a tumble. In a secret move after the chancellor's re-election in January, Mr. Kohl offered Mr. Stoltenberg's portfolio to the state governor of Bavaria, Franz Josef Strauss. Government sources say Mr. Kohl wasn't eager to get rid of Mr. Stoltenberg, but was anxious to curry favor with the powerful Mr. Strauss, who ended up declining the job.    Though insiders say that political embarrassment hurt Mr. Stoltenberg, his influence appears undiminished. Mr. Kohl continues to rely on him to shape the country's economic policy and to take the heat when that policy is under attack.    By all accounts, Mr. Stoltenberg stoically accepts the role of economic pointman. He is a master at stonewalling, rarely acknowledging publicly the extent of international criticism of German policy. He tirelessly repeats his belief that Bonn, to keep inflation and other economic evils at bay, must not let its deficits rise through increased government spending.    His stubborn resistance to expanding the scope of West Germany's tax reform has become a symbol of his fiscal zealotry. Despite repeated calls from Washington to accelerate tax cuts set for 1990, Mr. Stoltenberg insists that doing so would damage West Germany's economic equilibrium and wouldn't be either legally or administratively feasible.    However, at least part of this hard-line approach rests on the advice of senior civil servants in the Finance Ministry, including his deputies, Hans Tietmeyer and Hansjoerg Haefele. Some members of the ruling coalition of Christian Democrats and Free Democrats grouse that the finance minister relies too much on these high-level bureaucrats.    Born in the Baltic port of Kiel, Mr. Stoltenberg trained not as an economist but as a modern historian. In mathematics his best grades were only average, and he is said to abhor doing his own tax returns.    He learned economic policy as the minister for science and research under the wing of Chancellor Ludwig Erhard, known as the father of West Germany's postwar economic miracle. That training made him a staunch adherent to social market philosophy, which calls for a free-market economy while putting a high priority on maintaining &quot;the social net.&quot; He unyieldingly opposes Keynesian arguments for spending, believing that inflation is its constant byproduct, colleagues say.    Although he has a sense of political gamesmanship, he appears inflexible in most large forums. In news conferences, he is often controlled and clipped. &quot;Among friends,&quot; says Walther Leisler Kiep, a veteran Christian Democratic politician, Mr. Stoltenberg &quot;can be a lot of fun and enjoys a glass or two of red wine.&quot;    Part of the explanation for his public demeanor is the influence he wields. An ill-chosen word could send markets spinning.    In the Finance Ministry, those who like and respect him call him a consummate professional. Those who don't, say he is a martinet who seeks advice and then ignores it in favor of his own ideas.    The scandal in Schleswig-Holstein, where he is the Christian Democratic chairman, soiled Mr. Stoltenberg's &quot;cleanhands&quot; image. In that affair, which began in September, Uwe Barschel, a protege of Mr. Stoltenberg's who was state governor, was implicated in a series of political dirty tricks against his opponent, Bjorn Engholm, including the spreading of rumors about Mr. Engholm's sex life.    Even when it became clear that Mr. Engholm had been made the target of a villification campaign, Mr. Stoltenberg ranted against the &quot;left-wing press&quot; and the Social Democrats, whom he said had smeared Mr. Barschel's good name with their own allegations on the eve of the elections. In the midst of all this, Mr. Barschel died, an apparent suicide.    Sources say that the prudish Mr. Stoltenberg was shocked by the revelations and upset that Mr. Barschel didn't tell him the truth. But publicly he treated it as a partisan issue and refused to challenge his own party's ethics.    In a typical assessment of how Mr. Stoltenberg's image has suffered, a West German diplomat says: &quot;I was always his fan because he was intellectual and smart. But now I've lost faith in the man. He never really apologized for what happened in Schleswig-Holstein.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>