<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890907-0105 </DOCNO><DD> = 890907 </DD><AN> 890907-0105. </AN><HL> Correcting Carter's Ethiopian Disaster@  ----@  By Robert D. Kaplan </HL><DD> 09/07/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> AFRIC </CO><TEXT>   Talks are scheduled to begin today in Atlanta between the Ethiopian government and guerrilla insurgents. The discussions, which will deal with procedural issues preliminary to the main negotiations, were proposed and will be mediated by former president Jimmy Carter.    Don't laugh. Both the government and the guerrillas are burnt out from many years of fighting. Mr. Carter, a well-meaning man with a proven knack for handling complicated negotiations between sworn enemies, could yet atone for the naivety of his earlier approach toward Ethiopia.    Last February, Eritrean and Tigrean guerrillas destroyed three government divisions, killing and capturing 10,000 of Mr. Mengistu's troops, a debacle that led to the desertion of 20,000 more. Newsweek reported that Mr. Mengistu's army may have suffered more casualties since early 1988 than America did in Vietnam.    In May, Mr. Mengistu's own generals attempted a coup against him. If one of the plotters had not at the last moment tipped off Mr. Mengistu, President Bush would have had a lucky foreign policy break early in his term.    Mr. Mengistu punished the generals in characteristic fashion: The headless body of one of the conspirators was reportedly dragged through the streets of Addis Ababa. The others were tortured and killed. Then Mr. Mengistu proceeded to adopt their program. He indicated a willingness to make reforms and to negotiate unconditionally with the guerrillas.    And it was here that Mr. Carter seized the opportunity to make amends for one of the first of his foreign policy blunders. In 1977, the Amhara-dominated empire of Ethiopia teetered on the verge of collapse. Soviet-supported Eritrean and Tigrean insurgents were overrunning one government position after another in the north of the country. The Somali army, also Soviet-supported, was poised to invade from the southeast. Mr. Mengistu, a former army captain who had butchered his way up from a dusty supply office to head the ruling Dergue (military &quot;committee&quot;), was murdering his rivals while frantically searching for arms to fend off the Eritreans, the Tigreans and the Somalis.    And then the thought occurred to the Soviets: Why be satisfied with making a satellite of Somalia and its 3 million people, when the larger country next door was up for grabs?    It was up for grabs because Mr. Carter, appalled at Mr. Mengistu's human rights abuses, had refused to continue Henry Kissinger's Ethiopia policy. Mr. Kissinger, secretary of state under President Ford, had closed his eyes to Mr. Mengistu's pathological killing, evidently on the assumption that a Soviet-controlled Mengistu would be even worse.    Mr. Kissinger turned out to have been right. The result of the Carter arms embargo was a massive airlift of Soviet weapons to Ethiopia, the arrival of East German security police, some of them former Nazis, in Addis Ababa, and a &quot;Red Terror,&quot; in which thousands of Ethiopian teen-agers were gunned down in the streets of the capital.    Mr. Carter's options in Ethiopia were, of course, unenviable. But even if he felt morally obliged to turn away from one East African client, there was no justification for failing to arm the Somalis in order to retain some leverage over the regime in Addis Ababa. But Mr. Carter also decided to leave the Somali army, beaten by the Soviet-supplied and Cuban- and East German-advised Ethiopians, stranded deep in the Ogaden desert without the U.S. arms for which the Somalis were begging.    In this vacuum, the Soviets did more than merely establish their influence in Ethiopia. By engineering Mr. Mengistu's military victory over their former Somali satellite, the Soviets were able to completely take over in Addis Ababa.    The years rolled on. The Somalis were crushed, but the guerrillas in the north fought on. Mr. Mengistu's tactic was to burn recalcitrant Eritrean and Tigrean peasant farmers out of their homes. By the fall of 1984, famine had ensued. An ignorant world ascribed it to drought.    The first liberal reaction to the famine was to blame President Reagan for &quot;letting Ethiopian kids starve because the regime was communist.&quot; That was nonsense. The Reagan administration had refused to aid Ethiopia throughout the early 1980s because Mr. Mengistu was prosecuting a war and a scorched-earth policy in the very region threatened by famine. The Reagan administration had followed an anti-famine policy: It had urged the Ethiopian regime to abandon tactics that would inevitably cause mass starvation.    When that approach failed, the Reagan administration informed the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees about satellite photographs, which showed the beginning of the mass exodus of Eritrean and Tigrean peasant farmers to neighboring Sudan. This was 1983, a year before the famine emergency. UNHCR took no action: It was reluctant to interfere in Ethiopia's &quot;internal affairs.&quot; That's why there were few provisions set up for the hundreds of thousands of refugees who turned up at the Sudanese border in 1984.    When the Reagan administration was eventually persuaded to provide hundreds of millions of dollars worth of emergency food relief to Ethiopia, liberals rejoiced that the assistance would wean Mr. Mengistu away from the Soviets. They were wrong again: The aid won the U.S. absolutely no influence within the regime.    The aid did, however, save the government from collapsing, while leading to a purge of &quot;moderates&quot; in the Marxist Dergue and indirectly allowing for the forced resettlement and &quot;villagization&quot; of enemy ethnic groups, in which at least 100,000 peasants previously unaffected by the famine were reportedly killed.    Conservatives and others opined that, in terms of Ethiopia's domestic politics, the famine was caused not by drought, but by deliberate state policy. Only when the Eritreans and Tigreans did better on the battlefield would Mr. Mengistu be forced to moderate his policies in the agricultural field. Their liberal opponents denounced this focus on the war as mean-spirited and cynical. &quot;Kids are starving, who cares about the war?&quot;    But even liberals learn. By 1987, as it became clear that the regime's agricultural policies had gone even further toward Stalinism, the U.S. cut off virtually all aid to Ethiopia. There wasn't a peep of protest. Ethiopia's structural food deficit actually increased during the years of emergency aid, indicating the probable emergence of an even greater famine in the 1990s.    Conservatives can declare total victory in the debate over the causes of the Ethiopian famine: Collectivization of agriculture and the conflict between the central government and the insurgents was to blame. Ethiopia's only hope lies in the Atlanta talks. If they succeed, Mr. Carter will have redeemed himself for at least one of his administration's mistakes.    ---   Mr. Kaplan is the author of &quot;Surrender or Starve: The Wars Behind the Famine&quot; (Westview Press, 1988). </TEXT></DOC>