<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880928-0020 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   BUSH PROPOSED a tax-deferred savings plan for middle-income Americans.    Campaigning in Ohio, the GOP nominee presented a plan for &quot;individual savings accounts&quot; in which interest could accumulate tax free on deposits of as much as $1,000 a year for taxpayers earning less than $50,000. Bush contended that his proposal would encourage increased savings. In Illinois, Democratic candidate Dukakis asserted that Bush, if elected president, would seek to cut the budget deficit &quot;by raiding the Social Security trust fund.&quot;    The Bush campaign says the savings plan would eventually cost the Treasury $550 million a year. It is the fifth tax break the vice president has proposed.    ---   NASA officials conducted a review of the space shuttle Discovery and discovered a flaw in a satellite similar to one being carried by the $1.5 billion spacecraft. Officials also expressed concern over lightning near Cape Canaveral. But the countdown continued toward tomorrow's scheduled liftoff.    ---   The Pentagon said Air Force Lt. Gen. James Abrahamson has resigned as director of Reagan's space-based anti-missile research project. The president has nominated Air Force Lt. Gen. George Monahan to succeed Abrahamson, who reportedly has been frustrated over congressional budget reductions in the Star Wars program.    ---   Shevardnadze offered to convert a Siberian radar complex in Krasnoyarsk into an international space research center. In a speech at the U.N., the Soviet foreign minister called on the U.S. to do the same with radar bases in Greenland and Britain. The U.S. contends that the uncompleted Siberian complex violates the 1972 ABM treaty.    Reagan met with European and Asian allies in New York and called on them to shoulder more of their joint defense burden. Meanwhile, Shultz said planned East-West troop reduction talks wouldn't be expanded to cover nuclear weapons in Europe.    ---   Federal safety officials said an inexperienced cockpit crew's failure to ensure that its plane was adequately de-iced, and confusion caused by air traffic controllers led to the crash of a Continental Airlines DC-9 in Denver last November. The accident, in which 28 people died, occurred during a snowstorm.    ---   A U.N. spokesman said the foreign ministers of Iran and Iraq will meet Saturday in New York for face-to-face talks aimed at restarting the stalled Persian Gulf peace process. Both sides have failed to make progress toward a permanent armistice since a gulf cease-fire was declared in August.    ---   Defense Minister Rabin said the Israeli army was deliberately shooting and wounding more Palestinians in a drive to end the nine-month-old uprising in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. Arab hospital officials confirmed the first two Palestinian deaths from new plastic bullets.    Israel has lost a six-year border dispute with Egypt over a tiny Red Sea beachfront, Israeli radio said. An international panel accepted Cairo's position on the location of the Sinai peninsula border and ordered the 765-yard Taba resort returned to Egypt.    ---   The U.S. renewed efforts to end Lebanon's political crisis. Washington's new envoy to Beirut met with leaders of the country's rival Christian and Moslem governments to discuss plans for proceeding with a Lebanese presidential election.    ---   Poland's Parliament approved Politburo member Mieczyslaw Rakowski, 61, as prime minister. The Communist Party propaganda chief, a foe of the Solidarity union, asked for two weeks to build a broader-based government with people of &quot;reformist attitudes.&quot; The move came less than a month before talks between Warsaw and Lech Walesa.    ---   The Senate approved an amendment that would exempt most U.S. businesses and a majority of the labor force from proposed legislation requiring employers to give workers unpaid leaves for childbirth or serious illnesses.    ---   U.S. penal officials paroled former Teamsters President Roy Williams, citing his testimony against organized crime figures. The 73-year-old Williams, who has emphysema and an enlarged heart, was released from prison in Springfield, Mo. He served less than 34 months of a 10-year sentence for conspiring to bribe a U.S. senator.    ---   Radio Rangoon announced that former Prime Minister U Nu, deposed in a 1962 coup led by Ne Win, had formed a political party. Burma's military rulers, who seized power Sept. 18, have asked the opposition to participate in multiparty general elections that they have pledged to hold soon.    ---   Authorities in Armenia warned workers on strike over the Nagorno-Karabakh regional dispute that they face stiff penalties, including loss of pay and longer waits for housing. The latest strikes in the Soviet republic began last week after an Armenian was killed in clashes with Azerbaijanis.    ---   Haiti dissolved an agency that administered major development projects. The move appeared to mark the start of an official cleanup of government institutions following a Sept. 17 military coup by midlevel officers. The agency, mainly comprised of supporters of the Duvaliers, had been criticized by political and social organizations.    ---   Japan plans to kill as many as 300 whales this winter in a research project aimed at proving there are enough of the mammals to resume commercial whaling, officials in Tokyo said. A similar plan last year was criticized by environmentalists, who accused Japan of circumventing a whaling ban. </TEXT></DOC>