<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880513-0019 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. AND SOVIETS SETTLED an arms-control dispute at talks in Geneva.    Secretary of State Shultz and Soviet Foreign Minister Shevardnadze announced an accord on differences over on-site verification provisions in the treaty to eliminate medium-range nuclear missiles. It appears unlikely, however, that the pact will be ratified before this month's superpower summit meeting. Senate Majority Leader Byrd said he won't schedule consideration of the treaty unless Senate committees approve the pact reached in Geneva   National Security Adviser Colin Powell is expected to brief Senate leaders on the agreement today, but Sen. Nunn said he wanted formal hearings.    ---   A federal prosecutor met with Attorney General Meese to express opposition to the dropping of drug charges against Noriega as part of any deal for the Panamanian strong man to leave power. The federal judge in the case also questioned whether the government alone could order the indictments dropped.    ---   Soviet troops began pulling out of Jalalabad, their biggest garrison in eastern Afghanistan, rebel and diplomatic sources said. The 4,000-member brigade probably will be relocated to Kabul and replaced by Afghan government troops as Moscow begins Sunday to withdraw its troops from Afghanistan under a recently signed accord.    ---   France's Mitterrand appointed a cabinet dominated by Socialists, fueling speculation he will call early legislative elections. Despite the appointees' moderate reputations, the Socialist tilt surprised many because the president has said he wants to expand his power base and realign politics around the center-left.    ---   Indian police arrested four Sikh high priests for curfew violations and three people were killed in gun battles as a tense standoff continued at the Golden Temple in Amritsar. Sikh separatists holding the temple were also given a warning to surrender by the 3,000 troops and elite commandos surrounding the Sikhs' holiest shrine.    ---   Israeli warplanes struck a Palestinian base in Lebanon. The attack was apparently timed with a guerrilla leader's visit, but Palestinian sources said he wasn't hurt and only one guerrilla was wounded. Separately, Israeli officials decided to allow the gradual reopening of West Bank Palestinian schools, which were closed four months ago.    ---   Syrian and Iranian teams enforced a shaky truce in Shiite Moslem south Beirut as rival Hezbollah and Amal militias fortified positions and residents attempted to stockpile food. The latest truce in the week-old battle, which has killed 188 and injured 534, was arranged by Syrian President Assad and Iranian President Khamenei.    ---   The National Institutes of Health ended two decades of research into the artificial heart, and a top official said the biology of the device &quot;didn't work.&quot; The agency said it was focusing on smaller, more reliable devices to help the heart pump blood. The agency had spent $239 million to develop the artificial heart.    ---   The Reagan administration is backing a request by Kuwait to buy F-18 fighter-bombers. If approved by Congress, it would be the first sale of the advanced warplanes to an Arab country. Kuwait has asked to buy 40 F-18s. A State Department spokeswoman said the Persian Gulf state's request is &quot;consistent&quot; with U.S. policy in the region.    ---   Two top South African officials arrived in Brazzaville to resume talks aimed at ending the 13-year-old war in Angola. The arrival in the Congolese capital by Foreign Minister Botha and Defense Minister Malan marked a rare visit to black Africa by officials of Pretoria's apartheid government. The talks also include the U.S., Angola and Cuba.    ---   Guerrillas briefly seized a seminary in Peru where Pope John Paul II is scheduled to speak this weekend, but fled when police arrived. Separately, the Vatican expressed &quot;astonishment&quot; at President Stroessner's order to cancel the pope's planned meeting with an opposition group in Paraguay. Bishops insist the meeting will take place.    ---   Iranian hard-liners are expected to widen their gains in the second round of parliamentary elections today. State-run media said that while no faction won a majority in the first round April 8, when 188 of 270 seats were decided, radicals made sizable gains. Recent military setbacks are expected to give them an edge in today's vote.    ---   Peru's President Garcia is expected to appoint new cabinet ministers by the weekend in a shake-up over economic policy and the fight with leftist guerrillas. The prime minister and cabinet resigned Wednesday.    ---   American Airlines said a Boeing 727 was forced to make an emergency landing in Detroit Monday after it lost cabin pressure due to a 15-inch fuselage crack. A spokesman said the problem was &quot;in no way related&quot; to the structural failure that tore the top off an Aloha Air 737 in Hawaii recently. </TEXT></DOC>