<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870107-0011 </DOCNO><HL> Congress Opens, Creating an Iran PanelAnd Girding for Disputes With Reagan---By David Shribman and Jeffrey H. BirnbaumStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXES MDEST LATAMENVIRONMENT (ENV)AEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The 100th Congress got under way with the Senate creating a special committee to investigate the Iran-Contra scandal, signaling the start of what promises to be a contentious relationship between Congress and President Regan.    Senate leaders agreed to give the select committee a confidential report, prepared by the Senate Intelligence Committee, on the scandal. The select committee, in turn, will have discretion to release as much of the report as is &quot;in the public interest.&quot;    Handing over the report doesn't resolve a lingering partisan dispute over whether to release it to the public. Republicans, eager to put the Iran-Contra affair behind them, have been pressing to make the report public. But Democrats, who want an investigation conducted by a Democractic-controlled panel, have resisted, arguing that the report is incomplete.    &quot;Why all the hurry?&quot; asked Senate Majority Leader Robert Byrd (D., W.Va.). &quot;It's all going to be revealed. Let's not get in too big a rush here.&quot; But Minority Leader Robert Dole (R., Kan.) answered: &quot;I can't see any greater obligation than disclosing information that should be public.&quot;    The House is expected to create its separate investigative committee as early as today.    The Iran-Contra affair dominated the debate on Capitol Hill on a day in which new members of both chambers were sworn in. Rep. James Wright (D., Texas) was officially elected speaker of the House. And, in the Senate, majority control was formally transferred to the Democrats from the Republicans.    At the same time, a bitter dispute among Republicans in the Senate Foreign Relations Committee moved a step closer toward resolution when Sen. Richard Lugar of Indiana staved off, by a 7-0 vote, a challenge from Sen. Jesse Helms of North Carolina to be the panel's ranking GOP member.    Mr. Helms is trying to reassert his seniority on the committee after relinquishing it two years ago to fulfill a campaign promise to become chairman of the Agriculture Committee. Final resolution of the dispute mightn't come until next week, when all Republican senators meet.    The select Senate committee has been given broad authority to study &quot;all matters which have any tendency to reveal the full facts&quot; about the actions of government officials engaged in the sale of arms to Iran and diversion of the profits to the Nicaragua insurgents. The committee consists of six Democrats and five Republicans, chosen last month, with Sen. Daniel Inouye (D., Hawaii) as chairman and Sen. Warren Rudman (R., N.H.) as vice chairman.    The legislation creating the committee, approved on a 88-4 vote, calls for a final public report by Aug. 1, with an extension to Oct. 30 if circumstances warrant. The committee, to be known formally as the Select Committee on Secret Military Assistance to Iran and the Nicaraguan Opposition, is to be given access to documents and papers assembled by the Senate Intelligence Committee, which undertook a preliminary investigation late last year.    Sen. David Durenberger (R., Minn.), who stepped down yesterday as chairman of the Intelligence Committee, said the panel's 133-page report doesn't &quot;arrive at some specific conclusion about what went wrong and who ought to be blamed.&quot;    The legislation creating the select Senate committee also calls for the Intelligence Committee to provide a list of unresolved issues that it recommends be pursued by the new committee.    Both chambers prepared to do battle with President Reagan on other fronts. Democratic leaders in both the House and the Senate introduced for quick passage an $18 billion clean-water bill that President Reagan vetoed last year. Other measures likely to spark disputes, which House leaders introduced yesterday, included a highway bill and a trade bill, which both will be on the Senate's agenda soon.    In addition, the House yesterday rejected, in a vote along party lines, a GOP initiative that would have prevented any tampering with the scheduled reduction in income-tax rates later this year. Mr. Wright has suggested that the reduction, mandated by the new tax law, could be delayed in order to raise revenues.    Meanwhile, Sen. Dole introduced a non-binding resolution that would express the sense of the Senate that tax rates shouldn't be increased nor their reduction delayed.    Most of the day was spent in ceremony. In the Senate, the 34 newly elected members were escorted to the well of the chamber, four at a time, by the other senators from their respective states to receive the oath of office from Vice President George Bush. In the House, all 435 members stood, raised right hands and were sworn in for two-year terms by the new speaker, Mr. Wright.    Mr. Wright was elected by an unusual roll-call vote. Every House member was asked in turn to shout out his or her choice for speaker, picking between Mr. Wright and Republican Leader Robert Michel of Illinois. In a vote along party lines, Mr. Wright won. Mr. Michel was designated House minority leader.    In a brief address, Mr. Wright called for cooperation with the White House, but asserted that Congress would insist on equal footing with the executive branch. His speech often was interrupted, however, by the playful voices of small children who were brought to the Capitol to see their mothers and fathers being given the oath of office.    The vistors' galleries in both chambers were overflowing with well-heeled constituents and family members of the newly elected lawmakers. For hours afterward, the clink of cocktail glasses could be heard emanating from celebratory receptions in rooms throughout the Capitol. </TEXT></DOC>