<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870612-0056 </DOCNO><HL> Price Prospects:Small Pay Raises SpurHopes That InflationWill Remain in Check---But if Profits Start Surging,Unions May Get Tough;Major Negotiations Slated---Cost-Cutting Drives Roll On---By Rose GutfeldStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABORECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED) </IN><TEXT>   Recent signs of inflation, provoked largely by the falling dollar, have roiled the financial markets, sending bond prices plunging and mortgage rates climbing.    Despite a flurry of rising prices, however, wage increases remain subdued, and many economists applaud this restraint. &quot;As long as wages are extremely moderate -- and they have shown no tendency to be otherwise -- inflation will remain quite modest,&quot; says Charles Lieberman, senior vice president at Manufacturers Hanover Securities Corp. The reason: Labor costs constitute about two-thirds of the expense of generating the nation's output.    Recent wage increases have indeed been small. In the first quarter, hourly compensation of private non-farm workers rose just 1.8% from a year earlier, compared with a 3.6% increase between the first quarters of 1985 and 1986, according to the Bureau of Labor Statistics.    Wage increases probably won't stay so modest, but several forces augur continued restraint: the reduced power of labor unions in hard-hit industries such as steel and farm equipment, the still-intense competition by foreign companies struggling to keep their U.S. market shares, and, most important, American companies' continued emphasis on cost-cutting.    &quot;Wage restraint and cost improvement remain the name of the game,&quot; says Lyle Gramley, the chief economist at the Mortgage Bankers Association.    Last month, for example, the United Auto Workers union ratified a 39-month contract guaranteeing the jobs of 3,500 workers at Case IH, a Racine, Wis., agricultural-equipment subsidiary of Tenneco Inc. In return, workers accepted a wage freeze, a reduction in job classifications and some work-rule changes.    With inflation rising, however, the commitment to wage moderation could be tested this year. Especially if profits rise as the weaker dollar allows companies to lift prices at home and to increase their exports, workers who have been forgoing raises are sure to demand them. &quot;We could be looking at a very pressurized situation between employer and employee,&quot; says Lance Berger, executive vice president at Hay Group, a management-consulting firm.    Major contracts are being negotiated this year at Ford Motor Co., General Motors Corp. and the Postal Service. But in many cases, job security seems more important than higher wages. At GM, which plans 11 plant closings affecting 29,000 employees between now and 1990, &quot;job security is a much higher priority than last time,&quot; says Stan Marshall, a UAW regional director in Michigan. &quot;It doesn't make any difference if you get $20 an hour if the plant closes.&quot;    Such thinking makes a return to the double-digit inflation of the 1970s unlikely. &quot;Everything's different from the 1970s,&quot; Mr. Lieberman says.    Today, labor and supplies of most raw materials are ample. Although service firms in some areas are short of workers, the 6.3% national unemployment rate remains high enough to persuade unions to accept such concessions as two-tier wage scales and smaller cost-of-living increases. And gluts of many commodities are keeping price increases relatively modest for this late in an economic expansion.    The Federal Reserve Board, which monitors product and labor markets for signs of inflation, has found little reason for concern so far. For example, the Federal Open Market Committee, which sets monetary policy, observed at its May meeting that wage moderation should restrain inflationary pressures. &quot;Inflation was likely to pick up, reflecting the effects of the recent rebound of crude-oil prices as well as the projected acceleration of import prices,&quot; the summary of the committee meeting says. &quot;However, remaining margins of slack in product and labor markets were expected to limit overall inflationary pressures. . . . It also was noted that recent labor-contract settlements were generally favorable in terms of their impact on business costs.&quot;    Since subduing inflation in 1982 and 1983, the Fed has shown particular sensitivity to any signs of inflationary pressure. Despite slowing economic growth, the Fed tightened monetary policy this spring, partly in reaction to inflationary signals and partly to bolster the dollar. In addition, the fiscal stimulus from the Reagan presidency's record budget deficits has forced the Fed to maintain a firmer policy than it might otherwise have done.    Meanwhile, increased foreign competition, domestic deregulation, and the wave of mergers and consolidation sweeping corporate America have pushed companies to lay off workers, shed unprofitable lines, adopt closer relationships with suppliers and tighten controls over inventories.    However, some management consultants comment that companies have been slow to adjust to the newly competitive environment. Doran Twer, a spokesman for Hay Group, says it has taken a long time for them to recognize that costs must be kept down and that &quot;the age of entitlement, the age of keeping whole against inflation, is ending.&quot;    But now, the attitudes and expectations of both labor and business have changed; the climate is more characteristic of a recession than of what might be expected after 4 1/2 years of economic growth.    For example, only about 40% of people working under major collective-bargaining agreements are now covered by cost-of-living adjustment clauses, down from 61% in 1977. Moreover, these so-called COLAs generally allow employees to recapture less of price-index increases than they once did. Thus, with price increases spreading more slowly through the economy, the momentum of inflation should be reduced.    What's more, companies no longer expect to be able to raise prices to protect profits as costs rise. &quot;U.S. companies have learned to manage in an environment where they can't get price increases,&quot; says Joel Popkin, the president of an economic-consulting firm in Washington. &quot;They didn't have to do that before.&quot;    As a result, many managers are pushing hard for innovative, less costly labor accords. &quot;It's increasingly common for wage agreements to include more flexible compensation arrangements that will allow implementation of cost-saving measures,&quot; Fed Vice Chairman Manuel Johnson says.    For example, workers at Safeway Stores Inc. and other grocery chains in Washington and Baltimore agreed to multi-tiered wage contracts in 1983. But when the contracts expired last year, the employees, members of the United Food and Commercial Workers International Union, accepted a new agreement providing a salary increase only for lower-tier workers. Higher-paid employees will get lump-sum payments that won't raise base pay.    A decade ago, when inflation was raging, companies could afford to be less vigilant. Before the severe recession and unemployment of the early 1980s, workers successfully demanded to keep up with inflation and with employees at competing companies. At that time, Budd Co., a Troy, Mich., auto-industry supplier, automatically matched the labor contracts that its unions reached with the Big Three auto makers. But today, Budd's bargaining power has been bolstered by a 50% cutback in its work force since 1979, and the company negotiates its own labor contracts -- at considerable cost savings.    Some union officials argue that companies have pushed for concessions and smaller wage increases simply because they can get away with such moves in the climate fostered by the Reagan administration. In many executive suites, they say, the perception is that enforcement of labor laws has become less strict and that what the union officials view as corporate greed is more socially acceptable.    &quot;It's open season now; the rules are looser,&quot; says Leslie Nulty, the director of the research office of the United Food and Commercial Workers union in Washington. &quot;You're seeing a lot more pressure on labor costs from firms that don't have any problems at all. There is a sense that the power has shifted to them and they owe it to their stockholders.&quot;    But corporate cost control extends beyond wages. At American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co., deregulation has increased competition but also sharpened the company's ability &quot;to bring the power of ATandamp;T to bear to make sure we are getting the lowest cost,&quot; says William E. Ebben, a group vice president for contract services. Among other changes, ATandamp;T has consolidated purchasing to increase the discounts it gets from suppliers and has slashed the number of travel agents it uses.    Recognition that its competition had intensified and become increasingly global forced Stanley Works, beginning in 1981, to reorganize. It has cut back its U.S. handtool factories to six from 10 and streamlined manufacturing through increased computerization, among other things. It also has announced plans to shed certain businesses, including its U.S. and Canadian steel-product operations, to concentrate on the industrial and commercial tool market and the do-it-yourself sector.    Labor at these companies hasn't gone unscathed, either. ATandamp;T's work force has been trimmed to 304,000 from the 374,000 employees who stayed on after its 1984 breakup. Stanley's has been cut about 25% since 1981.    Despite such pressures, the inflation rate is rising this year. The Labor Department's consumer price index increased in April at a 5.5% annual rate, and many economists expect inflation between 4% and 5% this year, following last year's 1.1%. While the run-up so far in 1987 has largely reflected surging energy prices and costlier imports as the dollar has fallen, these increases could lead to accelerating prices elsewhere in the economy as inflationary expectations rise.    Donald Ratajczak, who directs the economic-forecasting project at Georgia State University, contends that a continuation of recent increases in commodity prices could spill into wage negotiations this year and lead to significantly higher hourly-wage costs in 1988. With Social Security taxes going up next January, he says, &quot;pre-conditions for a moderate inflationary spiral are nearly all in place.&quot; In addition, some in Congress are beginning to push for a higher minimum wage.    Mr. Ratajczak concedes, however, that currently &quot;there is no evidence that wages are responding to the higher inflationary psychology&quot; of the commodities markets.    Jerry Jasinowski, the chief economist of the National Association of Manufacturers, says that with manufacturing prices stable or declining for so long, &quot;there is substantial pressure to raise prices to restore profit margins.&quot; But he contends that most manufacturers are keenly aware of the need to keep price increases small to maintain market share, especially after the painful cost-cutting and restructuring of the past several years. &quot;When you talk to companies, what they talk about is market share,&quot; he says.    Also, it isn't clear how many price increases will stick, given the excess capacity in many industries. According to the Fed, the operating rate at the nation's factories, mines and utilities fell in April to a low 78.9% of capacity.    The civilian unemployment rate remains high by historical standards, too, although it has fallen to 6.3%, the lowest level since March 1980. While an expected slowdown in labor-force growth in the next few years could add to wage pressures, it isn't clear how immediately or broadly wage rates will be affected. During the past year, rising payroll employment hasn't prevented a deceleration in increases in hourly compensation.    To many economists, though, sluggish growth is the paramount factor. The first quarter's 4.4% inflation-adjusted annual rate of growth was due largely to strong inventory investment, which isn't likely to continue. And although exports probably will keep growing, most measures of domestic demand suggest weakness ahead. Capital spending is expected to remain sluggish. Many economists contend that consumer spending will grow only modestly after a two-year buying spree. Wage and salary gains have been weak.    &quot;The key factor that's going to hold down inflation,&quot; Mr. Popkin says, &quot;is that the economy is going through a relatively weak year.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>