<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870908-0080 </DOCNO><HL> Starting Over: High-Tech Entrepreneurs WhoHave Left Their Old Firms Ponder Next Moves---By Michael W. MillerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMPUTERS (EDP)ELECTRIC, ELECTRONICS, APPLIANCES (ELE) </IN><TEXT>   Old high-tech entrepreneurs don't fade away. They start all over again.    Other fields have heavy executive turnover, but the quintessential repeat entrepreneurs are in the computer industry. There, many creators of successful startups suddenly discover they don't like running a large company, or don't know how. Some get told they don't know how by the venture capitalists who backed them.    One way or another, at any given time, dozens of seasoned high-tech executives are wandering around with huge piles of cash looking for a new company to start. They are compulsive people who could spend the rest of their lives in extravagant leisure but would rather work 14-hour days in one of the world's most volatile businesses.    &quot;If you only succeeded one time, it could have been luck -- you've got to do it twice to prove you really did something,&quot; says Wilton H. Jones, who made millions founding software maker Multimate International Corp. and is getting ready for his next start-up.    Some of the industry's most celebrated founders are already in the throes of their second projects. Sometime in the coming year, Steven Jobs, one of Apple Computer Inc.'s founders, will pull the wraps off a computer work station for universities made by his second start-up, Next Inc. His old Apple partner, Stephen Wozniak, is about to start shipping a home-electronic remote-control device made by his second start-up, CL 9 Inc.    Here are five of the most prominent high-tech luminaries still waiting for their next venture. In the past, they helped build some of the pillars of the computer industry, including Digital Equipment Corp., Lotus Development Corp. and Rolm Corp. Today all of them -- even those not actively laying start-up plans at the moment -- are scanning the electronics field for the next big markets. They are worth watching, because chances are good that they will eventually make news again in the computer industry.    Their ambitions also reveal what some of the industry's successful players consider the alluring products of the future. They cover an eclectic range, including software to help work groups collaborate, computers to help kids with reading disabilities and how-to videotapes.    The odds are long for this quintet, and others like them. Besides the usual daunting hurdles of starting a high-tech company, they face a special set of pitfalls that lie in the path of the second-time founder.    Still, entrepreneurs with a successful start-up to their name usually have plenty of would-be backers chasing them, even if they're still bloody from problems that engulfed their last venture. &quot;The hardest thing to find is not money; it's managers,&quot; says Richard Shaffer, publisher of the Computer Letter, which tracks new electronics businesses. &quot;So there are a lot of dogs sniffing these guys' trails.&quot;    MITCHELL D. KAPOR   One of the titans of the young personal-computer software industry, Mr. Kapor founded Lotus six years ago and turned it into a $250 million powerhouse. Lotus's 1-23 spreadsheet, which Mr. Kapor helped create, has become one of the best-selling PC programs ever.    Mr. Kapor stunned the computer world last summer when he announced he was resigning as Lotus's chairman because he was restless working in a large corporation. Leaving large companies, he said then, &quot;is a natural evolution for founders and entrepreneurs.&quot; When he left, his Lotus holdings had blossomed into a fortune worth over $70 million.    Today, the 36-year-old former disk jockey and transcendental meditation teacher is pondering his next move. He has toyed with the idea of becoming a venture capitalist. He has turned down more than 100 feelers to join new start-ups. He says he is even considering forsaking the business world to enter academia.    But Mr. Kapor still talks like a computer entrepreneur keeping his eye out for his next shot. &quot;I can think of a few big opportunities in software,&quot; he says. One is a fledgling area known as &quot;groupware&quot;: programs that let several people work on the same computer file simultaneously. He also sees a market for artificial-intelligence tools to search through documents and sort out those a particular reader would be interested in. Any company with a product in these categories, he says, &quot;would be a project that I really could get excited about.&quot;    In September, Mr. Kapor will begin a year as a visiting scientist at Massachusetts Institute of Technology's artificial-intelligence labs, a short walk from Lotus's Cambridge, Mass., headquarters. He plans to study computer science, philosophy, and math, and contemplate the idea of staying to get a Ph.D.    Mr. Kapor does have one venture in the works already that could be described as a &quot;software&quot; start-up. It is a kosher delicatessen he and two partners plan to open in Harvard Square.    C. GORDON BELL   Mr. Bell, 53, led the team that designed one of the milestone machines in computer history, Digital's VAX. He was employee number 80 at the company, arriving in 1960 when it was a three-year-old bit player in the industry. The VAX opened up the multibillion-dollar minicomputer business and made Digital an industry giant.    Since 1983, when he resigned as Digital's engineering vice president, Mr. Bell has had a peripatetic career in government and new computer ventures. With his current job as a National Science Foundation official set to end next spring, he's already looking for another start-up.    Mr. Bell's pattern so far has been to link up with other industry luminaries looking for repeat hits. After he left Digital, he launched a super-minicomputer company with Henry Burkhardt III, a founder of Data General Corp., and Kenneth Fisher, an ex-president of Prime Computer Inc. The firm, Encore Computer Corp., quickly became mired in deep losses and technical problems. Mr. Bell and Mr. Burkhardt quit after a fight with Mr. Fisher.    Mr. Bell promptly hooked up with Allen Michels, the ex-chairman of Convergent Technologies Inc. Their young Silicon Valley company, Dana Computer Inc., is designing a high-powered work station that it ambitiously dubs a &quot;personal supercomputer.&quot;    After his term at the NSF, Mr. Bellplans to keep his hand in Dana, but he's also looking for a new company to start. He thinks Encore ran into trouble because it was founded without a product in mind, a mistake he vows not to make again.    Working at a big company doesn't interest Mr. Bell anymore. &quot;There's not much of a thrill to that -- that's just really hard work,&quot; he says. &quot;The thrills to me are the uncertainty of the market and the uncertainty of the technology.&quot;    M. KENNETH OSHMAN   Mr. Oshman co-founded Rolm (contributing the &quot;O&quot; to its acronymic name), built it into a telephone-equipment giant and one of Silicon Valley's brightest stars, then sold it to its longtime business partner, International Business Machines Corp. He stayed on as Rolm's president, but a year later he wanted out.    &quot;After 17 years of running my own show, being a third- or fourth-level manager in IBM ultimately wasn't going to be my career,&quot; Mr. Oshman said at the time. He resigned from Rolm in January 1986.    Since then Mr. Oshman, 47, has passed the time learning to play jazz piano and waiting for a chance to run another company. He is also nursing a fortune from his old Rolm stock, although he won't say how much. He has invested in two communications start-ups led by former Rolm executives. Though restless and looking for a new challenge, he says he's too old to launch another start-up himself. Rather, he's looking for an existing company that needs a good overhaul.    A few months ago he thought he had found one. Riding on his exercise bike, he read that Allied-Signal Inc. was selling its Ampex Corp. unit, which makes video equipment. He liked the idea of plunging into an industry in the throes of technological change and chasing the market leader, Sony Corp. He put together an offer to take Ampex private in a leveraged buyout, but a New York chemical company wound up outbidding him.    Today Mr. Oshman says he isn't actively scouting around for another job. &quot;Dreams aren't made like that,&quot; he says, speaking on the telephone from his Mercedes en route to his Menlo Park, Calif., office. &quot;I'm going to find something I stumble across.&quot;    WILTON H. JONES   Mr. Jones started thinking about his possible next venture on an 18-month sailboat trip he just finished from Florida to Alaska. He piled into the boat with his wife and three young children last year, after selling the software company he founded and chaired, Multimate International Corp.    The East Hartford, Conn., firm rose to the top ranks of the fragmented PC word-processing business, and then fetched $22 million from the software giant Ashton-Tate Inc. About $6 million of that went to Mr. Jones, a high-school dropout who had held a dozen different jobs before starting Multimate.    On board his boat, while giving his two sons reading lessons, Mr. Jones saw the germ of a new company. Both sons have a slight reading disability and so needed some extra drilling to learn how to recognize and pronounce new words. Mr. Jones began to think some of that drilling could be done by a computer.    &quot;You're certainly not going to replace the special-education reading teacher,&quot; he says, &quot;but you may be able to let her handle twice as many kids as she can today.&quot;    Building the machine as Mr. Jones envisions it would require solving some tough problems of technology. The machine would speak a word, listen to a child repeat it, and then say whether the child was correct.    Mr. Jones, 43, isn't worrying about those hurdles yet. He just bought a ranch in the tiny town of Mancos, Colo. He plans to spend the next year or two raising rare Paso Fino horses there and mulling over his idea for a new company. If he does launch it, he doubts he'll stay there forever.    &quot;I plan on doing something in the two-to-five-year bracket and then moving out again,&quot; he says. &quot;Once you reach a certain number of people, it takes a whole different management style than mine to make it work well.&quot;    JAMES LEVY   Mr. Levy created one of the biggest winners of the video-game boom: Activision Inc. of Mountain View, Calif. It made such hits as Pitfall, River Raid and Kaboom. Then it went kaboom itself, staging one of the biggest crashes of the video-game bust. It lost nearly $50 million over the past four years, and its market value was decimated.    In January, as Activision struggled to rebound with a new line of PC software, Mr. Levy left his post as chairman amid a falling out with the company's board. After licking his wounds on a monthlong ramble through the South Pacific, he is back home getting ready for action again.    A former Hershey Foods Corp. chocolate marketer and Time Inc. mail-order executive, Mr. Levy, 42, thinks he'll stay on the consumer side of the electronics business. One area that intrigues him: instructional home videotapes, a field that has seen scattered successes. &quot;If someone came to me with a terrific idea on how to put a company together that would make sense of that whole wide-open amorphous opportunity, that would be very interesting,&quot; he says.    Meanwhile, Mr. Levy is consulting for a new software magazine and an electronic music start-up, and writing a book about his eight years at Activision. His working title offers a certain skepticism about the prospects of striking it big a second time around: &quot;There Will Never Be Another Activision.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>