<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881012-0049 </DOCNO><HL> Commodities: Copper Futures Reach Highs Fifth Session in Row As Consumer Demand Exceeds Production Levels </HL><AUTHOR> John Valentine (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> CMD MIN PET PCS </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Copper futures prices rose to new life-of-contract highs for the fifth consecutive session.    All deliveries except the September 1989 contract -- which didn't trade -- posted new highs. The October contract settled at its peak of the day, $1.2950 a pound, up 1.5 cents. December copper rose a similar amount, ending at $1.2010 after trading as high as $1.2030.    Peru, which recently had a month-long miners' strike that delayed shipments of copper, was reported to be in the throes of a similar walkout, according to Fred Demler, metals economist for Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. Mr. Demler said that an &quot;indefinite&quot; strike had been called at Peru's silver mines and that there was concern it might spread to copper mines as the previous one did.    &quot;The market is still suffering from Peru's previous strikes, along with production problems in Chile, Zambia and Zaire,&quot; he said.    U.S. copper consumers haven't completely covered their needs in the fourth quarter, and production isn't keeping pace, Mr. Demler said.    U.S. copper consumption in the first half of this year was up less than 1% from a year earlier, but jumped 1 1/2% in the third quarter from the year-earlier period, Mr. Demler said. But production was flat in the first half, compared with a year earlier, and showed little change in the third quarter, he said.    &quot;Producer stocks are at a historical low and they're sold out through the end of the year,&quot; he said. &quot;As a result, they've had to resort to buying copper from dealers to fill some of their orders and this has been a major price-boosting development.&quot;    One analyst -- drawing a parallel between the current rally in copper and one that took place last year -- sounded a cautionary note.    Following last October's stock-market crash, he said, copper prices fell 13 cents but then took off in almost a straight line from 75 cents to $1.07, an advance of 43%. The current rally started at the beginning of August at 89 cents and has risen 45 1/2% to $1.2950, according to the analyst.    &quot;The current rally has taken place almost without a correction,&quot; he noted. &quot;The longer it goes this way, the sharper the reaction is going to be. I know such thinking goes counter to the fundamentals, which grow stronger every day, but the possibility of a setback must be taken into account, no matter how bullish the situation.&quot;    Alexander Paris, president of Barrington Research Associates, a Barrington, Ill., institutional investment firm, said he has seen first-hand, some of the industrial strength that has been the basis for the current strong copper demand.    &quot;I recently visited some 20 different concerns in the Midwest,&quot; he says. &quot;All are experiencing active demand for their products, and, in turn, they've been buying copper to help meet this flow of orders.&quot;    However, Mr. Paris noted that while these firms and others like them are buying copper, they're doing so cautiously so as not to have high-priced excess supplies of the metal on hand if there's an economic setback and demand for their products declines.    &quot;This can create a tricky situation,&quot; according to Mr. Paris. &quot;It's fine to buy just enough copper to meet needs -- while the copper is out there, but if demand for products continues strong and the supply of copper declines or dries up, then these manufacturers could be in a position that they'll have to scramble and compete with each other for existing inventories.&quot;    In other commodity markets yesterday:   ENERGY: Crude oil prices slipped slightly in choppy trading. Reports that United Arab Emirates President Sheikh Zayed Bin Sultan Al-Nahyan told Libyan leader Mohammar Khaddafi that the Emirates were willing to reduce production helped to bolster prices during early trading. However, prices later retreated because &quot;the market needs some real evidence of cutbacks,&quot; not just hearsay commentary, said Andrew Lebow, broker for E.D. andamp; F. Man International Futures Inc. Mr. Lebow went on to say that trading sentiment has shifted slightly to &quot;bearish and hopeful&quot; from &quot;horrendously bearish,&quot; as representataives of both the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries and non-OPEC oil producers this week increasingly called upon OPEC to resolve its internal bickering and reduce output. Traders say there is growing optimism that OPEC may start resolving its differences at a joint meeting of the price monitoring committee and long-range strategy committee scheduled for next week. Separately, heating oil prices climbed as seasonal demand for that product picked up. Conversely, gasoline prices fell as traders sold the fuel in favor of buying heating oil.    COCOA: Futures prices retreated from recent advances on the possibility that producing countries may have to sell cocoa beans because of limited warehouse space as crops are being harvested. December delivery cocoa fell $74 a metric ton to $1,216. The harvest has increased the availability of top quality cocoa and diminished the concern about supply tightness, according to Sandra Kaul, analyst for Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc., New York. Miss Kaul noted prices recently rose to as high as $1,304 Monday from $1,107 Oct.3, following the Ivory Coast's announcement that it would continue to pay farmers the same price it has been paying and that it also would maintain its position not to sell cocoa except at prices well above current market levels. Since the Ivory Coast is not only the world's largest producer of cocoa beans but also of the best-quality ones, this move created the possibility of tight supplies at a time when demand is particularly strong, Miss Kaul said.    ORANGE JUICE: Futures prices rose. November delivery juice advanced 1.60 cents a pound to $1.8150. According to one analyst, traders were awaiting the first estimate of Florida orange production for the 1988-89 season that begins Dec. 1. The U.S. Department of Agriculture will release figures after the close of trading today. Expectations are for an estimate of between 140 million to 160 million boxes, with most projections at 144 million to 147 million, the analyst said. This would be up from 139 million boxes in the current season. A box weighs 90 pounds. The expected increase reflects the continued recovery of Florida orange-producing areas from effects of the freezes that struck in the early part of the 1980s, as well as favorable weather during this past growing season, she said. However, she noted, the prospect of a larger Florida output is being countered by concern over dry weather in Brazilian citrus-growing areas. The 1988-89 Brazil crop was delayed last year by drought and is only half-picked now, the analyst said. The flowering of the buds that will produce the 1989-90 crop is about to begin and dry weather could hinder that process, she said.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Wheat futures prices jumped amid reports that China wants to buy 400,000 metric tons of subsidized U.S. wheat, said Richard Loewy, senior grain and oilseed analyst for Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., New York. Any purchase would be subject to approval by the U.S. Agriculture Department, and would be the first major Chinese purchase since the department made it eligible in August to buy up to two million metric tons of subsidized U.S. wheat. As part of a program designed to increase U.S. farm exports, the department compensates exporters that sell discountpriced wheat to certain countries. The timing of the purported Chinese move reinforced speculation that the U.S. and Soviet Union are close to agreeing to a new longterm grain pact that would require the Soviet Union to annually buy millions of tons of U.S. wheat and other crops. Traders are reasoning that China wants to buy U.S. wheat now because it expects any U.S.-Soviet pact to increase wheat prices, and thus make a later purchase more expensive. Other signs emerged that an accord with the Soviets is close. The White House announced that U.S. and Soviet representatives will hold a negotiating round in London tomorrow and Friday. Talks bogged down last month amid speculation that the U.S. had balked at a request that it subsidize the sale of wheat to the Soviets through the life of the pact, which might cover several years. Trade sources expect the U.S. to try to win over the Soviets with an offer to immediately subsidize the sale of four million metric tons of wheat. The long-term grain pact that expired Sept. 30 required the Soviets to buy nine million metric tons of U.S. crops annually.    PRECIOUS METALS: Futures prices gave up most of the gains posted Monday as they sank under widespread profit-taking and other selling. December delivery gold fell $4.30 an ounce to $408.40, while December silver was off 14.5 cents an ounce to $6.2750. January platinum dropped $7.30 an ounce to $510.10. According to Bernard Savaiko, senior precious metals analyst for PaineWebber Inc., New York, a tug-of-war is taking place in the futures market between commercial interests and funds that follow computer-generated buy and sell signals. &quot;Looking at the Commodity Futures Trading Commission's September monthly report on traders' commitments, the report shows banks and dealers to be sustained buyers of gold futures while the price fell to the recent low of $395. Since these interests don't speculate, it has to be that they're buying to fix prices and supplies against their commitments in the physical market, mostly from Far Eastern customers,&quot; Mr. Savaiko said. On the other hand, he noted, the report shows that large computer funds increased their short positions by about 14,000 contracts during the same period. &quot;This creates a large short position, which could be vulnerable if prices rise. These traders could be forced to cover their positions, accelerating any advance,&quot; Mr. Savaiko said. </TEXT></DOC>