<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871223-0060 </DOCNO><HL> REAL ESTATE:Scarce Housing in Some CitiesSpurs More Illegal Conversions---By William Celis IIIStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> OCFREAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON) </IN><TEXT>   CROWDED CITIES have always had to deal with sneaky residents who create apartments without acquiring the proper building permits. But now, says Bob Kelley, assistant superintendent of San Francisco's Bureau of Building Inspection, &quot;an old problem . . . has become acute.&quot;    A shortage of affordable housing has spurred an increase in the number of illegal conversions -- some of which are occurring even in affluent neighborhoods -- in San Francisco, Boston and New York, say building-code officials in these cities. Even though officials say they're trying to rein in the problem, they concede that the task of catching scofflaws remains difficult. &quot;Unless we hear about (the illegal conversions), we don't know about them,&quot; says a spokesman for the New York City Department of Buildings. Officials say that illegal conversions exacerbate existing problems such as neighborhood congestion and burdened city services, from garbage collection to utilities. In Boston, illegal conversions have been a factor in some recent electrical outages, says a spokesman for Boston Edison Co.    The bulk of the illegal activity, city officials say, is generated by new home-owners or investors who create extra units in their homes or apartment buildings to help them with high mortgage payments. Other building owners create the units for relatives, giving such apartments the nickname &quot;in-law units.&quot;    &quot;As an architect,&quot; says Kalle Tavela of San Francisco, &quot;I'm constantly running into people who ask me if there's any way to sneak in an in-law unit.&quot; Mr. Tavela says about the only way cities can catch people in the process of illegally adding a unit is &quot;if a neighbor squeals on you.&quot;    THAT'S HOW ONE NEW YORK resident got caught this fall.    Neighbors in an affluent Manhattan neighborhood reported the resident to city building officials after they noticed that he added a whole floor on the roof of his townhouse; the unit was ordered torn down. The whistle-blowing neighbors are part of Friends of the Upper East Side Historic Districts, which has 120 volunteer monitors whose jobs include sniffing out illegal conversions.    But city officials, who say they have long relied on the diligence of citizens to help them police illegal conversions, are starting to assume more responsibility. In San Francisco, for example, officials now inspect all dwellings that are sold, hoping to crack down on the illegal units. Mr. Tavela, the architect, bought a 10-unit building last fall and was ordered to eliminate one of them after city records showed only nine units were allowed.    In Boston, officials are attempting to gain an accurate count of illegal conversions. They say this will facilitate planning for services as well as provide them with a precise count of housing units. To encourage residents who have already completed illegal conversions to step forward, the city is using a fast-track zoning process in which a zoning appeals board considers such cases in a few days, compared with the several weeks it used to take. Approval for such units, however, depends on the supply of affordable housing in a particular neighborhood and the extent of congestion in the area.    Officials say a few illegal conversions are honest mistakes, where individuals simply fail to obtain the proper clearance. To catch these residents, Boston is scrutinizing plumbing permits, a tip-off that sends code enforcers to other city permit offices to ensure the expansion is legal.    ---   Builders Respond to Fiberglass Concerns    Some people in the construction and insulation industries have begun to take a closer look at their use of fiberglass, prompted by growing concern over whether the man-made material causes cancer and respiratory ailments.    Although laboratory tests indicate that under certain conditions fiberglass can cause cancer in animals, there's no conclusive proof that fiberglass has resulted in health problems for people handling the material. Nonetheless, in the past 14 months three international conferences on health concerns involving man-made insulation have helped focus attention on fiberglass.    The Sheet Metal Workers' International Association, which claims 150,000 members, expanded the responsibilities of its asbestos research team this fall to include the study of fiberglass. In September, Manville Corp. pledged to pay court costs for customers who are sued over alleged health problems because of exposure to fiberglass. And five months ago, Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp. began distributing brochures to its workers and customers advising them to wear long-sleeve shirts and gloves when handling the insulation and to wash with warm water if there is an irritation. An Owens-Corning spokesman says the company also is studying whether the advisories should be stronger.    BLACK MONDAY actually may be helping the housing industry, says the National Association of Home Builders. The trade group says the Oct. 19 stock market crash has altered key aspects of the economy, bolstering the housing business. Inflation worries have eased, the group says, helping to moderate housing prices. Mortgage-interest rates also have declined, to a low of 10 1/2% from a precrash high this fall of more than 12%. That reduces the monthly payment on a $90,000, 30-year fixed mortgage by more than $100, the builders note. </TEXT></DOC>