<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870622-0159 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor:Trade Is Everything but Unfair</HL><DD> 06/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN) </IN><TEXT>   Re James Bovard's June 3 editorial-page article, &quot;U.S. Fair Trade Laws Are Anything But&quot;:    Mr. Bovard displays an alarming ignorance of our trade laws, the purpose for which they were enacted and the Commerce Department's role in carrying them out. The statutes to which he refers -- those against &quot;dumping&quot; (selling foreign goods in the U.S. at below cost or home market prices) and those against foreign subsidies of U.S. imports (which permit offsetting &quot;countervailing duties&quot; to be imposed) were enacted by Congress as part of the Tariff Act of 1930. They are consistent with the provisions of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT), the prevailing international trade mechanism subscribed to by more than 90 nations.    The purpose of these laws is to defend American companies against loss of home market share to predatory pricing or to foreign producers that benefit from the deep pockets of their own governments through targeted subsidies. Without these laws foreign countries would expand their U.S. market share and home employment at our expense, thus reducing the sales and employment of their U.S. competitors.    The Commerce Department and the International Trade Commission (ITC) are responsible for administering these laws. With rare exceptions, trade-law cases are initiated by individual companies or by an industry that believes it has been injured by unfair practices, not self-initiated by government. These industrial petitioners seek the redress they are entitled to under both our laws and those of the GATT -- not protection from legitimate competition or an umbrella under which to raise prices.    When a case is brought to us, the Commerce Department assembles and verifies the facts on costs and prices, and determines whether dumping or a countervailable subsidy exists. The ITC determines whether the practice has in fact injured or threatens to injure the U.S. petitioner. Our decisions are based on facts established by our government investigators, not on unverified data from petitioners.    Only about 25% of the cases result in duties being imposed. Most are dismissed because the facts disclose no offense or the practice does not cause injury to American producers. We know that low-priced imports benefit consumers, but the benefits must be weighed against the potential loss of jobs caused by dumping and subsidies. Mr. Bovard points out that selling below cost by American producers in the American market is a common -- and legal -- practice. But selling to Americans, by American firms competing with one another, does not threaten to transfer wealth and unemployment across international boundaries.    Our statutes and regulations involve specific methodology, though we do accept changes from respondents when they lead to a fairer result and are consistent with our laws. And despite Mr. Bovard's criticism, we do include an allowance for &quot;profit&quot; in our cost analysis. Framers of the statute concluded, correctly I believe, that such an allowance was necessary to reflect the cost of capital inherent in any business. A carefully defined process of cost analysis enables us to reach consistent conclusions that are beyond the reach of political influence and are seldom upset if appealed in the courts.    Finally, Mr. Bovard complains about decisions to impose very small dumping margins, and about the proxy methods used to calculate costs of products of nonmarket countries such as China. We agree with his complaints, but are bound by the laws now in effect. The administration has proposed a different and better way of analyzing nonmarket economy imports; we are hopeful that it will be included as a part of the trade bill now being debated.    We will continue to implement our trade laws as vigorously, fairly and impartially as we can, recognizing that they are a vital and internationally accepted vehicle for striking a fair balance of benefits among consumers, American producers and their international competitors. The U.S.'s economic future can tolerate neither the protection of inefficient industries, nor the destruction of those that are competitive. It is in the national interest that we prevent both from happening.    Bruce Smart   Undersecretary, International Trade   U.S. Department of Commerce   Washington   ---   Fortunately the U.S.'s legal system provides some relief to problems created by quibbling bureaucrats administrating the U.S.'s arbitrary trade laws. The U.S. Court of International Trade repeatedly has struck down the determinations of federal agencies responsible for administrating unfair trade laws, particularly the decisions of the Commerce Department's International Trade Administration (ITA).    The federal judges who sit on this court have not minced words in describing the ITA's decisions. For example, the court directed the ITA to reconsider its decision concerning Canadian raspberries since the ITA is &quot;not at liberty to disregard the statute's plain meaning.&quot; The court also recently rejected the ITA's &quot;just-trust-us stance&quot; and enjoined it from releasing confidential business information. Last month the court agreed with U.S. specialty steel producers that the ITA's &quot;complete failure&quot; to address a particular issue &quot;was not in accordance with law&quot; and, in another case, it agreed with Canadian meat packers that the ITA's failure to use certain statutory provisions was an &quot;impermissible interpretation of the statute.&quot;    Mr. Bovard described as &quot;absurd&quot; the ITA's 1984 conclusion that parts of Italian musical instruments were being sold at 1.16% below their &quot;fair value.&quot; In fact, the court sent the case back to the ITA, which concluded in 1986 that the merchandise had not been sold at less than fair value.    The U.S.'s system is by no means perfect. Appeals to the Court of International Trade are expensive and often involve long delays before decisions are issued. Still, in the long run, U.S. and foreign businessmen are not wholly at the mercy of bureaucrats who often confuse political loyalty with intellectual honesty.    Jack Gumpert Wasserman   New York   ---   In November 1986, the Rev. William Hogan, economics professor at Fordham University and a longtime authority on steel, wrote: &quot;Within the last year, I saw the price list of a Western European company shipping steel to the U.S. at $300 to $325 per ton, depending on the product. The shipments to nearly all other countries were in the area of $200 per ton.&quot;    There's nothing fair about that! Foreign producers aren't out to kill the U.S.'s steel industry and then clobber American consumers. They simply wanted a strong steel industry and overbuilt plants to get economy of scale. To solve that problem, they protected their domestic markets and exported the surplus to the only open steel market in the world -- the U.S.    I've never been associated with the steel industry, but believe we need one in this country. For every absurd ruling such as that pejorative to Kenya carnation exporters, I can cite an equally absurd ruling pejorative to U.S. producers; e.g., dumped products have just about killed the ultramodern, efficient ferroalloy industry, one that I believe is critical to our national security.    R.L. Smith   President Emeritus   Michigan Technological University   Houghton, Mich.</TEXT></DOC>