<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870611-0060 </DOCNO><HL> ---By Andy PasztorStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABORJUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Justice Department has decided to try to oust the Teamsters union's national leadership in a move that could create a benchmark for federal anti-racketeering efforts, law enforcement officials said.    Department lawyers are drafting a civil lawsuit seeking to remove Teamsters President Jackie Presser and the rest of the union's central executive board on the grounds that the union hierarchy allegedly is controlled by organized crime, according to these officials. The leaders would be replaced by one or more court-appointed trustees, the officials said. The lawsuit is expected to be filed in a federal district court within a few months.    Prompted by recent allegations of extensive and continuing underworld influence on the 1.7 million-member Teamsters union and its leaders, the court filing would be the government's most dramatic and aggressive use yet of civil anti-racketeering statutes. It would cap three decades of sporadic federal efforts to rid the nation's largest union of alleged criminal influence, and would aim to destroy the independence of the only major union that enthusiastically supported President Reagan in his 1984 campaign.    Justice Department spokesmen declined to comment on the decision, first reported by the Los Angeles Times. However, law enforcement officials familiar with the issue confirmed that Associate Attorney General Stephen Trott has ordered the preparation of such a lawsuit. Attorney General Edwin Meese previously removed himself from participating in the decision because of his earlier campaign work with Mr. Presser on behalf of Mr. Reagan, according to these sources.    In a statement issued yesterday, the Teamsters called the Justice Department plan &quot;a calculated political ploy designed to take the pressure of numerous problems off the (Reagan) administration.&quot; The union stated, &quot;Organized crime has never, does not today, and never will control the international union.&quot;    If federal prosecutors are successful, the move could pave the way for using similar legal tactics against other large unions that are suspected of having longstanding links to organized crime, according to federal and state law enforcement officials.    &quot;It's more damaging to rob La Cosa Nostra of its enterprises than to put even some of its top leaders in jail,&quot; said David Williams, head of special investigations for the General Accounting Office and a former investigator with the President's Commission on Organized Crime.    Ronald Goldstock, director of New York state's organized crime task force, has argued that such civil anti-racketeering lawsuits would be &quot;the most effective way to break mob-dominated unions.&quot; Unless the government manages to change &quot;the structure and operation of corrupt unions and the industries in which they thrive,&quot; he asserted, long-term solutions aren't likely.    But the planned lawsuit also raises thorny legal issues that are likely to be in litigation for years. And some legal scholars and congressional aides worry that because of the union's decentralized structure, the move may fall short of forcing substantial changes in the way leaders of some Teamsters locals operate.    Federal officials said that agents from the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Labor Department also are working on the draft of the lawsuit, which, among other things, is intended to pull together evidence from earlier criminal and civil actions detailing the influence of organized crime on the union.    By citing a pattern of cases involving extortion, fraud and other criminal activity by local and other union officials over the years, the government hopes to use civil provisions of the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations Act that authorize courts to assert control over so-called racketeering enterprises. The provisions already have been used by the government to establish trustees for Teamsters Local 650 in Union City, N.J., and two New York City construction unions. But the approach has never been used against the entire leadership of a major national union.    As early as 1985, some members of the president's organized crime commission urged the Justice Department to take such action against the Teamsters, but the commission's formal report stopped short of such recommendations. The idea apparently was revived and gained support among senior Justice and Labor Department officials in the past few months, following a series of criminal trials and convictions that exposed alleged ties between organized crime groups and several current and former union leaders.    Federal prosecutors, for example, have used testimony from convicted mobsters and other evidence to show that organized crime leaders in the past ordered loans for Las Vegas casinos from the giant Teamsters central states pension fund. And only last week, in videotaped testimony in a New York criminal trial involving reputed underworld boss Anthony Salerno, former Teamsters President Roy Williams acknowledged that he received money and support from organized crime leaders.    The civil suit won't affect criminal charges of racketeering, embezzlement and filing false union reports with the government that are pending against Mr. Presser. The union chief, who was indicted in May 1986 on charges of participating in a scheme involving payments of more than $700,000 to three &quot;ghost employees,&quot; has denied the charges.    Federal officials previously indicated they intend to strip Mr. Presser, as well as two other Teamsters officials indicted with him, of their union jobs if they are convicted of the criminal racketeering charges.    Meanwhile, federal prosecutors are continuing to investigate Mr. Presser's dealings with FBI officials, including suggestions by some FBI agents that he may have been a government informant in the 1970s. Such issues could further complicate a civil lawsuit. </TEXT></DOC>