<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870928-0075 </DOCNO><HL> Seven NationsReaffirm PlanFor Currencies---Japan Tells 'Group of Seven'It Isn't Set on a CourseTo Raise Interest Rates---By Walter S. MossbergStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN EUROP CANDA FORGN FRESTECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Japan assured six other big industrial democracies it isn't embarked on a major new round of interest rate increases as the world's leading industrial nations again endorsed recent exchange rates for the dollar against other key currencies.    A communique issued over the weekend by finance ministers and central bank governors of seven nations -- the U.S., Japan, West Germany, Britain, France, Italy and Canada -- reflects satisfaction with the success of their agreement last February to keep dollar exchange rates within certain broad ranges. Those ranges never have been made public.    By strongly restating that policy, the so-called Group of Seven hopes to persuade currency markets to maintain the ranges.    Using language nearly identical to that of the February Louvre accord, the officials' communique declared: &quot;Ministers and Governors reaffirmed that currencies are within ranges broadly consistent with underlying economic fundamentals. They recommitted themselves to continue to cooperate closely to foster the stability of exchange rates around current levels.&quot;    The officials met at the U.S. Treasury building for much of Saturday as part of the preparations for the annual meetings of the World Bank and International Monetary Fund, which open tomorrow.    The statement praised economic policy changes under way in major nations, citing especially President Reagan's Saturday announcement that he will sign legislation to reinvigorate the Gramm-Rudman automatic deficit-reduction mechanism.    And the communique sought both to reassure and warn markets by adding, &quot;The Ministers and Governors commit themselves to take further appropriate actions as necessary to achieve the agreed goals set forth in the Louvre Agreement.&quot;    Since February, the countries' central banks have spent an estimated $70 billion in foreign exchange markets to keep the dollar exchange rate in the range agreed to at the Louvre. Despite the cost, officials believe the policy has succeeded and has begun to show signs of reducing the huge American trade deficit and the large trade surpluses of Japan and Germany.    The communique was silent on interest rates, but a major topic at the meeting was whether last week's move by the Bank of Japan to curb commercial bank lending might be the start of a significant tightening of Japanese monetary policy.    Such a monetary shift in Tokyo would make it tougher to keep the dollar from falling to new lows without forcing U.S. interest rates to rise.    But Bank of Japan Governor Satoshi Sumita told the meeting that the change is a minor one designed to hold inflation in check in key sectors, such as land prices, building materials and petroleum products, and that the bank has no current plans to raise official rates.    &quot;Lest there be any misunderstanding, we at the Bank of Japan have no intention of raising the discount rate any time soon,&quot; Mr. Sumita said later. But he added that &quot;greater consideration&quot; than in the recent past will be given to &quot;price questions,&quot; although the bank will continue to give &quot;due attention&quot; to exchange rates.    U.S. officials had been concerned about last week's Japanese action, and a similar small tightening in some types of credit by the West German central bank. But after the meeting, American and other officials seemed satisfied that for the moment, Tokyo and Bonn aren't significantly scaling back their basically accommodative monetary policies.    The officials at the meeting were reported to be unanimous in the view that renewed signs of inflation aren't very significant and don't warrant the sort of major tightening of monetary policy that could threaten economic growth or undermine support for the dollar.    The meeting also featured a discussion of whether the major countries have been keeping their February promises to adjust economic policies in an effort to bolster currency levels and help curb Japanese and West German trade surpluses and reduce the U.S. trade deficit.    Japanese Finance Minister Kiichi Miyazawa pledged that Tokyo will continue its stimulative fiscal policy, which has pleased the U.S. by boosting domestic demand and raising hopes of overall growth of 3.5% in Japan this year.    The Japanese said the next fiscal year's budget will use as its base the total of the current budget, plus the supplemental spending, to boost domestic demand.    West German officials were closely questioned about sluggish growth prospects in their economy. West German Finance Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg said later that &quot;Germany is looking for greater domestic growth,&quot; but that the other countries hadn't directly demanded new policies from Bonn. Nevertheless, the communique contained a veiled criticism of West Germany, saying &quot;growth in domestic demand in surplus countries is picking up, but it is important that it improves further in some countries.&quot;    That sentence in the communique was the subject of some discussion among the ministers and central bankers, and it represented stronger language than had been proposed originally.    Treasury Secretary James Baker, in a statement issued yesterday, also appeared to be calling for change in West Germany, saying &quot;slow growth in Europe is a matter of concern, particularly in the largest countries.&quot;    Mr. Baker found it easier than in the past to defend U.S. progress in reducing the federal budget deficit. He was able to cite the unexpectedly large $60 billion reduction in fiscal 1987 and Mr. Reagan's decision to sign the new Gramm-Rudman measure, which will help curb the deficit in future years.    &quot;The U.S. is making a considerable effort to reduce its budget deficit,&quot; said French Finance Minister Edouard Balladur. Mr. Stoltenberg said the president's decision will &quot;have a confidence-building effect&quot; in the markets.    Mr. Stoltenberg conceded it is taking longer than was expected in February for the Louvre accord to have a strong impact on the trade imbalances. But he and other officials nevertheless remain confident the moves will work.    The communique called on &quot;newly industrialized countries,&quot; such as South Korea and Taiwan, to let their currencies appreciate further against the dollar in order to trim their own large surpluses in trade with the U.S. And it pledged that the major powers would continue to pursue market-oriented reforms such as those championed by President Reagan and British Prime Minister Margaret Thatcher. These include overhauling tax codes and liberalizing financial markets.    The big countries' general upbeat tone was echoed in a world economic report issued yesterday by the IMF that was mildly more optimistic than previous reports.    The fund expects growth in the industrial nations to be 2.4% this year and 2.6% next year. Inflation is expected to be low, at 3.1% in 1987 and 3.3% in 1988. And for the first time since 1982, overall growth in the U.S. is expected to outstrip domestic demand growth, reflecting an increase in exports. In West Germany and Japan, domestic demand is expected to grow faster than overall growth.    But the IMF projections also highlight problems. The anticipated industrial world growth rates still lag the 3% generally considered healthy. The U.S. current account deficit, which measures the deficit in trade in goods and services, is expected to narrow only slightly by 1988, to $140.6 billion from $152.1 billion this year.    What's more, confidential IMF projections prepared for the ministers suggest, according to sources, that the U.S. current account deficit could still be $150 billion in 1991 and that U.S. foreign debt could reach 22% of gross national product by 1995, up from less than 10% now.    A negative view was reflected in a separate communique issued by officials of 24 developing nations. This called for a major revamping of the industrial nations' approach to solving the Third World debt problem.    Their statement declared that &quot;the present debt strategy is not viable under current economic conditions.&quot; The IMF study projected growth in developing nations averaging 3.3% this year and 4.4% in 1988. But the projected 1987 rates vary from 6% in Asia and 3.6% in the Western Hemisphere to just 1.5% in Africa. </TEXT></DOC>