<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861202-0004 </DOCNO><HL> General Motors and Perot Sever Most of Their Ties,Prompting Uncertainties on Long-Term Strategy---Messy Breakup Also BattersFirms' Shares, LandsBlow to Worker Morale---By Dale D. Buss and Amal Kumar NajStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/02/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GM GME WNEWS LABORAUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT)COMPUTERS (EDP)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)BUYBACKS, REDEMPTIONS, SWAP OFFERS (BBK) </IN><TEXT>   H. Ross Perot and General Motors Corp. severed most of their ties yesterday in a messy breakup that led to a battering of GM on Wall Street, landed a big blow to employee morale and prompted more uncertainties about the auto maker's long-term strategy.    With their many implications, the events were high drama of the rarest sort to many inside and outside GM. &quot;We've got a bunch of folks walking around here like the day (President) Kennedy was shot, saying, 'What could be next?'&quot; said a top manager for GM's Electronic Data Systems Corp. unit, which Mr. Perot founded.    A top official at one of GM's car-selling divisions said: &quot;This is more exciting than 'Dallas,' 'Dynasty' and 'Knots Landing.' We could start our own soap opera here.&quot; And there was anger in GM's ranks, too.    The increasingly acrimonious feud between Mr. Perot, the billionaire Texan, and Roger B. Smith, GM's chairman, climaxed yesterday morning when Mr. Perot sold for the equivalent of $56.50 a share, or $750 million, his 11.4 million shares of GM Class E stock and contingent notes. The stock was created when GM acquired EDS in 1984 for $2.5 billion and made Mr. Perot GM's largest shareholder, with 0.8% of its stock overall. GM Class E shares fell $4.50, to close at $26.875 a share, and GM common fell $1.375, to close at $71.50, both in New York Stock Exchange composite trading yesterday.    In turn, Mr. Perot resigned from the boards of GM and EDS and as chairman and chief executive officer of EDS. And Mr. Perot agreed, among other things, to refrain for a time from attempting a takeover of GM, from starting any new company that would compete with EDS in the data-processing business and from criticizing GM.    GM announced Mr. Perot's acceptance of the buyout plan yesterday morning after a GM board meeting in New York. But in the early afternoon, Mr. Perot made his own, unexpected announcement -- that he wouldn't accept GM's money outright and instead would put it in escrow until Dec. 15 &quot;in order to give the GM directors time to review this matter and the events that led to this decision.&quot; Late yesterday afternoon, GM said its board doesn't intend to rescind the agreement.    The events leading up to GM's offer reveal not only the deep differences between the parent auto maker and its EDS subsidiary but also some complicated maneuvering on the part of both sides to gain maximum leverage in the public perception of their moves and in the terms of the transaction itself.    A source close to GM said that Mr. Perot's explicit campaign to prod GM began last June, when he wrote a letter to Mr. Smith &quot;that basically said, 'Either let me run EDS the way I want to or buy me out.'&quot; The source said that, once Mr. Perot made the demand, &quot;the issue before the board was that there can be only one chief executive officer, and not two.&quot; The source also said Mr. Perot became more serious about his demand on GM a few weeks ago, when GM's negotiations to sell all or part of EDS to American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co. fell apart. A representative of Mr. Perot, this source said, &quot;called (GM) to say that the tax laws were changing and Mr. Perot is now serious about selling before the end of this year.&quot;    The source said that GM and Mr. Perot's representatives then worked out a proposal &quot;for a friendly separation that we thought we could recommend&quot; to holders of both GM common and of GM Class E stock; the latter is tied directly to the performance of the EDS unit. The proposal was approved Sunday evening by a special committee of three GM directors that had been formed in the fall of 1985 to &quot;ensure fairness&quot; in dealings between GM and EDS.    Actually executing the transaction, however, became another test of wills. GM wanted to make the offer only if it was assured that Mr. Perot would accept it. Since spending money apparently to silence criticism probably would result in criticism of GM management itself, the company's officers and directors didn't want to suffer that fallout and then leave Mr. Perot an opening to reject the offer, sources said.    Mr. Perot, on the other hand, had instructed his representatives to negotiate an agreement that would allow him to communicate the terms to EDS workers and only sign the document at some later time. By stalling the signature, he reasoned, he could make the offer public without accepting it. But when GM refused, Mr. Perot relented.    In a statement accompanying the GM announcement yesterday morning, GM's Mr. Smith had some kind words for Mr. Perot, his leading critic, and claimed that, despite their public fight over GM's management systems and current problems, the two had agreed on the goal of ensuring that GM is &quot;the leader in our industry.&quot; The buyout funds were transferred to Mr. Perot about noon.    With his afternoon announcement about the escrow account, sources said, Mr. Perot was underscoring his view that GM should have given its various &quot;constituencies&quot; a chance to react to the buyout plan before GM committed to it. Mr. Perot declared that putting the buyout funds in escrow was the only way he could conscionably accept the money &quot;at a time when GM is closing (nine) plants, putting over 30,000 people out of work, cutting back on capital expenditures, losing market share and having problems with profitability.&quot;    He later added: &quot;What I'm doing in effect is asking the question: Is paying me $700 million the highest and best use of GM's capital? That amount of money will buy you a brand spanking new car plant and the jobs that go with it. But I want to give all the constituencies of GM -- the employees, the shareholders, the dealers -- a chance to have their say.&quot;    GM also agreed yesterday, as expected, to buy back for about $100 million the Class E shares that had been issued in the EDS purchase to three other top EDS officers and longtime associates of Mr. Perot. And, again as expected, the agreement specifies that 200 top EDS employees can't join a competitive concern for at least 18 months. GM also folded EDS into a new business structure to oversee its high-technology operations, but the auto maker said the move wouldn't affect its Class E or Class H stocks.    But GM officials defended the amount paid to Mr. Perot, which came out to $56.50 a share, saying that the &quot;package price&quot; is a composite of the $33-a-share average market value of Class E stock during the period of GM's negotiations with Mr. Perot, and of $23.50 a share for the contingency notes.    When GM acquired EDS in June 1984, it offered EDS shareholders the choice of either $44 in cash for each of their shares, or $35.20 in cash, a fraction of the GM Class E stock and the nontransferrable contingency notes guaranteeing the future value of Class E at $62.50 a share if held until 1991. The $62.50-a-share figure is adjusted for a 2-for-1 Class E split paid in June 1985.    Mr. Perot was one of the holders who elected the second option. So, under yesterday's settlement, Mr. Perot received a total of $6 a share less than he could have received in 1991, had he held all his stock that long. In effect, however, Mr. Perot got almost the full guaranteed value about four years early.    A GM official said that the acquisition of Mr. Perot's stock would result in a total charge against earnings of 69 cents a share, over eight years, beginning with a charge of 10 cents a share against this year's earnings. The charge will decline to five cents a share in 1994, the official said, and will be applied against the earnings attributable to GM's regular common stock. In 1985, GM earned $4 billion, or $12.28 a common share; for 1986, analysts have estimated that GM will earn only $7 to $8 a share. The GM executive asserted that the charges will be &quot;immaterial&quot; to earnings of the auto maker, which has total stockholder equity of $25 billion. He said GM will retire the Class E stock it is acquiring from Mr. Perot and hold the shares for possible future use.    As part of the agreement with Mr. Perot, GM reaffirmed that it will live up to provisions of the original merger agreement with EDS that obligated GM to come to specific contracts with EDS for its services. Disagreement over pricing of those contracts has been a significant factor in the strains that have persisted between old-line GM staffers and new EDS arrivals: GM managers have faced increased pressures to cut costs while EDS managers have been more concerned about the performance of the EDS unit per se and the Class E stock that it supports.    GM yesterday canceled a meeting that had been scheduled for today with Wall Street data-processing and automotive analysts.    Many EDS employees were disappointed, and some felt betrayed, by yesterday's disclosures. &quot;Perot was our philosophical leader,&quot; one EDS executive said. &quot;We'd follow him to the ends of the earth, and now he's gone.&quot; Another EDS manager said he felt &quot;sold out&quot; by Mr. Perot because this manager, like many other EDS employees, had moved from Dallas to the snowy Midwest largely upon the assurances of Mr. Perot that the merger with GM would work out.    One Wall Street auto analyst anticipates that &quot;the top four people aren't the only ones who will leave EDS. So this move starts to call into question the whole value of the acquisition&quot; to GM. And Osman Eralp, senior technology analyst at San Francisco-based Hambrecht andamp; Quist, a high-technology investment-banking brokerage, predicted that the &quot;management turmoil&quot; would hurt EDS in any case outside GM. &quot;It will clearly create a lot of explaining and credibility problems with commercial clients,&quot; he said.    For their part, many old-line GM workers were upset with their management. &quot;A lot of people today are saying that, in these times when all of our expenses are supposed to be 'high value-added,' where is the value in giving up $750 million just literally to shut somebody up?&quot; said one manager at GM's Buick-Oldsmobile-Cadillac division. A top official at a GM car-selling group said, &quot;This is one of the dumbest things that Roger (Smith) has ever done.&quot;    United Auto Workers officials also criticized the agreement. Donald Ephlin, the union vice president in charge of its dealings with GM, said it is &quot;tragic that with so many problems facing the company and its work force, so much time, energy and money has been devoted to this situation.&quot;    Stanley Marshall, a top UAW official representing the Flint, Mich., area, which will be hard-hit by GM's planned plant closings, said GM's accord with Mr. Perot is bound to affect next year's crucial national contract talks with GM. &quot;Our members will say, 'If they (GM) have that kind of money to spend on something like this, they must have money for job security.'&quot;    Some industry analysts suggested that the Perot affair and the continued problems between GM and EDS have dimmed Mr. Smith's chances of attaining his oft-elaborated long-term goal: moving GM into industry leadership in all phases through high-technology acquisitions and investments. Expensive, leading-edge automation has failed at some of GM's newest factories, for example. GM has had to scale back Saturn Corp., its touted project to make an innovative, profitable small car in the U.S. Even the Hughes Aircraft Co. unit, which GM bought a year ago for $5.1 billion, has had a business slump.    &quot;The thing with Perot is just another indication that GM is only stuck in the middle of this grand strategy and may not get out of there,&quot; says a former GM manager who now works outside the industry. &quot;The middle is the worst place to be.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>