<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861205-0080 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Mr. Shad's Disclosure Problem</HL><DD> 12/05/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><TEXT>   When John Shad speaks to the Securities Industry Association in Boca Raton today, his audience will include a lot of people he's just burned in the stock market. Mr. Shad's Securities and Exchange Commission secretly blessed Ivan Boesky's partnership in unloading $440 million in takeover stocks. Neither the SEC nor Mr. Boesky disclosed this nonpublic, material information: that they'd reached a settlement ending Mr. Boesky's arbitrage activities, and that therefore the shares he was selling were worth less than the buyers thought.    We have little quarrel with the SEC's decision to let the Boesky partnership unwind its position. Perhaps the agency is right that this minimized the repercussions; the general market has recovered nicely. Some of the takeover stocks haven't, but the other arbitragers who bought them make their livings assuming risks. And of course, no stolen information was involved, so that the sales do not constitute insider trading as defined by the courts.    The $440 million in sales does constitute a perfect case of insider trading, though, under the definition pushed by the SEC. The courts keep saying: You can call it insider trading if you want, so long as something's involved that looks like a crime, such as conspiracy to steal information. But the SEC historically has tried to wiggle out of restrictions involving fiduciary relationships and so on. It has always wanted to establish a definition that says if anyone knows anything material, anything that will move the price of publicly traded shares, it is a fraud for him to enter a bid in the ongoing securities auction.    In the Dirks case, which the SEC lost in the Supreme Court, the central issue was this definition. Even today, it remains a gleam in the SEC's eye. On television after the Boesky case, Mr. Shad said the injured parties were people selling through the exchange markets. It would be business as usual if they'd sold at the same price to anyone else, but they were injured because their sell offers were hit by Mr. Boesky: &quot;There were no face-to-face dealings, but those people would not have sold to Boesky if they'd have had the same information.&quot; He added, &quot;To take advantage of material, nonpublic information is illegal, and we enforce the law.&quot; While later, under questioning by Jim Lehrer, he did add the qualification about fiduciary duties, clearly this was not the first thing on his mind.    The securities markets, we repeat, are not a crap game for the SEC to police. The markets' key function is to direct investment by correctly valuing stocks. They work precisely because material information is brought to bear, cannot work if this becomes illegal, and won't work as well if the incentive to acquire information is decimated by a requirement to make it public before buying or selling.    Now, Mr. Boesky was allowed to plea bargain, so the SEC's enforcement division is after bigger fish. A bigger fish than Ivan Boesky? Quite possibly there was a much larger information-stealing conspiracy, more bribes changing hands. Perhaps nervous chatter along Wall Street reflects only the fears of those who know they are guilty. If this is all the SEC is pressing, no one will complain, though of course such behavior could be prosecuted without any insider-trading law. (Or for that matter deterred through civil suits, such as Litton's suit against Shearson Lehman Brothers, whose employee leaked information increasing the price of Litton's acquisition.)    What we fear in the Boesky case, and what we think much of the securities industry fears, is that the bigger fish is the market itself. That the Boesky case is the enforcement division's bid to broaden the definition of insider trading. The concern is fed by reports that the SEC and federal prosecutors had Mr. Boesky walking around for weeks with secret microphones, recording his conversations with other traders. Such tapes would be an ideal vehicle for any attempt to turn market gossip into inside information.    In particular, there is the ordinary commerce among acquiring companies, their investment bankers and the arbs. Few acquirers have sued their investment bankers for leaking, probably because most leaks are authorized. A company asks its banker to test the market for a tender offer for a target company at a certain price, the banker sounds out some arbs, and they respond by buying or not buying shares in the open market. The information about a possible deal reaches the market, but no one has misappropriated anything. As we read the court cases, this is clearly not insider trading. Does the SEC want it otherwise?    Privately, Mr. Shad can be reassuring about the SEC's ambitions for the insider-trading law, but this means little unless it's on the public record. His Boca Raton speech is the ideal occasion. What he needs to say is simple: We're not going to prosecute you for doing what we did ourselves in selling the Boesky $440 million. </TEXT></DOC>