<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881114-0079 </DOCNO><HL> Technology (A Special Report): The Solution --- Cracking the Hackers: Police in Silicon Valley Deploy High-Tech Cops for High-Tech Criminals </HL><AUTHOR> Bernard Wysocki Jr. </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> EDP </IN><TEXT>   JAMES AGUIRRE HAS the mind of a computer criminal. He knows how to steal computer secrets. He knows how to embezzle money with the help of computers. He knows how to plant &quot;viruses&quot; in computer programs and thereby create data-processing havoc for their users.    And that's exactly what the San Jose, Calif., Police Department expects of him. That's who he works for.    In this computer age the advent of computer cops was perhaps inevitable -- and San Jose, the unofficial capital of Silicon Valley and a major center of computer crime, would be one of the first places you would expect to find such specialists. They have been in action here since last year, when the department detached two officers from its anti-fraud unit and put them to work full-time on high-tech scams.    Mr. Aguirre, 34, was a natural choice for one of the slots. A computer buff since high school, he can program in two computer languages, Basic and Fortran, and can read several others. Though he packs a gun, his most effective weapon is the IBM personal computer on his desk at police headquarters.    Like most other cops, he also gets a kick out of outwitting felons, and finds that nabbing computer criminals is particularly satisfying because so many of them are egomaniacs. A solemn sort, Mr. Aguirre allows himself a small, tight smile when he says, &quot;A lot of the people doing these crimes think they're so good they can't be caught.&quot;    Like Matthew Fox. The cocky Mr. Fox was hacking his way into the CompuServe nationwide computer network and charging gobs of computer time to the creditcard numbers of other people. In his electronic messages to friends across the country, he bragged about how he was cheating CompuServe, and he even called its executives at home to taunt them with his exploits. &quot;He was driving CompuServe crazy,&quot; says Mr. Aguirre.    But how to get the goods on him? Covering his tracks, Mr. Fox was using call-forwarding devices to conceal the original source of the calls he was making to CompuServe. Hard evidence linking his own phone to the calls was lacking.    So Mr. Aguirre tracked the credit-card numbers instead -- and found that six of them belonged to people who had bought items at the Radio Shack outlet in Santa Clara where Mr. Fox worked. Mr. Aguirre then was able to get authorization for a telephone &quot;trap&quot; on Mr. Fox's phone that solved the call-forwarding problem. The trap, which recorded the time and destination of every original call, produced a log that matched CompuServe's records. Mr. Fox was carted off to jail and pleaded guilty to three felony counts.    Currently, Mr. Aguirre is spending much of his time chasing chip thieves -- people who steal the semiconductor chips essential to computer function, items now in short supply and hence enjoying great demand. Thefts of $50,000 and more in chips are not unheard of now, Mr. Aguirre says.    When a company reports stolen chips, Mr. Aguirre and his partner, Sgt. David Flory, call purchasing managers all over Silicon Valley and ask them to call back if anyone offers them a similar type and quantity of merchandise, particularly at suspiciously deep discounts.    Last year, an official at one big Silicon Valley outfit tipped Mr. Aguirre to a large quantity of logic chips being offered for sale cheap by Cotronics, a San Jose concern. Armed with a search warrant, Mr. Aguirre impounded the chips, searched the company's records, and found that the chips Cotronics was trying to resell were indeed hot.    He turned up evidence, later used by prosecutors, showing that a Cotronics official had falsified checks to conceal the identity of the party from whom the company had bought the chips. The actual seller turned out to be a shipping-company employee who had been stealing them off the loading dock. The Cotronics official and the shipping-company employee each pleaded guilty to one count of grand theft. Charges against the company were dropped.    Mr. Aguirre concedes, however, that a great deal of the time chip thieves get away with their crimes. &quot;Unless the chips turn up in a week, they're gone for good,&quot; he says. He also has to accept, with the fatalism and frustration of policemen everywhere, legal settlements that may leave the guilty unpunished.    His biggest trade-secrets case ended that way. Mr. Aguirre put in 300 hours of dogged gumshoe work to prove that two former employees of Margaux Controls Inc., a San Jose-area company that makes controls for computerized refrigeration units, had copied the Margaux software program for the controls and had tried to sell the bootlegged software. Though the evidence seemed strong to Mr. Aguirre, Margaux ultimately decided on a negotiated agreement with its ex-employees rather than press charges against them.    Though often frustrating, the job of computer cop has its lighter moments too. This summer, for example, police broke a vice ring of 250 prostitutes whose handlers kept meticulous computer records. Mr. Aguirre plucked from the system the names of 40,000 clients and also was able to reconstruct the income of each hooker (one made $67,000). This time he made sure justice would be served. He gave the figures to the Internal Revenue Service. </TEXT></DOC>