<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871021-0082 </DOCNO><HL> A Recession Isn't Required:Australia Points the Way---By David Hale</HL><DD> 10/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST EUROP JAPANMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><TEXT>   Although it may appear that computers have been jumping out of windows in New York and Chicago in recent days, the sharp drop in U.S. stock prices since August is not an accident. The U.S. economy now faces growth constraints that could force a recession within a year.    Pessimism has increased about the long-term outlook for the balance of payments. The trade account has begun to adjust to devaluation in volume terms, but the price effects of devaluation are swelling the dollar cost of imports while real non-oil imports are still growing at a 5%6% annual rate. As a result, the nominal trade deficit may rise by $10 billion this year despite a 12% rise in export volume.    The current-account deficit could remain in the $150 billion to $170 billion range or above 3% of gross national product until 1990. It may be difficult to finance such a large imbalance unless U.S. interest rates climb higher and other American assets fall far enough in price to offer potential returns that offset the risk of currency depreciation.    At the same time, the U.S. has accumulated a large external debt since 1982 without materially expanding the size of its goods-producing capital stock. In fact, because of the competitiveness -- destroying effects of American exchange-rate policy during Donald Regan's reign at the Treasury, the country's manufacturing capital stock actually shrank during 1982-1983 for the first time in the postwar period.    As a result, the U.S. economy now faces a situation unprecedented for an industrial nation in the modern era: It has a manufacturing industry in which many sectors are close to full resource utilization despite a trade deficit exceeding 4% of GNP (twice the output typically lost in a postwar recession) and the accumulation of a half-trillion dollars of external debt, which ultimately will require a large rise in exports for debt servicing.    Since merely eliminating the trade deficit would push the U.S. capacity-utilization rate close to 95%, compared with previous non-inflationary thresholds of 85%, it may be difficult to generate an actual trade surplus for debt servicing without reducing the living standards of the American people. The arithmetic of the economy's growth determinants illustrates why.    Once the economy achieves full resource utilization, its potential non-inflationary growth rate becomes a function of labor force and productivity growth. As each is averaging about 1%-1.5% currently, the economy's optimal growth path after 1987 may be only about 2.5% a year. If we assume that the trade deficit has to shrink as a share of GNP by 0.5%-1% a year in real terms, domestic final demand will be able to grow by only 2% or less. Since more resources also will have to be allocated to rebuilding the capital stock, domestic consumption probably will have to remain static or even decline on a percapita basis for a prolonged period.    The big question that troubled the stock market during recent weeks was how that adjustment would occur. With fiscal policy caught in a gridlock, it appeared that the policy options would be further devaluation and higher interest rates. As a result, prices of bonds and consumption-oriented equities such as retailers slumped sharply in the weeks preceding Monday's crash. Now the crash itself has created an alternative mechanism for depressing American consumption: a trillion-dollar decline in the value of household equities.    In a high-speed, derivative, market-driven parody of rational-expectations theory at work, investors have discounted in the space of 72 hours a further collapse of the dollar, a resurgence of inflation, rising U.S. interest rates, and a slump in the economy as a consequence. Now the market's fears could actually become self-fulfilling if consumers respond to the strike in the capital markets by themselves going on a buying strike in order to rebuild their net worth.    A few months ago, it was possible to argue that the U.S. would be able to reduce its balance-of-payments deficit over a period of several years. The U.S. had robust asset markets that could attract foreign capital. Europe and Japan had excess savings because of aging population and conservative fiscal policies. But several factors have combined recently to lessen the markets' tolerance for America's large payments deficit.    First, forecasts of future current-account deficits have continued to rise. Second, after absorbing nearly $80 billion of U.S. securities in exchange-rate support operations during the spring, foreign central banks experienced an upsurge of monetary growth, and overseas bond yields rose sharply. (In Japan's case, surprisingly strong economic growth in the third quarter added to this concern.) Mr. Baker tried to calm these inflation fears with his commodity-price index idea, but many investors thought it a gimmick designed to distract attention from fundamental U.S. economic imbalances. Finally, the American people started to become concerned about the magnitude of foreign purchases of U.S. assets that would be necessary to finance a large external deficit into the 1990s. One could argue that such fears are economically irrational, but they are politically understandable.    As the recent recovery of the Australian dollar will testify, a country does not have to fully eliminate a balance-of-payments deficit in order to enjoy a recovery in foreign demand of its currency after a confidence crisis. It simply has to develop an economic strategy that is credible and shows some clear signs of progress toward shrinking its external deficit. After experiencing a major currency crisis during the summer of 1986, Australia regained investor confidence through three different policy adjustments. First, the government announced spending cuts, tax increases and asset sales that should balance the federal budget by 1988, compared with a deficit equal to 4%-5% of GNP two years ago. Second, the central bank permitted a large rise in interest rates in order to depress domestic demand and boost savings. Third, the government abolished restrictions on foreign investment and thus unleashed a tidal wave of real-estate investment from Asia. Today, the Australian dollar is 20% above its level of a year ago while interest rates have fallen so sharply that the government is concerned about domestic spending recovering too quickly.    As large as the American balance-of-payments problem may appear, recession is not an optimal solution to it. A slump in the economy will merely push up the personal savings rate and swell the government deficit; it will not increase net national savings. What is urgently needed is a coordinated global package that reduces the risk of recession while simultaneously forcing the U.S. to correct its domestic savings shortage by cutting the budget deficit.    In such a package, Europe and Japan would cut their interest rates and revalue their currencies by 5% to 10% while the U.S. would develop a substantive bipartisan program to reduce the federal deficit over three years to its pre-Reagan average of 1.5% of GNP. Such a policy package would permit financial-asset markets to recover, restrain inflation fears in Europe and Japan, and provide the U.S. manufacturing sector with further strong incentives to rebuild its export capacity.    As the stock market recognized during early October, an American economic policy that attempts to correct the balance-of-payments problem solely through devaluation and monetary restraint will be extremely risky because the ratio of non-financial debt to GNP has risen sharply during recent years.    The American economic situation is much better than Australia's last year, so the policy adjustment needed to restore confidence here should not have to be as wrenching. But the psychological adjustment will have to be larger. The Reagan administration will have to admit that the accumulation of a half-trillion-dollar external debt without an expansion of the manufacturing capital stock will require a correction in U.S. living standards. The Democrats will have to forgo a once-in-a-generation opportunity for political revenge in order to develop a bipartisan budget compromise that does not reverse the positive elements of Reaganomics and encourage capital flight from the U.S. by American investors.    Mr. Baker has already recognized the damage done by his U-turn toward exchange-rate unilateralism last Friday by publicly attempting to make peace with the German finance minister. Now Mr. Baker must attempt to organize a similar rapprochement with Congress over the budget deficit. No matter how much other countries may attempt to help the U.S. cope with its balance-of-payments problem, central-bank intervention cannot substitute for a credible fiscal mix of economic policy in the U.S. Indeed, as the events of recent days will testify, economic policies that are not credible will self-destruct in the financial marketplace.    ---   Mr. Hale is chief economist of Kemper Financial Services in Chicago. </TEXT></DOC>