<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870909-0104 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON) </IN><TEXT>   THE BOOM IN RESTORING old buildings has saved many such structures across the country from demolition. But those involved in restoration projects face dilemmas: Craftsmen who can do many types of fine restoration work, from gold leaf to ornamental plaster, are hard to find, and many materials used in the buildings are no longer available.    The dearth of artisans and supplies has proven nettlesome in a burgeoning restoration effort driven by tax credits and growing interest in historic preservation. Since the U.S. bicentennial, when Congress approved credits for historic renovation, 17,000 to 18,000 structures more than 50 years old have been restored at a cost of $11 billion, according to the National Park Service; before 1976, overhauls of old structures were rare. Under the tax code, investors can recoup 20% of their total renovation costs. The law calls for a structure to be restored as closely to its original state as possible, although the park service, which administers the tax-credit program, so far has been lenient about practical obstacles to precise restoration.    THE PARK SERVICE says it has approved 92% of tax-credit applications submitted under the 11-year-old program. Most of the rest were rejected because the developer or architect greatly altered interior spaces, such as eliminating grand stairways or subdividing large spaces.    Ward Jandl, the park service official who oversees the tax-credit program, says he is aware of the difficulties some people encounter in trying to find artisans and materials. He says the park service tries not to penalize architects or engineers who use current building materials in lieu of original supplies that may be obsolete, or who can't find a craftsman to do a certain job.    Still, for aesthetic reasons as well as to ensure themselves of the tax credits, many individuals and partnerships try to restore buildings faithfully.    The shortage of craftsmen, which building specialists attribute to modern building techniques and architectural tastes, is perhaps the biggest obstacle to faithful restorations. Over the years, &quot;there is a kind of technical memory that we've lost as the plastering craft turned to hanging sheet rock,&quot; says Wesley Haynes, a consultant to the Washington-based National Trust for Historic Preservation. Other skills that can be hard to find include restoring stained glass, stenciling interior walls and restoring aluminum or copper reliefs common on many art deco structures.    THE OLD COURTHOUSE in Fairbanks, Alaska, has regained much of its 1932 art deco splendor, but the project gave GDM Inc., a Fairbanks architectural firm, a problem: It could find no one to restore aluminum reliefs on the exterior of the two-story building. So the reliefs were covered with aluminum paint. Owners of an art deco diner in Vermont couldn't find anyone to repair exterior porcelain siding that was deteriorating, so they simply covered it with wood paneling to prevent further weathering. And in New York City, the partially damaged limestone exterior at the 24-story Gotham Hotel will go unrepaired &quot;because it was too much of a headache&quot; to find a stone carver, says a spokesman for Gotham Construction Co.    Sometimes the absence of original supplies stymies restoration work. In Fairbanks, GDM couldn't find replacements for the tiny panes of textured glass in the building's 250 tall windows; manufacturers no longer produced the material, so regular glass was used. And the black-and-white swirled marble that covered the floors had come from a long-closed quarry in Ketchikan, Alaska; marble resembling the original had to be shipped in from Italy. The extra cost of the marble significantly swelled renovation costs, says Gerald D. Myers, president of GDM.    In Iowa City, architect David H. Arbogast looked for two years for stone to match the red sandstone in the 101-year-old Burlington, Iowa, Public Library; the quarry from which the original rock was taken closed in the 1920s. Mr. Arbogast was about to recommend to the library's directors that they purchase sandstone similar in appearance from a quarry in England, when he learned about the demolition of an old Dubuque high school made of red sandstone believed to have come from the same quarry. &quot;I couldn't have found a better match,&quot; Mr. Arbogast says.    THE SURGE in historic restoration, meanwhile, has created a surge of another kind: Interest in the dying crafts is enjoying a rebirth. Last spring, for instance, the National Park Service sponsored a three-day seminar on restoring windows, which in old buildings often contain a great deal of detail. In four years, Historic Windsor Inc. in Vermont has run 900 people through classes ranging from stained-glass restoration to ornamental plaster works. And Arizona earlier this year formed a data base of craftsmen schooled in the art of restoring intricate Spanish facades on adobe structures, among other detail work.    The renewed interest helped the Chicago Tribune find a stone carver to restore parts of its aging landmark gothic tower. Walter Arnold, the carver, used original plans and broken pieces from the 85-year-old tower to reproduce gargoyles, scalloped shells and spires that adorn the landmark building as part of a restoration scheduled for completion next year.    But many involved in historic restoration lament that it will be years, perhaps decades, before there are enough artisans. Right now, frets Becky Campbell, curator of the $45 million Texas capitol restoration project, &quot;there's more demand than supply.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>