<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870217-0041 </DOCNO><HL> Business World:The Dollar-Stocks Seesaw Is No Great Mystery---By George Melloan</HL><DD> 02/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPANSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO) </IN><TEXT>   {A new weekly column by George Melloan, deputy editor, editorial page}    One of the puzzles of this year's bull market has been the upward push of stock prices at a time when the dollar has been zooming downward. Traders have been a bit perplexed -- a state of mind seldom confessed to -- because flight from the dollar and from dollar investments would seem a more likely consequence of the dollar's fall than a rising appetite for dollar stocks.    A careful look, however, washes away most of the mystery. The U.S. trade deficit reached nearly $170 billion last year, a circumstance not unrelated to the dollar's softness. The most likely place to find those surplus trade dollars is in dollar investments. Up until last year, foreign dollar-holders showed a distinct preference for either safe or solid investments, such as government bonds or real estate. Last year, however, they came charging into the stock market. Final flow-of-funds numbers for 1986 aren't yet available from the Federal Reserve Board, but estimates suggest that stock purchases by foreign dollar-owners exceeded $25 billion, five times the level of 1985.    Now an added $20 billion is not a vast sum by stock-market standards, but such a boost to an already rising market is not negligible either. Nor is the potential for investment as more dollars accumulate in foreign hands and as more foreigners become interested in stocks as opposed to other investments. The market will have noticed, for example, that Japan's trade surplus expanded a further 10% in January. The likely future behavior of foreign dollar-holders has become a matter of some interest to Wall Street.    To get some insights into what this behavior might be I visited with three U.S. executives of Daiwa Securities America Inc., a subsidiary of one of Japan's largest securities firms. They were, on the whole, bullish about the future of Japanese investment in U.S. stocks. Action from Japanese investors already has helped fuel the stock market's sharp rise since the beginning of the year. Motoi Okada, executive vice president of Daiwa America, sees Japanese activity rising 50% this year over last if U.S. interest rates remain at present levels.    There are a number of reasons. The run-up of the Tokyo market, brought about in part by certain changes in Japanese tax law, has put Japanese price-earnings ratios well over the U.S. level. Yields on all Japanese securities are relatively low. Japan continues to have excess liquidity, represented in part by its trade surplus. Japanese companies, feeling a pinch on their export earnings because of the strong yen, are looking for financial income. Japan is not growing as rapidly as expected and the U.S. continues to offer a great deal of security for investment.    Moreover, the U.S. market grows more attractive as the dollar approaches a level where the Federal Reserve Board and the Treasury must finally agree to call a halt to its slide. That point may be near. The Fed can not be sanguine about the 0.6% rise in producer prices in January. As Mr. Okada points out, no one expects the yen to appreciate by the 27% it gained last year. The stock market's uncertainty last week when the dollar firmed suggested that investors are very sensitive to any signal that they should start switching into fixed-interest securities.    But Japanese investors are in a better position than most Americans in one sense. They are not just playing the stock market; they are playing the foreign-exchange market as well. If stocks fall on news that the Fed is trying to firm up the dollar, the Japanese investors still can look forward to the foreign-exchange profit they would get from a firmer dollar. American traders, of course, can play the foreign-exchange market too, if they wish, but not with the same facility of, say, a Japanese bank, which can make good use of either yen or dollars.    What all this means, of course, is that the stock market owes at least some of its vigor to the U.S. trade deficit. Politicians and industrialists who have been describing the trade deficit as an unmitigated evil should try to keep the investment factor in mind. They might also keep in mind that investment flows are far larger than trade flows and have considerable importance to the soundness of U.S. financial intermediaries. If Congress passes a restrictive trade bill this year, attempting to shut foreign goods out of the U.S. market, one of its many damaging effects could be a shock to the U.S. stock market. We went around that track in 1929, when news that passage of the Smoot-Hawley tariff was imminent almost certainly helped precipitate the market crash.    Some analysts argue that the reason stocks rise on a falling dollar is that a weak dollar improves the earnings prospects of American corporations. That theory is widely enough believed that it was adopted by Treasury Secretary Baker as the rationale for letting the dollar fall. Theoretically, companies that produce world-traded goods get a higher cash flow when the currency of their base country falls. A stronger currency reduces cash flow.    Paul H. Aron, an American who serves as vice chairman of Daiwa America, says that all makes a good textbook theory, but nothing else. Yet the second proposition is more valid than the first. Certainly the profits of Japanese companies have taken a hit from the strong yen. But that has not translated into equivalent gains for U.S. companies, in part because Japanese producers have preferred to lose profits rather than market share. In today's world of volatile exchange rates, big companies also hedge against currency swings, at some considerable cost, of course. And finally, a strong yen reduces the costs of raw materials purchased by Japanese companies.    Moreover, different American industries are affected in different ways by dollar weakness. The dollar is much weaker against the yen and the German mark but not against the currencies of Canada, Mexico and much of South America, places that are very important to U.S. trade. Deborah Allen Olivier of Claremont Economics Institute weighed all these factors on the page opposite (Jan. 30) and concluded, on balance, that the weak dollar has not been a boon to American industry.    That being the case, it seems likely that it is not the weak dollar's benefits to American industry that is driving the market, but other factors. Those factors could be several, including tax reform, for example. Certainly one of them has been the mound of dollars put into the hands of foreigners by the U.S. trade deficit. It seems quite likely that the market has not been responding positively to dollar weakness as such but to the buildup of foreign dollar-holdings that dollar weakness reflects.    If that is the case, it suggests several things. First, Congress should be in no hurry to pass restrictive trade legislation; that would go without saying under any circumstances but especially now. Second, dollar weakness is not, in and of itself, a great tonic for the market and should not be regarded as such merely because stocks rise when the dollar falls. Third, there is no great harm in foreign dollar-holders' buying American stocks, or assets of any kind, so long as it is understood that they will, under changing circumstances, behave pretty much the same way as other prudent investors.    That, after all, is what foreign investors are, prudent. Moreover, they are just as sophisticated as American investors and just as well plugged into the vast communications system that serves the world investment community. Any American public policy that ignores their presence is not prudent in the least. </TEXT></DOC>