<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870225-0005 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 02/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   NORTH WROTE a memo to Poindexter about diverting funds to the Contras.    Law-enforcement and Reagan administration officials said the FBI and independent counsel Walsh want to determine why they haven't found any trace of the memo -- written last year and detailing the proposed diversion of Iranian arms-sales profits to the Nicaraguan rebels -- in Poindexter's files. The disclosure came as North filed a lawsuit to block the investigation of the Iran-Contra affair by the special independent counsel on grounds that it is unconstitutional. Meanwhile, a consensus is growing that the Reagan presidency has become paralyzed beyond recovery.    Reagan, queried about reports that he is unable to recall whether he authorized a 1985 shipment of arms to Iran, suggested &quot;it's possible to forget.&quot;    ---   SYRIAN TROOPS KILLED 22 pro-Iranian Hezbollah gunmen in West Beirut.    Police and sources said the extremist militiamen were killed in the mainly Moslem sector of the Lebanese capital after they attacked Syrian foot soliders. Damascus's peacekeeping troops also killed three gunmen as rival Druse and Shiite Moslem militias retreated from the West Beirut battle zone. The fatalities were the first reported since about 4,000 of Syria's troops entered the city Sunday in an effort to end a week of fighting for control of the sector.    The Hezbollah militiamen burned a barracks in West Beirut in what security officials considered an attempt to mask traces of foreign hostages.    ---   Morton Thiokol Inc. has agreed to give up $10 million in fees and to forgo any profit on $409 million of work needed to repair faulty space shuttle booster rockets. The firm will replace the rockets that were lost in last year's explosion of the shuttle Challenger.    ---   Democrats in Chicago voted in a mayoral primary election that was marred by allegations of ballot mishandling, prompting a judge to order thousands of votes counted by hand. With half the precincts reporting, former Mayor Byrne was ahead, but the city's major-network television stations called incumbent Harold Washington the winner.    ---   The Pentagon is easing its push for a more lax interpretation of the 1972 ABM treaty. Assistant Defense Secretary Perle said the Pentagon would keep its anti-missile activities within a narrow interpretation of the accord pending a new State Department legal assessment of the broader interpretation.    ---   A Senate panel endorsed Reagan's proposed $312 billion spending level for defense. The Armed Services panel's endorsement took the form of a recommendation to the Senate Budget panel. The $312 billion budget proposed for the fiscal year beginning Oct. 1 represents a 3% increase over this year's defense budget.    ---   Federal health officials opened public debate on a proposal that would require an AIDS blood test for anyone admitted to a hospital, seeking a marriage license, or treated at venereal disease or drug clinics. The Centers for Disease Control said expanded testing would help prevent the spread of AIDS.    ---   The Supreme Court ruled that honest mistakes by police officers may excuse what otherwise would be an unconstitutional search of someone's home. The 6-3 vote reversed a ruling that had dismissed a Baltimore man's heroin-distribution conviction, even though the police hadn't any authority to enter the man's apartment.    ---   The nation's governors voted for a national welfare policy that would require able recipients to work and would provide increased child care, transportation and health services. A White House plan, however, rejects formulation of a new national welfare program in favor of state-administered projects.    ---   Iranian authorities have launched a campaign to discredit a banned opposition group that has claimed responsibility for several recent attacks on officials, residents in Tehran said. The campaign against the People's Mujahedeen reportedly began after Iraq agreed to the group's request for a two-week halt in attacks on Iranian cities.    ---   Israeli Prime Minister Shamir said Foreign Minister Peres's support for an international conference on Mideast peace threatened to bring down the country's coalition and could lead to early elections. Peres is to meet with Egyptian President Mubarak today in Cairo to discuss the forum.    ---   Moslem guerrillas have infiltrated the Kabul area and appear to be planning attacks to coincide with today's resumption of U.N.-sponsored talks between Afghanistan and Pakistan in Geneva. The Afghan government is expected to unveil a proposal for the withdrawal of Soviet troops.    ---   The Air Force successfully tested an unarmed cruise missile over the frozen Beaufort Sea in the Canadian northwest, despite efforts by Greenpeace protesters to scuttle the test flight. The test was the first since two unsuccessful flights last year.    ---   New York Gov. Cuomo suggested that Reagan name former President Nixon as a special emissary to negotiate an arms-control treaty with the Soviets. Cuomo, who last week said he wouldn't seek the 1988 Democratic presidential nomination, said someone with Nixon's experience was needed to fashion an arms pact with Moscow.    ---   Communist rebels killed five people and wounded four others in attacks near Cebu City on the eve of the first anniversary of Philippine President Aquino's rise to power. Manila's armed forces chief appealed for peace and unity among Filipinos.    ---   South Korean police placed dissident leader Kim Dae Jung and eight supporters under house arrest. The move apparently was aimed at preventing them from attending a rally today in Seoul to protest the alleged torture of government opponents.    ---   NATO announced that Reagan has told U.S. Gen. Bernard Rogers to step down after eight years as the alliance's supreme allied commander in Europe, effective June 30. The announcement didn't elaborate on Reagan's decision, which was expected. The allies have asked the president to nominate another U.S. Army officer. </TEXT></DOC>