<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880503-0084 </DOCNO><HL> The Collector: Third World Borrower Can't Pay? Sure He Can, Mr. Helfgott Says --- Equibank's Man Stops By In Person, and 'No' Isn't What He Wants to Hear --- Step Into My Alley, Please </HL><AUTHOR> Constance Mitchell (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EQK FORGN </CO><IN> BNK MON </IN><TEXT>   The raid on the auto showroom in Ecuador came without warning. While customers browsed and salesmen cooed, a former Israeli tank commander and his crony suddenly burst in yelling.    &quot;Pay up now,&quot; they shouted to the owner, or lose everything. &quot;We'll take those sedans and that convertible. We've got a customer for that car, and that one too.&quot; The shaken dealer, delinquent on his debt, coughed up $600,000.    Mob enforcers? No. Just a couple of bankers from Pittsburgh.    Chaim Helfgott, the former tank man, is the manager of international lending at Equimark Corp.'s Equibank. With his unsmiling assistant, Giovanni Cazzarelli, he has helped the bank cope ably with a problem that drives others to distraction: bad Third World loans. Banks have lent developing countries' businesses billions of dollars they despair of seeing again.    &quot;Other bankers don't believe they can get any money from Third World borrowers,&quot; Mr. Helfgott says. &quot;But that's a state of mind. My stand is no compromises. We want cash, and we won't take 10% down.&quot;    To make his policy stick, he adds, he isn't afraid to show &quot;my ugly side.&quot;    So ugly is it that Equimark even collects for other banks, for a fee. Its roving reps trace borrowers and their assets around the globe, in quest of solace for unrequited lenders. They've retrieved hundreds of millions for lenders in the past three years this way, chiefly in medium-sized loans to businesses. Though private-sector loans in developing countries are dwarfed by the hundreds of billions in troubled government credits, they too give banks many headaches.    Mr. Helfgott, a small man in gold-rimmed glasses, looks more like an accountant than an arm-twister. The look belies a street-fighting toughness, a trait he says he needed growing up in war-torn Israel.    He needs it now, too. Like a repo man on a stranger's turf, he can find himself in dicey situations. His pursuit of the head of a failing Ecuadorian appliance company brought a nasty confrontation, threats and a near-fistfight in a dark alley. &quot;I realized I could have disappeared that night,&quot; Mr. Helfgott says. (After tempers cooled, he collected $750,000.)    One reason some of these borrowers haven't been repaying their loans, he says, is that they've found U.S. banks so ready to restructure debt that they expect it. They're also used to bankers' wanting only a formal, long-distance relationship. But a sharp face-to-face encounter, Mr. Helfgott thinks, is crucial in improving attitudes. &quot;Once they know you're serious, they'll find a way to pay you back.&quot;    With some clients, the first step is simply to find them. Mr. Helfgott operates on the theory that many troubled Third World companies have wealthy owners with assets hidden in Europe. Luckily for him, these people are somewhat conspicuous, tending to frequent the same clubs and go to one another's social affairs. He tries to be there too.    Once, he trailed a wealthy Nigerian real-estate developer from Lagos to London. Unable to find an address for him there, he went to a nightclub he knew Nigerians liked -- called the Barracuda -- where he spotted his man. While disco music blared, he harangued the client till he agreed to a $2.5 million repayment plan.    Another time, attending the dinner party of a Bolivian client who had been delinquent on a loan but eventually paid up, Mr. Helfgott ran into a nonpaying Brazilian borrower. Despite the setting, he pulled the man off to a corner and demanded money. It hasn't come in yet, but at least he has made contact.    The banker tries cooperation as well as threats. He is helping a Bolivian debtor form a joint venture with a West African company to help it earn the money to repay a loan from Equibank. He has promised to forget the debt of a small borrower if it will help him track down a bigger deadbeat.    Finding hidden wealth is one of Mr. Helfgott's biggest challenges. Once, suspecting a client was stashing money abroad, he persuaded a contact in Peru to give him a secret list of countrymen who had Swiss bank accounts.    That was a quick breakthrough. More typical was the nearly a year he spent trying to collect the last $800,000 on a sour loan to a construction-gear supplier in Ecuador. By sifting old bank statements and company records, he found canceled checks for an account in the Netherlands, from which he soon expects to collect the money. Some lenders don't realize, he says, that though the Swiss and Dutch won't provide information about a bank account, if you learn of it yourself and can prove the holder owes you money, you may be able to collect from the account.    This means hired detectives can sometimes be of help. When the head of a Saudi trading company vanished and left millions in unpaid bills, sleuths found him in Europe, along with his numbered bank account. Soon after, Mr. Helfgott showed up at the businessman's new home in Switzerland. &quot;No letters, no lawyers,&quot; he says. &quot;I believe in the personal touch.&quot;    In polite banking circles, this strongarm approach gets little respect. &quot;Most bankers don't want to be known as people with clubs who bang down doors to get their money,&quot; says Robert Walsh, an examiner at the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. &quot;Banks perceive those tactics as sleazy and distasteful.&quot;    Part of it is a matter of maintaining relationships. Equimark officials don't plan to do much Third World lending in the future, so &quot;they don't mind taking off the gloves,&quot; says Christie Sciacca, a managing director of Secura Group D.C., a bank consulting firm. He wouldn't use such methods, he says. But he adds, &quot;It's hard to argue with Equimark's success. They've done a good job of cleaning up.&quot;    The typical cautious bank, when a foreign loan begins to sour, moves to negotiate new terms. Or it may weigh some kind of debt-for-equity swap, or perhaps consider selling the loan for a steep discount to its face value. If all else fails, it may simply dump the matter in its lawyers' hands.    Equimark figures pressure is better. Not necessarily on public-sector loans; most of Mr. Helfgott's methods don't apply here, and he says he has less than a 50% success rate in collecting delinquent government loans. But Equimark claims a 90% success rate in recovering delinquent private-sector loans in Latin America. It says a subsidiary set up to help troubled banks and do collection work has recovered loans of as big as $20 million for clients -- keeping a 20% cut for its trouble.    And it is trouble. The investigating work is tedious. The travel is grueling. Mr. Helfgott recently was in India, Brazil and New York in a single week. His thanks for all this flight time: the unwanted attention of suspicious drug-enforcement officials. Returning last month from Mexico, Mr. Helfgott was detained for two hours at customs in Houston.    Then there are the taunts, the tirades and even the threats of angry borrowers. But, Mr. Helfgott says, &quot;I like the dirty stuff because it's more challenging.&quot;    You might not guess it from his background. Though he was a tank commander, he also has collected two law degrees (in Israel and in the U.S.) and done most of the work for a Ph.D. in banking law. Before joining Equimark, he was a credit-recovery lawyer in Philadelphia.    His employers there were Alan and Judith Fellheimer, crisis banking consultants known for their unsubtle methods. (Mr. Fellheimer once told an interviewer the hardest part of collecting from delinquent borrowers &quot;is trying to figure out when to punch them in the nose and when to lift them up by the elbow.&quot;) When Mr. Fellheimer became chairman of the then-ailing Equimark a few years ago, he recruited Mr. Helfgott to a turnaround team.    The new man's first coup involved the Great Wall Hotel in Beijing, financed by a dozen U.S. and European banks. After it missed its first interest payment in 1985, lead banks agreed to reschedule the loan, fearful that pressing for their money would insult the Chinese. Equibank had only a small piece of the loan, but it was under federal order to raise $100 million in capital and desperately needed the $2 million it was owed.    So Mr. Helfgott met privately with the Chinese, and let it be known that Equimark planned to classify the loan as a default. That might have hurt their chances for future U.S. credit, and the Chinese paid up. &quot;That's when we realized that the methods used by the big banks were archaic,&quot; he says.    His own methods assume that most delinquent Third World businesses, or their individual owners, can pay if sufficiently urged. Yet even when the borrower is broke, Mr. Helfgott has certain remedies. Among them is a currency trading scheme, known as &quot;round-tripping,&quot; with the kind of spread that would make an arbitrager blush.    What it requires is a country with both an official and a free-market exchange rate, separated by a wide gulf. In Venezuela, for instance, the rate used for paying U.S. debt is about 7.5 bolivars per dollar, but the rate for other currency exchanges is 30 bolivars to a dollar. So if a Venezuelan company owes $1 million but can't pay, the creditor might lend it another $1 million, earmarked for repayment of the first loan. The company exchanges the new funds for 30 million bolivars in the free market and deposits them in the central bank -- where they are converted into $4 million. That's enough to repay both loans, and then some.    It isn't as easy as it sounds, partly because round-tripping is illegal in some countries and partly because getting the dollars out of the country can be a problem. But because of loopholes in international banking laws, bankers who know their legalities can sometimes use the technique in disguise -- provided their institution doesn't forbid the practice.    &quot;Most banks wouldn't go this far to collect,&quot; says Mr. Helfgott. He won't say where he round-trips, but bank executives say it sometimes happens in Venezuela (where it isn't illegal) and Brazil (where it now is).    With his demands and his threats, Mr. Helfgott might seem unlikely to win many friends, however good he is at influencing people. Yet an element of professional collegiality sometimes creeps in. A tradition of the business is that after a tough but successful collection process, the ex-creditor may -- provided frictions didn't get utterly out of hand -- invite the borrower to dinner. &quot;Some relationships are created through hard fighting,&quot; Mr. Helfgott says. &quot;I like most of these people, even if I do get a bit rough.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>