<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880802-0021 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   SHULTZ FAILED to win Central American support in denouncing Nicaragua.    The secretary of state, on a tour of Latin America, held talks with the foreign ministers of Guatemala, Honduras, Costa Rica and El Salvador in an effort to devise a way to isolate Nicaragua politically and economically. The officials issued a statement calling for peace and democracy in the region, but an earlier draft was said to contain harsh criticism of the Sandinistas. In Managua, Ortega said Shultz was trying to escalate action against his government.    Democratic senators worked to draft a compromise package of new aid to Nicaragua's rebels. It wasn't clear if the plan would include military assistance.    ---   ISRAEL DEPORTED eight Palestinians amid a strike in the occupied lands.    A day after Jordan's King Hussein announced that Amman was severing ties with Arabs in the West Bank, Israel transported the Arabs to Lebanon, and ordered that six others be expelled for inciting unrest. Arabs launched a two-day strike to protest Israel's expulsion policy. While some Palestinians denounced Hussein as a traitor, others praised the monarch for declaring the PLO their sole representative and for calling for an independent Palestinian state.    The U.S. called for both Jordan and the Palestinians to participate in any Arab-Israeli peace talks despite Hussein's decision on the West Bank.    ---   The U.N.'s Perez de Cuellar said he would announce the date for a cease-fire in the Iran-Iraq war after a fact-finding team returns from the Persian Gulf. In Washington, the White House said Iran officially responded to a U.S. overture for direct talks on improving ties but repeated a demand that the U.S. release frozen Iranian assets.    A team of U.N. experts concluded that Iraq is continuing to use chemical weapons &quot;on an intensive scale&quot; in its eight-year war with Iran despite frequent pleas that it cease. According to its report, the team examined Iraqi soldiers injured by mustard gas but didn't conclude that Iranian forces had used chemical weapons.    ---   An explosion demolished a dormitory at a British army barracks in northern London, killing one soldier and wounding nine others. The Irish Republican Army claimed responsibility. It was the fifth IRA attack since May against British military targets outside Northern Ireland. Britain pledged a security review of military installations.    ---   Carlucci arrived in Moscow for a four-day visit that is expected to include a glimpse of Soviet military equipment and bases. The defense secretary held talks with Soviet Defense Minister Yazov. In Central Asia, the Kremlin destroyed four nuclear missiles as part of the superpower treaty eliminating intermediate-range weapons.    ---   NASA detected a new liquid hydrogen leak as it completed a countdown rehearsal for the space shuttle Discovery. Officials said the problem could further delay Thursday's test-firing of the spacecraft's engines. Another postponement of the test, which has been delayed four times, could impede Discovery's launch early next month.    ---   Kuwait has agreed to accept a $1.9 billion arms package whose final outlines were a compromise between the White House, Jewish leaders and congressmen. The compromise, including curbs aimed at safeguarding Israel, ended a dispute that began in May when Reagan announced plans to sell Kuwait 40 jet fighters and 300 missiles.    ---   Burma announced that it had detained the country's most outspoken dissident and nine other people, saying the crackdown was made to prevent an attack against the state. The move came less than a week after new leader Sein Lwin, a former general known for suppression of dissent, came to power. He succeeded Ne Win, who resigned.    ---   President Vassiliou of Cyprus urged Reagan to persuade Turkey to withdraw its troops and Turkish settlers from the divided Mediterranean island. During a meeting at the White House, Reagan pledged support for the new round of U.N.-sponsored talks on resolving a dispute between the Greek and Turkish communities on Cyprus.    ---   A U.S. appeals court upheld the 1987 conviction of New York Rep. Biaggi for obstruction of justice and accepting an unlawful gratuity. The panel in New York said the appeal was &quot;without merit.&quot; The ruling came as another jury deliberated the Democrat's fate in the Wedtech corruption trial.    ---   Anglican leaders endorsed a compromise resolution allowing the consecration of women as bishops. The motion was adopted overwhelmingly after a two-week debate at the communion's Lambeth Conference, which is held every 10 years and was attended by 520 bishops from 164 countries.    ---   Vietnam has said it is prepared to allow the return of boat-people refugees and accelerate the pace of legal departures, a senior U.N. official said. In Hanoi, the Vietnamese government blamed the &quot;negative attitude&quot; of American negotiators for a lack of progress on the proposed emigration to the U.S. of thousands of political prisoners.    ---   South Korea proposed talks with North Korea next week in Panmunjom aimed at drafting a non-aggression pact. The proposal followed two similar appeals by Pyongyang last month calling for a joint session of the legislatures from both countries. </TEXT></DOC>