<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881107-0018 </DOCNO><HL> Technology: Computer Security Firms Suggest Ways to Stop Viruses --- Protective Efforts Range From Password Changes to More Data Backups </HL><AUTHOR> Brenton R. Schlender (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> T BAC </CO><IN> EDP TEL </IN><TEXT>   Even though the &quot;virus&quot; that swept through computers at universities and research centers last week turned out to be more of a head cold than a plague, it has thrown a huge scare into anyone who uses or relies on computers.    Could a similar and more destructive computer program secretly inserted into a network have destroyed valuable data and programs, or penetrated computers containing classified information and research? Could the same thing happen to banks, insurance companies, brokerage houses, hospitals and other institutions that rely on computers, freezing their activities, or worse, destroying vital records?    Many data processing professionals say last week's virus spread so fast because it was operating in a wide-open network designed to let data and messages flow freely. They contend it is unlikely that a virus could sabotage the cloistered and closely guarded corporate systems that, by design, don't communicate with outsiders. And they say the widespread practice of making frequent backup copies of corporate data protects most companies from all but the most catastrophic computer malfunctions.    Nevertheless, computer security consultants and peddlers of so-called virus antidotes and vaccines are seizing on the event to drive home the point that computers and the information they contain are more vulnerable than they should be. &quot;This virus was not a trivial incident,&quot; says David R. Wilson, national director for information security services at Ernst andamp; Whinney, the big Cleveland accounting and consulting firm. &quot;The frightening thing is that viruses have not yet done the damage that they can really do.&quot;    The virus that struck last week took advantage of the communications network called Arpanet, which ties thousands of independent computers together. It moved from machine to machine, taking over control of each and filling up available data storage with gibberish to the point that an infected computer could no longer function. The bug wasn't designed to destroy data, but had it been, it would have played havoc with every machine it touched.    &quot;This was more of a nuisance than anything,&quot; concedes Gary Berman, president of Remote Technologies Corp., a St. Louis company that specializes in helping companies root out computer viruses and recover from other computer problems. &quot;But the lesson in all of this is that it could happen to anybody at any time, so people should be better prepared.&quot;    Indeed, the same thing could easily happen on a smaller scale, consultants say, within corporations and governmental agencies that are increasingly relying on networks of personal computers and workstations to handle information processing. The proliferation of personal computers and what consultants call &quot;end-user&quot; computing, in which data processing takes place on desktop machines rather than on a central mainframe, have created millions of potential entry points for viruses.    Part of the problem is that early networking software and equipment, which were designed to make it easy for non-experts to wire together personal computers, weren't adequate as far as security was concerned. After incidents like last week's virus, the day of walking into the local computer store and buying networking equipment that can be installed in 10 minutes is gone, says Delbert Jones, managing director of National LAN Laboratory, a Reston, Va., consortium of many computer and networking companies. To be sure that security won't be a problem, &quot;every LAN (local area network) requires analysis and planning,&quot; he says.    To help businesses secure their personal computers and networks, dozens of companies have sprouted up in recent years.    LeeWah Datacom Security Corp. of Hayward, Calif., for example, came up with a technique for personal computers to screen attempts to obtain data by telephone by automatically calling back to confirm the identity of the caller before releasing any data. Since 1984, LeeWah has installed more than 1,700 systems to protect computers for companies like Apple Computer Inc., Chase Manhattan and American Express Co.    Other companies sell either vaccines that purportedly prevent viruses from commandeering a machine or elaborate password systems to restrict access to personal computers much as large mainframe computers limit entry.    Not surprisingly, business is booming in the wake of last week's virus attack. &quot;The phones here have been ringing off the hook,&quot; says Gerald Burke, chief executive officer of Information Security International Inc., a Silver Spring, Md., security firm staffed by former officials of the National Security Agency.    Not everyone approves of what some call the &quot;ambulance-chasing approach&quot; of the security consultants and purveyors of vaccines. Mr. Jones of the National LAN Laboratory contends: &quot;They are attempting to hype this as a major issue and (in the process) they are promoting computer terrorism. Whenever money is being made through disasters,&quot; he adds, &quot;one has to be skeptical about profiteering.&quot;    Moreover, many larger companies with lots of experience in safeguarding their computers are satisfied with security measures already in place. &quot;Our people weren't too shaken by the virus,&quot; says Michael Zampa, a spokesman for BankAmerica Corp.'s data processing operations. &quot;I can't get too specific, but unlike the network that got infected, the computer systems at financial institutions are closed systems with very restricted access. And they are compartmentalized,&quot; he adds, so if one part is infected or sabotaged, the damage can be confined.    Despite such confidence, specialists such as Mr. Wilson of Ernst andamp; Whinney say now is the time for companies to plan for the worst, just in case. Moreover, he says, &quot;the scope and nature of the problem is one that isn't likely to be solved in the short to medium term by vaccines or antidotes.&quot;    Mr. Wilson recommends that companies act on three fronts. First, they should examine their systems, especially personal computers, research computers and other end-user systems that operate outside conventional data processing departments, to make sure that only authorized programs can be used and that only authorized people can use the machines either directly or remotely. That means creating very stringent password systems that change frequently.    Second, companies should devise a plan for reacting to and recovering from such a catastrophe. Last week, laboratories and universities that had such plans were able to avoid wholesale shutdowns of computer systems, while those that didn't, such as SRI International Inc., a Menlo Park, Calif., think tank, saw hundreds of computers go down.    Third, companies should make systematic, day-by-day backups of data, not just periodic backups. &quot;This is especially important, because most viruses are designed to go off like time bombs,&quot; Mr. Wilson says, &quot;so if you simply replace lost data with the latest copy, you can conceivably re-insert a dormant but deadly virus.&quot;    Some consultants contend that last week's virus attack could have been avoided with the proper defenses in place. Mr. Berman, for example, asserts that certain maintenance routines and a measure of vigilance could have caught the virus dead in its tracks. American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co.'s Bell Laboratories in Murray Hill, N.J., which has hundreds of computers tied into the afflicted network, didn't get infected at all because a year ago it removed the so-called trapdoor that allowed the virus into other computers.    Some data processing professionals even see a silver lining to last week's virus attack. &quot;There's an information problem with computer viruses that is similar to the AIDS scare, in that the fear is disproportionately greater than the real danger,&quot; says Daniel Gross, president of Magnetic Press Inc., a New York company that, among other things, consults with companies trying to protect their computer systems. &quot;I don't like all the hype, but perhaps all this attention will raise people's awareness of just what viruses can and cannot do.&quot;    ---   William M. Bulkeley and Bob Davis contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>