<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881017-0153 </DOCNO><HL> Europe: Arms-Talk Ball Is In the Soviets' Court </HL><AUTHOR> Frederick Bonnart </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP FREST </CO><IN> ARO NUK </IN><TEXT>   If the ascent to a world of peace and security is through arms control then the road will be arduous. The negotiations for reductions in conventional forces could easily have the reverse effect. They depend, initially, on major political concessions by the Soviet Union, and -- even after the shakeup of the Politburo -- it is not entirely clear whether Mikhail Gorbachev has the power to make them. Perhaps, in the interests of reaching agreement, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization can help him.    The discussions between the 16 NATO and the seven Warsaw Pact member countries for a mandate for such negotiations, which resumed in Vienna after a short summer break, are now expected to come to a successful conclusion by late autumn. Substantive negotiations, known as Conventional Stability Talks, could then begin early in the new year. Despite optimistic sounds coming out of Washington after the meeting on Sept. 22 and 23 between American Secretary of State Shultz and his Soviet counterpart, Eduard Shevardnadze, such talks could drag on interminably and result in stalemate and increased acrimony.    Although both sides have a similar aim of increased security at lower levels of military confrontation, the way to agreement is littered with innumerable and frequently misunderstood obstacles. These are caused by the diversity of conventional armaments, the absence of reliable Warsaw Pact force figures and the problems of making accurate comparative assessments of the respective capabilities of the armies in confrontation. According to experts, the Intermediate Nuclear Forces negotiations were child's play compared with the complications of those for conventional forces.    In the first place there is the so-called data question -- the figures of troops and major equipments which make up the forces of both sides. Several Western assessments have been published: NATO produced a force comparison in 1984 and, more recently, so did the British, German and U.S. ministries of defense; in addition the International Institute for Strategic Studies, known as the IISS, gives detailed figures in its annual publication &quot;The Military Balance.&quot; All these reckon Warsaw Pact strength differently in manpower figures, as well as in major equipment, such as aircraft, tanks, fighting vehicles, artillery and helicopters.    Figures alone do not tell the whole story. The biggest question mark remains over operational capabilities -- the fighting quality of the military formations which make up the opposing forces. The manpower and major armaments differ in all of them, so that the power of a formation like a division means something different for most allied and Warsaw Pact armies. Moreover, Soviet forces are divided into four categories, of which only units in the first category are fully up to strength and in a high state of training. That, incidentally, includes all Soviet forces stationed in Eastern Europe. But there is a vast pool of manpower which can be called upon rapidly to fill cadre formations. Similar arrangements exist, of course, for the forces of other member countries of both sides, but there are large differences in procedures and capabilities.    There are studies made by such organizations as the Rand Corporation, which establish models by attaching different weighting to such factors as strength and readiness, numbers and quality of weapon systems, location, distances and transport capabilities. These numbers, fed into computers, produce different answers. On one conclusion, however, all agree: The Warsaw Pact's conventional forces in Europe are significantly more powerful than those of NATO and would need to diminish considerably before any Western reductions could be envisaged.    This standpoint is likely to be challenged by the Soviet leadership. Although Mr. Gorbachev has implied that imbalances exist and agreed that they should be rectified, he has not specified them. From public declarations by other Soviet officials, such as Mr. Shevardnadze and Defense Minister Dmitri Yazov, as well as published documents, a Soviet line appears to be emerging which maintains that whatever superiority its side may have in tanks, artillery and other battlefield forces, it is balanced by NATO's superior air and naval forces. In a recent speech the chief of staff of the Soviet armed forces, Marshal Sergei Akhromeyev, claimed that if all the components of conventional forces -- army, air force, navy and air defense -- were taken into account, there was &quot;approximate parity&quot; in Europe. However, experts at the annual IISS conference recently pointed out that one cannot trade off armored divisions against aircraft carriers, or assess the value of interior lines of communications against strike aircraft. There is a danger, therefore, that the Conventional Stability Talks, when they begin, may meet the same fate as the Mutual Balanced Force Reduction negotiations, now in their 15th year -- that is, they may drag on interminably in a futile discussion on detail.    NATO has pointed out repeatedly, in particular in its summit declaration in March, that the root cause of the present instability is not the nuclear confrontation but the continued threat to the West from the conventional armed forces of the Soviet Union which have now been deployed in Eastern Europe for almost half a century. It is these that have caused the Western buildup and the maintenance of a nuclear arsenal to deter war. In military terms, at any rate, this threat has become even more acute as, after the Chernobyl disaster and the elimination of INF, the credibility of the West's reliance on nuclear deterrence is declining. NATO must, therefore, at the least, maintain its present force level.    If Mr. Gorbachev is to carry through his modernization of the Soviet Union, he must free up resources now taken up by the military. He also urgently needs a period of external stability to carry through his internal reforms. It is particularly in conventional forces, with their large manpower and high technology armaments costs, that such savings could be effected. He will, therefore, look to a speedy and successful conclusion of these negotiations. To get them going, however, a radical change is needed in the offensive force posture of the Soviet Union in Europe. This means making a major political gesture.    Mr. Gorbachev could start by making good on his declaration of willingness to declare his actual forces and to accept full verification. Furthermore, Soviet statements of a new &quot;defensive strategy&quot; could be matched by deeds. Some Soviet divisions could, for example, be withdrawn from Eastern Europe. To help him to carry this through, NATO would have to reciprocate. The allies could, in return, declare their own force figures together with verification and, furthermore, agree to the comparison of military doctrines.    Such measures would enable the talks to start from a basis of knowledge instead of guesswork. With prior Warsaw Pact reductions and a verification system established, mutual confidence would be immeasurably increased. There would then be some hope of resolving the remaining difficulties.    ---   Mr. Bonnart is editor of NATO's Sixteen Nations, a Brussels-based defense periodical. </TEXT></DOC>