<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870414-0046 </DOCNO><HL> The Texaco Bankruptcy---Family Feud:How the Texaco CaseShaped Up Years AgoAs a Fight of the Gettys---Sons of J. Paul Vied for PowerAnd Gordon Finally Won,Almost in Spite of Himself---Putting the Place Up for Sale</HL><DD> 04/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TX PZLPETROLEUM (PET)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY) </IN><TEXT>   Would Texaco Inc. be seeking protection from creditors in bankruptcy court if J. Paul Getty had been a better father?    The question is an intriguing and significant one. Texaco is trying to escape from a $10.3 billion damage award, by far the largest in history, levied against it for improperly interfering in a merger agreement between Pennzoil Co. and Getty Oil Co. In following the twists and turns of the case, it is easy to forget that the drama originated with an internal power struggle at Getty Oil that began long before Pennzoil or Texaco entered the picture.    It was that struggle that attracted the rival bidders to begin with, that &quot;spread blood on the water,&quot; as one lawyer put it. To understand the particular nature of the internal conflict, one must go still further back and learn something of the relations between the creator of Getty Oil, the icy-eyed, ferociously demanding J. Paul Getty, and his sons. In particular, one must focus on his youngest surviving son, Gordon, who was no businessman but who played the pivotal role in one of the most dramatic developments in current business annals.    The following account of that relationship and the fruit it bore is adapted from &quot;Oil andamp; Honor: The Texaco-Pennzoil Wars,&quot; to be published May 5 by G.P. Putnam's Sons. The author is Thomas Petzinger Jr., a staff reporter of The Wall Street Journal.    J. Paul Getty had little time for his wives -- one reason, he had five of them -- and less for his sons. You don't become a purported billionaire, billed as the world's richest man, hanging around the house chucking the kiddies under the chin. The oil game required most of his attention, and extramarital affairs consumed much of the rest.    So his fourth wife, born Ann Rork, could not have been surprised when her husband, arriving too late for the birth of their son Gordon on Dec. 20, 1933, said he could stay only a minute. The marriage was almost dead anyway; she had already attempted suicide by drinking iodine during her first pregnancy, which had produced Gordon's brother Eugene Paul. According to Ann's subsequent divorce petition, the oil man scrutinized Gordon, said, &quot;Huh, he looks like you,&quot; and left for a yacht trip off San Diego.    Gordon and Eugene grew up with men around the house -- his mother married three more times -- but they were transitory figures. The boys' biological father remained remote. There were gifts, including an electric motor kit one Christmas that Gordon was disappointed to learn had been bought by the great man's secretary. There were visits; after one to Tulsa, the father, making a diary entry in his cool, precise prose, noted that 10-year-old Gordon had &quot;read a poem he had written about the good qualities of Negroes.&quot; But there was no constancy, little warmth.    J. Paul Getty did value his sons in one way: as important components in the family-controlled oil empire he was building. In the late 1950s he plugged Eugene and Gordon into the mechanism, starting them as nozzle jockeys at a gas station -- Gordon was a dreamer who didn't want to get his hands dirty, a visitor remembers -- but quickly moving them up.    For Gordon, it was the beginning of years of humiliation and failure. He was sent to manage a key concession of his father's in the Middle East. He proved himself adept at ping-pong, bridge and musical composition but brought in no gushers, and he ultimately wound up in jail for sanctioning a subordinate's flight from Saudi Arabian justice. In jail, Gordon polished off the complete works of Keats and some Shakespeare before his father got him sprung.    Expressing deep disappointment in his son's judgment, J. Paul next gave him a middle-management job at a Getty-controlled Tulsa aircraft company. Gordon had some good ideas, but in the age of the Organization Man he proved a misfit. He was intimidated by the multibutton phone on his desk, kept strange hours, disappeared for long stretches and lectured his betters, often on music. Soon he was gone.    This time his father wrote him a strangely gentle, almost plaintive letter. &quot;In my opinion you are a fine young man in most respects,&quot; it said. &quot;I love you and am proud of you. I do feel, however, that for some reason or another you are very immature in relation to business. You seem to have kept a rebellious attitude toward authority. . . .&quot; Gordon's mother was noticing the same thing and wrote that at 28 &quot;Gordo has retained the perspective of an eight year old.&quot; His brother Eugene Paul said that Gordon wasn't interested in any opinions that disagreed with his own.    In a last effort to harness his son's obvious intelligence and ability with numbers, J. Paul made Gordon his personal consultant. This worked well as long as Gordon studied safe subjects, like the ventilation at the Getty-owned Hotel Pierre in New York, but when he poked around the oil business, he found himself in frequent conflict with his half-brother George, J. Paul's oldest son, who was second only to his father in authority over the business.    George had contempt for Gordon, tried to undercut him as a consultant by ordering aides to search out every possible flaw in his reports, and ridiculed him and tattled on him to their father.    There was more to this than an older son making sure a younger one wouldn't displace him, for Gordon deserved some of the criticism. He was a wool-gatherer, hopelessly forgetful and often careless; at one point George sent a letter to J. Paul detailing how Gordon had simply abandoned cars at airports and forgotten them, adding, &quot;Gordon certainly does not seem to have been in touch with reality.&quot; As a consultant, he produced analyses that were always creative and sometimes brilliant, but his recommendations were frequently contradictory or utterly impractical. In one report he advocated selling service stations; in the next, he thought buying more would be a good idea.    In memos sent to George, he seemed intent on getting the most dignified title and highest salary, regardless of the nature of the work he was doing, and insisted on fitting assignments into his personal schedule rather than accommodating the company's. George wrote his father that although Gordon was creative, he doubted that he could ever be a business success because he was so averse to &quot;pick and shovel work.&quot;    Then Gordon went to war with his father. He wanted more money.    ---   J. Paul Getty was supposed to be a billionaire and the world's richest man, but the majority of his wealth was not his own. It lay in the Sarah Getty Trust, his mother's, which was for the ultimate benefit of her great-grandchildren; the assets were not to be distributed until J. Paul, who was trustee, and all his sons were dead. But while they lived, the father and his sons were entitled to all of its income, with J. Paul getting about 80% and George, Eugene Paul and Gordon dividing the rest equally (the second son, Ronald, was limited to almost nothing because his mother had wrung an elephantine divorce settlement out of J. Paul).    But there was no income to speak of. The trust's sole asset was Getty Oil stock, which paid no cash dividends; J. Paul plowed every penny of earnings back into the company, which greatly accelerated its growth. This benefited George and Eugene Paul, who had careers with the company. But Gordon, who was just a part-time consultant and who now knew he didn't want to spend his life behind a desk, demanded cash dividends, saying &quot;this income to me should be no less than $50,000 a year.&quot;    J. Paul, fearing a lawsuit and public scandal -- no one could tell what someone of Gordon's temperament would do -- grudgingly began paying a dime-a-share dividend in 1962 that yielded $46,000 annually to Gordon and his brothers. He told Gordon that this would probably set Getty Oil back in its growth and urged him to get a job. He also blotted Gordon's name from the list of sons eligible to succeed him as trustee someday.    A gloating George told Gordon that the old man never wanted to lay eyes on him again. &quot;So it looks as if you have gained $50,000,&quot; he said, &quot;and lost a father.&quot;    But soon the $50,000 wasn't enough, either. In 1964 Gordon married and quickly became a father several times over; cash was tight. Finally he did what his father had most feared. He sued for more.    While Getty Oil had paid no cash dividend until 1962, it had been paying stock dividends all along -- about $100 million worth, translated from then-current stock prices -- and Gordon argued that as an income beneficiary of the trust he was entitled to his share. The old man put his most ferocious lawyers on the case, which dragged through the California courts and the world's newspapers for six long years, until 1972.    Gordon lost more than the case. He was pilloried as an inept, gold-digging ingrate. His father's lawyers called his act &quot;reckless and shameful,&quot; an attempt to line his pockets at the expense of children -- including his own -- who would inherit the trust's assets. The breach with J. Paul seemed irreparable.    At one point in the struggle, Gordon's wife, Ann, telephoned J. Paul at his English mansion, Sutton Place, to ask for mercy. &quot;Your lawyers are killing my husband,&quot; she pleaded. Later, the old man talked to one of those lawyers. &quot;Keep killing my son,&quot; he said.    ---   The progeny of J. Paul, updated: Ronald Getty went into the family business, stumbled and was driven out by George. Eugene Paul, who had had a promising start, self-destructed. He became a narcotics addict, divorced his wife of 10 years, dropped out of the business and into the counterculture, and married a Dutch actress. They had a son they cursed with the name of Tara Gabriel Galaxy Gramaphone Getty, who would be a cat's-paw in the corporate battle to come. Finally, Gordon had sued himself right out of the picture. So George Getty stood alone as the heir apparent to leadership of the company and control of the trust -- but not for long.    He was suffering almost constant humiliation from his father. The old man refused to make him president of a newly reconstituted Getty Oil, keeping the title for himself; George was relegated to executive vice president. In abusive hour-long calls and in letters, he was barraged with criticism and cutting sarcasm from Sutton Place. Year after year, the attacks grew more mean-spirited, more demeaning. &quot;I think there is a place for a nine-year-old Hottentot in {Getty Oil's} management,&quot; a letter sneered. &quot;He couldn't feel less inspired and he might do better.&quot; In the office, George would sometimes drive a letter opener into the back of his hand.    On June 5, 1973, he came home, got drunk and stabbed himself in the stomach. It was only a superficial wound; the overdose of prescription drugs is what killed him.    Years later, when Gordon was asked about the terrible, abusive letters he had gotten from his father, he said: &quot;I laughed at them. My father was a mischievous man; he liked to ruffle people's feathers.&quot;    But it's unlikely that any son of a famous father -- particularly one so demanding, so coldly forceful -- can escape his father's influence. Sometimes such sons passively defy the paternal power by living lives that they know their fathers won't like. Others try to ape the parent or even outdo him to show themselves worthy of his love and regard. But few men are untouched by fathers like J. Paul Getty.    ---   With George gone the old man had little choice but to name Gordon as a trustee of the Sarah Getty Trust upon his death. Exactly three years after George's death, J. Paul Getty himself passed away in England at the age of 83.    He left almost all of his personal holdings in Getty Oil to the Getty Museum, a rococo establishment in Malibu, Calif., that overnight found itself the richest museum on earth. He left a moderate bequest to Ronald, whose trust income was a pittance. And he left smaller ones to 11 presumably grateful women.    Gordon, as the trustee for 40% of Getty Oil's stock, took a seat on the company's board. One fellow director would watch him and wonder, What is going through that man's head? There he would be at the directors' table -- his head thrown back and his lips moving -- looking straight at the ceiling. Was he reciting poetry? Going through a libretto?    Other times he would sit bolt upright with his eyes shut. He might ask questions about the first agenda item while the board was on the last, once mistook a break as the conclusion of a meeting and disappeared, and another time forgot where he had parked his car. Sidney Petersen, who became the chief executive officer in 1978, helped him find it. &quot;It's like he came to us from Mars,&quot; Mr. Petersen recalls.    Gordon was passive during his first years on the board. He was in the shadow of Lansing Hays, a rather nasty lawyer his father had appointed as a co-trustee, and the company was doing splendidly anyway. But when Getty Oil's performance faltered in the early 1980s and Mr. Hays died leaving him sole trustee, Gordon found a mission: close the &quot;value gap,&quot; the difference between Getty Oil's real value, as measured by the oil it had in the ground, and its stock price, which had tumbled to about $50 a share in 1982 from $110 two years before.    Gordon was an intelligent man with no job but many avocations, including poetry, music and anthropology. When he got interested in something, he was capable of bursts of intense, focused concentration. He once boned up furiously on basic college physics, took the exam at Berkeley &quot;just for the hell of it&quot; and passed. Now he attacked the value gap, and the reasons behind it, with the same energy.    &quot;It was kind of hard to ignore the sorry performance of the management,&quot; Gordon would recall. &quot;They were able men, yet they managed to do a wretched job.&quot; His ultimate purpose: obtain total control of the company by the trust. In the meantime, he wanted to find a way to get more of the company's value into the hands of shareholders.    Gordon began ingesting information. He chatted up T. Boone Pickens, who told him about royalty trusts and urged a wholesale restructuring of Getty Oil, saying, &quot;You've got a dying duck on your hands.&quot; Sid Bass of the Fort Worth Bass brothers talked to him about stock buybacks, and oil man Corbin Robertson Jr. of Houston told him about going private.    In the fall of 1982, Gordon started a fact-finding mission up and down Wall Street. This action by the controller of a 40% block in one of the nation's major corporations was tantamount to hoisting a &quot;for sale&quot; sign over the company, and by January word was out that Getty Oil was a ripe plum. On top of that, Gordon had given an internal company report to a possible bidder.    Mr. Petersen was beside himself. At a meeting held, he says, &quot;to keep Gordon from flopping around in the marketplace,&quot; he asked Gordon to have patience and halt the information-gathering campaign. Gordon refused. Then Mr. Petersen's people gingerly brought up the inside-information leak. Gordon, affronted, said that he was perfectly capable of deciding what was inside information and what wasn't. &quot;It was insolent and ridiculous,&quot; he would say later. But Mr. Petersen was shocked at Gordon's refusal to see the dangers in passing such information.    Mr. Petersen resolved to lash down this loose cannon. Gordon soon resolved to oust management and the board. The insider war for Getty Oil had begun.    Management, led by Mr. Petersen, schemed to dilute Gordon's power over the trust by getting one of its beneficiaries to sue for the appointment of Bank of America as a co-trustee. Gordon's brother Eugene Paul (who had changed his name to Jean Paul Jr.) agreed to sue, but the suit was filed in the name of his estranged 15-year-old son, Tara Gabriel Galaxy Gramaphone Getty, who, it is presumed, knew little or nothing about what was going on. The Getty Oil board, with Gordon absent, also agreed to sue for a co-trustee.    Is recruiting a petitioner dirty pool? Mr. Petersen defends such tactics, saying that he only wanted to bring some &quot;stability and business experience&quot; to the trust, which J. Paul had declared should have a bank co-trustee. And, he asks, &quot;Was it evil to go to these people and say, 'Here is what this nitwit is doing'?&quot;    Gordon was outraged, but he was hatching a scheme of his own. He wanted to combine the 40% stockholding he controlled with the 12% block owned by the museum and toss out management and the directors, whom one of his lawyers was shocked to hear him call &quot;a bunch of snakes.&quot; (Gordon doesn't recall the statement.)    And so it went through the summer and fall of 1983, the opposing sides locked in a death struggle, each wounding the other but unable to deliver the decisive stroke. No attempt at conciliation or compromise held up. The blood was all over the water now, and institutions began snapping up Getty stock and options on the open market. Ivan Boesky bought a big batch. &quot;I thought the son wanted very badly to get back at the father,&quot; he explained later. (Gordon's investment banker, Martin Siegel, would eventually admit to furthering Mr. Boesky's psychological insights by providing him with inside information about the goings-on at Getty Oil.)    Mr. Boesky was only one of a herd of amateur psychologists feverishly speculating about Gordon's motivation. It certainly wasn't money: Gordon was getting $28 million a year from the trust now, but he drove an AMC Pacer and a Jeep. His proudest possessions included a grand piano (he had become a serious composer) and his stereo rig. His pleasures were simple ones, easy on the budget; in the time it took him to listen to a single $14.95 compact disk, he took in enough money to buy almost 200 of them.    If not money, what then? Was he indeed, as Getty Oil officials believed, seeking unconscious revenge against J. Paul by selling out the old man's dream of a family oil empire? Or was he trying to emulate his father and prove worthy of him, by seizing the power J. Paul himself had once held? Was his wife, Ann, a prominent San Francisco socialite, pushing him? There's a lot more cachet to running a company than just being a director of one.    Nobody had the answer, but this much was becoming plain: The impasse at Getty Oil was inviting the intervention of a third party; Gordon would be either a buyer of more Getty stock or a seller, depending on who offered the best deal for the trust beneficiaries, and only a madman would try to do a deal without wooing him.    Hugh Liedtke, the chief executive of Pennzoil, a chesty, forceful man known to some of his aides as Chairman Mao, wooed Gordon with this deal: power for Gordon and the trust, a billion barrels of oil for Pennzoil. Getty Oil would be taken private, with Pennzoil buying half the shares that Gordon didn't control and Getty Oil itself buying back the rest. Pennzoil would then own three-sevenths of the reconstituted company (an interest equivalent to a billion barrels of oil), and Mr. Liedtke would be the chief executive. The trust would own four-sevenths, and Gordon would be chairman -- a real chairman, with the real power that an unquestioned stock-majority ownership brings. If he and Mr. Liedtke didn't get on after a year, they could divide their interests and separate.    Mr. Liedtke got Gordon's support. After incredible wrangling over price and the ethics of Gordon's behavior (he had given Mr. Liedtke a private written assurance that he would push Pennzoil's proposal to the exclusion of all others at the board meeting), the Getty Oil directors reluctantly agreed to the plan at a stock purchase price of $112.50 a share. Gordon even approached Mr. Petersen and said, &quot;Good luck in your career.&quot;    But before a definitive agreement could be signed, John McKinley, the chief executive at Texaco, made an offer. His proposal amounted to money instead of power: Texaco would buy out the trust, and everyone else, for $125 a share. The museum wanted to sell at the best price, and the board would have had a difficult time turning down an offer that benefited the public stockholders more than Pennzoil's offer. So Gordon agreed.    According to some recollections, Gordon apparently knew the terms before the courtly John McKinley formally proposed them. Mr. McKinley said, &quot;I am prepared to offer . . .&quot; Gordon quickly interrupted with &quot;I accept!&quot; Seeing the surprise of the Texaco people, he added, &quot;Oh, You're supposed to give the price first!&quot; as laughter swept the room.    No one dared a smile over at Pennzoil. Fearing an explosion of Vesuvian scale, none of Mr. Liedtke's aides were eager to tell him what had happened. But when he was told he sat in silence. They've made off with a billion barrels of my oil, he thought. Finally he spoke. &quot;We're going to sue everybody in sight,&quot; he said.    ---   Gordon was no businessman. Everybody agreed on that. But his decision to sell out was perfectly timed, coming near the peak of oil prices, just before the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries lost its cohesion and world oil quotes dived into the basement. &quot;I picked up my marbles,&quot; Gordon would say, &quot;and I took them home.&quot;    His principal interest now is composing. Though some of his early works were panned, he is now reviewed more favorably. Newsweek detected &quot;a genuine dramatic sensibility at work&quot; in his &quot;Plump Jack,&quot; a cantata about Falstaff. He admits to wondering sometimes what it would have been like to run Getty Oil with a partner like Mr. Liedtke. &quot;I'd have enjoyed the fun of seeing what could be done,&quot; he says. But he does not wonder for long. &quot;Composers,&quot; he has also said, &quot;are remembered when the businessmen are forgotten.&quot;    From &quot;Oil andamp; Honor: The Texaco-Pennzoil Wars,&quot; Copyright 1987 by Thomas Petzinger Jr., to be published by G.P. Putnam's Sons. </TEXT></DOC>