<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870904-0043 </DOCNO><HL> Dollar's Recent Trend Poses No ThreatTo Currency Accord, U.S. Officials Say---By Walter S. Mossberg and Alan MurrayStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The U.S. government doesn't see the recent downward move of the dollar as a serious threat to the currency-stabilization agreement reached by the major industrial powers in February.    A steep, sudden decline in the dollar to entirely new levels would provoke concern and presumably would prompt the Federal Reserve Board to boost interest rates in response, but officials don't anticipate any such problem.    So far, the Fed has intervened only modestly in the market in the past two weeks, buying dollars at the Treasury Department's direction. It also has allowed the interest rate on federal funds to rise somewhat to dispel any market notion that the U.S. and its allies would sit on the sidelines and risk a plunge in the dollar.    This information comes from senior U.S. officials who agreed to discuss the matter on the condition that they not be identified.    In the so-called Louvre accord reached in Paris in February, the U.S. and its major allies called for stabilizing the dollar against the Japanese yen and the West German mark within a loose range that has never been spelled out.    Many market participants say dollar rates of 140 yen and 1.80 marks may be the low end of this range. But those levels, which were pierced in trading Wednesday, have been breached at other times since the accord without causing any major central bank reaction. The dollar fell against most major currencies yesterday but made a small gain against the yen.    The officials said the current low level of the dollar -- like the relatively high levels it reached earlier in the summer -- isn't viewed as troubling. Further, they said, there hasn't been any evidence in recent weeks of the kind of disorderly market conditions that might signal a dangerous downward spiral in the dollar's value and threaten the Louvre accord.    However, officials here have been concerned that market participants recently believed incorrectly that the U.S. government was staying out of the market and was in effect encouraging traders to take the dollar significantly lower.    Officials concede that foreign exchange traders probably are probing to see how low the dollar can fall without provoking major government action to prop it up. In part, the probing reflects uncertainty about new Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan's resolve to support the dollar.    &quot;It looks like a test,&quot; one Fed official said. &quot;It looks like they are trying to force Greenspan's hand.&quot;    Some analysts have called on the Fed to force up interest rates to defend the dollar. But so far, the Fed has resisted such pleas.    The officials say neither the U.S. nor Japan and West Germany -- which have been intervening more actively in the currency markets -- is defending any particular dollar level.    Japan and West Germany appear to be more sensitive than the U.S. about the levels of 140 yen and 1.80 marks. But the U.S. itself would grow concerned if the dollar were to continue falling for a few weeks at the rate it's been falling the past several days.    The nations involved have insisted that the Louvre accord -- which has been agreed to by the U.S., Japan, West Germany, Britain, France, Canada and Italy -- didn't establish a formal &quot;target zone&quot; for exchange rates. But former Fed Chairman Paul Volcker, speaking last month at an economic conference of the Aspen Institute in Aspen, Colo., conceded that &quot;we have been working -- in a de facto way, not admitted -- toward some sense of target zones in exchange rates.&quot;    Mr. Volcker, however, wouldn't say what a proper dollar-yen exchange rate would be, saying only that it should be &quot;somewhere around the current levels.&quot;    Several factors might work to keep the dollar from making any further precipitous drop. One might be the modest interest rate rises already brought about by the Fed and the bigger rise in long-term bonds, which widened the already significant spread between U.S. and Japanese rates.    A second factor is a gradual but largely hidden improvement in the U.S. trade balance, which already has shown up in terms of trade volume but not in dollar terms.    The U.S. officials insisted that Washington and its allies aren't discussing, and haven't any plans to discuss, revising the Louvre accord or sanctioning in any other way a lower general range for the dollar's exchange rates.    ---   Risk to Dollar Is Suggested   VIENNA -- International monetary specialists expressed fears here that February's Louvre accord to stabilize exchange rates could break down, precipitating a further sharp fall in the dollar's value.    Sylvia Ostry, a Canadian government aide who helps prepare the annual economic summit of the world's seven leading industrial nations, said the dollar risks a &quot;hard landing&quot; if governments don't make rapid enough progress on coordinating their economic policies.    She told bankers, economists and policy makers attending a meeting here that the biggest risk facing the world economy is protectionism and its barriers to trade.    Lord Harold Lever, a former British Treasury minister, said the U.S. dollar &quot;will have to drop further and soon&quot; if Japan and West Germany don't stimulate their economies.    But Tomomitsu Oba, an adviser to the Japanese finance minister, said a falling dollar could do still greater damage to the U.S. by pushing inflation higher and causing Japanese investors to stop buying U.S. bonds. </TEXT></DOC>