<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870505-0113 </DOCNO><HL> The Perils of Open Diplomacy---By Husain Haqqani</HL><DD> 05/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> ISLAMABAD  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Pakistan has never been completely at ease in its relationship with the U.S. even though American security and economic assistance has played a crucial role in the country's development during the past three decades. Pakistan now has the highest per-capita income in South Asia and its gross domestic product has grown at an average rate of more than 6.5% over the past six years. Economic growth has been assisted by U.S. aid, which totaled $3.6 billion between 1981 and 1987; $4.02 billion is earmarked for disbursement over the next six years.    In return, Pakistan has served U.S. strategic interests in South and Southwest Asia in various ways at different times -- most recently by supporting the freedom fighters in Soviet-occupied Afghanistan. Despite the mutual benefits of their close ties, the two allies have clashed over a number of issues, such as U.S. support for Israel and Pakistan's nuclear policy.    Criticism from Islamic fundamentalists and left-wing radicals has forced successive Pakistani governments to play down the American connection. Instead of taking pride in Pakistan's alliance with the U.S., as was the case during the 1950s and '60s, Pakistani leaders now publicly profess nonalignment, but without altering the pro-American basis of their foreign policy.    U.S. influence is also visible in Pakistan's domestic affairs. The U.S. has supported the country's transition from military rule to constitutional government and has used the aid lever to prevent Pakistan from exploding a nuclear device. Pakistan's program to control the production and trafficking of narcotics has also been boosted by U.S. assistance.    Public attitudes on ties with the U.S. remain volatile. In 1979, an angry crowd burned down the U.S. Embassy here following rumors of American involvement in the seizure by fanatics of Islam's holiest shrine, the grand mosque at Mecca. The Pakistani government still prefers that its relationship with the U.S. be kept out of the public eye as much as possible. This could prove difficult because of the public mood in the U.S in the wake of the Iran arms scandal. The catchword in Washington is &quot;open diplomacy,&quot; but Pakistan is an awkward place in which to put it into practice.    Take the case of the Afghan war, for example. American covert assistance channeled through Pakistan -- expected to reach $600 million this year -- has been crucial for Afghan freedom fighters. The Afghan guerrillas are largely Islamic fundamentalists whose leaders are reluctant to acknowledge U.S. assistance, though they are not averse to receiving it. From their point of view, it is important to maintain an independent public posture. Public acknowledgement of material aid from one secular superpower to fight another could lend credence to Soviet propaganda against the religious motives of the holy war.    Even if the Afghan resistance leaders were to become more flexible in their attitude toward U.S. involvement, domestic considerations would keep Pakistan from allowing overt military assistance to pass through its territory. Many Pakistanis are suspicious of the almost three million Afghan refugees in their country, blaming them for spreading illegal weapons and drugs, and contributing to the country's law and order problems. Freedom fighters are recruited from Afghan refugee camps, but the Pakistani government maintains control over their operation and refuses to accord armed groups legal status to engage in political activity or maintain direct relations with foreign governments.    Pakistan's reasons for formally denying the existence of the Afghan guerrilla bases within its border are manifold. Foremost is that any admission of support for the Afghan resistance would provide justification for stronger Soviet reprisals, which already include increasingly frequent raids by warplanes based in Afghanistan and terrorist bombings in urban centers. Pakistan last week made an urgent request to lease U.S. radar aircraft to defend against the border raids. (A Pakistani F-16 was shot down Friday.) If pressure in the U.S. for open diplomacy results in open assistance for the Afghan freedom fighters, Soviet reprisals could strengthen.    This would provide propaganda material to anti-American elements in Pakistan and strengthen India's position in questioning Pakistan's nonaligned status. Indian Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi, like his late mother Indira Gandhi, espouses an Indian version of the Monroe Doctrine, and New Delhi, despite considerable Soviet aid, remains sensitive to the engagement of &quot;outside powers&quot; in South Asia.    There is a reluctance among Pakistanis, including those who don't see a moral equivalence between the U.S. and the Soviet Union, to become involved in superpower conflicts. The success of America's policy in Afghanistan has been in denying the Soviets an opportunity to project it as an East-West issue.    Direct U.S. aid could lead China and the Moslem countries, including Iran, to reduce their support to the freedom fighters. This broad international support has augmented the guerrillas' success in the battlefield, and the Soviets are unlikely to continue negotiations if the political and military pressure diminishes. The U.S. either has to keep its aid to Afghanistan covert or accept the risks of open diplomacy.    The Afghan issue is not the only area in U.S.-Pakistan relations in which American interests could be compromised by undue publicity. Pakistan's nuclear program has ruffled more than a few feathers in Washington. U.S. intelligence reports indicate that Pakistan is moving toward building nuclear weapons though Pakistan denies any intention of doing so.    Congressional critics of Pakistan's nuclear program have sought to tie aid to demands for nuclear safeguards. The administration's requests for aid have to be accompanied with certification that Pakistan has not produced a nuclear bomb. Any evidence that it has acquired or tested a nuclear device could result in an aid cutoff.    For Pakistan, its nuclear achievement is a matter of national prestige. Its scientists are believed to have acquired the capability of enriching uranium for weapons-grade material without foreign assistance.    Demands by American congressmen and in the U.S. media for action to keep Pakistan from developing a nuclear device usually provoke a wave of anti-Americanism in the country. Pakistani critics argue that the U.S. is discriminating against their country. They note that India, Israel and South Africa are not subjected to the same level of pressure.    Until now, the Reagan administration has discussed the nuclear issue privately. In what was a victory for the administration, the Senate Foreign Relations Committee two weeks ago defeated an effort to restrict aid to Pakistan in protest of its nuclear-arms policy. If the U.S. were to replace its subtle pressure with direct action, it almost surely would alienate public opinion in Pakistan without having any effect on nuclear policy.    Subtle pressure has worked in the past. Hints and nudges from the State Department over human rights contributed to the end of Pakistan's eight-year-old martial law in December 1985. The government now functions under a constitution and is run by a civilian prime minister. Tolerance of dissent is much higher than under martial law or the preceding civilian government of Zulfikar Ali Bhutto. American politicians and journalists frown over the fact that the 1985 general elections excluded political parties, and there are still some issues that irritate civil libertarians. There is agreement among U.S. congressmen, however, that Pakistan is moving toward full democracy and that the process has been helped by American support.    Similarly, Pakistan has reduced the illicit production of opium and improved drug enforcement. During the past year there has been a significant decline in the supply of heroin from Pakistan.    There are still several measures that the U.S would like to see implemented, such as aerial herbicide spraying of poppy fields and the extradition of Pakistani drug traffickers for trial in the U.S. On drug issues, as on the question of democratization, U.S. policies have a better chance of acceptance if the U.S. is not seen as a bully dictating to Islamabad over matters that are essentially in the local domain.    The American public's concern over secrecy in the conduct of foreign policy is understandable. None of America's friends abroad would like to see a repetition of the confusion resulting from the secrecy surrounding the Iran arms deal. At the same time, it is important to recognize that foreign policy cannot be effective if the principle of open conduct is applied widely and indiscriminately. The answer, perhaps, is to distinguish between &quot;secret&quot; and &quot;quiet&quot; diplomacy. American allies such as Pakistan would not mind different branches of the U.S. government maintaining checks and balances over each other in foreign-policy matters.    They would be seriously worried, however, if all aspects of their relations with Washington were publicly exposed.    ---   Mr. Haqqani is the Far Eastern Economic Review's correspondent in Islamabad. </TEXT></DOC>