<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861202-0107 </DOCNO><HL> Insider Trading Raises Fewer Hackles Abroad---Some Nations Aid U.S. butKeep Their Own Rules Weak---This article was written by Gary Putka in LondonAnd is based on reporting by Mr. Putka,Bruce Ingersoll in WashingtonAnd Karl Schoenberger in Tokyo</HL><DD> 12/02/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGN EUROP JAPANSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><TEXT>   In London late on the afternoon of Oct. 21, Philip Birch, chairman of Ward White PLC, was putting the final touches on the company's plans for a hostile bid for LCP Holdings PLC. Then an unexpected block trade forced a change in plans.    An unidentified party, acting after normal London trading hours, bought 25,000 shares of LCP at 8% above the previous trading price. The unusual trade, Mr. Birch says, convinced him that word of his intentions had leaked. After hurried talks with advisers, he sped up the plans and made his move on LCP the next day.    In Britain, where other apparent misdeeds have recently made insider trading a hot issue, the unidentified LCP buyer may some day be brought to heal. But it isn't likely.    Like the rest of the increasingly intertwined world of finance, Britain's concern about insider trading is growing. There, as in at least five countries outside the U.S., insider laws and regulations have been proposed or adopted in the past year. But actual prosecutions in major non-U.S. stock markets have been few, while the level of apparent abuse is either rising or is unacceptably high by U.S. standards.    The rest of the world doesn't share American revulsion to insider trading, nor do other countries give their regulators strong powers or resources to ferret out wrongdoers. &quot;We aren't a committee of snoops,&quot; the head of the Frankfurt Stock Exchange's insider-investigations team said recently.    Perhaps more important, most foreign markets don't have the same level of public-investor participation as the U.S., reducing pressure for tougher policing. Only one in 40 people in France owns shares, and one in eight in Britain, compared with one in five in the U.S. The concentration of market influence in a tight, protective group -- banks in Switzerland and West Germany, and the Big Four securities houses in Japan -- also reduces the chance of anyone crying foul.    &quot;There is little . . . pressure for regulatory efforts to enforce a high standard of conduct in the stock market,&quot; says Larry Zoglin, a Washington-based lawyer who has studied Japanese securities regulation. &quot;To many, insider trading is within the accepted rules of the game.&quot;    To be sure, U.S. pressures and increased regulatory cooperation have produced spectacular results lately in hunting blatant insiders who trade through foreign accounts to cover their tracks in the U.S. market. Without Swiss and Bahamian help, the Securities and Exchange Commission would never have identified Dennis Levine, the investment banker who dealt as an insider and gave the SEC the ammunition to shoot down Ivan F. Boesky, its largest prey yet.    But foreigners have been much less aggressive about their own insiders.    In Britain, price moves of 20% or more occur in the month preceeding one out of every four takeovers, but the recent probe of investment banker Geoffrey Collier for alleged inside trading marked the first time a major figure was named. In Germany, share-price movements regularly foretell earnings results; trading on such knowledge isn't even against the rules. And Japan, despite 38 years of U.S.-style securities laws, has prosecuted only five securities-laws violations.    SEC officials and some regulatory experts argue that other countries will have to raise their regulatory standards as the world's financial markets become more integrated. &quot;People are going to go to the market (that has) the greatest amount of integrity,&quot; says SEC attorney Michael Mann, who cites increased foreign cooperation with the agency's investigations.    But that cooperation generally comes only after U.S. coercion. To avoid sanctions against their expanding branches in the U.S., for instance, Swiss banks divulged account-holders' names to the SEC in some of the agency's biggest insider probes, including the Levine case and the 1981 takeover of St. Joe Minerals Corp.    Whether helping the SEC will lead to tighter local policing is debatable. The Swiss banks support a domestic insider-trading law that is expected to pass next year, but &quot;the main reason for this law is to help the U.S.&quot; in American-market cases, says Edwin Zimmerli, a Zurich police commander responsible for investigating white-collar crime.    Generally, it is a crime under Swiss law to divulge bank-account names to foreign authorities unless the activity under investigation is also a crime in Switzerland. So to protect themselves from prosecution when they help the SEC, the banks pushed for the new insider law, says Mr. Zimmerli, who argues that &quot;there will be very few cases&quot; brought when it passes.    Other countries' approaches to trading abuses also underscore the differences in defining just what constitutes inside information. The SEC has brought actions not only against corporate officials, but also investment bankers, financial advisers, printers, lawyers, investment analysts and even financial journalists. The agency also interprets inside information broadly to include advance knowledge of earnings announcements and other corporate events as well as takeovers.    Most other countries take a narrower view. Germany's insider guidelines don't embrace lawyers, accountants or journalists, who are regularly given earnings results a few days before their announcement. Switzerland's proposed law includes only corporate takeovers or new issues as events that insiders shouldn't profit from.    Not even the enormity of Mr. Boesky's offenses -- or the possibility that he operated through a foreign company -- has persuaded many outside the U.S. that they need tougher controls. &quot;Our system is to hold the problems in check before they get to the criminal stage,&quot; says Masakatsu Abe, a Japanese government official responsible for market supervision. &quot;Maybe it's a social difference between America and Japan, but we don't think you can solve everything in court.&quot;    To many, however, the suggestion that trading abuses are under control in Japan is laughable. Jumping the gun on takeovers, the classic insider-trading abuse, is rare because acquisition activity is small. But stock prices often swing so wildly on rumors that Japanese and foreigners believe market manipulation is widespread.    Manipulation was suggested when Japan Airlines shares earlier this year climbed the equivalent of $33.85, to nearly $86.10, converting the yen at its current rate, despite poor earnings and bad publicity from a 1985 crash. In July, shares of Tokyu Department Store gained 15% in two days and volume jumped 30-fold on rumors of a big real-estate sale to Nomura Securities Co. that never materialized. In both cases, the share prices retreated, leaving individual investors holding the bag.    Seijiro Watanabe, a lawyer who represents small investors in civil suits, says manipulation is widespread. &quot;The SEC (would) be surprised at the low level of morality in the Japanese securities markets,&quot; he says. And when the Tokyo Stock Exchange does ferret out wrongdoers, it issues warnings that remain confidential, denying investors the chance to avoid miscreants.    In May, the SEC and Japan's Finance Ministry agreed on a plan to exchange information about suspected securities abuses in each other's markets. The memorandum of understanding is one in a web of similar agreements the agency has worked out with countries including Canada, Britain and Switzerland. Britain is negotiating a similar pact with Japan.    Several other nations, including the Netherlands and Italy, also have information-sharing treaties with the U.S. that theoretically could help bilateral investigations of insider trading. Under the agreement between the United Kingdom and the U.S., the SEC has released information in the Boesky case to Britain, where the merger speculator held many of his takeover plays in the portfolio of Cambrian andamp; General Securities PLC, a British investment trust.    Cambrian, which has fired Mr. Boesky as its investment manager, says it doesn't know of any illegal trading done through the British vehicle, which also included some U.K. stocks. While the SEC has subpoenaed the company's records, the U.K. government says it hasn't sought such material, even though insider trading has been a crime in Britain for five years.    With a wave of takeovers in Britain and new computerized trading, the London Stock Exchange says it has noted a record number of suspicious trades. No figures were released, but at one stage last year there were as many as 2,000 a month.    Yet, of 100 cases the exchange has referred to the government in six years, there have been only a handful of prosecutions, and five convictions. &quot;The record hasn't been terribly good,&quot; says Philip Healey, editor of Acquisitions Monthly, a British financial magazine.    Bob Wilkinson, the London Stock Exchange's head of surveillance, says the problem is getting worse. He believes organized insider-trading rings such as those uncovered in the U.S. are operating in London, using offshore acounts.    Until recently, investigators such as Mr. Wilkinson have lacked many of the powers that could help crack such rings. But they are getting some help.    Under the new Financial Services Act, British regulators and their designates can compel testimony from witnesses. Overall, there appears to be more determination to punish insider trading, as the investigation of Mr. Collier, an investment banker at Morgan Grenfell, shows. To help in the Collier probe, the government hastened implementation of the insider provisions in the new securities law.    Mr. Healey of Aquisitions Monthly says the government still lacks the &quot;manpower, resources and will&quot; to go after insiders. But he notes that share ownership is spreading with the government's sell-off of state-owned assets. If the market is perceived as unfair, this may increase voter pressure for tighter regulation.    That could also occur in France, Italy and other countries where ownership of shares is becoming more widespread. </TEXT></DOC>