<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870727-0042 </DOCNO><HL> Treaty on Long-Range Missiles StalledDespite European Arms-Talk Advances---By Phillip RevzinStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> GENEVA  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Even as superpower talks on eliminating nuclear missiles in Europe budged off dead-center last week and headed for possible success later this year, the talks that U.S. officials call &quot;our No. 1 priority&quot; remain stalled.    These are the Strategic Arms Reduction Talks, known as START, that aim to cut by at least half the more than 12,000 nuclear warheads the U.S. and Soviet Union have aimed at each other from their own territories. Since the Reykjavik, Iceland, summit in October, the Soviets have made progress on START contingent on the U.S. essentially abandoning its Strategic Defense Initiative space-defense plans, which the Reagan administration refuses to do. Separate talks here on space defense, aimed at modifying or extending the Anti-Ballistic Missile treaty, also are going nowhere.    Negotiators here say any U.S.-Soviet agreement on shorter-range missiles would give a push to the other negotiations by resolving many of the same issues, such as how to verify the treaties. But getting anywhere would require a major Soviet concession.    &quot;Mr. Gorbachev has to decide if he really wants to deal on this one,&quot; says an American involved in the talks. &quot;He decided to deal on the shorter-range stuff, but he's made so big a deal about SDI that he would probably need some sort of fig leaf to cover himself. The question is, how big a fig leaf?&quot;    U.S. and European analysts think the Soviet leader will wait for a new American administration in 1989 before making any move, such as withdrawing his blanket rejection of SDI and thus reigniting the START talks. They think he will have as much trouble selling the elimination of two classes of short-range and medium-range missiles to his own armed forces as the Reagan administration will have assuring Congress that any shorter-range deal is verifiable and in U.S. long-term interests.    The Soviets are expected to bring to Geneva soon a draft START treaty that the U.S. almost certainly will reject because of Moscow's stand on SDI. But the draft treaty could clear up differences on verification, thus making it easy to nail down an agreement once the political decisions are taken.    Much will depend on domestic reactions to the near-certain agreement on short- and medium-range missiles. Talks here, now more than two years old, got what may have been a key boost last Thursday when Mr. Gorbachev decided he wouldn't insist on keeping 100 medium-range missiles in Asia, to be matched by 100 U.S. missiles, probably in Alaska. This decision swept away a raft of ticklish verification problems, and made moot U.S. demands about converting some of its arsenal to other uses.    Negotiators who had spent the last 28 months on such details as a U.S. plan, called Perimeter Portal Monitoring, to surround Soviet missile factories with closed-circuit television cameras and giant scales imbedded in the driveways, can now drop most of these demands if nobody can make any of these types of missiles.    The main obstacle to the European missile agreement is Soviet insistence that 72 U.S. warheads on West German Pershing-1A missiles be part of the agreement. The U.S. says they are German weapons, exempted from these talks just as French and British weapons are. Both sides say this issue isn't negotiable and could torpedo the talks. Privately, both expect a compromise. Whatever happens to these missiles, the U.S. would still retain a big stockpile of very short-range nuclear shells and mines, mainly in West Germany.    Mr. Gorbachev's acceptance of the so-called global double-zero proposal makes irrelevant a U.S. demand to convert some Pershing-2 long-range missiles to shorter-range Pershing-1Bs, because Pershing-1Bs would now be banned.    The U.S. is also now likely to drop its insistence that it be allowed to move some European-based cruise missiles on to American ships, rather than destroy them. The U.S., as a gesture of good will, may also stop insisting that it won't begin destroying its missiles until Soviet stockpiles come down to U.S. levels.    &quot;We are ready for an agreement,&quot; deputy Soviet negotiator Alexei Obukhov said Friday. &quot;The way is open if the U.S. meets our remaining concerns.&quot;    If an agreement is reached, the next few months will be filled with detailed drafting of a treaty governing how both sides could inspect each others missile sites. Problems remain. The Soviets, for instance, want to inspect all bases in the five European countries that currently host U.S. missiles, not just the sites where the missiles currently are, or other U.S bases in those countries. The U.S. says it can't sign a treaty giving the Russians inspection rights at all Dutch, British, German, Italian and Belgian military bases.    But neither can the treaty exempt too many Soviet and U.S. installations, which could render it unverifiable. &quot;Effective verification must be an integral part of any agreement,&quot; the U.S. says, and the verification agreements while couched in technical language, will need to be clear and explainable. They will almost certainly include generous Soviet access to U.S. installations, in return for U.S. access to Soviet sites. Negotiators expect the toughest Senate scrutiny to come on verification questions.    The U.S. initially had wanted to tie any treaty on short- and medium-range weapons to progress on the long-range missile talks. But with a shorter-range missile treaty so near, it won't do so. &quot;We regard (this treaty) as a significant political step toward the first step of reducing the world's nuclear stockpiles by one-half,&quot; said a diplomat not involved in the shorter-range talks. &quot;But any treaty is an important reversal of the monotonously increasing number of missiles on both sides.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>