<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870615-0073 </DOCNO><HL> Family Crisis:Foster-Care SystemIs Strained as ReportsOf Child Abuse Mount---Suitable Homes Are ScarcerAs Need for Them Rises;Vicious Circle for Melissa---Tiffany B. Is Taught a 'Game'---By Michel McQueenStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> BALTIMORE  </DATELINE><TEXT>   At age 10, Melissa was sexually abused by her father and placed in a foster home. She was treated so harshly there that she was moved to another home. There she was raped. In March the girl, now 15, was confined to a psychiatric facility after her most recent suicide attempt.    Like Melissa, a growing number of children across the country are caught in a vicious circle, encountering abuse wherever they are placed. The number of children in foster care is rising even as the number of available foster homes is shrinking. Child-welfare groups and lawyers charge that, to keep up, many state and local agencies are forced to cut corners on foster-home investigations, overcrowd homes and overlook risks. Reports of child abuse in both natural homes and foster homes have surged.    &quot;The system is overwhelmed,&quot; says Mary Lee Allen, a child-welfare expert at the Children's Defense Fund, a child-advocacy group in Washington, D.C.    In many cases, the victims of abuse in foster homes are black or other minority-group children. &quot;It's a crisis of major proportions when you think that there are more black kids injured by the foster-care system in a year than were injured by the Ku Klux Klan in 20 years,&quot; says Robert Woodson, the president of the National Center for Neighborhood Enterprise, a Washington-based think tank on black issues.    Although there are thousands of good foster homes and many states are stepping up efforts to find more of them, foster-care systems throughout the nation are showing signs of stress:    In Maryland, a suit filed on behalf of the 2,800 foster children in Baltimore charges that children as young as three years have been raped and that many have been medically neglected and otherwise mistreated in foster homes. The suit was filed against the state by the Children's Defense Fund and legal-aid lawyers. State officials say they have done everything possible to protect the children.    In the District of Columbia last spring, five foster children, three of them infants, died in a fire in their inner-city row house. The foster mother had left them in the care of a 65-year-old alcoholic and former convict who was drunk when the fire began. The tragedy made public what city officials already knew -- that because of a dearth of homes, they were sometimes placing more infants in a foster home than district regulations permit.    In New York City, child-welfare workers have operated in a crisis atmosphere since last year when the number of children entering foster care began to far exceed the number of homes available. The 17,600 children in foster care now are the most since 1982, and the city for the first time has opened a group home for infants because of the dearth of beds in private homes. Several suits have been filed charging that too few services are being offered to families who could otherwise keep their children with them.    Six-year-old Tiffany B. entered foster care as an infant in Baltimore. Soon after she was adopted last spring, she told her new mother about a &quot;game&quot; involving sexual fondling that she said she was taught by her foster father. The mother took Tiffany to a doctor, who found physical scarring associated with rape.    Now the mother has seen that Tiffany receives psychiatric therapy -- and is undergoing therapy herself as she tries to figure out how to best raise a six-year-old who has experienced what her daughter has.    &quot;All the pain she's ever known you can see in her eyes,&quot; the mother says of her pensive daughter, who often becomes depressed when away from home, trails her mother from room to room, and refuses to undress for a medical examination without a fierce struggle. &quot;It's like somebody has robbed this child of her childhood, somebody's taken it from her.&quot;    Another victim is Frederick Martin, an 18-year-old with a deep desire for an apartment and family to call his own. He has lived in 14 different foster homes, and some of the scars on his arms, chest and legs are testimony to the beatings he received from foster parents.    Frederick, who was sent to a home for troubled youths at the age of 14 after he tried to poison a girl in a foster home -- he says she repeatedly taunted him for being parentless -- is happy in his current home where his foster parents are teaching him such skills as cooking and grocery shopping.    &quot;They let me know they trust me. They've had teen-agers so they know what it's like,&quot; he says, beaming. Still, he complains, &quot;a lot of the stuff I've been through wouldn't have happened to me&quot; if the foster homes had been checked out thoroughly.    A law passed by Congress in 1980 was supposed to prevent many of the problems surfacing today. It is designed to reduce the number of children in foster care by a system of federal aid that encourages authorities to release children for adoption or return them to their own homes. And indeed, the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services estimates that the number of children in &quot;out of home&quot; care fell by nearly one-half -- to about 260,000 in 1983 from around 500,000 in 1977.    But it was children from families with relatively minor problems who were sent home. And those children placed for adoption were those easiest to place. The most-troubled children -- as well as many older and minority-group children -- were left in foster homes. Troubled children, child-welfare experts say, need foster parents with special training, something few such parents receive.    &quot;You saw the numbers going down,&quot; says Ms. Allen of the Children's Defense Fund. &quot;But also what you saw, as a result of getting the easiest kids out of care, what you're left with are the roughest cases -- the multi-problem children, the adolescents, sexually abused children.&quot;    That might have been manageable, officials say, if the number of children in foster care had continued to drop, but it began rising again, to about 270,000 in 1984, and continues to rise in many sections of the country. The main reason: a rise in reports of child abuse by biological parents. The rise is attributed to everything from poor economic conditions to increased public awareness of child abuse. In any case, the number of reports of abuse in all homes jumped to more than 1.9 million in 1985 from 669,000 in 1976, according to a recent report to Congress by the American Humane Association.    The result is that more abused children are removed from homes. At the same time, mainly because more women have joined the work force, fewer foster homes are available. This is particularly true of the kind of foster home that agencies have traditionally relied upon -- those with a wife at home full time and room for more children. Now, in a growing number of cases, children abused by their parents are ending up in homes where they are abused by foster parents.    &quot;I think the system itself is better off today&quot; than a decade ago, Ms. Allen says. &quot;But I think the demands are greater, and I'm not sure the system can withstand the demands that are being placed on it.&quot;    Marcia Robinson Lowry, who heads the American Civil Liberties Union's children's-rights project, charges that in many cases, &quot;the states are taking the {federal} money and not doing the difficult and sometimes expensive things that the law requires them to do.&quot; Under the 1980 law, states are required, for example, to adequately regulate and evaluate foster homes.    State officials say they feel beaten on all sides -- buffeted by social forces beyond their control and stung by public criticism.    &quot;We're dealing with a crisis situation,&quot; says Ruth Massinga, Maryland's secretary of human resources. After the federal law was passed, &quot;states were figuring we'd clean up what had become a mess in many places,&quot; she says. &quot;However, none of us anticipated that poverty would rise as quickly as it did. None of us knew the phenomenon of single-parent families would rise as it has, that the problems of families would become as intractable as they have over the past decade.&quot;    Some foster parents also feel stung. Carl Brown and his wife, Mary, have raised foster children in Pontiac, S.C., for 13 years. With more reports of abuse, he says, &quot;I think there's a stigma attached to foster parents and a stigma attached to foster children.&quot; And Mr. Brown says the cost of providing such care has increased. In his state, he says, parents are paid $4 a day to care for a pre-school child -- &quot;in most states, it costs $5 to $7 to board a dog.&quot;    Many states are taking action to improve that situation. In Maryland, the legislature has granted repeated increases in the reimbursement rates for foster parents, to an average of $265 a month starting this summer from $181 in 1981. The state has also hired more caseworkers and raised social workers' salaries in an effort to stem the rapid turnover that left some children without an assigned worker for months at a time.    After the lawsuit was filed, the state reviewed its foster homes -- and closed 25% of Baltimore's. Now state officials have hired a marketing agency and a task force to help them come up with a strategy for recruiting more foster parents. So far, however, only 60 families have come forward to replace more than 600 cut from the rolls.    Other states and localities have also stepped up recruitment efforts. In Harris County, Texas, which includes Houston and about 25% of the state's child-welfare caseload, recruiting and training of foster parents are part of a program that closely evaluates the numbers and reasons that children are taken into the system.    The county has managed to keep removals of children from their original homes at about 5%, says Gene Daniel, the regional director of protective services. &quot;I think it's important to treat the child in the home because we know how traumatic it is for a child to be removed from the home,&quot; he says. It also can be dangerous to leave children at home, where they occasionally are seriously injured or killed. That, in turn, sparks harsh criticism that an agency isn't doing its job. &quot;It's a risk every time we send a child home,&quot; Mr. Daniel says, &quot;but the risk is worth it.&quot;    In the Houston area, Mr. Daniel says, foster parents recruit other foster parents. He says the county is lucky to have held the number of foster families steady at 450 over the last eight years &quot;because for us, not losing is winning.&quot;    Other areas, including parts of Minnesota, are experimenting with salary-sized payments to specially trained foster parents who care for particularly hard-to-place children. Such payments would allow many trained workers to stay home and provide 24-hour care.    Douglas Besharov, a scholar in residence at the American Enterprise Institute, a Washington think tank, calls for a radical shift away from the use of foster homes. &quot;Sometimes foster care is good for kids. It's essential that foster care be available when the parents are beating the child. And sometimes they get a good home, where they get a lot of love and stability for several years,&quot; Mr. Besharov says. But, he adds, &quot;we just don't deliver that product very often.&quot;    Doing everything possible to keep children at home even in troubled families is a goal that at least one foster youth endorses. Says Frederick Martin: &quot;If I did have a baby, I would keep it with me. I wouldn't let nobody else raise it.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>