<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870810-0115 </DOCNO><HL> Washington Insight:Soviets' Big Stick Gets Better ResultsThan That of U.S., Gulf Actions Show---By Gerald F. SeibStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In May, Iranian speedboats attacked a Soviet container ship in the Persian Gulf, and a Soviet tanker hit a mine presumably planted by Iran.    The Soviet response was so low key that few in the U.S. even realize the violent incidents occurred. Moscow said little in public and quietly dispatched three additional mine sweepers to help protect Soviet-chartered tankers being operated for Kuwait. The Soviets so skillfully put the incidents behind them that they were able last week to resume cooperation with Iran on big cross-border economic projects.    On July 24, an American-flagged Kuwaiti tanker hit a mine, also probably Iranian, in the gulf. There was an instant uproar in the U.S. White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater faced persistent press questions about retaliation against Iran. Alarms sounded in Congress. The Navy boosted its forces in the gulf. And while Iran is talking economic cooperation with the Soviets, Tehran is threatening to attack U.S. ships in the gulf.    Why have the superpowers followed such different paths? The answer lies largely in the obvious difference between an open, democratic society where policies are debated and a closed, authoritarian state where public opinion rarely influences policy. The contrasting reactions illustrate a fact of geopolitical life: The Soviet Union is far better equipped than the U.S. to carry out limited military actions to support foreign policy.    The Soviet political culture &quot;is much more geopolitically oriented and . . . controlled from the top,&quot; says Dimitri Simes, a scholar at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace. &quot;When a minor incident occurs, there isn't any inclination to get excited.&quot;    The gap in superpower capabilities in this tricky foreign-policy area may expand under Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev's deft leadership. In the Middle East, Moscow long has had a reputation for barging in to take charge whenever there was an opening for a military presence. The bull-in-a-china-shop reputation stems largely from Egypt's military association with the Soviets, which finally soured so badly that Egypt expelled all Soviet advisers in 1972. The Soviets' more-subtle handling of current operations in the Persian Gulf could benefit Moscow's image.    To be sure, the Reagan administration has reacted with restraint to the mining of the U.S.-flagged tanker Bridgeton. It has avoided threats to retaliate and calmed politicians who suggest the U.S. should drop its plan to provide American flags and military escorts for Kuwaiti tankers. Now administration officials are trying to lower the profile of the escort operation and convince U.S. allies to do more.    Of course, openness has its benefits. The American predilection for loudly debating and second-guessing military moves undoubtedly has kept the U.S. out of foreign-policy traps. Kremlin leaders may well wish there had been more internal debate over the decision to invade Afghanistan.    But Soviet leaders' ability to make decisions without the pressure of public reaction gives them distinct advantages in the jockeying for position in the gulf. Soviet-watchers suspect that rather than hint publicly at possible retaliation, as the U.S. has done, the Kremlin responded to violence against its ships by sending Tehran a quiet, two-part message:    First, the Kremlin probably assured Iran that by limiting its naval task force around the gulf to four ships, including three mine sweepers, it was demonstrating that its military moves weren't meant to threaten Iran. To emphasize this point, analysts speculate that the Soviets may have noted that the growing U.S. naval contingent in the gulf contains far more belligerent equipment.    The second part of the message probably was more threatening. The Kremlin may have warned Iran that further attacks would force Moscow to support a U.S.-backed United Nations resolution calling for a cutoff of arms to Iran and Iraq if they don't accept a U.N. cease-fire.    And if those kinds of subtle threats don't work, the Soviets have a reputation for being able to extract revenge in ways the U.S. can't and shouldn't try to emulate. According to a story widely circulated in the Middle East, when four Soviet diplomats in Lebanon were kidnapped and one was killed in late 1985, Soviet intelligence agents secured the release of the remaining three by matching the kidnappers' techniques.    Soviet agents reportedly kidnapped friends and relatives of the kidnappers, killed one and sent his body to the kidnappers with a warning to release the Soviet diplomats, who were quickly freed. U.S. diplomats can't confirm the Soviets used such methods, but they note the story's mere circulation may give the Soviets a psychological advantage.    For American policy makers, the lesson of current events probably is that they must be careful to cultivate domestic political support for even limited military actions before they are launched to mute second-guessing at home once the operations are under way. Arab nations, for example, &quot;want our protection as long as we can walk softly and carry a big stick,&quot; says Mr. Simes. &quot;When we walk loudly, that isn't helpful to the process.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>