<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870619-0041 </DOCNO><HL> New U.S. Migrants Law Vexes Mexicans--Loss of Remittances, JobsCould Destabilize Country---By Matt MoffettStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM </IN><DATELINE> OCAMPO, Mexico  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The municipal seal of this small town in the farm belt bears a drawing of the miracle worker Saint Ysidro. Legend has it that he once made a team of oxen plow a field without a driver.    For years, Ocampo's economy appeared to run as miraculously as that plow. One-quarter of the population went away to work in the U.S. but sent back enough money to supply more than three-quarters of the town's wealth.    But now Ocampo's economic miracle is jeopardized by events far to the north, where the U.S. will soon levy penalties on businesses that hire illegal aliens. Already, the northward flow of emigrants is down to a trickle. The number of letters from the U.S. has decreased. Sales at a local vegetable stand are off by one-third.    Loitering in the plaza are more people like 19-year-old Ignacio Sandoval, who was fired two weeks ago as a busboy in a Dallas restaurant because he didn't qualify for the law's amnesty provision. &quot;God knows how we'll survive,&quot; he says.    For thousands of Mexican towns like this one, the Simpson-Rodino immigration law poses a formidable economic and social threat. It is likely to reduce remittances from the U.S., which are Mexico's second largest source of foreign exchange. At the same time, it will add a frustrated new group of young men and women, whose dream of economic advancement has been shattered, to an already underemployed and discontented populace.    It is in towns like Ocampo where Mexico will pay the price for Washington's desire to slow illegal immigration. Mexico falls far short of the one million new jobs needed each year to keep its growing population employed, and it has long relied on the informal safety valve provided by the exodus of young adults to the north. Any crimp in the flow would add to the political and economic pressure on a nation already burdened by foreign debt, unemployment and overpopulation.    &quot;Mexico is ready to receive its prodigal sons with open arms,&quot; said A.M., a newspaper in the central Mexican city of Leon, on the day the U.S. law went into effect. &quot;As a welcome-home gift all we have for them is unemployment, poverty, social isolation, overpopulation and the imminent danger that arable lands will be pulverized even more.&quot;    Over the decades, this agrarian region has borne an inordinate share of the suffering caused by the fluctuating U.S. attitude toward foreign workers. In a backlash against foreigners during the Depression of the 1930s, about 500,000 Latinos were sent to Mexico, even though half of these were U.S. citizens. After briefly encouraging Mexican immigration to compensate for departing soldiers during World War II, the U.S. in the 1950s launched a deportation program known as Operation Wetback; more than one million Latinos were expelled in the program's peak year.    But Mexico's protracted economic crisis has made the risk of deportation in the U.S. more attractive than the stark certainty of deprivation in Mexico. Economists say the standard of living in many parts of rural Mexico has regressed several decades. A 1985 study done in the areas around Leon indicated that a father, a mother and a child all would have to enter the work force to achieve the same purchasing power that the father alone achieved a decade earlier.    Today, on any of the thousands of ejidos, or communal farms in central Mexico, it is easy to distinguish the households whose breadwinners stay in Mexico from those whose providers are in the U.S. Those who remain here often as not inhabit wooden shacks, where wood from vegetable crates is used to patch holes and donkey carts sit on the front lawn. The emigrants, on the other hand, live in new adobe houses, with colorful tiles, big glass doors and pickup trucks with Texas or California license plates in the driveway.    Some ejido dwellers are confident that the new law won't diminish the flow of emigrants to the U.S. and the flow of dollars back to Mexico. &quot;The border is too long and your businesses are too greedy,&quot; says Lorenzo Martinez, the head of the local government in La Haciendita, a farming community that has sent so many people north that it is known as Chiquita Chicago, or Little Chicago. &quot;Besides, Americans won't work in fields or in kitchens. The U.S. needs us.&quot;    But other leaders are preparing for the worst. Ocampo's mayor, Jose Pedroza Torres, says he has come up with what he calls his Simpson Plan -- a makeshift public works program to employ emigrants forced to return because of the new law. Some of the returnees would work at windmills grinding corn to make tortillas. Others would gather edible cactus fruit.    But Mr. Pedroza Torres, who worked for several years in the U.S. himself, worries that such menial jobs won't satisfy people who have known better work. &quot;It will be hard for them to accept the poor pay in Mexico after they have worked on the other side,&quot; he says.    Not far from here, El Maguey, another town that depends heavily on emigrants, is hearing ominous reports from workers who have returned after losing their U.S. jobs. Jesus Perez says a lawyer visited the construction firm where he worked in California to winnow out those who don't qualify for the amnesty. The lawyer -- in apparent violation of the law -- told Mr. Perez and others who didn't qualify that they could buy U.S. work permits for $2,500. The cost was too much for Mr. Perez and several others, who packed up and returned to Mexico.    &quot;I don't know what I'll do here,&quot; he says. &quot;The future looks like it will be very hard.&quot;    Stories such as Mr. Perez's have discouraged others villagers who were considering the trip to the U.S., which requires a steep intial $400 investment for transportation to the border and a guide for the risky crossing. Mr. Perez's 18-year-old son, Angel, put his plans to go north on hold when his father returned. Likewise, when Rosalio Rios was recently forced out of a job in a Chicago restaurant, his two teen-age sons postponed plans to go north.    Many community-improvement projects in El Maguey are also in limbo. Plans for a sewer system have been shelved. And Father Salvador Munoz isn't sure he will be able to count on emigrants to fund the construction of a new chapel.    &quot;We must be prepared to give more,&quot; he told the people of El Maguey from the pulpit on a recent Sunday, &quot;because we can no longer expect our brothers on the other side of the border to carry the load for us. There is a harsher immigration law in the United States.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>