<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890802-0060 </DOCNO><DD> = 890802 </DD><AN> 890802-0060. </AN><HL> Con Game:@  Vitarine's Drug Switch@  Underscores Fallibility@  Of Federal Surveillance@  ---@  It Presented SmithKline Drug@  As Its Own New Product,@  Hoodwinking the FDA@  ---@  A 'Black Eye' for the Generics@  ----@  By Gregory Stricharchuk@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/02/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> SBH </CO><IN> DRUG MANUFACTURERS (DRG) </IN><GV> FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION (FDA)CONGRESS (CNG) </GV><TEXT>   In the generic drug business, being among the first to market means everything. Vitarine Pharmaceuticals Inc. knows the stakes in the footrace, so when the company set out to introduce its own version of a hot-selling blood-pressure drug a couple of years ago, it took a shortcut -- and a radical one at that.    Vitarine was trying to get government approval for its generic form of a SmithKline Beecham PLC drug called Dyazide, one of the most widely prescribed medicines. When a patent expires on a big brand-name seller, as it had with Dyazide, the field opens to the generic companies, and the first to concoct a comparable formula is virtually guaranteed a windfall.    But Vitarine wasn't taking any chances: Rather than risk having its own formulation rejected by the Food and Drug Administration, it says an employee simply cracked open some capsules of Dyazide, had the material tested for effectiveness, and sent along the results -- under Vitarine's name -- to the FDA for approval. A short time later, the FDA gave the green light, and Vitarine was in business.    It was just one of at least five times in the last two years that Vitarine, one of the biggest generic drug makers, pulled a similar switch in an application to the FDA. Though Vitarine's version of Dyazide was the only one of the five proposed drugs to make it to market, it became one of the company's major success stories, helping propel Vitarine from a troubled research dud in 1984 to a company with $28.9 million in profit and $82.1 million in sales in 1988. There were even plans to take the company public this year. Then, in April, almost by accident, the scam came apart.    Vitarine's con was one of the biggest ever perpetrated against the FDA, and has sent shock waves through the generic drug industry and the federal government. Investigators are now exploring whether others, too, got away with the same thing and are asking if, in light of the simple ruse, the FDA is capable of carrying out its chief mission: safeguarding the public. One focus in the investigation will be a 1984 law -- passed in the era of deregulation -- that made FDA review of generic drug applications less stringent.    &quot;The country can no longer be reasonably confident that the FDA is able to detect the entry of unsafe or inefficacious generic drugs into the pharmacies of the nation,&quot; contends Rep. John Dingell, a Michigan Democrat and head of a House Energy and Commerce Committee subcommittee investigating the FDA's handling of generic drugs.    The Vitarine scam is merely the latest embarrassment for the FDA. Already, the U.S. Attorney in Baltimore is investigating a series of payoffs made by generic drug makers to FDA chemists instrumental in approving drugs. So far three FDA employees have been indicted and two have pleaded guilty. Complaints by Mylan Laboratories Inc. of Pittsburgh, which suspected certain competitors were bribing FDA officials, prompted the investigation.    Moreover, Par Pharmaceuticals Inc. of Spring Valley, N.Y., last week said it was recalling its generic version of the anti-hypertensive drug Maxzide because it had filed false information with the FDA.    Dee Fensterer, president of the Generic Pharmaceutical Industry Association, a trade group, says events such as this have given the industry &quot;a black eye. Our industry depends on having the public confidence, we know that.&quot; However, she says none of 24-or-so companies that are members of her association has had a safety-related problem with its drugs.    For its part, Vitarine, based in Springfield Gardens, N.Y., has suspended its two top researchers and an associate, and says it suspects them of pulling off the switch. In letters to the FDA, the company contends that the employees have said little to explain the fraud and that many research materials and products apparently were destroyed several months ago. The FDA referred the matter to the Justice Department for criminal investigation.    &quot;Almost overnight, things went from glorious to gory,&quot; says Roger W. Jordan, Vitarine's chief executive. He insists top management didn't exert any pressure on its researchers to cheat. &quot;This whole thing's a mystery.&quot;    As a precaution, Vitarine has recalled nearly all of its various drugs produced since 1986, even though the company maintains the medicines are safe. Evaluations of the Vitarine products continue, however. The company says it is fairly certain that, excluding the Dyazide copy, other drugs it brought to market were properly approved by the FDA.    The normal process for getting approval of a new generic drug goes something like this: After examining the active ingredients of the brand-name drug, generic makers devise their own formulations and propose them to the FDA. The recipes don't exactly match the original drug-maker's, since the specific mix of ingredients in the brand-name drug is proprietary information. Still, the recipes come close.    The FDA doesn't do a chemical analysis of a proposed generic. Instead, it relies upon the truthfulness of reports -- which indicate how the drug is absorbed into the body and its effect -- filed by the generic maker or by contract laboratories that do tests for the company. The FDA's chief aim is to determine whether the generic is &quot;bioequivalent&quot; to the brand-name drug.    Notably, before the FDA's procedures were revised by the Waxman-Hatch Act of 1984, the agency made the generic makers go through a battery of additional chemical and other tests to prove their drugs' effectiveness and safety, not just bioequivalence. But Congress wanted to create more price competition in many pharmaceutical lines, and therefore expedited the FDA's treatment of generic drug applications. The effect was to cut down on needed tests, making it tougher to spot a fraud.    These days, once generic drugs are approved, they often hit the market at prices 50% below brand-name products, largely because they simply ride on the innovation -- and attendant costly research and development -- of the brand-name company. FDA Commissioner Frank Young figures that the generics company that lands first approval for a popular pharmaceutical can snare up to 60% of the nonbrand market for that drug. While Bolar Pharmaceutical Co. of Copiague, N.Y., was the first out with a generic Dyazide, Vitarine was close behind.    By substituting the brand-name product for its own in the application process, a company like Vitarine stands to get quicker approval than most of its competition -- after all, what can mimic the brand-name drug better than the brand name itself. In Vitarine's case, once the company got approval, it manufactured the generic with its own, different recipe.    It was largely by chance that the FDA found out about Vitarine's switch. In April, an FDA inspector paid a routine visit to Vitarine's St. Croix manufacturing plant in the Virgin Islands. The company, which was already producing its version of Dyazide at its Springfield Gardens facility, had applied to make the medicine in St. Croix as well, and the inspection was part of the approval process.    What the inspector found was a research manufacturing process in disarray. Records were out of order and materials were jumbled. A batch of the Dyazide copycat had been mixed for testing purposes, but much of it hadn't been made into pills, as is customary. &quot;Ungranulated tablets were still in the building, all mixed and everything,&quot; says Mr. Jordan.    Company officials back in New York claimed they were as perplexed as the FDA, and invited the agency to its headquarters to continue what had now escalated to a major investigation. Over a six-week period, two FDA inspectors from the Brooklyn district office and a Vitarine executive uncovered a pattern of missing and mismatched research documents for batch after batch of drugs. In one instance, records for a batch of verapamul, a heart-treatment medicine, showed that the tablets should have been white. But a bottle from the same batch actually contained dark-green tablets. Vitarine's verapamul, which didn't get to market, is a version of G.D. Searle's Calan and was one of the five drugs Vitarine admitted had been switched in applications to the FDA.    In other cases, records showed that certain raw materials had already been used in test runs when, in fact, they weren't used until days later. In a letter to the FDA, Vitarine added: &quot;We believe that a number of products were destroyed by or under the direction of research personnel {since suspended} in early April 1989 without documentation.&quot;    During the investigation, the agency eventually discovered the Dyazide switch. Vitarine's Mr. Jordan, while insisting the scam was the work of underlings, says he doesn't know what the suspended employees had to gain from it. He claims they had only modest, if any, stock or stock options in the company.    &quot;The whole thing is confusing right now,&quot; says Steve Colton, 39, the company's head of research and development before his suspension. He refuses to comment further. Lawyers for all three suspended employees also refuse to comment.    What is clear is that Vitarine's research and development costs have been relatively modest in contrast to its rocketing sales and earnings, and switching products could have been one way costs were kept down. Mr. Jordan acknowledges that Randamp;D costs generally represent 4% to 6% of sales at most generic drug makers, and that figure runs higher when a company is trying to duplicate a major brand drug. Vitarine's research and development outlays, however, were just 3.4% in fiscal 1988. Mr. Jordan says he doesn't consider that low.    He also bristles at the suggestion that Vitarine was unusually successful in getting FDA approvals. &quot;I don't think we did that well. We did pretty well. Others did as well as we did,&quot; he says.    When the company's troubles first erupted in April, Mr. Jordan and other officials were in the midst of a roadshow promoting Vitarine's initial public offering of common stock. But the news put an end to the offering. &quot;I went from not being a millionaire to a millionaire on paper to a nonmillionaire again,&quot; says 55-year-old Mr. Jordan, who owns 1.3 million, or 7.4%, of Vitarine's common shares.    The FDA says it plans to step up surveillance to prevent future frauds like Vitarine's and is creating a new office with new management to handle generic drug applications. It also says it wants to hire more people to do actual chemical testing and other work to verify the claims made in applications. But, while the FDA says Vitarine's is the first instance of misrepresentation it knows of, FDA Commissioner Young acknowledged before a congressional hearing that his 7,000-person agency doesn't have the manpower to detect this type of fraud.    The agency's surveillance burden has grown in recent years. While staffing levels have remained relatively constant, the number of generic drug applications has soared, largely because of the 1984 Waxman-Hatch Act. In 1985, for example, applications jumped to 1,069, from 280 in 1984. Last year, the number hit 2,700.    The problem is only likely to get worse. Hemant Shah, a generic-drug industry analyst in Warren, N.J., estimates that patents representing prescription drugs with total annual sales of $1.6 billion expired in the 1983-85 time frame, driving the growth of the generic market. But between 1990 and 1995, the industry expects patents will expire for drugs with annual sales totaling $8 billion. That will prompt an even greater flood of new applications for generics, he says, and a greater burden for the FDA.    At Vitarine, meanwhile, things are practically at a standstill. Since it recalled most of its drug products, sales have shriveled and the company fears that damage to its reputation may be beyond repair. Already Mr. Jordan has laid off 96 employees, and the jobs of the remaining 660 are threatened. The St. Croix plant has been closed. &quot;If we survive,&quot; says Mr. Jordan, &quot;it'll be through the FDA's grace.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>