<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880511-0138 </DOCNO><HL> Europe: West Germany's Left Is Showing Strength </HL><AUTHOR> Enno von Loewenstern </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><DATELINE> BONN  </DATELINE><TEXT>   If you tumbled out of bed at the wrong hour here Monday, you might have heard the Social Democrats' favorite novelist in Britain, Margaret Drabble, burbling over the BBC about a new wind blowing from Europe. There was not only the election in France, Ms. Drabble babbled, but there was also the election in the northern West German state of Schleswig-Holstein. Had she known what was to happen the next day in Hamburg, she'd have been doing pirouettes in her marmalade. The left is clearly making progress in West Germany's rust belt.    The Social Democratic Party's victory in the state election in Schleswig-Holstein Sunday was one of the biggest in many years. The party won 54% of the vote and reduced the conservative Christian Democrats in the state to a paltry 33.3%. This means the SPD, as the Social Democrats are known in Germany, will take control of the state government. The SPD in Schleswig-Holstein is relatively radical. Its victory won't affect the balance of power in the national government immediately. But it doesn't bode well.    The events in Hamburg, the main northern city long ruled by the left, are more complicated. The mayor, Klaus von Dohnanyi, chief of the SPD government, stepped down. He had led the SPD to a majority four times in Hamburg. His resignation might look like a good thing for the conservatives, since the CDU had been trying to unseat the mayor for years. But Mr. Dohnanyi -- the irresolute son of one of the most famous and courageous resistance leaders against Hitler, former German supreme court judge Hans von Dohnanyi, who was murdered by the Nazis in 1945 -- was done in by his own party. He claimed that after 20 years in politics he wanted to take up reading and philosophy. A Hamburg SPD politician commented drily: &quot;He quit before they fired him.&quot;    &quot;They&quot; are the left wing of the Hamburg SPD. They kept Mr. Dohnanyi from clearing out the Hafenstrasse block, a row of city-owned houses taken over by squatters that became a veritable nest of crime, including robbery and violence. Respect for the law deteriorated in Hamburg; many citizens refused to pay parking tickets, telling the police: &quot;If the Hafenstrasse people can get away with things, why should I pay?&quot; But the party's left-wingers also insisted on &quot;Ausstieg&quot; -- getting out of nuclear energy.    Mr. Dohnanyi's departure is important because he is one of the last leading Social Democrats of the old Helmut Schmidt school. During his chancellorship Helmut Schmidt might have shown some disagreeable or arrogant sides -- like bashing the U.S. to his country's own detriment. But Mr. Schmidt was not a Marxist. He was driven from power and his party's leadership because of his support for the deployment of Intermediate Range Nuclear weapons in Europe. In West Germany patrician figures such as Mr. Schmidt -- and Mr. Dohnanyi -- are being replaced by more radical figures. Oskar Lafontaine, the likely successor to the current Social Democratic leader Hans-Jochen Vogel, has fought Germany's heavy commitment to NATO. He stands on the Green end of the nuclear-power debate.    If in the wake of Mr. Dohnanyi's resignation the left wing is able to gain full control of the government in Hamburg, the consequences would be felt widely. On nuclear energy, for example, the city remains dependent for 70% of its electricity on three nuclear plants in surrounding Schleswig-Holstein. If Hamburg got out of nuclear power, it would not only have to pay tremendous damages, it would also have to build four coal-burning electricity works that would suffocate the city. Business leaders had been warning Mr. Dohnanyi. A number of firms fled beyond the city limits into Schleswig-Holstein -- friendly, because it was run by the Christian Democrats.    Now that Schleswig-Holstein has been captured by the SPD, that state has become risky for business too. The SPD victory followed a scandal that surfaced in the Christian Democratic administration during the September 1987 election, when the CDU was alleged to have used a &quot;dirty tricks&quot; campaign -- which is to say the CDU is accused of trying to dig up political dirt on its opponents. The state's CDU prime minister, Uwe Barschel, committed suicide, and a new election was scheduled for May 8. The new CDU leader, Heiko Hoffmann, failed to put up a strong resistance to the left. So the SPD was considered a sure winner from the start -- unless something happened.    If, for instance, the mayor of nearby Hamburg had resigned before Schleswig-Holstein's election day, the Schleswig-Holstein voters might have shied away from installing their own SPD government. Exactly that had been Mr. Dohnanyi's intention. He wrote a letter in November anouncing his resignation as of March 15. But then -- precisely to avoid problems for the SPD in the surrounding state -- he kept the letter secret. So Schleswig-Holstein elected an SPD ticket. Although the candidate for prime minister, a former federal minister named Bjoern Engholm, promised that he would do everything to attract business and not to frighten it away, the SPD ticket was the farthest-left wing ever offered in any German election.    On Monday, Mr. Engholm's designated state minister of energy, Guenther Jansen, the strong man of his cabinet, promised he would do everything to close down the three nuclear works in Schleswig-Holstein -- and use the resulting court battle to enforce the Ausstieg throughout Germany. This is when Mr. Dohnanyi surrendered to his left-wingers and quit. Suddenly, people in northern Germany are waking up to the fact that one of the social problems plaguing the country, the gap between north and south -- called in Germany the &quot;Sued-Nord-Gefaelle&quot; -- is likely to grow to even more serious proportions.    West Germany's southern states, Bavaria and Baden-Wuerttemberg, are blooming, but the northern states are in economic trouble. The trouble isn't caused primarily by structural problems. The SPD and Greens are stronger in the northern regions. They are violently anti-capitalist, harassing industry and business with red tape, encouraging protest groups, fighting for higher taxes, particularly taxes aimed at the rich, and generally suggesting that Germans ask not what they can do for themselves but what their country can do for them. They also argue that since the southern states make more money, they should be forced to share more with the north, through revenue-sharing laws.    Whether this slide is going to turn serious in West Germany is something for the rest of the Western world to watch carefully. The worrisome thing is that the governing center-right coalition, led by Helmut Kohl, is failing to confront this drift with the proper policy prescriptions. The finance minister, Gerhard Stoltenberg, himself from Schleswig-Holstein, has been blocking any attempt to speed up and deepen a package of tax cuts. The Christian Democrats are preparing to welcome Mikhail Gorbachev to Free German soil. So the northern voters may well be thinking that the national conservative leadership is no longer as sure as it once was of the values that rebuilt the nation.    ---   Mr. von Loewenstern is editorial-page editor of Die Welt. </TEXT></DOC>