<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880105-0132 </DOCNO><HL> Zimbabwe's Churches and the New Order </HL><AUTHOR> Walter H. Kansteiner </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> AFRIC </CO><TEXT>   Zimbabwe's President Robert Mugabe calls himself a Christian-Marxist. Until recently, the churches in that country hadn't been very sure what that means to them.    But now they know: An official document from the ruling Zimbabwe African National Unity (ZANU) party calls for &quot;Revolutionary Theology&quot; as an integral part of Zimbabwe's continuing drive to establish a new order.    Bringing the churches to heel is but one element of Mr. Mugabe's vision of a Zimbabwe dominated by his ZANU party. At independence in 1980, he moved carefully in a coalition that included ZANU, the Zimbabwe African People's Union (ZAPU) party of fellow guerrilla leader Joshua Nkomo, some agricultural leaders (primarily white farmers), some industrialists and church leaders. But once in power, ZANU quickly extended its control over the armed forces, civil service, media and unions, making the original coalition members expendable.    At its Second Party Congress in 1984, ZANU formally declared the dominance of party over government. And last month, Mr. Nkomo's party agreed to merge with Mr. Mugabe's -- very much on Mr. Mugabe's terms. President Mugabe became Zimbabwe's executive president on Dec. 31; the parties' merger should be complete in less than three months.    During the guerrilla war that ended white rule, the Christian churches in Zimbabwe -- mostly Roman Catholic, Anglican, Presbyterian and Methodist -- were divided in their loyalties. Officially, none of the mainline denominations overtly supported the guerrillas, but many church leaders, Protestant and Catholic, personally declared their affinity with them. In the Methodist Church, there was a schism between those clergy who supported Methodist Bishop Abel Muzorewa, the key player in the Zimbabwe-Rhodesia coalition government that preceded the Mugabe regime, and those who backed Mr. Mugabe.    In the ZANU pamphlet entitled &quot;Society and Church,&quot; published last fall, Zimbabwe's churches are separated into two groups: those that opposed the new order when it came with independence and those that supported it. &quot;The challenge that the Church faces today,&quot; the document declares, &quot;concerns both that wing of it which supported the colonial order and that which opposed it, for while the former has now opportunistically adapted to the new situation, the latter might think it has done its job, and may have reached the end of its line.&quot;    But this is not the end of the line, because ZANU is &quot;committed to changing the existing order. . . . The end of colonial rule was only the first stage of ushering in a revolutionary process by which a socialist order would do away with the oppression and injustices of the existing capitalist order.&quot;    What is the churches' role in society as Zimbabwe enters a second stage of revolution? The ruling party suggests that the churches look to Latin America's liberation theology as a worthy example. ZANU urges the churches to turn to &quot;Marxism for a discovery of their true vision and true vocation&quot; and states that &quot;those sections of the Church that are fearful of Marxism are fearful of the people.&quot;    Now that ZANU has openly declared its goal of a one-party state, the original coalition members can either hew to the party line or be purged. The co-option of the rival ZAPU party is well under way, and it is increasingly clear that the independent churches are becoming less useful to the ruling party.    The Catholic Justice and Peace Commission, a church-funded human-rights organization, has already felt the heat. Once a thorn in the side of the previous white regime, the commission is now the only human-rights group operating in Zimbabwe. In 1985 and 1986, it reported on the arrests and subsequent torture of hundreds of ZANU's political opponents. In 1986, the two top officers of the Justice and Peace Commission were detained; they were released only after an international outcry.    When the Roman Catholic bishops issued a pastoral letter of concern about atrocities by ZANU against civilians of the minority Ndebele tribe who support ZAPU, Mr. Mugabe dismissed their call for an investigation and charged that the bishops were attempting to tarnish his international reputation.    Last year, ZANU officials charged that the rapidly growing evangelical church movement might be using religion as a cover for political activity against the Mugabe regime. Zimbabwe's former president, Canaan Banana, a Methodist minister, suspects that some evangelical missionaries might be &quot;on the paylist of South Africa.&quot;    Mr. Mugabe's government isn't so clearly bent on destroying the church at this time as it is on using the church. ZANU is explicitly naming and enlisting churches as key institutions for implementing the new order: &quot;The churches are well placed to perform this revolutionary task because they deal with the people at the grassroot levels. But for them to do this, they must not become witting or unwitting agents of perpetuating the existing order. Their vocation must be, as of all revolutionaries, to change this order.&quot;    Already, the advocates of a church as servant to the state are forging ahead. In the past year, there have been frequent conferences and seminars on &quot;Christian-Marxist dialogue&quot; and &quot;Socialism and Christianity.&quot; Mr. Banana is often the keynote speaker at these affairs. At one, he declared: &quot;All the government is saying is . . . let us destroy individualism so that we can rediscover our true identity within the context of the collective. . . . Genuine Christianity and capitalism can never be bedmates. . . . We can ill afford to perpetuate a state where capitalism and socialism are mutual tenants.&quot;    Mr. Mugabe tries to reassure the churches with references to his Jesuit school training and his &quot;non-practicing Christian-Marxism&quot; -- whatever that means. He has insisted that &quot;God Bless Africa&quot; continue to be played before Zimbabwe's TV station signs off at night.    However, these soothing words don't alleviate a deep sense of alarm in Zimbabwe's churches, because ZANU's ultimatums are not to be taken lightly. In October, Enos Nkala, former home affairs minister and now defense minister, declared: &quot;ZANU rules this country. Anyone who challenges this is a dissident and should be dealt with.&quot; As last month's Mugabe-Nkomo accord demonstrates, the country is slipping further into the grip of a party elite that seeks nothing less than complete domination.    One churchman who was active in the war against the old white regime put it simply: &quot;When they adopt a one-party system, freedom will be absent. I did not fight for independence to have no freedom.&quot;    ---   Mr. Kansteiner is director of economic studies at the Institute on Religion and Democracy in Washington. </TEXT></DOC>