<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871204-0090 </DOCNO><HL> House Approves Omnibus Spending BillTotaling $587 Billion for Fiscal 1988---By Jeffrey H. Birnbaum and John E. YangStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMT TAXES FREST LATAMECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Congress launched its Byzantine drive to enact a budget agreement as the House approved a $587 billion omnibus spending bill for fiscal 1988.    The bill, like the budget accord reached last month by White House and congressional negotiators, is more important for what it promises than for what it delivers. Like many of the steps along the accord's tortuous path, yesterday's action on the spending bill put off most important decisions involving the budget agreement's $30.2 billion in deficit reductions.    The bill was passed 248-170 on the strength of a promise, which was appended to the measure, that the spending totals would be adjusted during a later House-Senate conference in order to conform with the deficit-reduction accord. The final details will be worked out at that time -- making the House measure, like a similar spending bill the Senate could consider as early as next week, the legislative equivalent of an advertisement reading: &quot;Watch this space.&quot;    The spending measure passed despite staunch Republican opposition. Republicans, aided by a small faction of conservative Democrats, attempted to instruct appropriators to come up with a larger deficit-reduction program. But the effort failed, 220-198, after Democratic leaders implored lawmakers to stand behind the bipartisan budget accord. Final passage of the spending bill included the support of 23 Republicans.    All this activity is aimed at superseding the automatic $23 billion, across-the-board spending cuts mandated by the Gramm-Rudman law. The cuts began to take effect Nov. 20 because a legislative substitute for those reductions hadn't been prepared by that deadline.    Legislation now moving through Congress would permit the president to rescind the Gramm-Rudman cuts, which are divided equally between military and nonmilitary spending programs. If the legislation fails to pass Congress, or if the president rejects it, the automatic cuts would remain the law of the land.    The House-approved omnibus spending bill would fund the entire federal government through the end of the fiscal year next Sept. 30. But the provisions of the bill exceed by more than $2.6 billion the nonmilitary spending called for in the White House-congressional budget agreement. Meanwhile, the amount of military spending in the bill is $1.1 billion less than the amount in the agreement.    The deficit-reduction agreement today is little more than a concept and a few lines of numbers. Over the next few weeks, lawmakers will labor to translate it into thousands of pages of substantive legislation contained in two bills. The route to enacting these bills is likely to be bumpy and extend until Christmas. And as in the holiday season, many of the final details probably won't be tied up until a last-minute rush.    The omnibus spending bill is one of those bills. It is an amalgamation of the 13 separate appropriations bills that fund the federal government. During a House-Senate conference committee, hundreds of accounts will either be squeezed or expanded to meet the budget accord's general guidelines that limit military spending to $285.4 billion and nonmilitary spending to $176.8 billion in the current fiscal year.    If the appropriators do what they promise in the House-Senate conference, they will produce about $7.6 billion of the $30.2 billion in savings in the budget compromise. These savings are measured against an inflation-adjusted level of spending projected for the current fiscal year. Even though the budget accord is supposed to cover two years, next year's savings will be fought out next year.    The second measure is a combination tax-and-spending package called a reconciliation bill, which is supposed to include the remainder of savings in the budget accord. The Senate Finance Committee yesterday mapped out the tax portion by drafting a $9 billion tax-increase proposal. The rest of the savings are expected to come from a potpourri of changes, mostly in Medicare and farm subsidies.    Compiling that bill, however, might be difficult. When the reconciliation bill reaches the Senate floor, probably next week, some senators are likely to try to substitute a more substantial deficit-reduction plan. The leading alternative, proposed by Sen. Nancy Kassebaum (R., Kan.), is a one-year spending freeze that includes Social Security benefits, but its chances of success aren't high.    What's more, the bill that reaches the floor will have to be amended to conform to the budget accord. But because of procedural reasons, that action might require a hefty 60 votes in the 100-member Senate.    Of course, the president could veto both of the measures once they reach his desk. But Mr. Reagan, who has taken a tough stance against such tax increases as higher income-tax rates, wouldn't get a clean shot at vetoing the tax-increase bill, as it is part of the broader reconciliation package.    The final details of the reconciliation package also must await House-Senate conference action. The House, by the narrowest of margins, has passed its own reconciliation bill, which contains more in tax increases and less in spending limits than the budget accord calls for.    Nonetheless, congressional leaders are confident that in the end, the budget package will become law. &quot;There are a few sticking points in the leadership package,&quot; said Sen. Pete Domenici (R., N.M.), a leader on budgetary matters. But, he added, &quot;I'm very optimistic. More and more senators are beginning to realize we did the achievable.&quot;    House Majority Leader Thomas Foley (D., Wash.) said, &quot;I'm satisfied we'll finish the year with two bills . . . which will receive a presidential signature and will encompass the budget summit agreement.&quot;    In addition to funding the government's operations, the spending bill contains other legislative provisions. In actions taken yesterday, lawmakers:    --Agreed, 259-157, to a controversial amendment offered by Rep. John Dingell (D., Mich.) that would make the fairness doctrine for broadcasters a law. In August, the Federal Communications Commission abolished the doctrine, which required radio and television stations airing controversial material to give opponents free air time to respond, and President Reagan has vetoed a previous attempt to enact it into law. A similar measure is pending in the Senate.    --Adopted, on a voice vote, a provision sponsored by Reps. Silvio Conte (R., Mass.) and Henry Waxman (D., Calif.) that would postpone until Aug. 31, 1988, a deadline that could impose economic sanctions against some 60 cities -- mainly in the Northeast, California, Texas Gulf Coast and the Chicago area -- with the worst air-pollution problems. The extension would force lawmakers to confront the politically sensitive issue in the midst of next year's election campaigns. Lawmakers rejected, 257-162, an attempt offered by Rep. John Murtha (D., Pa.) to postpone the deadline until late 1989.    Other provisions of the spending bill would:    --Eliminate the previously authorized 3% pay increase for members of Congress, federal judges and other top federal officials.    --Ease restrictions over the next two years on the immigration of an estimated 12,000 Vietnamese children, who were born of American fathers between 1962 and 1976, and their mothers.    --Amend last year's immigration law to make it easier for tens of thousands of illegal immigrants and foreign agricultural workers to come to or remain in the U.S.    --Cut military aid to South Korea by $64 million, the amount the Treasury lost when the State Department renegotiated loans for military sales to the Seoul government without congressional approval. That would eliminate most of the remaining uncommitted balances in the military-sales program for that country.    The bill doesn't include any aid to the Contra rebels in Nicaragua, but it does include a temporary renewal of aid to Pakistan that was slated to be suspended. </TEXT></DOC>