<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880519-0150 </DOCNO><HL> Some Good News (Briefly) on Taxes </HL><AUTHOR> Vermont Royster </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TAXES </CO><TEXT>   If you are more or less an average taxpayer, there's a little good news. This month you begin working for yourself instead of Uncle Sam. The Tax Foundation, that fountain of copious information on taxes, figures that this month your earnings will have covered your tax liability.    Of course, that doesn't mean that you can quit paying taxes. If you work at wages or salary, taxes still get deducted, and if you pay directly yourself, you'll still have a payment due June 15. But statistically you've already earned enough to cover those taxes. O frabjous day!    Just don't get overcome with the joy of it all. Lindley Clark and Alfred Malabre, two of the more knowledgeable Wall Street Journal writers on taxes and such, recently delivered the news that while we've had some years of tax-rate cutting, our actual tax burden has been getting heavier year by year. Today it's heavier than ever.    One reason is Social Security taxes. Though I'm a septuagenarian and actually being paid by Social Security, I not only have to pay taxes on half of that amount but in addition must continue to pay Social Security taxes on such &quot;earned&quot; income as the pittance paid for these essays in the paper. I get caught both ways.    Another reason your taxes can be up is that while the rate paid may be less, there are an awful lot of deductions you used to get that you don't get any more. A big lost deduction is state sales taxes, many of which have already been hiked up. Then there's the lost deduction on money you borrowed to buy a car, take a trip or just paid on your credit-card balance.    About the only interest still deductible is on a home mortgage, but even here you'd better be wary. If you borrow on your home and use the money for riotous living instead of a new roof, better not let the IRS find out.    Altogether, then, what the Tax Foundation rather optimistically calls &quot;tax freedom day&quot; didn't arrive this year until May 5. Only four years ago you got there on April 28, which was in time to help me celebrate my birthday two days later.    So far, I've just been talking about federal Social Security and income taxes. If you add in state taxes, especially those nondeductible sales taxes, the rosy glow fades even more. According to Messrs. Clark and Malabre, state and local tax receipts rose in 1987 as a percentage of gross national product.    Meanwhile, if you bought 10 shares of, say, IBM 10 years ago and decided to sell them recently either because of the uncertain market or because you needed the money, the federal government took a bigger bite out of any &quot;profit&quot; you made. It used to be that capital gains were recognized as a special category with a special lower rate than income you really earned in a single tax year. Now they are lumped in with the real income you earned and taxed at the same rate. There's no recognition that the &quot;gain&quot; you had was spread out over a period of years and that, besides, some of it may be illusory due to inflation.    As for the future, it doesn't look very rosy. When the federal government got rid of revenue sharing, which used to send some money to states and localities, the states reacted by planning tax increases to make up for the revenue shortfall. For fiscal year 1989, at least 14 of them already have increases planned on everything from motor fuel to cigarettes.    According to a survey by the National Governors' Association, the total additional tax take will approach $900 million, if not more. All right out of your pocket, of course.    One reason that the $900 million figure may be low is something you've been reading about in your local newspapers, and that is the deteriorating condition of state roads and bridges. Some bridges have already collapsed and others have been closed for fear they might.    But back to the federal government.    Next year we will have a new president, and you think maybe he'll improve things? The prospective Republican nominee, George Bush, says he won't raise taxes; he doesn't say anthing about reducing them. Moreover, his no-increase pledge seems to apply only to income-tax rates, not to other forms of taxes. The most likely Democratic nominee, Michael Dukakis, says he doesn't see how any president can avoid thinking about tax increases, considering the sad state of government finances.    No matter which one is elected, he'll face, right off, another big government deficit and a Congress that for years has shown no inclination to cut expenditures. In fact, in every one of the past eight years, Congress has managed to increase the deficit budgeted by President Reagan, which has been big enough anyway.    Indeed, these deficits have accumulated year by year until the gross public debt is now $2.5 trillion, a figure so big nobody can grasp it. I'm old enough to remember when we were told not to worry about the government's debt because &quot;after all, we owe it to ourselves.&quot; Perhaps there was some truth in that when the government's bonds were held by investors, individual and business, here at home -- liabilities on one side of the balance sheet were assets on the other.    Anyway, that's no longer true. Huge amounts of our government's debt (nobody knows how much) is now owed abroad; we have shifted from a creditor to a debtor nation. In fact, in the vernacular phrase we are now the &quot;biggest banana republic in the world.&quot;    Of course, we aren't ever going to pay off that debt. But we ought to nibble away at it lest the Japanese or somebody decide to take the cash and let the credit go; then we'll have real problems. Even to nibble at it, though, requires big bites out of our spending or more bites out of the taxpayer.    Messrs. Clark and Malabre are pretty sure which it will be. They think the new president, whoever he may be, may well enact sizable tax increases in 1989. Even if he doesn't, the Social Security taxes already enacted will take a bigger bite out of every payroll check.    So all in all I suggest you enjoy this month's &quot;tax freedom day.&quot; The good news may be brief but better that than what comes hereafter.    ---   Mr. Royster is editor emeritus of the Journal. </TEXT></DOC>