<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871221-0075 </DOCNO><HL> Manager's Journal:Lessons of the Great Cranberry Crisis---By Harold Thorkilsen</HL><DD> 12/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   All too often, successful companies can fall victim to a byproduct of their own success: complacency.    It is when products are moving well, customers are happy and profits are high that complacency, like an undetected virus, can move in on a firm. The effects can sometimes be devastating, in terms of lost markets, plummeting sales, job layoffs, plant closings, and even takeovers or company closedowns.    A classic example is Detroit's experience in the 1950s and 1960s, when auto makers with full order books believed their hold on the U.S. market was secure forever. Not until the public began buying the new, high-quality imports did Detroit realize it might have been taking its customers for granted. It took years of attention to workmanship, quality standards and production costs before a significant turnaround began. Car makers, in their complacency, had failed to keep abreast of their clients' changing needs.    Similarly, companies with best-selling products that overlook subtle changes in consumer tastes are susceptible to the complacency bug. Back in the days of the so-called energy crisis, my organization started looking around for ways to package our products that would be more cost-efficient and less energy-dependent. Nowhere in the U.S. could we find anything suitable. But by looking abroad we discovered the new technology of aseptic &quot;paper bottles,&quot; which we promptly introduced. American container makers, it seemed, had been perfectly happy with their existing product line. Their complacency lost them a lucrative new market.    Sometimes it can take a near catastrophe to reveal the extent of corporate complacency. At Ocean Spray, we learned the hard way after a crisis situation years ago that almost put our cranberry growers' cooperative out of business.    In those days, consumption of the fruit was almost entirely confined to the serving of cranberry sauce at Thanksgiving and Christmas dinners. We were quite content, at the time, with this single-purpose, single-season usage of our product. We were complacent.    Then disaster struck. Just before one Thanksgiving holiday, federal authorities reported that a pesticide used by some West Coast growers had caused cancer in laboratory rats. Although this widely publicized scare turned out later to be erroneous, pre-holiday TV coverage of &quot;The Great Cranberry Crisis&quot; cut sales drastically and came close to ruining our growers and their cooperative.    In the aftermath of this catastrophe, we were forced to re-think our entire marketing philosophy and management style. We acknowledged, first, that self-satisfaction, short-term thinking and ignorance of consumer needs were the reasons we had never developed a year-round product line. Then, after an extensive Randamp;D effort, we embarked on a continuing program to diversify and create a year-round market by producing cranberry-based juice drinks and other products. By marketing our new beverages as &quot;good for you&quot; -- just when consumers were starting to demand natural, healthier products -- our organization was fortunate enough to save itself.    Our experience showed us several ways in which managers can spot early signs of &quot;the complacency factor&quot; and take corrective steps. One way is to institute a regular corporate review and self-examination process. This can work in any organization, but seems particularly apt for old, established companies, where the risks of status-quo thinking and entrenched working methods may be high.    At Ocean Spray (founded in 1930) a small management committee monitors every aspect of our operation on a biweekly basis. We examine and question, for instance, the breadth of our product line and consumer outlets, new products and packaging under development, our manufacturing and distribution methods, customer comments and complaints received, salesmen's reports, results of ongoing market research, our company policies and actions by competitors. In particular, we watch closely any product, packaging or working system that has remained unchanged for three years or longer. In some cases, we appoint a study group to examine a specific product whose performance might be improved.    As part of the corporate culture, we also let employees know that we encourage a spirit of innovation, entrepreneurism, risk-taking, questioning of orthodox methods and &quot;thinking the unthinkable.&quot; Through such measures, and by staying vigilant, it is possible for a company to keep smugness and complacency at bay.    Other effective countercomplacency steps can include:    --Staying in close touch with consumers, trade factors and suppliers to get an honest reading of how outsiders view the company's products and marketing methods. This process has helped us to quickly spot our occasional product failures, such as a cranberry-prune juice drink and a vegetable juice cocktail that consumers flatly rejected. It has shown us shortcomings in package sizing or design. It has also led us to capitalize on successful new ideas such as a tropical drink using Hawaiian guava fruit and the blending of a pink grapefruit-juice cocktail.    --Encouraging the free exchange of ideas and suggestions, however far-fetched, at every employee level. In our case, this &quot;bottom-up&quot; approach has been responsible for innovations such as the first ultraviolet cranberry sorter, better methods of crop harvesting, lighter shipping cartons, a cost-saving revision of our truck delivery system, more effective quality control with fewer inspectors, and an improved way of moving bottles down a line, suggested by a new employee.    Openness to new ideas, closeness to consumers and constant watchfulness are among the most potent weapons an organization can use to guard against the dangers of self-satisfaction and complacency.    ---   Mr. Thorkilsen is president of Ocean Spray Cranberries Inc., based in Plymouth, Mass. </TEXT></DOC>