<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880823-0063 </DOCNO><HL> Business World: Making Gizmos in Arthur Andersen's Factory </HL><AUTHOR> George Melloan </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> FIN IND EDP </IN><TEXT>   A building in Northwestern University's new Evanston research park contains a minifactory demonstrating some of the latest tools of America's manufacturing revolution. Called a &quot;systems integration center,&quot; it matches up the products of 36 companies. About $10 million worth of equipment and software, made by corporations as wide-ranging as Ameritech, Cincinnati Milacron, IBM and Weyerhaeuser, is on display. The most interesting thing about the center, however, is who runs it, Chicago's Arthur Andersen andamp; Co.    Arthur Andersen is best known for its world-wide accounting and auditing practice. But the fastest growth for it and most other big accounting firms comes from giving advice. Andersen will earn $1 billion in consultancy fees in the fiscal year that ends this month, an increase of nearly 20% from fiscal 1987. The largest share, some $230 million, will be from helping companies redesign their factories.    An article by the Journal's Lee Berton last month described some of the internal stresses in Andersen and other major firms as consultants catch up with accountants as generators of fees. Given the opportunities for helping clients save money, many consultants feel they could earn more if freed of the traditional constraints of the accounting profession, such as prohibitions against contingency fees. Another penalty has been the reawakened interest of politicians and regulators looking for signs that large consultancy fees are tempting accounting firms to become more Panglossian in auditing the books of corporations.    However, the point of this column isn't to discuss the consultant-accountant dichotomy, if one exists, but the manufacturing revolution. One measure of its power is that M.B.A. graduates, who not long ago saw Wall Street as the promised land, have a renewed interest in manufacturing. Consultants are playing a large role, it seems, because the range of technologies that can be matched up has become quite wide. There are thus opportunities for anyone with a broad enough knowledge of high-tech manufacturing to provide cross-pollination.    Leroy D. &quot;Pete&quot; Peterson, Andersen's managing director for the manufacturing industry consultancy practice, describes his preferred path to greater manufacturing efficiency. The secret, he says, is to first simplify. Then production can be more easily automated and integrated into a system of computerized control, where computers are receiving customer orders, managing raw material and parts deliveries, controlling the production lines and directing the shipping and billing.    When Mr. Peterson sets about to help a factory install &quot;Computer Integrated Manufacturing&quot; or &quot;CIM,&quot; he often finds that production lines wind around all over the place, giving parts a &quot;plant tour&quot; as they go from machine to machine. At Lockheed, Andersen helped install a new &quot;Computer Aided Layout and Fabrication&quot; (CALFAB) system for one aircraft part to aid the company in competing for the Advanced Technology Fighter contract. It reduced plant travel for the part to 150 feet from 2,500 feet. Long, elaborate production lines mean large inventory costs, big production losses when a machine breaks down and costly scrappage when defects aren't discovered until a part reaches the other end of the line for final assembly.    So Mr. Peterson recommends scrapping long lines and replacing them with a series of horseshoe-shaped &quot;manufacturing cells,&quot; each with a group of workers producing an entire component. Because the machines are highly automatic and computer controlled, a single worker can often serve several. Materials are delivered to the cells from suppliers on a &quot;just-in-time&quot; basis. The cells are flexible, designed for quick retooling by the operators themselves when a change of product is needed.    With changes like this, Mr. Peterson says he has been able to cut delivery times and inventories by as much as 90%. Tool-resetting times have been reduced as much as 75%, mainly by analyzing the process and through the use of self-calibrating devices. Direct labor costs in some modern factories go down to below 10% of total costs.    While these numbers sound startling, the manufacturing revolution itself is pretty impressive. According to the National Chamber Foundation, a branch of the U.S. Chamber of Commerce, manufacturing productivity in the U.S. grew at an annual rate of 3.9% annually from 1981 through 1987. That is a sharp gain from the 1.8% rate of the late 1970s. Unit labor costs in manufacturing were rising at a 7.4% annual rate in the late 1970s. Since 1981 they have been falling about 1.1% annually, the Chamber study shows. U.S. manufacturers, as they switch to CIM, are becoming more competitive internationally, contrary to much popular wisdom.    Arthur Andersen, as it happens, goes back a long way in manufacturing consultancy. The original Arthur Andersen, who started the firm in 1913, had consulting engineers on his staff almost from the beginning. The combination of an accountant's focus on costs and an engineer's eye for production seemed to work well.    But Mr. Peterson says there still is an image problem. &quot;If we haven't worked with a company before, the natural reaction is, 'Why the hell are you bringing in accountants to work in the plant?' Yet we probably have the largest manufacturing consulting practice in the world.&quot;    When Mr. Peterson goes into a factory he studies the layout and makes a proposal for reorganizing and re-equipping. &quot;We try for a one-year payout on our projects. We don't always achieve that but sometimes we achieve it many times over.&quot; Rapid payouts are possible in part because the hunting ground is lush after a long period of neglect of production engineering in many companies. An outpouring of new technology is another factor.    For example, computer assisted design, known as CAD, can be mated with computer assisted manufacturing, or CAM, from the very beginning to factor manufacturing simplicity into the design of the product. There was a time, says Mr. Peterson, when designers simply &quot;threw their designs over the wall&quot; to the production people, who had to figure out for themselves how to make them inexpensively. One function a consultant can perform is to get marketing, design and production people together to work on the simplification problem together.    Another area where Andersen advises is personnel training. General Motors, for one, has been accused of getting its automation ahead of its people. Andersen is moving as well into the computer software business, which means it not only has services but also products of a sort. It is working to develop generic software so that manufacturers won't have to custom design their own. For example, it has manufacturing inventory control software for defense contractors.    Mr. Peterson doesn't expect the opportunities for further efficiencies to diminish much as plants become more efficient. &quot;When that happens we will be moving into a new generation of manufacturing technology and we can do it all over again. With almost any manufacturer the possibilities are tremendous and I guess that's why I'm very positive on the opportunity that exists for manufacturing in the U.S. and the Western world.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>