<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870203-0157 </DOCNO><HL> Spain Wants U.S. F-16 Jets Out of Franco-Era Air Base---Failure to Agree Could UndermineMilitary Ties, Hurt NATO Unity---By Nicholas BrayStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROPAEROSPACE (ARO)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><DATELINE> TORREJON DE ARDOZ, Spain  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In 1953, Gen. Francisco Franco allowed the U.S. to build an air base just east of Madrid. For the Americans, the defense pact provided a valuable foothold in Europe for nuclear bombers with which to threaten the Soviet Union. For the Spanish dictator, it meant coveted foreign recognition for his isolated rightist regime.    Today, Spain is a democracy and a member of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization and the Common Market. But the base outside Torrejon, now a city of 83,500, is still home for the U.S. Air Force's 401st Tactical Fighter Wing. With 4,500 U.S. military personnel and as many as 79 General Dynamics F-16 jet fighters, it's one of the most important U.S. military installations in southern Europe. It's also an intolerable affront to many Spaniards' national pride.    &quot;Torrejon is a super-symbol,&quot; says Inocencio Arias, the director of the Spanish Foreign Ministry's Information Department. &quot;Franco could have put the base in a sparsely populated area. Instead, he put it just outside Madrid.&quot;    Now, as Spain and the U.S. set about renegotiating their 34-year-old bilateral defense pact, the Spanish government wants the F-16s out. After three rounds of talks in Madrid and Washington last year, the two sides are to meet again today in Madrid for two more days of discussions.    The negotiations have become a trial of strength between two conflicting points of view. On the one hand, Spanish Prime Minister Felipe Gonzalez maintains that Spain, now a full member of the club of Western democracies, ought to reduce its dependency on foreign forces. On the other hand, the U.S. insists its forces in Spain fulfil important NATO missions -- including the defense of Italy, Greece and Turkey -- and if Mr. Gonzalez can't take over responsibility for these himself, he should allow them to stay. Moreover, the U.S. argues that it would be both costly and diplomatically tricky to find another European location.    The bargaining over their future puts the entire U.S. military presence in Spain at stake. The current arrangement expires in May 1988. If no agreement is reached before then, Spanish diplomats warn, the U.S. will have to tell its troops here to pack up and go home. Aside from Torrejon, that would mean removing 5,000 troops from an important naval base at Rota, near Cadiz, and a further 2,690 from smaller air bases at Zaragoza and Moron, near Seville. It would also mean closing valuable communications and nuclear test monitoring stations at these and other sites.    Some analysts worry that even partial eviction of U.S. forces from Spain could prompt pressure both in Europe and the U.S. for the expulsion or withdrawal of U.S. troops from other West European locations.    For NATO, defense analysts say, that would be little short of a disaster, making West European governments an easy target for intimidation or attack by the Soviet Union.    &quot;The Mediterranean is already one of NATO's crisis zones,&quot; says Philippe Moreau Defarges, an analyst at the French Institute for International Relations. &quot;If the presence of the U.S. bases in Spain is thrown into question, that would immediately create a climate of crisis. The expulsion of U.S. troops from Spain would be perceived as a first step in the withdrawal of U.S. troops elsewhere in Europe. The alliance is a structure which can crack on all sides.&quot;    For the time being, neither side portrays the outlook as quite that grim. Analysts say both Spain and the U.S. want to avoid confrontation, and point out that Washington appears confident of finding a solution. Negotiations will continue at least through November and perhaps beyond, and might well achieve a compromise, the analysts say.    To some extent, Prime Minister Gonzalez may be taking a hard line now to placate his Socialist Party's left wing. But some Spaniards sympathetic to the U.S. assert that, as an immensely popular politician who is dedicated to the cause of European integration, the prime minister is unlikely to want to provoke a crisis in the Atlantic alliance.    Still, the Spanish leader has gotten himself into something of a domestic political fix over the issue. When a previous conservative government brought Spain into NATO, in 1982, Mr. Gonzalez's Socialist Party expressed strident opposition. A few months later, he won elections on a platform promising to submit NATO membership to a referendum and possibly even pull Spain out.    In the months that followed, he and many other Socialist leaders changed their minds. NATO membership, they decided, by confirming Spain's place among other western democracies, was good for Spain. But Spanish public opinion, cut off for so long from the rest of Europe by the isolation of Gen. Franco's regime, wasn't easily convinced.    In the promised referendum last March, when Mr. Gonzalez set his personal prestige at stake to secure Spain's continued NATO membership, many expected the vote to go against him. The ballot's outcome -- an unexpectedly strong 53% &quot;Yes&quot; vote -- was hailed by politicians in other NATO countries as a tour de force on his part and one of NATO's most significant political achievements of 1986.    But it was won at the price of several conditions limiting Spanish membership -- including a stipulation for &quot;the progressive reduction of the U.S. military presence in Spain.&quot;    That reduction, in the minds of Spanish officials, has come to mean nothing short of the removal of the F-16s from Torrejon and a scaling down of U.S. activities at the Zaragoza training base.    &quot;The Americans have to leave Torrejon,&quot; insists Angel Vinas, a senior adviser at the Foreign Ministry. &quot;This isn't just a military problem. It's a political, psychological and cultural problem as well. This is Spain, not New Jersey.&quot;    Adds a senior Spanish diplomat: &quot;Felipe Gonzalez spent considerable personal political capital in getting the (positive NATO) referendum result. &quot;That's something the allies, including the Americans, have got to take into account.&quot;    At Torrejon itself, opinions are divided as to what will actually be the final outcome of the negotiations. &quot;As far as I can see, this talk (about getting the U.S. troops to leave) is mainly propaganda,&quot; says Adolfo Herrero, who with his father runs a souvenir shop just outside the base's main entrance. &quot;If you're in NATO, you have to fulfill your obligations.&quot;    But the unlikelihood of the base's closure doesn't stop some people from dreaming. If the base was shut down, says Antonio Navarro, an official at the Socialist-run city hall, &quot;I'd open a Disney World there. I'd gladly exchange all those jets for Mickey Mouse and Donald Duck.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>