<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871113-0133 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Jargon on Wall Street sometimes makes the simple complicated.    With that in mind, here's a glossary of terms used to describe investment risks and risk-related concepts. It doesn't pretend to be complete, and it won't protect anyone from losing a bundle. Some risks, for instance that the Dow Jones Industrial Average will drop 500 points in a day, don't lend themselves to fancy language. But knowing what you're up against can be at least half the battle. And if you do lose anyway, some of this language might help you impress your friends when you try to explain why.    Call risk: The risk that the issuer of a bond will buy it back at or near par before maturity. Investors not only lose future interest payments, but, depending on the price at which they bought the bond, they can also get an unexpected loss or gain. And because companies usually call their bonds when rates fall, to refinance more cheaply, investors face &quot;reinvestment risk&quot; (see below) when they try to find somewhere else to put their money.    Concentration risk: If investments are concentrated in one industry or one market, a single event can hurt the entire portfolio. Investors can also be hurt indirectly if an individual issuer is overly dependent on a single customer or source of supply.    Credit risk: The risk that an obligation won't be paid. An obvious example would be a company that couldn't afford to pay its bondholders. But an investment also can go sour because the payments chain breaks down. In this broader sense, investors face credit risk every time they buy or sell an an investment. The price could be good and the deal profitable -- but what if the broker, or the syndicator or somebody else along the line fails to deliver the proceeds?    Default: Failure of an issuer to make timely payment of interest or principal. Default can hit short of bankruptcy: If a perfectly solvent issuer doesn't live up to all its covenants (promises about the levels of financial status it will maintain), it can go into &quot;technical default&quot; and be forced to pay the affected debts in full or be barred from making payments on other debts.    Event risk: Unanticipated events can significantly change the public perception or financial condition of an issuer and thus the value of its securities. Examples: Union Carbide's Bhopal disaster, which pushed its stock price down more than 30% in December 1984; the $11.1 billion court judgment that pushed Texaco into bankruptcy-law proceedings.    Hedging: The ideal investment would have no risk and unlimited return. But the real world is one of tradeoffs: Investment professionals have developed a variety of hedging techniques that limit risk while preserving some of the upside potential of an investment. Most frequently, these techniques involve buying something whose value will be increased by the same factors that cut the value of the investments being hedged. Oil stocks, for instance, are often viewed as an inflation hedge because rising oil prices, a main factor in inflation, boost oil companies' profits.    Investment grade: Such rating companies as Standard andamp; Poor's Corp. and Moody's Investors Service Inc. make a living assessing the credit worthiness of issuers of fixed-income securities. Ratings that range from triple-A down to triple-B-minus (at Sandamp;P) or from triple-A to Baa-3 (at Moody's) are considered investment grade, meaning the ratings firm thinks investors will get their principal and interest in full and on time. A bond below investment grade is more familiarly called a junk bond.    Inflation risk: Money is only worth what it can buy. If the return on an investment isn't greater than the inflation rate, the investor ends up with more money but worse off.    Interest rate risk: If a change in interest rates will change the value of an investment, the investor is taking interest rate risk. This is an inherent risk in fixed-rate bonds.    Liquidity: When lots of investors are buying and selling a security, the market is more efficient and transactions are cheaper and easier. Treasury bills are very liquid; investors will get almost identical bids from a variety of dealers. But try to sell a house and the bids may vary widely; the real estate market can be illiquid.    Market risk: The risk that changes in the market in general -- such as the 508-point drop last month in the Dow Jones Industrial Average -- rather than in a specific investment, will affect that investment (see &quot;volatility&quot;).    Marketability: Liquidity describes the efficiency of a market, marketability its very existence. If an investment can't be sold at all, to anyone, at any price, it's unmarketable. The latest hot stock issue ranks high on the marketability scale; private limited partnerships and unfashionable works of art rank around the bottom.    Naked position: Going unhedged; taking an avoidable risk.    Opportunity cost: The cost of the road not taken. Any investment decision involves a decision not to do something else. If the rejected option turns out to be more profitable, and you find yourself sadly calculating the difference between the hypothetical profit on what you didn't do and the real profit on what you did, that's opportunity cost.    Prepayment risk: Securities backed by mortgages or other types of loans face their own, especially unpredictable brand of call risk. Homeowners and other borrowers are free to repay their loans early; if they do, investors get some of their principal early but lose future interest payments. A called security disappears all at once; prepayments nibble at it more slowly, but the general effect is the same. Enough of them, and the whole security disappears, as Ginnie Mae investors discovered last year when mortgage rates fell and borrowers rushed to refinance.    Present value: When financial wizards want to say that a bird in the hand is worth two in the bush, they talk about the &quot;discounted present value,&quot; a term that expresses the &quot;time value of money.&quot; What they mean is that a given amount of money now is worth more than that same amount of money later. Say you put $100 in a savings account. At current interest rates, that $100 will turn into around $106 in a year. Because getting the $106 a year from now is as good as getting $100 now, the discounted present value of the $106 is said to be $100.    Regulatory risk: Governments often change the ground rules under which companies and industries operate, and the result can be a less valuable investment. Recent examples include airline deregulation and the government's attempt to abrogate the Netherlands Antilles tax treaty, a move that rendered billions of dollars of bonds instantly callable and subjected their holders to unexpected call risk until the government backed down.    Reinvestment risk: When an investor gets a good rate, he likes to keep it. But markets change, and income from an investment might have to be reinvested at a lower yield, cutting the investment's overall return. One of the great appeals to investors of zero-coupon bonds is their freedom from reinvestment risk; at maturity investors get their initial investment with interest compounded at a rate set when the bond is issued. There may, however, be opportunity cost if rates rise in the interim and investors miss the chance to make those higher returns.    Spread risk: Investors can make a lot of money borrowing at a low interest rate and investing at a higher one. But there's a risk that the relationship, or spread, between the two interest rates will shift. For instance, suppose you borrow on your home equity line at the prime rate. If prime is at 11% and you can invest the money at a fixed rate of 12 1/2%, it's a great deal, right? Well, it depends. Prime is a floating rate. If it stays low, fine. But if it rises to a level higher than the fixed rate, you'll be losing money, not making it. Spread risk can also affect some hedging strategies.    Tax risk: The form of regulatory risk that individual investors are most likely to experience first hand. In any given year, the chances are probably better than ever that either Congress or the Internal Revenue Service will change the ground rules affecting at least one investment strategy.    Timely payment: Because investors care about things like the time value of money, they don't like getting paid late. In rating securities, the rating companies pay more attention to the likelihood of timely payment -- the payment of interest and principal when due -- than they do to the likelihood of eventual full payment.    Volatility: The value of any investment can change; volatility measures the speed and extent of that change. Much modern financial theory focuses on the analysis of volatility, and the field is full of jargon. The terms investors are most likely to meet are &quot;beta,&quot; which describes how much a particular stock's volatility varies from average, and &quot;duration,&quot; which measures the sensitivity of a bond's price to changes in interest rates. Beta is expressed by a scale on which 1.0 is average: For example, a 1.4 beta implies high volatility and a 0.7 low. Duration is expressed in years; the more years, the more volatile the bond.    ---   Ms. Monroe reports on corporate and mortgage-backed finance from The Wall Street Journal's New York bureau. </TEXT></DOC>