<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870227-0050 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas:Blind Support of El Salvador's LeaderStirs Anti-U.S. Feelings---By Mario Rosenthal</HL><DD> 02/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM </IN><DATELINE> SAN SALVADOR  </DATELINE><TEXT>   President Jose Napoleon Duarte and U.S. Ambassador Edwin Corr, publicly one of President Duarte's strongest supporters, shared the dais two weeks ago at a luncheon sponsored here by El Salvador's American Chamber of Commerce. The ambassador didn't even blink when President Duarte lectured the businessmen that running a nation was the job of professional politicians. &quot;I believe in private enterprise,&quot; President Duarte said. &quot;Its specific duty is to produce, and the government should not attempt to take its place. But neither should private enterprise try to displace the politicians in running a country. That is the specific duty of those who have dedicated their lives to the common welfare.&quot;    The problem is that the Duarte administration has consistently attempted to take the place of the nation's producers in pursuit of its goals. Even loyal Ambassador Corr privately deplores President Duarte's economic philosophy. And Agency for International Development officials, too, privately complain that President Duarte won't take sound economic advice from anybody.    Just eight years ago El Salvador got by with practically no U.S. economic assistance and sustained a constant growth rate. Today it is an economic basket case dependent on international welfare. The U.S. taxpayer has supported the Duarte regime, and the interim Revolutionary Junta he also headed (during which banks and export agencies were nationalized and all agricultural lands of more than 1,235 acres were expropriated), to the tune of $2 billion in the past seven years. Despite the aid, production is at 1968 levels, per capita income in real terms is lower than it was 20 years ago and experts fear that an astronomical budget deficit will spark runaway inflation. Says economic consultant Jorge Rochac: &quot;President Duarte is giving priority to political objectives at the cost of economic and social objectives. He has destroyed the very means of achieving economic and social progress.&quot;    President Duarte has consistently refused to follow economists' recommendations. Various measures that have been proposed -- and rejected by the president -- include: permitting a flexible exchange rate for El Salvador's overvalued colon; relaxing the restrictive import policy that hamstrings industry by limiting raw material imports, and raising the rates of government-owned utilities, especially electricity, to wipe out losses that represent an important part of the deficit.    The president's remedies have been much simpler. To fight inflation, the president decided to &quot;strangle credit,&quot; according to an adviser who chose not to be quoted by name. To lower the deficit, the president has raised taxes. Last December, capital tax was almost doubled; travel tax was doubled to 20%; income taxes at higher levels were increased, and an additional tax was placed on coffee exports. All this under the slogan &quot;those who have the most should pay the most.&quot;    Credit is very tight, not because of government policy but because of slipshod practices by the nationalized banking system. A young executive in charge of his bank's branch credit department said that most banks are in trouble because of their reserves. &quot;The Central Reserve Bank is cracking down and has suspended discount privileges for most banks until reserves are brought up to regulations. Too many loans were made on the basis of political recommendations and now there is a nationwide liquidity problem.&quot;    The trade organizations, led by the National Association of Entrepreneurs, the Chamber of Commerce and the Industrial Association, were so frustrated after talking with President Duarte and his ministers fruitlessly for two-and-a-half years that they took advantage of a hue and cry against the new taxes to call a 24-hour work stoppage on Jan. 22. It was successful beyond their wildest dreams. Practically 90% of the country shut down. The streets were empty. At the Central Market of San Salvador, traditionally President Duarte's stronghold, the president was met with rows and rows of empty stalls. He accused &quot;extreme right agitators&quot; of &quot;terrorist tactics&quot; and attempting a coup.    The president's response was to call a demonstration of support for Feb. 7. The demonstration took place with &quot;campesinos&quot; brought in from neighboring cooperative farms in government trucks and chartered buses. It was widely rumored that President Duarte's Christian Democrat Party paid 25 colons ($10) to those attending. A public official had defended the right to do this because the private sector had paid wages for the work stoppage. A U.S. observer remarked: &quot;President Duarte's parade was the best money could buy.&quot;    In addition to the economic malaise, democracy is not precisely flourishing in El Salvador. The 27 opposition deputies to the Legislative Assembly have been on strike for several months in protest of alleged abuses by the 33 Christian Democrat deputies, which opposition deputy Armando Calderon Sol of the ARENA party says have given President Duarte dictatorial powers. Amendments to the Electoral Law now give absolute power of decision to the Christian Democrat president of that body, and to the secondary laws governing the Supreme Court that make it next to impossible to get a decision on an appeal of unconstitutionality. &quot;When we protested,&quot; the ARENA deputy says, &quot;the Christian Democrat president of the Legislative Assembly, Guillermo Guevara Lacayo, said that since his party controlled the Assembly, and since the Assembly wrote and approved its own regulations, they could amend the regulations any time they felt like it. After that we went on strike.&quot;    The U.S. State Department's blind support of President Duarte as a showcase democrat, and Ambassador Corr's relentless defense of the man, whom many believe will be the most unpopular president in the history of a nation that has hated most of its presidents, has sparked anti-U.S. feelings. Opposition deputy Rene Fortin Magana comments: &quot;President Reagan cannot be well informed about the situation in El Salvador. If he believes, as he has said, that the Duarte government is promoting economic growth and strengthening the democratic system, he was either misinformed by his subordinates about the true situation in El Salvador, or he was consciously promoting an economic system diametrically opposite to that which he promotes for the United States.&quot; One Salvadoran, who served as a paratrooper in the U.S. Army, says: &quot;From now on, it's no longer the United States -- no more Miami. When we leave, we're going to Spain.&quot;    Even more disturbing was a notice published in two newspapers by a new, conservative organization called MAN (National Action Movement). The notice was a primer on the Salvadoran situation in the form of 10 questions in the dailies El Diario del Hoy and El Mundo. Touching a very delicate -- and dangerous -- subject, MAN asked President Reagan if he was aware that the armed conflict in El Salvador has become a permanent condition, despite the substantial U.S. military aid to the armed forces -- not only because it was a lucrative business, but also because it gave President Duarte a tool with which to practice domestic and international blackmail.    ---   Mr. Rosenthal is editor and publisher of the El Salvador News Gazette. </TEXT></DOC>