<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870224-0004 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 02/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE SUPREME COURT AGREED to decide if states may execute youths.    The justices said they will hear the appeal of an Oklahoma death row inmate, convicted of a 1983 murder committed when he was 15 years old. The high court said it would study arguments that sentencing the youth to death is unconstitutionally &quot;cruel and unusual punishment&quot; because of his age at the time of his crime. The court's decision is expected to affect 36 people currently awaiting the death penalty for murders they committed before they were 18.    The court refused, at least for now, to reconsider its past rulings that allow states to require some girls seeking abortions to obtain parental consent.    ---   A PARIS COURT OPENED a trial against a suspected terrorist leader.    Georges Ibrahim Abdallah, accused of complicity in the 1982 murders of American and Israeli diplomats in the French capital, delivered an anti-Western diatribe before being led from the courtroom. Abdallah is the presumed leader of a Lebanese terrorist group. The trial, the first to be conducted under a new anti-terrorism law that authorizes trials without juries, is considered by some to be the most important international terrorism case ever to be tried.    Thousands of gendarmes and riot police patrolled Paris streets after the government reported receiving threats in connection with the trial.    ---   Administration officials said two memos used to brief Reagan in January 1986 on arms sales to Iran may have been revised by aides in an effort to play down the president's role in the affair. Separately, the independent counsel and the FBI are investigating whether documents in Poindexter's office are missing.    Reagan held a meeting with Chief of Staff Regan and a group of advisers from in and outside the administration to discuss how to respond to a report by the president's special Iran-Contra review board. The report, to be issued Thursday, is expected to be critical of White House policy making.    ---   Syrian troops exchanged gunfire with Druse militiamen in West Beirut. It was the first such clash since Damascus sent thousands of soldiers into the Lebanese capital over the weekend in an effort to quell factional fighting. Political sources said the troop deployment could renew action to free foreigners held hostage in Lebanon.    ---   The White House said U.S. arms advisers would travel this week to six West European nations as well as China, Japan, South Korea and Australia to discuss the 1972 ABM treaty, which governs testing of a space-based missile defense. In Moscow, Tass said an arms accord couldn't be reached if Reagan adopts a broad view of the treaty.    ---   Missouri Rep. Gephardt announced his candidacy for the 1988 presidential nomination, the first Democrat to formally launch a campaign. He said his campaign would center on trade issues.    ---   A Holocaust survivor identified retired Ohio auto worker John Demjanjuk as a Nazi guard responsible for torturing and killing hundreds of Jews in the Treblinka concentration camp during World War II. Demjanjuk, who claims he is a victim of mistaken identity, is on trial in Jerusalem.    ---   Soviet and Chinese officials agreed to begin an examination of the entire length of their common border in a first step toward resolving territorial disputes. Tass reported the agreement as the two Communist nations ended two weeks of border talks, the first such negotiations in nine years.    ---   Gandhi's government pledged to crack down on Sikh extremist violence in India's Punjab state as thousands of Hindus protesting a spate of recent killings demanded that the prime minister &quot;govern or quit.&quot; Meanwhile, Pakistani President Zia offered to sign a mutual pact with India renouncing support of Sikh separatist movements.    ---   The nation's governors said Reagan agreed with low-cost elements of their welfare proposal, but rejected their call for a national standard for benefits. The governors, who met with Reagan at the Oval Office, have proposed an overhaul of the welfare system that would require work for any recipient with a child three years or older.    ---   Iran said its forces launched an offensive in the Kurdistan region of northern Iraq, and reported that its troops were advancing toward the Iraqi port city of Basra in the south. Baghdad, citing Iranian truce violations, said it didn't feel bound any longer to a cease-fire against civilian targets.    ---   Manila's armed forces chief said that groups still exist within the military capable of attempting a coup against Philippine President Aquino's government. Meanwhile, government peace negotiators met with Roman Catholic leaders to discuss regional peace talks with communist insurgents.    ---   Polish leader Jaruzelski said Warsaw's Communist Party members must be more critical and remove incompetent officials. In remarks delivered Saturday and published yesterday in Poland's major newspapers, Jaruzelski also declared full support for Soviet leader Gorbachev's campaign for political and economic changes.    ---   Died: Henry John Heinz II, 78, chairman of H.J. Heinz Co., in Hobe Sound, Fla. . . . Bernard A. Monaghan, 71, former president of Vulcan Materials Co., Sunday, in Birmingham, Ala. </TEXT></DOC>