<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880919-0034 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- Business and Finance </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   AMERICAN BRANDS VOWED not to use the so-called Pac-Man defense to fend off a hostile overture by New York investor Bennett LeBow. The diversified tobacco company said it won't try to buy LeBow-controlled Liggett Group, though some analysts said the acquisition might make sense. American Brands and Liggett stocks surged Friday.    ---   Texas Air is preparing to sell more airplanes and is considering selling certain Eastern Airlines operations, including the East Coast shuttle. The aircraft sales, aimed partly at raising cash, might occur both at Eastern and at Continental Airlines.    ---   Drexel is expected to try this week to block Judge Milton Pollack from presiding over the SEC's insider-trading case against the firm, its junk bond chief Michael Milken and others. The judge is known for having issued tough rulings in such cases.    ---   MasterCard raised by 29% a key fee that banks charge merchants for credit card transactions. The move, which will earn banks more money and may prompt heavier promotion of MasterCard, is viewed by some as a bid to gain ground on rival Visa.    ---   GM and the auto industry won a major victory involving 1985 fuel-economy standards. An appeals court reversed itself and effectively upheld the EPA rules, which a consumer group said favored car makers.    ---   ATandamp;T received tentative permission to cut long-distance rates for one corporate customer. If it stands, the FCC's decision will allow ATandamp;T to exert greater control over pricing in the industry, according to analysts.    ---   The Fed's policy committee is expected to leave credit conditions unchanged when it meets tomorrow. But several economists believe Fed officials will raise short-term interest rates slightly in a few months.    ---   Interco may sell its Ethan Allen furniture unit to thwart a $2.47 billion takeover bid led by the Rales group. The possible sale could be part of a proposed Interco restructuring.    ---   Unisys plans to announce today several long-awaited models of a mainframe computer, as well as related software, sources said.    ---   The Seabrook nuclear plant moved closer to getting a license as the NRC eased rules for emergency planning of plants operating at low power.    ---   OPEC is battling again with nonmember producers over who should reduce their oil output first.    ---   Time's stock price jumped $9.375, to $106.625, Friday on rumors it may be a takeover candidate or is considering a management-led buy-out.    ---   Japan cut the size of a third share offering in Nippon Telegraph andamp; Telephone, bowing to market pressure.    ---   Prospects for a minimum-wage bill have improved sharply in recent days, sparked by Bush's call for an increase in the wage floor.    ---   Moet Vuitton may face a new management fight this week after a Bernard Arnault-controlled firm raised its stake in the luxury-goods concern.    ---   Markets --   Stocks: Volume 211,110,000 shares. Dow Jones industrials 2098.15, up 5.87; transportation 876.94, up 6.57; utilities 180.24, up 1.19.    Bonds: Shearson Lehman Hutton Treasury index 1242.15, off 2.20.    Commodities: Dow Jones futures index 135.25, off 1.61; spot index 133.38, off 0.51.    Dollar: 134.08 yen, up 0.15; 1.8709 marks, off 0.0032. </TEXT></DOC>