<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870429-0153 </DOCNO><HL> Europe:'Mitteleuropa': An Out for the German Left?---By Michael Stuermer</HL><DD> 04/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP </IN><DATELINE> ERLANGEN, West Germany  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Is there life after death? The return of &quot;Mitteleuropa&quot; seems to prove it. Five years ago the phrase, which can be translated roughly as &quot;Central Europe,&quot; lived almost entirely in the vocabulary of historians. But today Mitteleuropa has a wider and more ominous meaning.    In the Federal Republic of Germany, and especially in divided Berlin, intellectuals use the phrase to evoke a nostalgic image of Central Europe, transcending present divisions in the name of socialism. For them, Mitteleuropa conjures a romantic past and radical chic with Germany reunited and independent of Western ties. What's problematic about the dream is the anti-Western premise behind it.    Those who advance the importance of Mitteleuropa also advance the assumption that an American withdrawal from the European continent inevitably would be paralleled by a Russian retreat into the Eurasian steppe. In the delicate context of the present missile negotiations, the increasing currency of Mitteleuropa means the increasing weight of a dangerously seductive argument amounting to an unspoken farewell to the postwar settlements.    To understand the phrase's significance today it helps to trace its roots. For the past 140 years, Mitteleuropa has been a term in search of a meaning. In the mid-19th century it referred to the Habsburg monarchy's ill-fated bid for political domination over all the Germanys in the guise of an economic union. In the early part of this century, Mitteleuropa served as a justification for German, not Austrian, dominance. Hitler came closest to making a radical form of Mitteleuropa a reality, but his military conquests in the end did the most to destroy the possibility of a strong Central Europe. Among the consequences of his action the postwar partition of the European continent is to be found.    Part of Mitteleuropa's attraction is its very vagueness as a concept. In today's Austria, Mitteleuropa is being defined as a cultural landscape reuniting what was once a political and military empire. Austrians see this territory extending from Krakow to Trieste, from Salzburg to Budapest and Belgrade. Their definition conveniently leaves both Germanys out.    In West Germany, the phrase has a more political meaning. Some of the leaders of the large Social Democratic Party and some supporters of the growing ecological movement, the Green Party, are united in their hope for a geostrategic miracle in the course of which Americans pull out of Germany, instantly followed by the Russians. Although there are many variants on the theme of Mitteleuropa, it has already produced policy. It is, first of all, a symbol for uniting the Central European left. (The French Socialists abhor the notion.) One leader in the SPD, Peter Glotz, uses Mitteleuropa as a rallying cry, a means of escaping what he terms the &quot;alienation&quot; and &quot;colonization&quot; of Germany. Mr. Glotz's manifesto brings back memories of Austro-Marxism, an odd, stern gospel preached long ago in the hope of holding together the unwilling nations of the crumbling Austro-Hungarian empire.    Mr. Glotz's Mitteleuropa rhetoric is part of a larger anti-Western sentiment advocated by the SPD's left wing. Mitteleuropa has caused concrete political action. Its advancement is the goal behind the unusual extra-governmental negotiations the German left has been carrying out with the Communist Party that rules East Germany.    In 1985, SPD leaders completed an agreement -- at one point they went as far as to call it a draft treaty -- with the East German Communist Party on chemical weapons. That accord was followed, in 1986, by a similar agreement to prepare for a nuclear-free zone at Europe's heart. The Social Democrats claim such diplomacy by an out-of-power party is a justified part of their campaign strategy, to remind voters of the detentist days when Social Democrat Willy Brandt was West German chancellor.    But the negotiations have a symbolic impact and a message; no political party in the West, not even French or Italian communists in the time of the Cold War, has ever gone so far. While, like Britain's Labor Party, the SPD still professes support of the North Atlantic Treaty Organization, the SPD policy tends to undermine the foundations of NATO strategy in Europe.    The January victory of Helmut Kohl's party, the Christian Democratic Union, means Germany's Social Democrats have been spared the agony of deciding whether to honor these agreements made in the absent-mindedness of electioneering. With the center-right government in power, uneasiness in the West is limited, and the wider implications of Mitteleuropa can almost be ignored. But if the election didn't return the SPD to government, it did foreshadow a frightening scenario. The electoral strength of the ecological Greens grew and, concomitantly, the dilemma of the SPD as to whether it should confront the Greens or cohabit with them.    To some extent, the new popularity of Mitteleuropa must be understood as a genuine intellectual change. It corresponds with the decline of the U.S. cultural message and U.S. political leadership in the wake of Vietnam and Watergate. The freedom, wealth and social equilibrium currently enjoyed in Germany are no longer considered the result of statesmanship and nuclear deterrence. They are viewed as an inalienable right by the present generation. Mitteleuropa promises an emergency exit from NATO and Western Europe to some. But to others it promises doomsday.    East of the great divide, of course, Mitteleuropa has another meaning. Messages from the churches and other quarters in East Germany indicate that the concept is seen as an answer to the hollowness of communism, a promise for better times and a way out of misery and suppression. But for both Germanys, the longing for Mitteleuropa is in some senses also a self-destructive one. It implies that Germany will willingly cut itself off - that it will complete what the French call an auto-decouplage. This is the newest version of what Henry Kissinger and Zbigniew Brzezinski called &quot;self-Finlandization&quot; a decade ago.    The basis for a long-term strategy cannot, in the end, be the decline of Western Europe and the Atlantic Alliance. It must be their reaffirmation. A successful strategy must be based on the West's vast economic and political success, cultural vitality and the capacity to be firm, yet open, toward the East. This was the essence of what NATO leaders defined as long-term alliance policy 20 years ago.    Detente as described in the 1960s has fallen on hard times. A new kind of detente, a detente born of a realistic vision of what Europe can be and must be, is surely the best answer to the dangers inherent in Mitteleuropa. Without a new, strong West German policy, the Federal Republic risks giving up more than it must in the cultural, political and military spheres. It would be bizarre and tragic to see the Germans lose the courage of their convictions just as the decline of Marxism becomes obvious and the Soviets admit failure.    ---   Mr. Stuermer, a historian at the University of Erlangen, publishes frequently in Germany on East-West issues. </TEXT></DOC>