<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861230-0004 </DOCNO><HL> REGIONS:Coal Firms Start to CooperateWith Small-Mine Cleanup Bid---By Robert E. TaylorStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/30/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTMINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)ENVIRONMENT (ENV) </IN><TEXT>   EIGHT YEARS AFTER enactment of a tough federal cleanup law, big coal-mining companies are making grudging progress at repairing Appalachian landscape scarred by small mines. Although some of the coal giants hindered the cleanup effort by using contractors to skirt the reclamation rules, tougher regulations and a favorable court ruling have given the Interior Department more leverage and pushed the concerns toward cooperation.    When Congress passed the coal-mining reclamation law in 1978, it included an exemption for anyone whose mine disturbed less than two acres of land. The rule was meant to ease the financial burden of land reclamation on small, financially strapped coal operators.    But the loophole was exploited by some of the largest U.S. coal companies. The most flagrant type of abuse occurred when a mining concern built a road into a coal-rich Appalachian hollow, then contracted with a number of local operators to carve out a series of small mines along each side of the road. Under the cleanup law, if the surface excavation at each mine was kept under two acres, cleanup wasn't required. Often the roads were deeded to the county so as not to count against the land-disturbance quota.    The tactic produced mining operations resembling a string of pearls: a series of small pits along twisting mountain roads. Contractors worked and then abandoned the mines, often leaving open shafts, scarred ridges, barren hillsides and acid-stained creeks.    OVER SEVERAL YEARS, spurred by an environmentalist lawsuit, the federal government tightened rules against such practices. But Virginia and Kentucky were slow to follow, and because the program is administered by the states, they wound up with the most unreclaimed mines.    In Virginia, as many as 1,500 mines have used the two-acre exemption since the reclamation act was passed, according to Douglas Stone, acting head of the Two-Acre Task Force in the Interior Department's Surface Mining Office. Some of these were legitimate small operations that stayed small. Others grew beyond the two-acre benchmark and subsequently complied with cleanup rules. But Mr. Stone's inspectors are finding that about one in three in Virginia are abandoned, don't qualify for the two-acre exemption -- many because they were part of a group contracted out by the big companies -- and require cleanup under federal rules.    WHEN CONFRONTED by the federal government with orders to fill in excavations, plant trees and otherwise repair the damage they helped cause, the mining companies have reacted in strikingly different fashions.    Sun Co., headquartered in Philadelphia, agreed in June to make good on any reclamation-law violations created by contractors working for a Sun unit, Elk River Resources Inc. Federal inspectors found environmental shortcomings at more than 20 small Elk River mines in southwestern Virginia. Sun has cooperated fully with the cleanup, federal officials say.    In October, Greenwich, Conn.-based Pittston Coal Co. said it would do the reclamation work required to meet federal standards at 46 Virginia mines. In return, the Interior Department absolved Pittston of civil penalties for not repairing the sites earlier. While Rep. Morris Udall (D., Ariz.) questioned whether Pittston was getting a break, the Interior Department reasoned that getting the mine sites cleaned up without going to court was the best strategy.    It's a different story with Rapoca Energy Co. In September 1985, New York-based W.R. Grace andamp; Co. sold Rapoca, a coal-mining unit, to two Virginia coal firms. Now the government is pointing to a series of abandoned two-acre mines dug for Rapoca when Grace owned the firm, but neither Grace nor Rapoca's new owners are acknowledging responsibility for the cleanup.    The government's position has been buttressed by a federal court decision. In July 1985, James Turk, a federal judge in Roanoke, Va., ruled that Rapoca was responsible for its contractors, or at least for paying federal fees on coal they mined.    THE COURT HELD that the contractors &quot;are no more than Rapoca's agents.&quot; Rapoca selected, surveyed and prepared the sites for the contractors, engineered the underground mining and even typed permit applications. The contractors, for their part, could sell coal only to Rapoca. Federal officials say Judge Turk's ruling should make it easier to hold a company responsible for the costs of reclaiming its contractors' small mines.    Complicating the picture is the fact that state and federal mining agencies have often worked at cross purposes. When he worked as a Virginia mining inspector, Ian Dye invoked the two-acre exemption and allowed a Rapoca contractor to leave a &quot;highwall&quot; -- a vertical wall above and around a mine entrance -- at a mine near Nora, Va. Returning later as a federal inspector, Mr. Dye voided the exemption and ordered earth filled in below the highwall. &quot;It's not often in your life that you get to go back and correct your mistakes,&quot; Mr. Dye says.    Meanwhile, the Rapoca case remains muddled. Rapoca's new owners say Grace certified that it had no mine violations at the time of the sale. They claim that Grace and its partner in Rapoca, M.A. Hanna Co., a Cleveland mining concern, are responsible for any preexisting reclamation problems.    Hanna says it surrendered all obligations to Grace. A Grace spokesman says Rapoca's buyers were &quot;fully apprised of the entire situation.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>