<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870831-0044 </DOCNO><HL> The Constitution: 1787-1987---Protection of the Press Under First AmendmentStill Stirs Debate in the Constitution's 200th Year---By Stephen WermielStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/31/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PUBLISHING (PUB)TELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL) </IN><TEXT>      {Seventh of a Series}   WASHINGTON -- The press, the late Supreme Court Justice Potter Stewart once observed, is &quot;the only organized private business that is given explicit constitutional protection.&quot;    But the meaning of that protection, spelled out in the First Amendment, remains a subject of considerable controversy in this, the Constitution's Bicentennial year.    The First Amendment, drafted by the first Congress in 1789, declares that &quot;Congress shall make no law . . . abridging freedom of speech, or of the press . . . .&quot; Today, these words raise such practical questions as how much legal protection the news media should have from lawsuits for libel, whether they have a right of access to events and records, and whether broadcast news should be subject to federal regulation. The words also raise theoretical controversies, such as whether the First Amendment affords the press any special treatment beyond the guarantee to all of freedom of speech, and whether the free-press clause was intended to do anything more than prohibit government restraints before publication.    Nowhere is there greater intersection of these practical and theoretical debates than in libel law. The Supreme Court has given the news media unusually strong constitutional protection in libel actions, and conservatives have taken aim at the arrangement. They argue it is contrary to the intent of the framers -- an argument that also cloaks their claim of a liberal slant by the press.    Before 1964, a newspaper set about proving the accuracy of its report when it was sued for libel, and the plaintiff set about proving injury to his reputation. State law governed, and libel laws varied from state to state.    But in 1964, the Supreme Court launched a dramatic change by ruling that public officials who sue for libel must prove that a statement, even if it was false and harmful to their reputations, was printed or broadcast with &quot;actual malice.&quot; That meant it was printed or broadcast with the knowledge that it was false or with reckless disregard for whether it was false.    This extra protection for the news media is necessary, Justice William Brennan wrote in the 1964 opinion, because of the &quot;profound national commitment to the principle that debate on public issues should be uninhibited, robust and wide-open, and that it may well include vehement, caustic and sometimes unpleasantly sharp attacks on government and public officials.&quot;    Since then, the high court has ruled that public figures -- that is, persons who are involved in a public controversy or who are in positions of public visibility -- also must prove actual malice.    Even 23 years later, the actual-malice requirement is a prime target of conservatives, who claim it has become almost impossible to successfully sue the news media for libel. &quot;There was no intention on the part of the framers that the press should be shielded from punishment for damaging an individual's reputation,&quot; says Michael McDonald of the Washington Legal Foundation, a conservative public-interest law firm. Moreover, he says, &quot;It does not serve the electorate's interest or knowledge to have false information placed in front of it.&quot;    But David Anderson, a professor at the University of Texas Law School in Austin, argues that the actual-malice ruling &quot;is rooted very much in the original understanding of the press clause. . . . The spirit of the First Amendment is that the press serves an institutional role in checking the power not only of government, but of other big institutions, of business, labor, people that exert influences over our lives.&quot;    While conservatives were criticizing the Supreme Court's libel decisions for being too generous to the press, lawyers who defend the news media were complaining that the actual-malice test wasn't enough to guarantee a free press. For about a decade, beginning in the mid-1970s, Supreme Court decisions turned generally less favorable to the news media. The number of libel lawsuits surged, and the Libel Defense Resource Center, a media-backed office in New York, said that between 1980 and 1985, the average jury award for libel exceeded $2 million, although most were reduced on appeal.    The high cost of libel insurance and of defending against lawsuits made even winning prohibitive, especially for smaller publications. Even if a libel suit were thrown out of court after pretrial proceedings were completed, the cost of a defense could range from $20,000 to $500,000, one lawyer estimated.    These costs lead to a chilling effect on the news media, some editors and media lawyers say, with news organizations reluctant to play the active watchdog role over government and business that the First Amendment was intended to guarantee. A federal appeals court, for example, recently upheld $4.1 million in damages against CBS Inc. and its Chicago outlet in a suit by the Brown andamp; Williamson Tobacco unit of B.A.IT Industries PLC. The outlet's anchorman had said in a commentary that the tobacco company developed ads to attract youngsters to smoking; the company said it hadn't.    Other editors and lawyers dispute charges of a chill. &quot;People are more cautious in the newsroom,&quot; says David Donaldson, a First Amendment lawyer for the daily Austin American-Statesman in Texas, &quot;but I haven't seen too many stories that remain untold because of concern about libel suits.&quot;    Moreover, the number of libel actions is subsiding, and the press is winning more cases, says Bruce Sanford, a Washington lawyer. The malice test &quot;offers the press substantial protections, if not all the protections that were hoped for,&quot; he adds.    Fueling the libel dispute is a debate over the intent of the press clause. Leonard Levy, a historian at Claremont Graduate School in Claremont, Calif., argues that the free-press guarantee was intended only to bar Congress from preventing publication of information. There already was a law of seditious libel -- under which statements that denigrated the government could be criminally punished by the states -- and the framers intended to keep that on the books, Prof. Levy writes. His view suggests that the Supreme Court's actual-malice test thus goes beyond the intent of the framers.    But the University of Texas's Prof. Anderson writes that there were very few prosecutions for seditious libel at the time -- although newspapers were full of material that would have qualified -- and so there is little evidence the framers were trying to preserve the law. Moreover, Prof. Anderson writes, &quot;There is no evidence that the framers intended to protect freedom of the press qualifiedly. Whatever the concept meant to them, they sought to protect it fully.&quot;    When James Madison proposed the Bill of Rights, Prof. Anderson writes, his model was an amendment offered by Virginia's constitutional ratifying convention in 1788. That convention concluded that &quot;freedom of the press is one of the greatest bulwarks of liberty and ought not to be violated.&quot;    That should give more solace to defenders of the press than the claim by some that the press clause is in the &quot;first&quot; amendment, and so is one of the most important guarantees. As Prof. Anderson observes, the press clause originally was in the third amendment. The first two, setting a ratio of voters per House member and limiting the power of Congress to raise its own pay, weren't ratified. </TEXT></DOC>