<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870306-0080 </DOCNO><HL> Goldman Official Traded HeavilyIn Takeover Stocks, Records Show---Seized Data on FreemanSaid to Describe ActivityFor Self, Firm, Trusts---By James B. Stewart and Daniel HertzbergStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Records seized by the government from Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co. show that Robert M. Freeman, the firm's head of arbitrage, engaged in massive trading in stocks that later became targets of takeover bids, according to persons familiar with the records.    In some cases, the records indicate, Mr. Freeman's trades preceded the announcement of significant developments involving stocks where takeover bids already were under way, the persons added. The trading was done for Mr. Freeman's personal account, in trust accounts established by him, and on behalf of the securities firm, the persons said.    Until now, Mr. Freeman's implication in the government's wide insider-trading probe involved only one security, which he allegedly traded for his own account using inside information. The timing of the purchases in the seized records could be coincidence or luck, and the records, standing alone, don't explain why Mr. Freeman made the investments that the records indicate he did. But the pattern of his trading should have led to serious questions within Goldman Sachs, said one person who has seen the records.    Lawyers and Wall Streeters say that if the government alleges any wrongdoing in Mr. Freeman's trading, this would raise questions about the effectiveness of Goldman Sachs's internal compliance system, which is supposed to guard against violations of securities laws by employees. The same experts added that it could also open Goldman to potential liability, if it were proven that illegal trading profits were made by the firm or Mr. Freeman.    Goldman Sachs has mounted a vigorous defense of Mr. Freeman, saying that the firm has conducted its own internal investigation and has no reason to believe that there has been any wrongdoing by Mr. Freeman or the firm.    An indictment naming Mr. Freeman is expected to be handed up by mid-March, according to lawyers familiar with the government's investigation.    The indictment is expected to provide more detail about the charges against Mr. Freeman, who was arrested at his office last month and charged with conspiracy in an insider-trading scheme involving Goldman Sachs and Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co.    Persons familiar with the Freeman-Goldman Sachs trading records declined to identify most of the specific stocks in which Mr. Freeman invested. But they named one stock that Mr. Freeman purportedly purchased for his own account and for trust accounts, Kaiser Steel Corp., which became the subject of takeover activity.    The persons also said that Mr. Freeman earned large profits for himself by dealing in Storer Communications Inc. securities. The government has alleged that the issue was the subject of inside information passed to Mr. Freeman by Martin Siegel, the former Kidder Peabody investment banker who pleaded guilty to two felonies and whose testimony helped implicate Mr. Freeman. When Mr. Freeman was arrested on Feb. 12, he was charged with trading for his own account in Storer using inside information.    Persons familiar with the case said that Mr. Freeman, dealing in the options market, sold calls in Storer for his personal account, meaning that he bet that the stock's price would rise only a limited amount. Market experts said the tactic is a highly refined one, ordinarily used in a takeover situation only if there is precise information available about the final takeover price.    Paul J. Curran, Mr. Freeman's attorney and a partner at Kaye, Scholer, Fierman, Hayes andamp; Handler, said: &quot;There has been no indictment filed; when and if one is filed, we will deal with it, and Robert Freeman will be acquitted.&quot;    Mr. Curran added that &quot;it would appear the government is now doing an investigation after his arrest.&quot;    Mr. Curran declined to discuss any trading by Mr. Freeman or confirm the existence of Mr. Freeman's personal trading accounts.    A spokesman for Goldman Sachs issued the following statement: &quot;We have been asked to comment about assertions concerning Mr. Freeman's personal trading activity. We believe that the anonymous source unfairly and inaccurately characterizes the records and seeks to create a false impression. We are told that the source says Mr. Freeman engaged in 'massive' trading. Personal trading by persons of considerable means -- in large or small amounts -- is not illegal, including trading any stocks being arbitraged by the firm for its own account.    &quot;As to the question whether any personal trading of Mr. Freeman was motivated by insider information, no internal audit has ever indicated any violation by Mr. Freeman of the insider trading laws, as the source apparently suggests.    &quot;The issue of insider trading violations should be decided in a court of law. To the extent the anonymous source, whoever it might be, seeks to influence that decision prematurely, that source is acting unfairly.&quot;    Persons familiar with the Kaiser Steel trading said Mr. Freeman acquired stock for family custodian and trust accounts. Kaiser Steel was acquired in March 1984 by a group led by Oklahoma financier J.A. Frates for a combination of cash and securities valued at more than $40 a share. Over a period of months preceding the Frates bid, the stock rose from about $28 a share. It isn't known when Mr. Freeman acquired his stake.    Further suggestion that Mr. Freeman may have accumulated such a stake appears in a recent lawsuit filed in a Los Angeles state court by retired Kaiser Steel employees against arbitrager Ivan F. Boesky and others. The defendants were accused of forcing Kaiser Steel into bankruptcy-law proceedings by triggering a leveraged buyout and then diverting assets to shareholders. The defendants haven't commented on the suit. Mr. Freeman is named as a defendant, though he isn't accused of wrongdoing.    According to a lawyer for the plaintiffs in the case, J. Michael Hennigan, various Freeman custodial and trustee accounts were shareholders of Kaiser prior to the distribution. Mr. Hennigan said the Freeman accounts held about 10,000 shares of Kaiser Steel prior to the distribution, holdings which he estimates were ultimately valued at more than $500,000. He said the trustee for the trust accounts is David M. Silfen, one of Goldman Sachs's top equity traders and a former arbitrager. As trustee, Mr. Silfen would have received copies of trading records for the accounts, even if Mr. Freeman directed the trades, trading experts said.    Mr. Silfen declined comment yesterday.    It couldn't be determined to what extent Goldman Sachs compliance officers followed through on any questions about Mr. Freeman's personal trading or trading in his trust accounts. One Goldman Sachs employee said he believed that compliance officers checked partners' trading to make sure there was no trading in stocks where the firm has confidential information because of a client relationship.    However, the employee said the firm made little effort to detect other types of suspicious trading.    Another employee, however, said he believed Mr. Freeman's trading had been questioned by a Goldman Sachs auditor in the course of an internal audit. The firm, in its statement yesterday, said no internal audit had ever indicated any violation of insider-trading laws by Mr. Freeman.    Charles Carberry, the assistant U.S. attorney in charge of the case, declined comment. Garry Lynch, head of enforcement at the Securities and Exchange Commission, couldn't be reached. </TEXT></DOC>