<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880418-0017 </DOCNO><HL> Accounting for the Dollar Glut </HL><AUTHOR> David Hale </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FORGN </CO><IN> BNK MON FRX </IN><TEXT>   The rapid growth of world foreign-exchange reserves during the past year has raised the interesting question of whether foreign central banks should be asked to register with the U.S. government as export-promotion departments, Republican political action committees, or covert defense-funding agencies.    How we choose to define activities of foreign central banks is of critical importance to understanding the U.S. economic and political scene today because they are now the world's largest buyers of dollar securities. Last year, world foreign-exchange reserves grew to $790 billion from $559 billion. Most analysts estimate that about two-thirds of this growth was a byproduct of official dollar support operations in the foreign-exchange market.    While only fragmentary data is available about official intervention so far this year, some governments have tried to convince the markets that it will be large if necessary. After expanding its foreign-exchange holdings by $40 billion in 1987, the Japanese Ministry of Finance recently published a new budget suggesting that it is prepared to spend at least $60 billion supporting the yen-dollar rate in fiscal 1988. In fact, there was heavy intervention by Japan and other countries last week to stem the dollar's decline in the face of the February trade deficit, which was $198 billion at seasonally adjusted annual rates, the greatest ever.    Why are central banks prepared to spend huge sums stabilizing the U.S. dollar at a higher price than private investors are willing to pay? Unfortunately, official balance-of-payments data tell us little about the reasons for central-bank intervention, but if we had realistic disclosure of its purposes, three motives would appear to be dominant. First, central-bank intervention is a form of export subsidy. Western Europe, Japan and other Asian nations have been trying to slow the appreciation of their exchange rates in order to protect their manufacturing industries from a further loss of competitiveness.    Second, central-bank intervention is a form of political insurance. Other countries do not want the U.S. to suffer an election-year financial crisis that might trigger a recession and encourage the election of a candidate who preaches economic nationalism. While there is no precise way of quantifying how the financial markets would have behaved in the absence of official intervention, it is a safe bet that the dollar would be much lower, inflation rates would be higher and mortgage rates would be significantly above current levels. If the U.S. were a small or medium-size country, foreign central banks would not have been willing to finance the external deficit in order to prevent an election-year slump, but the size of the American economy permits this country to operate under different rules. Even the fiercest critics of America's budget deficit in Frankfurt and Tokyo still would prefer a Bush administration to the alternatives.    Third, central-bank intervention could be classified as a form of surrogate military spending. Western Europe and East Asia have been propping up the American economy through dollar purchases not only to prevent an election-year slump; they also want to lessen the danger that Congress would react to a balance-of-payments crisis by shutting down America's foreign military bases.    While there is no way of knowing whether the U.S. Treasury has done explicit deals with foreign central banks to swap currency intervention for defense expenditures, it did precisely that in the years immediately preceding the collapse of the Bretton Woods fixed-exchange-rate system. In 1967, the U.S. threatened to reduce its military presence in Germany if the Bundesbank didn't cease converting dollars into gold. Despite complaints from German monetarists that they were being forced to finance the Vietnam War surreptitiously, the Bundesbank bowed to American pressure.    There is nothing intrinsically wrong with using central-bank intervention as a covert mechanism for subsidizing exports, reelecting the Republican Party, or compensating the U.S. for its large international military burden, but it is a potentially suboptimal form of resource transfer for at least two reasons.    First, as was demonstrated to the world last October, it can cause other countries to lose control of their money supplies and thus destabilize financial markets. While the October stock-market crash was as much a function of technological breakdown as policy failure, the economic chain of causality ran from large central-bank intervention to explosive foreign money-supply growth followed by rising bond yields in Japan and Germany, which then pushed up U.S. bond yields and punctured the New York equity boom. Second, reliance on central-bank intervention to fund America's external deficit lessens pressure on policy makers to correct the very economic imbalances that made such intervention necessary in the first place.    Consider, for example, the current American debate on foreign defense spending. It is commonly argued that Japan should spend far more than 1% of GNP on military expenditures. Yet, if Japan's spending on dollar-support operations is added to its defense budget, its spending would have exceeded 2% of GNP last year. Europe also would appear to be spending about 1% more of its GNP on defense if central-bank intervention were reclassified as military expenditure.    What the U.S. needs in the 1990s is less central-bank intervention in its capital account and a new line in its current account for income derived from military services to friendly countries. Although some people might object to reclassifying our defense forces as mercenaries, Western Europe's shrinking population will make it impossible to sustain adequate military strength without American Hessians.    More honest accounting for the goals of central-bank intervention also could help to elevate the quality of public debate in the U.S. about economic policy. In practically any other country, the existence of a large full-employment budget deficit, a rapidly growing external debt and the need to shift 5% of GNP from consumption to net exports for debt servicing in the 1990s would generate serious public discussion about how to reduce government borrowing. But there is little incentive for American politicians to speak candidly about how they will reduce the deficit if they think other countries' central banks will monetize it whenever private investors withdraw from the market.    Sophisticated people often argue that we should be delighted to have other nations so generously subsidizing our standard of living. But the fact is, such tranquilizers are denying the American people the chance to have an honest debate about such important questions as how to cut the budget deficit, whether we need a national consumption tax and what is a reasonable defense-spending target.    The fact that we are postponing serious discussion of such questions because foreign central banks are funding the external deficit could also at some point call into question the legitimacy of the 1988 presidential election itself. Although it may seem hard to believe today, during America's previous incarnation as a debtor nation in the 19th century, there was intense hostility to British financial power because populist politicians convinced millions of Americans that the Bank of England had bribed the U.S. Congress into pegging the dollar to the gold standard in order to produce large profits for foreign bondholders.    In 1896, William Jennings Bryan won the Democratic presidential nomination with a spellbinding oration denouncing British monetary policy and the &quot;financial servitude to London&quot; resulting from the gold standard. There could be a similar sense of outrage in the U.S. next year if it becomes apparent that foreign central banks were prepared to prop up the American dollar and restrain U.S. interest rates only through November 1988.    We should not be indignant that other nations want to influence American policy. Because of the interdependence that now exists among the U.S., Europe and Japan, there is no longer any precise way of saying where one nation's self-interest ends and another's begins. East Asia needs American markets, the U.S. needs Asian savings, and Europe needs the military protection that is made possible by American prosperity. The problem is that technology has transformed the world's financial markets into a fully integrated 21st-century electronic village while most political institutions continue to operate within the emotional parameters of the 18th-century nation state.    There is no simple way to narrow the gap between parochial political entities and a globalized financial marketplace, but the politicians of some smaller nations have been innovative enough to try. In last year's Australian elections, the ruling Labor Party asked a group of foreign economists to conduct a nationally televised discussion of why the government would have to pursue austere economic policies to maintain investor confidence in the country's currency.    Our networks could give similar intellectual uplift to this year's election campaign by organizing a panel of Japanese life-insurance portfolio managers to address the American people on the policy changes they will demand before putting new funds into the U.S. securities markets next year. Such a program probably would give American voters more information about the direction of economic policy after 1988 than they appear likely to get from the candidates themselves.    ---   Mr. Hale is chief economist of Kemper Financial Services in Chicago. </TEXT></DOC>