<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871120-0155 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas:Censorship From Venezuela's Gorging, Bureaucratic State---By Carlos Ball</HL><DD> 11/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAMTELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL)PUBLISHING (PUB) </IN><DATELINE> SANTIAGO, Chile  </DATELINE><TEXT>    This week's meeting of theInter-American Press Association in Chile highlighted presscensorship in such dictatorships as Paraguay and Nicaragua.Few would think to include Venezuela, one of the hemisphere'soldest democracies, on the list of nations engaged in statecensorship. However, since the 1958 overthrow of the lastmilitary dictatorship, Venezuelans have lived under a partialsuspension of their constitutional bill of rights. The bulkof that country's interventionist legislation has beenenacted by the executive branch of the government, based on a1960 state of emergency decree. Intervention in pressfreedoms has reached an alarming level.   Emergencies do not last for 27 years, even in Latin America, and the &quot;acts of rebellion with the purpose of destroying the constitutional order&quot; disappeared in the early 1960s. But in the headlong pursuit to increase the state's role in virtually all aspects of public and private life, Venezuelan presidents exercise dictatorial powers by refusing to reinstate Article 96 of the Constitution, which reads: &quot;All may freely dedicate themselves to the lucrative activity of their preference, without any limitations except those referred to in this Constitution and those established by law for reasons of security, health or other social interest.&quot; Information -- and the public's access to it -- has become the most recent victim of Venezuela's continuing devolution from a democracy toward a gorging, bureaucratic autocracy.    As a Venezuelan journalist now living in the U.S., I was surprised to learn that it is illegal for the U.S. Information Agency to distribute material domestically. In fact, a lot of fuss was made when a Miami radio station broadcast a program from USIA's Radio Marti operation. In contrast, a main source of news for the regional newspapers and radio stations in Venezuela is the free wire service of the Central Office of Information, the government's press bureau, which also handles the allocation of government and &quot;parastatal&quot; media advertising.    While President Reagan is frequently denied air time by the American TV networks, Venezuelan television and radio stations are subject to constant interference in their regular programs, on the flimsiest of excuses. A simple call from the Central Office of Information may order the stations to carry a presidential message, a military parade or ministerial views on a labor dispute. Such demands are usually received at prime time, and noncompliance is unthinkable. Soon after President Jaime Lusinchi took office, a daily radio broadcast, aired since the 1960s by members of the Venezuelan Chamber of Radio Broadcasters, was suspended on the grounds that only the national government can have a radio broadcast simultaneously transmitted by several stations. The chamber's last editorial had made the mistake of criticizing the concentration of power in the president's hands.    It is not as easy to interfere with the written media beyond the manipulation of advertising budgets and breaking news first to the friendly journals. After all, newspapers do not require a license to operate. But, nonetheless, the Venezuelan government is perfectly aware of its enormous economic power and makes unabashed use of it to tame dissident views. And the tremendous leverage enjoyed through the government's centralization of the advertising budgets of the 300-plus government agencies and state-owned corporations is not considered sufficient.    The government is now planning the construction of a newsprint plant, in order to control the supply of paper to the national press. It makes little economic sense for a country plagued with a huge foreign debt, high inflation and high unemployment to invest in a $400 million project that will create fewer than 1,000 new jobs, at a cost of about $500,000 per employee. In Venezuela, the private industry has to invest less than $10,000 to create a new job, and the informal sector (a k a the black market) does it for under $500.    When all else fails to curb the news hounds, the government takes more decisive action. In 1986, Rodolfo Schmidt, editor of El Diario de Caracas, was imprisoned twice, for a total of 65 days, on trumped-up charges. To bargain for his release we had to stop publishing the columns of two of our best editorialists (strongly disliked by President Lusinchi), suspend four investigations on government and police corruption, relieve Mr. Schmidt of his responsibilities at the newspaper, and appoint an executive more agreeable to the government. This last step was a very transparent decision, since this new executive was not only critical of our past editorial policy, but also derived a major share of his income from selling phones to the state-owned telephone monopoly.    During the very first meeting we had after his appointment, my new boss told me that he saw no point in a daily editorial that served only to infuriate the authorities. Then and there I knew that the long and unequal struggle was coming to an end. He was determined to get rid of the unpalatable columnists and change an investigative and independent newspaper, with good coverage of political and economic news, into a bland sheet, with lots of space devoted to sensationalizing the private lives of our sister TV station's soap-opera stars.    Soon afterward, my new boss would call from Miami or New York -- where he often was involved in selling Venezuelan TV programs -- to censor headlines or to stop the publication of an editorial to which the government objected. Upon his return to Caracas, on May 13, he fired me one minute after arriving at the office. Nothing was said about professional standards; no charges were specified beyond his view that we would not get along.    Within 48 hours, the president of the republic was for the first time visiting El Diario de Caracas and sitting in a reporter's desk in the news room to type an unforgettable message that was to appear the following day. On the front page, under a picture of our smiling ruler, was written: &quot;It is sinful to speak evil of the Government.&quot; A few weeks later, El Diario de Caracas was to receive the coveted, government-sponsored, 1987 National Prize for Journalism. And Channel 2, the principal concern of the group that owns El Diario de Caracas, would no longer face difficulties with the renewal of its broadcasting license.    No direct censorship is required when press lords, in order to continue to enjoy economic privileges granted by government officials, are willing to accept guidance concerning editorial content and the presentation of the news.    The current Venezuelan administration has been very successful in pushing medias' &quot;self-censorship&quot;; the disadvantages of noncompliance are far too costly, making publishers willing to do the dirty work for the government. The danger is, of course, that when reliable coverage of political and economic issues disappear, potential foreign investors can no longer evaluate the risks of doing business in a particular country, preferring to stay away. And local entrepreneurs ponder the allurements of capital flight.    ---   Mr. Ball, former director general of El Diario de Caracas, is John M. Olin fellow at the Heritage Foundation in Washington, and vice president of CEDICE, a Caracas-based free-market educational institute. </TEXT></DOC>