<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870807-0007 </DOCNO><HL> Grain and Soybean Futures Prices FallAmid Predictions of Rain This Weekend---By Wendy L. WallStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PETROLEUM (PET)MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)STOCK INDEXES (NDX) </IN><TEXT>   Grain and soybean futures prices slid amid forecasts of more scattered rain in the Corn Belt this weekend.    Prices fell as many traders took to the sidelines in advance of the Agriculture Department's first field estimate of the U.S. corn and soybean crops. The report, due out Tuesday, is expected to show that scorching weather in the Midwest this summer did little lasting damage to the crops.    Despite the hot weather, many analysts are expecting the report to predict aboveaverage corn yields and a crop of between 6.95 billion and 7.05 billion bushels. With a crop that size, there would be little reduction in the stockpiles that are holding down prices.    While a crop of the size expected would be about 15% to 16% below last year's harvest of 8.25 billion bushels, the decline largely reflects severe cutbacks in acreage planted.    Similarly, many analysts are expecting the report to predict just a 5% to 8% decline in the soybean harvest. The report is likely to forecast a crop of between 1.83 billion and 1.9 billion bushels, down from two billion bushels last year, analysts said.    Sparse but timely rains and fortuitous breaks in the summer heat wave forestalled a lot of crop damage, analysts and meteorologists said. For instance, although temperatures soared into the high 90s in early June and late July, the corn crop's crucial pollination occured during a relatively mild period between the two hot spells.    &quot;The crop is struggling along in this hand-to-mouth existence, and doing quite well,&quot; said Peter Leavitt, executive vice president of Weather Services Corp. in Bedford, Mass.    Yesterday, scattered showers doused the far western Corn Belt. Those showers are expected to move eastward through the northern Corn Belt this weekend, Mr. Leavitt said.    Grain and soybean futures also were sent lower by weakening cash prices. Both farmers and exporters are pushing more of their grain onto the market to make room in storage bins for the approaching harvest, said Jerry Gidel, an analyst at G.H. Miller andamp; Co. in Chicago.    Soybean oil futures also tumbled, as traders speculated that India may have completed its recent round of buying. India has bought soybean oil heavily on cash markets in recent days to supplement its own drought-stricken crops, Mr. Gidel said.    In other futures markets yesterday:    ENERGY: Oil futures prices skidded lower the third day in a row, as many traders liquidated long, or buying, positions in thin trading. &quot;It was more book-squaring than anything else,&quot; a broker said. Crude oil for September delivery on the New York Mercantile Exchange slipped 15 cents a barrel to $21.14, and petroluem product prices also edged lower. Since crude reached $22.67 a barrel early Monday, prices have eased $1.53 a barrel, or almost 7%. The market continues to be torn between an apparent overabundance of oil and concerns about a possible disruption in the flow from the Persian Gulf, analysts and traders said. &quot;There is still great reluctance&quot; to hold short, or selling positions, a floor trader said. &quot;The market is touchy, but could be under pressure if there's not much news from the gulf,&quot; said Richard Redoglia, an oil broker at Merrill Lynch Futures Inc. in New York. &quot;In this case, no news is bad news for prices.&quot;    COPPER: Prices eased for the second consecutive day as investors consolidated recent gains. Prices fell from the start and settled near the day's lows. An absence of fresh developments and slow seasonal industrial demand for copper appear finally to be catching up with the market, an analyst said. Despite the summer doldrums, prices had continued &quot;to rise on supply tightness, but that momentum now appears to be slowing,&quot; he said. Autumn demand, which will begin to appear within a few weeks, should provide a fresh stimulus, he said. Concern about supplies is still reflected in the substantial premiums the September contract command over deferred months, even though they have narrowed slightly, the analyst said. Usually the price of the more-deferred contract has the premium. The tightness in supplies will provide underlying support when renewed demand for copper appears, the analyst said. Meanwhile, computer-guided buying of futures that fueled the prolonged rally has slowed, he said, and this has contributed to some light liquidation. And, while copper recently rose in sympathy with precious metal prices, now that precious metals have slipped &quot;that influence is also lacking,&quot; he said.    COTTON: Prices moved in a relatively narrow and steady range as traders awaited the weekly government export sales report to be issued after the close of trading. The report reflected continued strong foreign demand for U.S. cotton. Net sales for the week ended July 30 totaled 143,200 bales, up from 90,500 bales the week before. Japan was a major buyer, taking 87,100 bales, and South Korea bought 32,900 bales. In addition, there was talk in industry circles that Japan late Wednesday bought an additional 30,000 to 40,000 bales, said Ernest Simon, cotton specialist at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. in New York. Domestic mill demand is also running very strong, Mr. Simon said. Meanwhile, traders are focusing their attention on the Agriculture Department's first production estimate for the 1987-88 season, which began Aug. 1, analysts said. The report is due out Tuesday.    STOCK INDEXES: An afternoon rally sent prices to life-of-contract highs, as investors continued to show a healthy appetite for stocks. Despite weakness in interest rate futures, the September futures contract on Standard andamp; Poor's 500-stock index surged 4 to 323.25. The rally was fueled by traders scrambling to buy back contracts they had sold in expectation of a decline in prices, said Peter G. Grennan, manager of the stock-index futures department at Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. in New York. He predicted continued strength in stock-index futures prices as long as there is skepticism about prices going higher -- and consequently, a good supply of buyers -- and as long as yields on 30-year Treasury bonds don't climb above 9.5%. J.R. Fredericks, an analyst in Chicago at E. David Stephens Commodity Corp., said he expects lower oil prices and lower interest rates to send September Sandamp;P 500 futures to around 328.5. </TEXT></DOC>