<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861209-0080 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> KM OMMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)SUPREME COURT (SUP)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)ENVIRONMENTAL PROTECTION AGENCY (EPA) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court agreed to review the validity of Customs Service regulations that permit the entry of some &quot;gray market&quot; goods into the U.S.    The regulations were struck down last May by a three-judge panel of the federal appeals court for the District of Columbia. The appeals court, rejecting the Customs Service's interpretation that has been in effect for about 50 years, said federal law doesn't permit the importation of gray market merchandise.    The gray market describes a system in which U.S. companies import trademark-bearing goods from foreign manufacturers without permission from the U.S. trademark owners. These importers purchase gray market goods at reduced prices abroad and sell the goods at discounted prices in the U.S. The foreign-made goods were intended either for sale in other foreign markets or for sale in this country exclusively through the U.S. trademark owner.    For several years, the legal battle has been heating up between companies that own U.S. trademarks and importers of gray market goods. Troy, Mich.-based K mart Corp., a retailer that includes gray market merchandise in its inventory, told the Supreme Court in one of several appeals that under the Customs Service regulations, annual retail sales of gray market goods total $6 billion.    The Customs Service has interpreted the law to permit gray market imports when a U.S. trademark owner sets up a foreign subsidiary to manufacture trademarked goods, is owned by the foreign manufacturer, or authorizes a foreign manufacturer to use its trademark. The law, according to the Customs Service, was intended to ban gray market imports only when a U.S. company purchases a trademark from a foreign company.    The appeals court ruled that the 1930 law involved in the case doesn't distinguish among different import situations. The law, the appeals court said, prohibits unauthorized imports of goods bearing trademarks that are registered in the U.S. The ban applies to all such imports.    The appeals court ruling conflicts with rulings in similar cases by two other federal appeals courts that upheld the Customs regulations.    Appeals were filed in the Supreme Court by the Justice Department and by K mart and 47th Street Photo Inc., a New York-based outlet of electronics and photographic products that also sells gray market merchandise.    The justices yesterday agreed to hear enough appeals to fill their oral-argument schedule through April, when hearings end for the current term. The gray market case could either be argued in April and decided in June or early July, or be argued next October and decided in the spring of 1988.    Waste Cleanups   The justices dismissed an appeal they had earlier agreed to hear on whether Environmental Protection Agency officials have authority under the Superfund law to enter private property to plan and carry out cleanups of hazardous wastes.    A federal appeals court in Chicago had ruled that Outboard Marine Corp. wasn't required to give EPA officials access to property that it owns in Waukegan Harbor, Ill., where the marine accessories company is based. The EPA appealed to the Supreme Court.    But Congress, in extending the Superfund law two months ago, included a provision making clear that the EPA has the authority to enter private property to plan a cleanup.    As a result, the Supreme Court yesterday threw out the appeals court ruling and sent the case back to the appeals court for reconsideration in light of the new law. However, the appeals court could decide that the new law isn't retroactive and that the EPA's authority wasn't clear under the previous law.    An Outboard Marine spokesman said the company is in settlement discussions with the EPA and recently presented the agency with a proposal, which is under review. He wouldn't disclose any details of the proposal. And he wouldn't speculate on what legal steps Outboard Marine might take if settlement talks break down. </TEXT></DOC>