<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870205-0006 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 02/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   IRAN ORDERED the expulsion of Wall Street Journal reporter Gerald Seib.    The Islamic Republic News Agency quoted an Information Ministry official as saying that Seib, detained in Tehran since Saturday, was ordered to leave Iran after a judicial probe of his case ended. The correspondent had entered Iran on a reporting assignment at the invitation of the Iranian government. Following his detention, government radio identified him as a &quot;spy for the Zionist regime.&quot;    Iran's premier told Tehran Radio that &quot;after being questioned, the issue has been clarified.&quot; The U.S. said it hadn't confirmation of Seib's release.    ---   The Senate passed a $65.6 billion four-year highway and mass transit bill. The legislation's provisions on the speed limit and special highway projects differ from the version in the House.    ---   The Senate joined the House in overriding Reagan's veto of the $20 billion Clean Water Act. The 86-14 vote, which was expected, came on the same bill that Congress approved last year.    ---   Officials in Bogota said the reputed leader of one of the largest drug networks in Latin America was captured in a shootout with Colombian authorities. Carlos Lehder Rivas was transferred to U.S. custody and put aboard a military plane for a flight to the U.S. He is wanted on U.S. charges of conspiracy to import 19 tons of cocaine.    ---   Reagan officials last summer knew more about the ostensibly private arms network supplying the Nicaraguan rebels than they have acknowledged. Sources said officials concluded then that weapons the network was providing were overpriced and of poor quality.    ---   A senior militia leader in Beirut said Anglican envoy Terry Waite had been abducted by the kidnappers of foreigners for failing to fulfill alleged promises regarding the fate of 17 Arabs imprisoned in Kuwait. A Moslem religious source said Waite was &quot;tried&quot; by an Islamic court.    Syria accused the U.S. of using the hostage situation in Beirut as an excuse for a possible attack on Lebanon. In Washington, a White House spokesman urged &quot;the downgrading of the speculation&quot; on the U.S. military buildup in the Mediterranean.    ---   A former Chilean official pleaded guilty to aiding in a 1976 car bombing in Washington that killed former Chilean ambassador Orlando Letelier. The former secret police captain, Armando Fernandez Larios, is to be sentenced April 6 in U.S. court. He faces as long as 10 years in prison.    ---   The Soviet Union indicated it would soon resume its nuclear-weapons testing program because of Tuesday's test blast by the U.S. The official media in Moscow said the Kremlin would show &quot;restraint and good common sense,&quot; but noted that the U.S. explosion was &quot;a provocative step to frustrate&quot; Moscow's 18-month moratorium.    ---   The House voted against pay raises for legislators and other federal officials, but the action apparently didn't rescind the increases. Earlier, the Senate voted to repeal the $12,100 pay boost for congressmen and other wage increases for high-level federal officials.    ---   The House Intelligence panel released a report describing a &quot;litany of disaster&quot; in the management and operation of U.S. intelligence activities. The report was prepared in response to the arrests of 27 Americans for spying during the past two years, which the panel said had damaged U.S. security.    ---   Soviet forces attacked Moslem guerrilla bases near the Pakistani border, sources said. Thousands of Soviet commandos and paratroopers, backed by jets and helicopter gunships, participated in the offensive, which was launched despite a truce called last month by the Afghan government.    ---   India and Pakistan reached an agreement to reduce border tensions heightened by military buildups on both sides of their common border. The accord, reached after five days of talks in New Delhi, provides for the withdrawal to peacetime positions of troops in some frontier sections.    ---   NASA said four of the five astronauts who are to fly the first shuttle mission since last year's Challenger explosion began training, rehearsing launch malfunctions in a simulator. The launch of the space shuttle Discovery is scheduled for Feb. 18, 1988.    ---   Philippine President Aquino urged the military to honor the country's new constitution, which was endorsed in Monday's plebiscite. Unofficial returns show that about 40% of the military voted against the charter. Defense Minister Ileto ordered the armed forces to pledge allegiance to the government or face expulsion from the military.    ---   South Africa's government reiterated its opposition to creating a chamber of Parliament for representatives of the black majority. President Botha also ruled out an early end to the state of emergency, and said Pretoria would form a special panel for the reporting of political speeches during the whites-only election campaign.    ---   Spain and the U.S. ended two days of negotiations over the renewal of a bilateral defense agreement. Madrid rejected new proposals for cuts in the U.S. military presence in Spain as insufficient. The U.S. currently maintains more than 12,000 military personnel in Spain.    ---   Swedish ministers held an emergency cabinet meeting over a plan to reorganize the investigation into last year's assassination of Prime Minister Olof Palme. Officials said a dispute between police and prosecutors has been hindering the inquiry.    ---   Methane gas exploded in a 150-year-old coal mine near Katowice in southern Poland, killing 17 miners. About 20 other workers were injured, officials said.    ---   Stars andamp; Stripes defeated Kookaburra III to win yachting's America's Cup. The U.S. entry beat the Australian 12-meter yacht 4-0 in the best-of-seven series off the coast of Fremantle, Australia.    ---   Died: Wladziu Valentino Liberace, 67, entertainer, in Palm Springs, Calif., of anemia, emphysema and heart disease. </TEXT></DOC>