<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871113-0156 </DOCNO><HL> When Jim BakerSays 'Dollar,'Markets Flinch---By Paul A. Gigot</HL><DD> 11/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)EXECUTIVE (EXE)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   At the Treasury Department these days, the unkindest cut of all is to mention the name W. Michael Blumenthal. As treasury secretary in the Carter administration, Mr. Blumenthal is mainly, and notoriously, remembered for a Paris press conference in June 1977 that convinced the markets the U.S. wanted to talk down the dollar. While he later denied he'd ever said that, the markets never believed him and the long dollar rout of the Carter years had begun.    Treasury Secretary James A. Baker is no Michael Blumenthal, but in the past week he got a glimpse of how the markets react even to the fear of Blumenthalism. After Mr. Baker told this newspaper last week that his priority was low interest rates even at the risk of a falling dollar, the markets took him at his word and the dollar and stock markets plunged.    By Tuesday morning, with a rout threatening, Mr. Baker tried to stem the tide. He wrote a two-sentence statement for White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater that denied a New York Times story on the dollar and said the U.S. still wanted &quot;exchange-rate stability.&quot; The decline continued, however, until President Reagan took it upon himself to tell reporters that he, at least, did not want the dollar to fall. The dollar then rose, the flight from stocks and bonds ended, and the markets were still rallying yesterday.    While this latest crisis may have passed, the truth is that the pressure hasn't eased a bit on James A. Baker. Six months ago, Mr. Baker may have believed he could resign in 1988 to run the campaign of his friend George Bush, confident that the economy and his reputation were both strong. The stock-market crash changed all that, and Mr. Baker now knows he must rebuild confidence in both.    Stung by the reaction to last week's interview, Mr. Baker wasn't talking in public this week. Other Treasury officials made it clear enough, however, off the record, that Mr. Baker is not talking down the dollar. Far from it, they say, Mr. Baker believes the path to calming the markets lies in reinvigorating the international policy coordination process that he helped start in 1985. Mr. Baker hopes to bring an accord on the U.S. budget deficit to a G-7 meeting, persuading Germany and Japan in return to do more to stimulate economic growth.    In Washington, of course, everyone claims to care about the &quot;interdependent world economy,&quot; but in fact most politicians become raving nationalists at the first sign of trouble. Sen. Lloyd Bentsen, for example, has lately taken to fretting about world markets, even as he helps to midwife a protectionist trade bill. James Baker, on the other hand, really does understand that we live in a global economy -- or at least he seemed to until he gave the impression that he didn't care about the decline of the dollar.    It's easy to sympathize with Mr. Baker, of course, because most everyone in Washington has been telling him the dollar needs to fall. Outside the administration, Mr. Baker's Keynesian critics have long urged devaluation as the only way to reverse the trade deficit; they're still waiting for the J-curve to kick in and reduce the deficit, despite two years of devaluation.    Inside the administration, meanwhile, the monetarists are back in full and confident cry, asserting that only the market can determine the value of the dollar. Beryl Sprinkel may have only confused people at the White House with his graphs of M-what-have-you a year ago, but he's just been given cabinet rank and asked to stay on.    &quot;As nearly as I can tell,&quot; says one of the leading monetarists, &quot;we don't want to talk the dollar down, we don't want to talk the dollar up, and we wish everyone else would try not to talk about the dollar either.&quot; His view, shared by most of the other monetarists, is that February's Louvre Accord made a mistake in fixing the dollar at too high a rate against the yen and D-mark, and so it needed to fall.    And for good measure, Alan Greenspan, the new Fed chairman, has also chipped in by telling Fortune magazine that the dollar needed to fall by a couple of percentage points a year.    About the only people challenging this view have been a few supply-siders, Paul Volcker, and, this week, the markets. What the markets almost surely fear is what Mr. Volcker has long said he fears -- a collapse of the dollar, the risk that private foreign capital may flee all dollar assets, and inevitably a burst of inflation.    By most accounts, the past week's dollar scare communicated its message. Fed officials told this newspaper Wednesday that they weren't about to make any precipitous changes in monetary policy, and that they, too, worried about the dollar. And the president, finally, made clear he doesn't want to preside over any Carter-style dollar crisis.    Mr. Baker's challenge now is to convince the rest of the G-7 this dollar problem is theirs as much as ours. And administration officials believe they have a chance. &quot;I think the understanding is there since the market crash,&quot; says one official. The Germans, always fighting the last inflation, remain the most obstinate opponents of any monetary ease, or pro-growth incentives, despite the flight to the D-mark and no signs of inflation at home. This time, however, Mr. Baker will also have allies in the French and other Europeans, who are increasingly worried that Germany might take them into recession.    To have credibility with the nervous post-crash markets, of course, any new agreement will probably have to go well beyond the Louvre; and it will have to include actions, not simply promises. None of this will be easy, but at least Mr. Baker is looking in the right place. Now, if he'll only stop talking about the dollar.    ---   Mr. Gigot is a member of the Journal's editorial board. He was chief speech writer for Secretary Baker earlier this year while a White House Fellow. </TEXT></DOC>