<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871013-0107 </DOCNO><HL> KGB So Far Escapes Gorbachev's EffortTo Reshape And Open Up Soviet Society---By Mark D'AnastasioStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> MOSCOW  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Under black skies last winter, amber sparks flew from the scaffolding around a building on Dzerzhinsky Square as welders worked nights in sub-zero temperatures to hurry construction of an addition to KGB national headquarters.    The scene typified the special treatment that the KGB -- the Committee for State Security -- traditionally receives in Soviet society and continues to enjoy under Mikhail Gorbachev. In fact, the KGB is the only state body to have escaped Mr. Gorbachev's criticism -- and significant reform -- since he launched his campaign to restructure society 2 1/2 years ago.    Western and Soviet sources say the Soviet leader's failure to overhaul the personnel and functions of the secret police bureaucracy severely limits, and could thwart, his policy of &quot;glasnost,&quot; or openness, which Mr. Gorbachev says is crucial to ending the nation's social and economic stagnation.    Mr. Gorbachev's drive to dismantle central planning boldly challenges the power and privileges of an 18 million-strong entrenched economic bureaucracy. His relentless push for nuclear-arms cuts and more rational military spending challenges the formerly sacrosanct principle of defense at all costs. But toward the KGB Mr. Gorbachev has been limp, taking on the security police just once, and only indirectly, since coming to power.    When KGB agents in the Ukraine falsely arrested one of Pravda's investigative reporters, KGB Chairman Viktor Chebrikov, who is also a member of the party's ruling Politburo, was forced to write an apology that appeared on the party newspaper's front page. Says one senior Western diplomat: &quot;Gorbachev's message was the KGB may be above the people but not above the party.&quot;    Some analysts view the KGB as an all-but-independent agency and have written that it's just too powerful for Mr. Gorbachev to confront directly. But Jeremy Azrael, a Soviet specialist at Rand Corp., rejects that view, describing the KGB as an institution that follows orders of the political leadership. It is &quot;an instrument that sometimes enjoys autonomy,&quot; says Mr. Azrael, &quot;but certainly isn't a perpetual rogue elephant.&quot;    Mr. Gorbachev's ginger stance toward the KGB is often explained as coming from a debt he owes them. This view holds that he rose to prominence on the coattails of former leader Yuri Andropov, who earlier headed the KGB. And experts give credence to widespread rumors that the present KGB boss, Mr. Chebrikov, clinched Mr. Gorbachev's selection as party leader by threatening to unveil secret compromising dossiers on the two other Politburo members vying for the job.    Perhaps. But Mr. Gorbachev's careful handling of the KGB also stems from the special role it plays in Soviet society. Besides gathering intelligence abroad and guarding the U.S.S.R.'s 37,000-mile border, the KGB's 700,000 employees protect state security internally. That mandate, of course, is used as a smokescreen for controlling all aspects of Soviet life while enforcing the Communist Party's political monopoly.    The KGB's tools, popularly referred to as &quot;the organs,&quot; include not only an army of plainclothes police and countless paid informants, but also offices that the agency maintains in every government ministry, major industrial enterprise, newspaper and cultural and scientific body. The sign outside these offices reads &quot;First Department,&quot; leaving no doubt this is where the ruble stops.    One reason Mr. Gorbachev avoids confrontation with these watchdogs is, ironically, that they play an integral role in administering glasnost. The more dynamic and productive society and economy that he wants to spark by loosening controls over public discourse isn't possible without the cooperation of the police machine that has kept a tight grip on those controls for the past seven decades.    Yet KGB apparatchiks must be conscious that Mr. Gorbachev is asking them to help implement what, to them, is a self-destructive reform. Sergei Grigoryants, chief editor of an independent journal called Glasnost, says that as the radical nature of the Gorbachev reforms unfolds, the KGB's awareness of its contradictory position is reaching a critical mass.    &quot;It's clear by now that the KGB is participating in something that would reduce its role in society to a minimum,&quot; says Mr. Grigoryants, who is tuned into the secretive organization through a long history of clashes with it. He and other savvy dissidents say they see signs of a backlash.    On the recent anniversary of the birth of the security forces' founder, Felix Dzerzhinsky, KGB Chairman Chebrikov publicly accused the purveyors of glasnost -- cultural figures and journalists -- of having come under the influence of &quot;the secret services of imperialism trying to discover new loopholes to penetrate our society.&quot; Alarm was added two weeks later when, at a meeting of editors, the party's No. 2 man, Yegor Ligachev, Mr. Gorbachev's archrival, bitterly condemned the glasnost flagship publications Moscow News and Ogonyok.    Soviet judiciary officials now promise repeal of only one, instead of two as previously rumored, articles in the Russian criminal code that the KGB often uses to arbitrarily silence political dissidents. Article 190-1, covering the less serious crime of &quot;anti-Soviet slander&quot; will go, but article 70, which allows a 10-year prison sentence for &quot;anti-Soviet agitation,&quot; will remain on the books.    In Moscow, the showplace of the new Soviet liberalism, arrests under these articles haven't resumed since they were halted several months ago. But detentions and harassment by the KGB typical of the past are beginning anew.    Outside a subway station last week, two plainclothes KGB agents picked up a colleague of Mr. Grigoryants who was carrying 30 copies of the latest edition of Glasnost, which until then had been permitted to publish unhindered. Tass says &quot;the appropriate organizations&quot; are investigating accusations Glasnost was being printed illegally on government printing presses.    In the Soviet capital, the KGB some time ago stopped obstructing news conferences called by private Soviet citizens. But this week, when one was held to announce the formation of a Moscow branch of the International Society for Human Rights, a plainclothes agent accompanied by a uniformed militiaman showed up saying a gathering in a private apartment might disturb neighbors.    Small-scale demonstrations generally have gone unmolested. But last Wednesday, Soviet Constitution Day, a middle-aged couple donned placards a few hundred yards from the Kremlin listing rights violations. Within seconds they were bundled up by plainclothes men and swept away in a police van. </TEXT></DOC>