<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870409-0015 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> JWTMARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   In an attempt to change its negative image among immigrants, the Immigration and Naturalization Service has turned to Hollywood.    The INS awarded a $10.7 million contract yesterday to a Los Angeles group of three firms, who face the daunting task of explaining the new Immigration Reform and Control Act to a multilingual, multi-ethnic pool of illegal immigrants and employers. The contract comes just four weeks before the complex legalization process takes effect.    The advertising and public relations group is led by Fernando Oaxaca, a Los Angeles-based Hispanic Republican activist who once fought the immigration reform effort he'll now promote. Mr. Oaxaca lobbied against the Simpson-Mazzoli bill, an earlier version of the immigration act, because he objected to employer-sanction provisions that remain under the new law.    &quot;We have a law in the United States and I'm going to be paid by the INS to help make it work the same way Maldef (Mexican American Legal Defense and Educational Fund) and other organizations that opposed the bill before are going to work in informing employers and aliens about what it means,&quot; Mr. Oaxaca said in an interview.    The 18-month contract calls for the Justice Group, a joint venture made up of JWT Group Inc.'s Hill andamp; Knowlton Inc. unit, Coronado Communications Corp. and La Agencia de Orci andamp; Associados, to convince eligible undocumented immigrants to apply for amnesty and to inform employers about penalties related to hiring illegal workers under the new law.    Media experts and immigration-rights leaders say the public relations task is formidable. The major problems center on audience diversity and the fact that the government script has yet to be written. Regulations that explain crucial processes for legalization and employer sanctions haven't been finalized yet. Comments on those proposed regulations are being accepted until April 20. Hearings begin today on Capitol Hill on the proposed regulations, which many immigrant-rights and employer groups consider too restrictive and burdensome.    Processing centers run by the INS and community groups trusted by immigrants will begin accepting legalization applications May 5. Some immigration lawyers and groups are now calling for a delay in the start-up of the legalization program.    The Justice Group said its information campaign will be a combination of public service announcements and paid advertising. The first television commercial will probably go on the air the week of April 20.    Projecting an image of the INS as an agency that can be trusted by illegal immigrants will be a particularly vexing problem. For many Asian and Hispanic immigrants, mention of &quot;la migra&quot; (the INS) produces memories of raids in which people have been chased through factories or from homes, separated from families and placed in handcuffs for a trip to a detention center.    &quot;This is like asking the Indians to trust Custer,&quot; said Herman Baca, a longtime Latino activist from the San Diego area. &quot;Would the blacks have allowed the KKK to administer the Civil Rights Act?&quot;    Mr. Oaxaca said the joint venture will be working with, and in some cases subcontracting with, a variety of community-based organizations that are already involved in counseling immigrants about legalization. At its peak, about 30 Justice Group employees will be coordinating the national campaign, which Mr. Oaxaca said will also involve &quot;hundreds of organizations across the country and thousands of volunteers.&quot;    Employing trusted community leaders among immigrants, such as Roman Catholic priests, bishops and nuns, to assist in the education-campaign would help, said Michael Martinez, who heads his own marketing firm in Texas and worked for years for Madison Avenue advertising concerns throughout the Americas. &quot;But there is no immediate corrective action that will change the INS image from black to white all of a sudden,&quot; he added.    Media experts and immigration-rights leaders said another challenge of the campaign is the diversity of the audience it seeks to reach: large and small employers and ethnic groups ranging from affluent white South Africans to poor Mexicans. Some questions also have been raised about the extent to which the campaign will be aimed at Asian and other immigrants.    Immigration policy &quot;developed&quot; anti-Asian exclusionary laws, said William Tamayo, an attorney with the San Francisco-based Asian Law Caucus legal firm. In California, where the bulk of Asian immigrants reside, as many as 20 languages or dialects must be used to reach all those affected by the law, added Mr. Tamayo, who heads a national immigration-rights coalition. And even though a common language bonds Hispanic immigrants, cultural differences fracture the communities in New York, Los Angeles, Chicago, San Antonio, Texas, and Miami.    The campaign also faces the challenge of explaining to employers the raft of complex detail in the new law's employer-sanction and anti-discrimination provisions. The first lesson: An I-9 is now as basic as a W-2. The I-9 is the new form employers must complete to demonstrate they've made a good-faith effort to verify the legal status of every employee hired after Nov. 6, 1986.    Linda Wong, associate counsel for Maldef, said she doubted that the INS's public service announcements would &quot;be given much credibility, given the . . . mistrust&quot; for an agency long associated with deportation rather than legalization.    Michael Machesko, an INS official who will administer the public information and awareness contract, said the winning group will be reimbursed for its costs and receive an undisclosed percentage for profit.    The Justice Group venture wasn't the lowest bidder, he added. Twelve advertising firms bid for the contract in an open competition; they were evaluated for their technical skills as well as cost-effectiveness by a five-member Justice Department panel.    Though the $10.7 million contract was awarded late in the game, the INS had already started a public-education campaign to provide details of what's known of the new law. In Houston recently, in a clear effort to change its image, the newly appointed INS district director opened a two-hour press briefing by saying, &quot;We are dedicated to providing quality service with respect for human dignity. That is our motto.&quot; A banner with the motto hung behind the director.    However, in El Paso, Texas, a similar education forum began in English. The audience was filled with Spanish-speaking Mexicans. </TEXT></DOC>