<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880128-0099 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88: Moderate Conservatives Bush and Dole Woo A Right Wing That Doesn't Quite Trust Them </HL><AUTHOR> Ellen Hume and David Rogers (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE CNG </G><TEXT>   For &quot;right-wing activists,&quot; columnist Robert Novak recently wrote in the conservative American Spectator magazine, the dilemma in this year's GOP presidential contest is &quot;whether President Bush would give away more to the Soviets through weakness than President Dole would through deviousness.&quot;    With polls suggesting that the Republican race is turning into a two-man battle between the vice president and the Senate minority leader, hard-line conservatives are in a quandary. In recent elections, they set the tenor for the GOP's ideological debate. Yet, as the party prepares to pick its 1988 standard bearer, the candidates of the right lag behind the front-runners, two moderate conservatives who are mistrusted by most hard-liners.    The situation may work to the benefit of George Bush and Robert Dole unless some more-conservative candidate like Rep. Jack Kemp can break out of the pack to challenge them. But as long as the only realistic alternative for conservatives is another similarly suspect candidate, neither the vice president nor the minority leader is attracting extreme enmity from the party's right wing.    Indeed, both men -- anticipating a long head-to-head battle with each other for the GOP nomination -- are trying to woo support from this critical bloc. Without attempting wholesale changes in their own philosophies, they are emphasizing issues they hope will appeal to the right. Mr. Bush stresses economic issues, including his opposition to tax increases; in addition, his televised argument with anchorman Dan Rather this week bolsters his standing among conservatives who dislike the news media and have been skeptical about the vice president's toughness. Meanwhile, Sen. Dole -- who isn't often accused of lacking toughness -- emphasizes a working-class appeal based on social and cultural issues.    Still, many hard-line conservatives are unimpressed. &quot;I'm not happy with either of these guys,&quot; laments Reed Larson, president of the National Right to Work Committee. Adds Gary Bauer, President Reagan's domestic-policy adviser: &quot;I do not know whether or not in the forseeable future there will be one great conservative hope again.&quot;    So far, the two candidates' standings among self-styled GOP conservatives closely track the attitudes toward them among other voters. In a nationwide Wall Street Journal/NBC News survey conducted last week, Mr. Bush was considered the more conservative by almost identical margins among GOP conservatives, among all Republicans and among all likely voters. In the race for the nomination, the vice president led by about the same margins among GOP conservatives and all Republicans.    Both men have some conservative credentials. Both of them strongly favor military aid to the Nicaraguan Contras; back President Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative, though not quite as strongly as Mr. Reagan; and oppose abortion -- though conservative critics are suspicious of Mr. Bush for having taken a softer stance when he sought the 1980 GOP nomination.    The vice president's strategy is built around his seven years of assiduous courting of hard-right groups and loyal service to the conservatives' favorite president. &quot;The credibility he has with them is just a carryover from Reagan,&quot; says Kemp supporter Tom Ellis, chairman of the Congressional Club, a Southern political organization associated with Sen. Jesse Helms.    But Mr. Bush also makes an economic pitch to the right. Abandoning his 1980 charge of &quot;voodoo&quot; economics, he takes a supply-side approach to taxes, calling for a cut in the capital-gains tax rate to 15% from the current top statutory rate of 28%, which he says would add $5 billion to the federal treasury and boost industrial competitiveness.    He also attacks an oil-import fee, despite his own ties to the Texas oil business. Lambasting Mr. Dole, who has said he would consider such a fee if necessary to reduce the budget deficit, Mr. Bush says &quot;this is an anti-business, anti-farmer, anti-consumer tax.&quot;    Mr. Bush has also adopted Reagan-like rhetoric in bashing Congress for the deficit and the budget snarls. That, of course, lets him indirectly bash Sen. Dole as well. &quot;I'm not sure being in Congress all your life is a part of the answer,&quot; he said in a speech earlier this month. &quot;I think it may be part of the problem.&quot;    While Mr. Bush has aimed much of his pitch at economic conservatives, Mr. Dole goes after the religious and social-issue conservatives. His organization in Iowa has close ties to evangelical churches and the Rev. Pat Robertson's camp, and the two men were the only Republican candidates to appear personally at the Texas Conservative Leadership Conference this month.    He also has long cultivated Sen. Helms, who is neutral in the nomination struggle but whose support helped to win Mr. Dole the GOP leadership post in 1984. Mr. Dole stood with Sen. Helms in opposing 1986 legislation imposing sanctions on South Africa, and may have sacrificed a Republican seat in the Senate to win a bitter fight for the confirmation of conservative federal Judge Daniel Manion.    On the campaign trail, Sen. Dole's use of prayer and populism is aimed not just at the religious right, but also at attracting crossover votes by conservative Democrats and independents. Such voters, some Dole strategists believe, could help blunt Mr. Bush's immense edge in the Southern Republican party structure in the weeks leading up to the Super Tuesday Southern primaries on March 8.    Still, Mr. Dole's strong suit with hardline conservatives is personality, not beliefs. He is viewed as being no more ideologically committed than Mr. Bush; it is his toughness that allows him to court conservatives while escaping the image of pandering.    &quot;Dole has succeeded in establishing the reputation that if he's on your side, he will fight for you,&quot; says L. Brent Bozell III, formerly with the National Conservative Political Action Committee. &quot;But you'll never know if he's on your side. You'll never know it based on principle -- it's based on politics.&quot;    Both candidates, in fact, go against the conservative grain on some issues -- most notably, the Intermediate-range Nuclear Forces treaty with the Soviet Union. Both say they support the INF accord, although Mr. Dole initially hesitated before embracing it.    Campaigning last week in Iowa and the South, Mr. Bush also praised Martin Luther King Jr., urged more action for civil rights and arms control, and talked about a dispassionate, medical approach to AIDS. When asked about tuition tax credits -- a priority for those who want to send their children to private religious schools -- he concluded: &quot;I'm for them, but let me be honest with you, we don't have the funds to do that now.&quot;    Sen. Dole also takes stands that aren't traditionally found at the top of the hardline agenda. He often talks of the need for compassionate government to aid the poor and handicapped. &quot;There are real people out there who depend on the government to stay alive,&quot; Mr. Dole tells Somersworth, N.H., Rotarians. He proposes new initiatives for child care for low-income and moderate-income families that would be paid for by phasing out, for households earning above $50,000, an existing dependent-care tax credit.    Despite such non-hard-line positions, the two candidates have each made inroads. Mr. Bush has &quot;done a really good job of defanging,&quot; says Paul Weyrich, a conservative activist and theoretician. &quot;There's definitely a feeling that while we may not think he's the best leader, he's not a danger to us if he gets elected.&quot; Meanwhile, he says, Sen. Dole &quot;touches a chord with his appeals to help those less fortunate up the ladder&quot; among religious-right activists who &quot;tend to be more service-oriented.&quot;    Efforts to appeal to the critical conservative bloc can only intensify if the GOP contest becomes a protracted struggle between the two. Back in 1980, George Bush, unwinding in his Houston home a few hours after he conceded the nomination to Ronald Reagan, picked up a copy of the conservative National Review from a coffee table. &quot;I guess I can put that away now,&quot; he said with a broad smile.    These days, the magazine may be back on both the Bush and Dole coffee tables. </TEXT></DOC>