<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870529-0043 </DOCNO><HL> Navy May Have Pressed Too Hard on ShipyardsFor Low-Cost Fleet as Expenses Keep Mounting--By Tim CarringtonStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BSTRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When the Reagan administration launched its ambitious plans for a 600-ship Navy, officials made a widely publicized, and widely applauded, push for more competition and lower costs from the nation's shipbuilders. But as the bills come in, some of the anticipated savings may turn out to be short-lived.    Now that the ships are being built, there's a growing worry that the contractors promised too much. &quot;My perception is that people bid at unrealistically low prices,&quot; says David Klinges, president of maritime construction at Bethlehem Steel Corp. As a result, contractors are preparing to seek more money from the government to make up the shortfall -- at a time when Congress is more loathe than ever to provide it.    Of 22 recent shipbuilding projects studied by the General Accounting Office, a congressional watchdog agency, 17 have begun to swell beyond the target prices established in the contracts. Government estimates project $1.2 billion more may be needed to cover costs. Many hours of wrangling will be necessary to determine just how much of that cost the government will bear.    &quot;The Navy may have driven companies to do dumb things that are going to cost the taxpayer later,&quot; says John Stocker, president of the Shipbuilders Council, an industry lobbying group.    In addition to pushing lower prices, the Navy has been pushing for higher technology, leaving some contractors in a squeeze. Sophisticated detection systems and new defensive weapon platforms are being added to protect ships from so-called smart weapons like the one that hit the frigate USS Stark in the Persian Gulf earlier this month. Some new systems were on that ship, but apparently weren't switched on in time to counter the attack.    Many shipbuilding officials concede that the tough Navy negotiating position on costs brought about efficiencies that may never have happened otherwise. &quot;We've developed a leaner and more competitive industry,&quot; says Bethlehem's Mr. Klinges. And Everett Pyatt, Navy undersecretary for shipbuilding, insists that &quot;we're in pretty good shape,&quot; adding that he believes the Navy can avoid trips back to Congress for more money.    But already it has made one such trip -- for nearly $100 million to shore up a mine-countermeasures ship -- and currently is deep in negotiations with several builders about responsibility for several other cost run-ups. For instance, two surveillance ships being built by Bethlehem already have risen above the contract price; Mr. Klinges says it's &quot;too early to determine the extent or say what part is mine and what part is the government's.&quot;    Observers trace the current problems to the desperate scramble for business that was set off by the administration's ambitious defense plans. With commercial shipbuilding contracts steadily drifting overseas, many U.S. shipyards look to the Navy as their only source of sustenance; when the fleet buildup got under way, most were inclined to go along with whatever terms the Navy dictated.    Many shipyards that failed to win Navy business closed down operations. General Dynamics Corp., for example, shut its venerable shipyard in Quincy, Mass., a year ago. &quot;We were blown out by low-balling elsewhere in the industry,&quot; says a company official. (The contractor continues to build submarines for the Navy out of its Groton, Conn., facility).    The shipyards correctly saw the Navy's gusher of contracts as a one-time opportunity, and were eager for the business while it was available. Indeed, now that the work is under contract to result in the 600-ship fleet, the decline in shipbuilding jobs is evident. In the current fiscal year, there are 16 ships to be contracted for, and under the Pentagon's fiscal 1988 plan there are 13. Congress will almost certainly cut this back by one or two ships.    Under most Navy contracts, shipyards agree to a target price that is fully covered by the government. There also is a ceiling price, generally set about 30% higher than the target price. Once costs pass the target price, the government and the shipyard share the additional costs. (Costs that exceed the ceiling price are borne by the shipyard.)    The GAO found that most of the surveyed shipyards currently see costs floating somewhere between target prices and the ceiling prices. Seven already predict final costs will be within 10% of the ceiling prices, the GAO found, and there could still be further cost run-ups.    Moreover, cost-splitting isn't automatic; if a shipyard can show itself blameless in cost increases, or even prove that the Navy was at fault, it can generally get out of paying for any of the run-up. Bath Iron Works in Maine, for example, is negotiating over about $100 million in added costs for the Aegis cruisers it is building. Some of the added costs result from a labor dispute, which the Navy will likely cover. Others stem from late deliveries of parts that the Navy itself is responsible for providing. Others result from Bath's own failure to run a production line as efficiently as it had intended.    Sorting out liabilities can become tortuous. Mr. Stocker and other industry officials worry that the Navy's negotiating positions will be driven by the absence of new money from Congress, which funded many programs on the overly optimistic assumption that costs wouldn't climb much above the target prices.    All these problems prompt bitter memories in some quarters of the deluge of shipbuilding claims that swamped the Navy during the late 1970s. Some of the claims, critics say, resulted from the Navy demanding low contract prices, then asking for improvements or changes in the design.    R. James Woolsey, who was Navy undersecretary in the late 1970s, is one who thinks there may be a replay. &quot;The administration is riding for a another wave of claims,&quot; he says. But he and others say they don't expect the current claims to be as large as the ones that came in during the previous round.    And the Navy does have some bright spots these days where it can look for help. For instance, the Ingalls Shipbuilding unit of Litton Industries Inc. has actually saved the Navy tens of millions of dollars on cruiser construction, mainly through shipyard efficiences. That, along with savings from other healthy projects, can be put into the ailing shipbuilding programs. </TEXT></DOC>