<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880629-0078 </DOCNO><HL> U.S. Sues to Oust Teamsters' Leadership, Name Trustee, Seek Election of New Slate </HL><AUTHOR> Ann Hagedorn and Robert E. Taylor (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LABOR </CO><G> JUS </G><TEXT>   The government, alleging organized-crime influence, filed a lawsuit aimed at ousting the national leadership of the Teamsters union and appointing a trustee to run the union until new officers are picked in a &quot;free and fair&quot; election.    The civil suit, which has been under consideration since last year, alleged that the union's 18-member board has deprived its 1.6 million members of their rights by allowing itself to be corrupted. The suit, filed in New York City, asked the court to remove from office any Teamsters union official found at trial to have violated federal racketeering laws.    In an attempt to gain a voice in union matters while the case is litigated, the government will ask for appointment of a court liaison officer empowered to discipline misconduct, review major executive committee actions and seek court orders blocking improper ones.    U.S. Attorney Rudolph W. Giuliani, who filed the suit, said the government alleges that &quot;organized crime has deprived union members of their rights through a pattern of racketeering that includes 20 murders, a number of shootings, bombings, beatings, a campaign of fear, extortion and theft . . . .&quot;    &quot;We are not seeking to take over the union,&quot; Mr. Giuliani said at a news conference. &quot;We are using the racketeering statute in a surgical way to take back the union from the Mafia.&quot; By removing the organized-crime influence, he said, the government intends &quot;to strengthen the trade union movement, not weaken it as some have suggested.&quot; Later, he added, &quot;{Union officials} have refused to clean it up so we will.&quot;    Weldon Mathis, the Teamsters' general secretary-treasurer, called the suit a &quot;vicious anti-labor tactic.&quot; In a statement issued from a union meeting in Montreal, he insisted that the union &quot;is not now and never was controlled by organized crime influence.&quot; And he specifically denied the suit's claim that Teamster elections were rigged in 1981 and 1986.    Mr. Mathis, one of the defendants, said the suit was especially &quot;shocking&quot; in light of a New York City jury's rejection of some of the government's claims last May.    That jury acquitted alleged mobster Anthony &quot;Fat Tony&quot; Salerno and associates of wire fraud in allegedly rigging the elections of Roy Williams and Jackie Presser as Teamsters presidents.    Edward Dennis, head of the Justice Department's criminal division, said in a news conference that the government would use the same evidence that it put before the Salerno jury, but would face a less-stringent burden of proof making that charge in the civil-racketeering suit.    The suit is the first to apply the civil provision of the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organizations statute, or RICO, to an entire international union. However, in eight other instances including two Teamsters locals, a New York union for cement and concrete workers, and a local roofers union in Philadelphia, the government has similarly used RICO.    Among the suit's 48 defendants are the union; Mr. Presser, current president; the current Teamsters board and one former board member; the Commission of La Cosa Nostra and its ruling council, and 26 individual Cosa Nostra defendants. La Cosa Nostra is the Justice Department's name for the Mafia in America.    Some, but not all, of the 26 Cosa Nostra defendants are members of the Teamsters and, according to the suit, all are alleged to be &quot;major La Cosa Nostra members and associates including the bosses of six La Cosa Nostra Families.&quot; Twenty-five in this group have been convicted of Teamster-related crimes, such as embezzlement of union funds, illegal labor payoffs, murder and extortion, the suit said. Of the 26, some 23 are currently in jail, including Mr. Salerno.    Shortly after the suit was filed yesterday, federal Judge David Edelstein, of the Southern District in New York, issued a 10-day temporary restraining order to immediately prevent the 18-member board from destroying union records and from expending funds other than ordinary expenses and benefit-fund payments. The order also restricts the 25 defendants with prior Teamster-related convictions from participating in union affairs.    To extend the power of the temporary restraining order through the impending court proceedings, the government will request a preliminary injunction at a hearing scheduled for Tuesday in Manhattan federal court.    The proposed injunction would bar current Teamster board members and the 26 Cosa Nostra defendants from any acts of racketeering. The court liaison officer would discipline any potential Teamster corruption while the government's case is locked up in court.    The current officials, Mr. Giuliani stressed, will continue to run the union on a daily basis. If the government's allegations are proven at a trial, then the government can appoint a trustee to manage the union. The trustee's main charge will be to run free elections and to keep the union clean of organized-crime influence.    The Teamsters union was readmitted to the AFL-CIO last October after being expelled in 1957 for refusing to respond to a federation investigation of the union's ethical conduct. It was widely suggested at the time that the prospect of the Justice Department lawsuit had spurred the Teamsters to rejoin the AFL-CIO in the hope of enlisting labor-movement aid in blocking a takeover.    The AFL-CIO hinted yesterday that it may intervene in the suit on behalf of Teamsters officers. The AFL-CIO called the government's lawsuit &quot;a clear abuse of prosecutorial power.&quot; It contended that the legal theories underlying the suit would, if sustained in court, &quot;undermine the free trade union movement.&quot;    Yesterday's civil action results from investigations connected with several successful convictions of Teamster-related crimes, as well as information gleaned from the President's Commission on Organized Crime, an investigation of union corruption.    In its March 1986 report, &quot;The Edge: Organized Crime, Business and Labor Unions,&quot; the commission concluded, among other things, that: &quot;The leaders of the nation's largest union, {the Teamsters} have been firmly under the influence of organized crime since the 1950s.&quot;    In fresh allegations against the union's 18-member board, yesterday's complaint said all had committed mail fraud and that seven board members had committed acts of racketeering that include embezzlement, receipt of illegal labor and benefit-fund payoffs, and bribery. Further, 12 of the board members were accused of aiding and abetting wire fraud in connection with the alleged scheme to ensure the elections of Messrs. Williams and Presser.    The suit comes at a time when the union's leadership already is in disarray. Mr. Presser's trial in federal court in Ohio on racketeering and embezzlement charges was postponed after his physicians said the defendant, who is suffering from brain tumors, was undergoing radiation treatment.    Mr. Presser, who is on a leave of absence from the union, was admitted yesterday afternoon to Lakewood Hospital near Cleveland in &quot;serious&quot; condition to undergo tests, a hospital spokesman said. During Mr. Presser's absence, Mr. Mathis has been running the union.    Only last month, the Teamsters' top leadership officially accepted a controversial nationwide trucking contract in the face of a 63.5% rejection by voting members. It wasn't immediately clear what impact yesterday's lawsuit might have on the three-year agreement, which covers about 200,000 workers.    Teamster dissidents have challenged the official acceptance of the agreement, arguing that a 1961 provision in the union's constitution requiring a two-thirds vote for authorizing a strike was illegally interpreted as negating the need for a majority vote to accept the new contract.    In Washington, Attorney General Edwin Meese said that he had removed himself from involvement in any investigations of the Teamsters, because he worked in the 1980 Reagan for President campaign, which accepted contributions from the union. He said that Mr. Reagan wouldn't have accepted Teamsters support if information in the department's lawsuit had been available at the time of his campaigns.    William Wynn, president of the United Food and Commercial Workers Union, protested the lawsuit as head of Americans Against Government Control of Unions, a group of about 70 unions and 1,000 individuals formed to publicly oppose the government's expected legal assault against the Teamsters.    Mr. Wynn complained that although several members of Congress have expressed dismay over the suit, President Reagan and Vice President George Bush have been silent since it was first threatened last fall. One union official hinted that workers would retaliate against Mr. Bush. &quot;Our relief will be at the ballot box Nov. 8,&quot; said Al Zack, a spokesman for Mr. Wynn's union. </TEXT></DOC>