<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870703-0109 </DOCNO><HL> Japanese Shareholder-Meeting HecklersTrying a New Tack: American Gadflies---By Karl SchoenbergerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN </IN><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The arrival of &quot;Mike Johnson,&quot; a mysterious American investor, will go down as a bizarre footnote in the internationalization of corporate Japan.    Someone -- or perhaps several Westerners -- using that name has attended shareholder meetings during the past year in the company of reputed Japanese thugs, confusing the proceedings by asking questions in English.    Mr. Johnson could be Japan's first foreign &quot;sokaiya.&quot; The term applies to a curious breed of underworld characters who extort payment from publicly listed companies by threatening to disrupt shareholder meetings. When paid, sokaiya also ensure that meetings close quickly and quietly.    Police say they don't know if Mike Johnson really exists. Sokaiya watchers say he's a fictitious character and that a Tokyo sokaiya gang has hired several transient foreigners to play his part.    Whoever Mike Johnson is, his appearance coincides with a period of desperation for the sokaiya, who have plied their blackmail and extortion since corporate capitalism took root in Japan. Police are actively enforcing a 1982 revision to the Commercial Code prohibiting payments to sokaiya. Since June 1986 police have arrested a total of 19 company officials and 21 sokaiya for violating the code. Scores of sokaiya have been arrested for blackmail. The unprecedented police crackdown has cut the sokaiya off from their corporate patrons, forcing them to seek new methods.    Among those convicted of making payoffs were officials of Sumitomo Marine andamp; Fire Insurance Co., Japan's fourth-largest non-life insurer; Konishiroku Photo Industry Co., maker of Sakura film and Konica copiers; Noritake Co., a tableware maker; and Sogo Co., owner of a major department-store chain. Payments to sokaiya were as high as 8.6 million yen (about $60,000). Punishment so far has consisted of fines and suspended jail sentences. One sokaiya spent five months behind bars.    Last Friday, more than 6,000 police fanned out to keep vigil over 1,067 general meetings held at the peak of the shareholder-meeting season. Sokaiya heckled the directors of many major corporations, including recently denationalized telecommunications giant Nippon Telegraph andamp; Telephone Corp., which was holding its first shareholder meeting. No major disruptions were reported.    And Mike Johnson wasn't sighted.    Members of the Komine Group, which police say is a band of sokaiya associated with the elusive Mr. Johnson, made an appearance at Nippon Stainless Steel Co.'s meeting, but without any foreign investors in tow. Goro Komine, leader of the group, says the fact that Mr. Johnson didn't seek publicity on Friday shows that he's a &quot;serious investor with serious questions.&quot;    Mr. Komine describes Mr. Johnson as an American in his 30s who has lived in Japan for several years and represents a group of foreign investors. Mr. Komine says Mr. Johnson asked him for help in &quot;studying about Japanese companies&quot; and has attended a shareholder meeting with Mr. Komine's group each month for the past year. A Mr. Johnson is on record as having attended the meetings of papermaker Chiyoda Shigyo Co., Kakuei Construction Co. and Sakura Rubber Co.    Mr. Komine refuses to provide further information about his &quot;client.&quot; Independent attempts to reach shareholders named Mike Johnson were unsuccessful. (Mike Johnson is a common American name, so it is possible that investors by that name have bought Japanese stocks but have no connections with sokaiya.)    Analysts at Commercial Law Center Inc., a Tokyo research institute that monitors the sokiaya, say they suspect the Komine Group has bought shares of companies under various false foreign names, including Mike Johnson, then hired Westerners to pose as him. The cast has even included a Frenchman, they say.    Sources close to the sokaiya say the Komine Group hires &quot;hippies&quot; off the streets of Shinjuku, a seedy Tokyo entertainment district. Shareholder's proxy in hand, the foreigners ask questions on cue, the sources say. Mr. Komine denies this.    Whether Mike Johnson is legitimate or not, his English-language questions have spurred a debate among corporation officials about whether they are obliged to respond, and in what language. Though foreigners invest heavily in the Tokyo Stock Exchange, non-Japanese rarely attend shareholder meetings. With the advent of Mike Johnson, most corporations now acknowledge questions only in Japanese.    Meanwhile, life is getting tougher for the sokaiya, many of whom have lost primary sources of income to the chill of police investigations. Mr. Komine says his group has diversified into real estate and runs an advertising agency. &quot;We call what we're doing public relations,&quot; he says. Others have expanded into publishing tip sheets and magazines to get under-the-table funds from companies, police say.    As many as 6,800 sokaiya flourished before the 1982 code revision; now there are about 1,400 active in approximately 45 groups, says Yasuhiko Nishimura, a National Police Agency investigator. Many sokaiya have strengthened ties to Japan's hard-core organized-crime syndicates, the &quot;yakuza,&quot; to survive in the new environment, Mr. Nishimura says.    The leader of a major sokaiya group, speaking on condition of anonymity, says the influence of organized crime has long permeated his world. &quot;The relationship between yakuza and sokaiya is like the chicken and the egg,&quot; he says.    Filibustering is the sokaiya's preferred method of harassment. Shareholder meetings are usually completed in minutes in Japan, where investors look for capital gains and seldom care about dividends or management. Ceremony-conscious management would be humiliated by a meeting that lasted more than two hours.    NTT's meeting, the first gathering of shareholders since stock was sold to the public last year, was punctuated by shouting and heckling. About 5,000 shareholders watched meekly as sokaiya peppered the management with questions about a director who allegedly pinched a woman on a crowded train and about pay phones that don't give change. The meeting closed without serious disruption in just under two hours.    Although the influence of the sokaiya may be waning, shareholder democracy isn't growing in its place.    &quot;The aim of the legal revision may have been to promote shareholder participation, but that doesn't fit the Japanese mentality,&quot; says Yasushi Kanno of the Commercial Law Center. &quot;If you look at the meetings that the sokaiya have abandoned, there aren't any real shareholders left behind.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>