<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871216-0039 </DOCNO><HL> Conferees AgreeTo Curb BenefitOf Equity Loans---Tax Negotiators in CongressStill at Odds on BreakFor Defense Contractors---By Monica Langley and Jeffrey H. BirnbaumStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXES GOVMT LATAMECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)AEROSPACE (ARO)BUYBACKS, REDEMPTIONS, SWAP OFFERS (BBK)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   House and Senate conferees agreed to limit tax benefits on home-equity loans, impose a new tax on corporate raiders and prevent a scheduled drop in estate taxes.    But the conferees remained far apart on several critical issues, including whether to eliminate tax breaks for defense contractors and companies involved in takeovers. &quot;We have a long way to go,&quot; said Senate Finance Chairman Lloyd Bentsen (D., Texas). &quot;There are still considerable differences.&quot;    The conferees are trying to agree on $9 billion in tax increases that, along with spending cuts, were called for in the recent budget agreement worked out by the White House and Congress. Yesterday, House and Senate conferees met separately and exchanged compromise proposals.    The Senate accepted a provision in the House-passed tax bill that would forbid interest deductions on home-equity loan amounts exceeding $100,000. The provision would allow borrowers to use all of their loan money for any purpose and still qualify for interest deductions, though. Currently, borrowers can't qualify for interest deductions on loan amounts exceeding the purchase price of the home plus improvements unless they use the money for specified purposes such as education and medical expenses.    The Senate rejected another House provision that would put a lid of $1 million on the amount of mortgage debt eligible for interest deductions. The real estate industry vehemently opposes that provision.    The Senate conferees agreed to a House provision that would create a 50% nondeductible &quot;corporate raider&quot; excise tax on the &quot;greenmail&quot; gain from stock that is bought back from companies subject to hostile tender offers. But they insisted that the tax only apply to raiders who are allowed to sell the stock at terms more favorable than those available to other shareholders.    The senators rejected the most controversial anti-takeover provision in the House bill -- even after House conferees offered to moderate it. The provision would deny deductions for interest in excess of $5 million on debt that a company incurs either to acquire a majority of another corporation's stock or to buy back its own stock. Yesterday, the House conferees suggested disallowing deductions for just 25% of the interest exceeding $5 million on such debt.    The House conferees' move to soften the proposal came as no surprise. Wall Street and the White House have adamantly opposed the original House provision, suggesting that it helped spark the stock market crash in October.    The Senate also refused to accept a House provision that would reduce tax advantages of hostile takeovers by denying interest deductions for debt used to purchase 20% or more of another corporation's stock in a hostile tender offer.    Senate conferees agreed with the House to freeze the existing estate tax rate at 55% for five years. The Senate bill would have extended the rate, which was scheduled to fall to 50% next year, at its current level for only two years. The White House, which objected to even the two-year extension, is sure to oppose this agreement.    The Senate conferees agreed to seek a compromise with the House on a provision that would prevent corporations from escaping taxes when they dispose of the assets of another company they acquire. Currently, companies can avoid taxation by placing the unwanted assets in subsidiaries that &quot;mirror&quot; the structure of the unwanted unit, and then liquidating these subsidiaries. The House proposed taxing liquidation of such subsidiaries.    The Senate rejected a House provision to repeal the completed-contract method of accounting used by defense contractors to defer taxes. Congress curtailed use of the method last year. It's possible the conferees could reach a compromise to cut back on it further without completely eliminating it, if they find that necessary to meet the budget accord's revenue goal.    Senate conferees also turned down a House measure that would base the minimum corporate tax on &quot;adjusted current earnings,&quot; rather than on part of book income as required under last year's tax law. This change generally would increase corporations' tax liability under the minimum tax.    Senators also rejected the House provision that would prevent a parent corporation from using all the income of a partly owned subsidiary to shelter its own losses, even though House conferees offered to delay its effect for one year.    Meanwhile, lawmakers made only limited progress on other elements of this fiscal year's deficit-reduction package. Only two of 13 appropriations panels said they were close to resolving differences in House and Senate spending measures, but most said the pace would accelerate today.    Congress probably will consider today a measure to extend funding of federal agencies temporarily while conferees try to resolve their differences on legislation appropriating funds for the government through fiscal 1988, which ends Sept. 30. Otherwise, appropriations would expire today, and the government would have to shut down.    Rep. Jamie Whitten (D., Miss.), chairman of the House Appropriations Committee, said he would ask that the funding be extended through Friday.    To surmount one obstacle to completion of the deficit-cutting package, House leaders have prepared a possible compromise position with the Senate on the issue of aid to the Nicaraguan Contra rebels. House leaders were moving toward accepting at least some nonlethal aid to the Contras, though less than the $9 million approved by the Senate. But the House leaders appeared unwilling to accept money to transport any weapons, as the Senate approved. A caucus of House Democrats on the issue is scheduled for tomorrow.    But Rep. David Obey (D., Wis.), one of the House negotiators on the Contra issue, questioned whether a measure with any funds for the Contras could pass the House.    Separately, conferees moved toward an accord that would reduce a proposed budget cut for the U.S. Postal Service. Lawmakers were considering halving a proposed $850 million cut in the Postal Service budget in fiscal 1988. They would make up the difference by letting the federal work force shrink by attrition. </TEXT></DOC>