<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880603-0172 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas: U.S. Planners Share the Blame for Brazil's Economic Woes </HL><AUTHOR> Paul Craig Roberts </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><TEXT>   The Brazilian government's latest effort to revitalize its economy is caught in a tug of war between President Jose Sarney's administration and the 559-member constituent assembly. In a May 19 plan, President Sarney called for privatization, reduced regulation and fewer protectionist trade barriers. However, the assembly seems headed in the opposite direction. In the meantime, Brazilians are registering their protests in the streets, down on the farm and by their migration patterns. The big loser is Brazilian democracy.    In February, a demonstration by 5,000 farmers in the state of Minas Gerais showed the extent of demoralization by its call for a return to a military government. Simultaneously, a poll published in the Jornal do Brasil revealed a population so demoralized that 64% of the residents of Rio de Janeiro and 60% of those in Sao Paulo would emigrate from Brazil if they had a place to go. The poll results may reflect protest rather than intentions, but statistics do indicate that Brazilians are leaving their country in record numbers. In 1987, 400,000 passports were issued, up from 239,000 the previous year. Federal police report that in each of the past three years 400,000 more Brazilians stayed abroad than returned home.    These are startling developments for a country whose traditional attitude has been that &quot;God is a Brazilian.&quot; They also offer U.S. policy makers a lesson on our historical failure to help develop and democratize the &quot;Third World.&quot; Instead of promoting free enterprise and the equity markets that made the West successful, the State Department and U.S.-funded multilateral development agencies imposed socialist &quot;development planning&quot; on lesser-developed countries (LDCs) as a condition for aid; a country without such a development plan could not get grants or loans and loan guarantees from multilateral lending agencies. And an LDC that was not a recipient of multilateral aid could not expect to receive loans from U.S. or European commercial banks.    Consequently, investment decisions in LDCs were centralized in the state, and development funds flowed primarily into socialist enterprises. What development economist and Nobel Laureate Gunnar Myrdal called &quot;grand scale national planning&quot; was so completely sanctioned by Western advisers that by 1956, he could write: &quot;This policy line is unanimously endorsed by governments and experts in the advanced countries.&quot; Debt-financed development planning centralized money and power in government hands. The result has been the corruption of political and economic life in the LDCs.    Last February, the former finance minister and current member of the House of Representatives, Francisco Dornelles, declared in a leading Brazilian newspaper, O Estado de Sao Paulo, that the lack of criteria for the disbursement of federal funds &quot;facilitates influence peddling and corruption.&quot; Corruption has reached the point that legally appropriated funds do not reach their destination unless the designated recipients pay bribes. Luiz Magnabosco, the mayor of Sacramento in Minas Gerais, told O Estado de Sao Paulo that only those who hire consulting firms to &quot;assist&quot; in the process receive their appropriated funds from Seplan, the Central Planning Ministry.    Corruption scandals abound, providing constant headlines that disgust the populace. And literally anyone can be accused, including the family of President Sarney, whose son-in-law has been accused of involvement in the Seplan scandal. Indeed, there are calls for President Sarney himself to take the witness stand.    Although international advisers taught Brazilians that public-sector growth is the path to development and economic justice, now virtually everyone realizes that the public sector is out of control. Brazil is an LDC, but the government takes about the same share of gross national product as in mature welfare states in the developed West. Because of this enormous burden, Brazilian government expenditures exceed revenues by about 7.4% of GNP, leaving a large gap that is financed by printing money. Inflation reached 350% in 1987 and is expected to reach 600% this year. The central bank announced that the monetary base grew 44% in March alone.    This enormous burden of taxes and inflation is borne almost entirely for the purpose of paying government salaries. On March 18, Luis Antonio Gonclaves, the secretary of the Brazilian National Treasury, reported that 78% of the government's revenues in February were used to cover salaries. Attempts to rein in payroll costs have caused massive strikes and well may be defeated by the entrenched bureaucracy, which has used successfully a provision of the &quot;acquired rights&quot; law to turn the federal budget into entitlements for bureaucrats.    Money that escapes the pockets of bureaucrats disappears into rat holes. The government continues to finance activities sanctioned by development planners that would be much more efficiently carried out by private firms (i.e., mining, oil-drilling, forestry, communications, construction, etc.). State companies continue to receive preferential treatment over private firms even though the state companies are unable to show a profit. Last year PETROBRAS, the state oil company, lost $170 million in its gasohol program alone. Caraiba Metais, a state copper-mining company, is reported to have lost $600 million in an uneconomic mine, construction of which was undertaken to provide jobs in the state of Bahia. Votes were temporarily bought at the expense of Brazil's development.    The government disrupts the economy in other ways. Prices for many manufactured goods and services are set by the Interministerial Council of Prices. Autolatina, a holding company for Ford and Volkswagen, was denounced by the finance minister in November when it sought to raise its prices to keep pace with inflation. The company had to fight for months for the right to recoup costs. Other regulations, such as those creating the excruciatingly slow and expensive process of legally starting a business, impede Brazil's growth and foster corruption. Many people simply have turned their backs on the official economy and are creating a private, parallel economy that was estimated by the International Labor Organization to employ 30% of the urban labor force in 1981. Today, it is certainly larger.    U.S.-sponsored development planning, which has demoralized the populace and made democracy a synonym for corruption, is creating a fertile ground for subversion. U.S. policy makers will continue to deny the obvious, but this dangerous development became starkly apparent last Feb. 12 when President Sarney announced in his weekly radio address to the nation: &quot;The situation in Brazil will get worse.&quot; From now on, &quot;there will be chaos, a reign of crime and impunity.&quot;    Little wonder Brazilians are leaving their country in record numbers, while some of the remaining are demonstrating for the return of military government. The question is: After years of corruption, can Brazilians summon the strength to kick out the development planners and launch a private-enterprise revolution? If China can do it, there is hope for Brazil as well.    ---   Mr. Roberts holds the William E. Simon chair at the Center for Strategic and International Studies in Washington. </TEXT></DOC>