<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870417-0019 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 04/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN SAID &quot;important progress&quot; was made on arms talks with Moscow.    The president, while expressing optimism, said he may have &quot;new ideas to offer&quot; rather than simply accept recent Soviet proposals. His remarks came after a meeting with Shultz, who had briefed NATO allies on his three days of talks with Gorbachev and other Kremlin officials. The U.S. and its allies are expected to accept Moscow's offer to abolish short-range and mid-range nuclear missiles from Europe, but will reaffirm a commitment to preserve and modernize battlefield nuclear arms.    The U.S. and six of its allies agreed to new international controls aimed at curbing the spread of missile technologies that could be used to deliver nuclear weapons. The agreement followed four years of secret negotiations.    A Soviet Foreign Ministry aide said Shultz didn't provide any proof of KGB involvement in a sex-for-spying scandal at the U.S. Embassy in Moscow.    ---   Federal agents arrested a co-owner of the Brooks, Weinger, Robbins andamp; Leeds Inc. brokerage firm, and 12 others, most of them brokers, in a Wall Street cocaine-distribution case. The government charged that brokers traded cocaine among themselves in exchange for stock tips and data about potential customers.    ---   The FCC warned broadcasters that it would levy fines on &quot;indecent&quot; programming. A spokesman for the agency, whose move followed an investigation of New York radio personality Howard Stern and others, said fines could be imposed of as much as $2,000 a broadcast for indecent programming.    ---   Court documents show that the FBI's investigation of Morton Thiokol centers on &quot;substantial allegations of fraud&quot; made by company employees concerning space shuttle booster rockets. The papers were filed in connection with a civil lawsuit by an ex-engineer for Thiokol, which made the shuttle Challenger's rockets.    ---   Three Pulitzer Prizes were awarded to the Philadelphia Inquirer, and the New York Times and the Los Angeles Times each captured two of the journalism awards, Columbia University announced. August Wilson's play &quot;Fences&quot; won the prize for drama and the fiction prize went to Peter Taylor for the novel &quot;A Summons to Memphis.&quot;    ---   Authorities in Seoul ruled that anyone under a suspended sentence can't be a member of a political party or influence a political group. The directive would affect dissident leader Kim Dae Jung. Throughout South Korea, thousands of students held rallies to protest President Chun's decision to end debate on constitutional change.    ---   Argentine President Alfonsin said he wouldn't negotiate with rebellious troops at a military camp outside the central city of Cordoba. An army major wanted for questioning about human-rights abuses took refuge at the camp and military commanders defied a court order to arrest the officer.    ---   A federal judge ruled that retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Secord can't be compelled to release records of foreign bank accounts to the Senate panel investigating the Iran-Contra scandal.    ---   Archbishop Tutu joined 46 other Anglican clergymen in defying Pretoria's new restrictions on anti-apartheid actions by urging South African President Botha to free detainees or bring them to trial. In Durban, a judge scheduled a hearing April 26 on a challenge to some of the curbs.    ---   Turkey formally notified the U.S. that it is suspending an agreement that would have automatically extended leases on American military bases in Turkey until 1990. Ankara said the U.S. hadn't maintained an agreed-upon level of military assistance.    ---   The EPA reaffirmed that formaldehyde, a chemical used in clothing and construction materials, probably causes cancer in humans. The EPA's risk estimates will be sent to other federal agencies for use in considering tighter limits on formaldehyde emissions.    ---   Italy's premier-designate told President Cossiga that he had succeeded in forming a government, which is expected to oversee early elections in June. The make-up of the coalition formed by Amintore Fanfani, a Christian Democrat, wasn't disclosed.    ---   NASA announced that the Atlas-Centaur rocket destroyed after launch in a rainstorm last month apparently was struck by as many as nine lightning bolts. The space agency, criticized for its decision to proceed with the launch, also disclosed that instrument readings before liftoff showed a high potential for electrical activity.    ---   The Justice Department said it would continue to consider offers from any country that will accept Karl Linnas, who has been sentenced to death in the Soviet Union for Nazi war crimes. The department's statement came despite a public furor and failed effort to deport Linnas to Panama.    ---   The State Department said it would press for the prosecution of Americans who traveled to Libya this week to attend rallies marking the first anniversary of the U.S. bombing of Tripoli and Benghazi. As many as 200 Americans reportedly went to Libya, despite a U.S. ban on such travel.    ---   Weinberger said the Soviet Union deciphered more than a million sensitive U.S. messages as a result of information from former Navy communications expert John Walker, who has pleaded guilty to spying. The defense secretary also questioned the Soviet policy of openness, warning that it might be a cover for espionage activities.    ---   Died: Robert H. Bethke, 71, former chairman of Discount Corp. of New York, Wednesday, in New York City. </TEXT></DOC>