<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880819-0008 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   BUSH ACCEPTED the GOP nomination, stepping out of Reagan's shadow.    In a speech to the Republican National Convention, the presidential nominee portrayed himself as a can-do optimist, a former torpedo-bomber pilot who sees life &quot;in terms of missions -- missions defined and missions completed.&quot; He portrayed Dukakis, his Democratic opponent, as a pessimist and a liberal in moderate's clothing.    Quayle received help through contacts of his wealthy family to secure a place in the Indiana National Guard during the Vietnam War. The controversy surrounding the vice presidential nominee drew attention away from the celebration of Bush's nomination.    After the delegates' approval and the Indiana senator's acceptance of the nomination, Bush said he was &quot;proud to have Dan Quayle by my side.&quot;    ---   OFFICIALS FOCUSED on sabotage as the cause of the crash of Zia's plane.    U.S. and Pakistani officials said such a possibility can't be ruled out in the midair explosion of a C-130 that killed President Zia, U.S. Ambassador Arnold Raphel and several generals. Pakistan's U.S. envoy said there have been &quot;several rather incriminating aspects&quot; about the crash, including the fact that the plane shouldn't have been carrying any explosives and that the pilot sent no distress signal. The U.S. is sending two teams of specialists to assist the Pakistani government.    Zia's body and those of the other 29 who were killed were recovered and taken to Islamabad. Acting President Khan declared 10 days of mourning.    ---   Burma's socialist government met unexpectedly in advance of today's parliament and party sessions to choose a successor to Sein Lwin, who resigned as president following bloody protests last week. Anti-government protesters demanding democracy held rallies in Rangoon and Mandalay, the two largest cities, according to diplomats.    ---   Polish labor unrest spread as at least 8,500 miners at five coal mines in the southern region of Silesia and 1,800 workers in the northern port of Szczecin struck, demanding official recognition of the outlawed Solidarity trade union. Poland's labor minister warned the strikers that they faced dismissal if they didn't return to work today.    ---   Israel banned Palestinian popular committees that carry out the orders of leaders of the eight-month-old uprising. The Red Cross and hospital officials said Israeli troops beat more than 250 Palestinians in four days of unrest in the Gaza Strip, where the army lifted a curfew. Palestinians also began a general strike in the West Bank.    ---   The White House has blocked an inquiry into the influence that Panamanian military ruler Gen. Noriega's alleged drug activities may have had on U.S. foreign policy, congressional investigators said. The investigators said a National Security Council directive advised government officials not to cooperate with the congressional inquiry.    ---   Najibullah's brother has defected to the U.S. with his family and is being accepted as a refugee, a Reagan administration official said. The official said Saddiq, brother of the president of Afghanistan, recently joined a rebel group. Separately, the U.S. said Moscow met a recent deadline to withdraw half its troops from Afghanistan.    ---   The space shuttle Discovery cleared one of its final hurdles as the space agency successfully test-fired a solid-rocket booster with flaws intentionally drilled into it and critical adhesives left off. The flaws were created to test whether backup seals would contain leaking hot gasses during the test-firing in Utah.    ---   Lebanon postponed the selection of a successor to President Gemayel after Christians opposed to Syria stayed away from a parliamentary session where Damascus-backed candidate Suleiman Franjieh was favored to win election. The interior minister accused a hard-line Christian militia of preventing lawmakers from attending.    ---   South Africa hinted it will soon free jailed African National Congress leader Nelson Mandela. President Botha said he hoped the 70-year-old Mandela would not have to return to prison from a hospital where he is being treated for tuberculosis.    ---   Estrogen helps prevent fatal strokes among elderly women, according to a British Medical Journal article based on a California study. Estrogen, used by many women to control menopause symptoms, was found to cut stroke rates in half among women participating in the six-year study.    ---   Died: Thomas C. Simons, 59, chairman of Capital Holding Corp., Wednesday, in Louisville, Ky., of cancer. . . . Frederick A. Manske Sr., 87, ex-National Gypsum Co. president, Wednesday, in Boca Raton, Fla. </TEXT></DOC>