<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870323-0069 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:Soviet Changes: Revolution or Reform?---By Henry S. Rowen</HL><DD> 03/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Striking events are happening in Moscow. Plays, films, literary works whose appearance would have been impossible a few years ago are now on the scene. Andrei Sakharov returns from Gorky; many other dissidents are released from the Gulag; Mikhail Gorbachev speaks of having competition in elections to party positions; and family businesses are made legal.    How fundamental are the changes these events portend? In &quot;The Waking Giant: Gorbachev's Russia&quot; (Pantheon, 298 pages, $17.95), Martin Walker, the Manchester Guardian's Moscow correspondent since 1984, says that the situation is &quot;revolutionary.&quot; More importantly, Mr. Gorbachev describes it that way as well. As Mr. Walker puts it, the situation is driven by the emergence of a new class, well-educated, relatively prosperous, influential, frustrated by the inefficiencies and dreariness of Soviet life and keenly aware of Soviet backwardness. This class wants to see the system reformed.    &quot;Reform&quot; is not &quot;revolution.&quot; Mr. Walker's informed and sympathetic descriptions of the struggle to gain more freedom for the arts, of the emergence of a feminist movement (in a country where women have a truly hard lot), of recent economic experiments, suggest that the modification of the existing system, not its transformation, is the aim of most of those pushing for change; and there are many in the Politburo, Central Committee and Communist Party who resist even this.    Mr. Gorbachev may indeed want some big changes; at least he says some bold things. He sometimes asserts that there is a need for flexible prices linked to demand as well as cost; that farmers should be able to market their produce; and that wages should be linked to personal -- and organizational -- performance. But, as Mr. Walker observes, the system has little room for maneuver. The party and bureaucracy resist, needed price increases could result in riots, and Mr. Gorbachev might go, as did Nikita Khrushchev, in a &quot;Putsch.&quot;    The economic system and its performance are of central importance, and Mr. Walker's treatment of them is inadequate. Soviet real national income did not grow at anything like the 62% rate during the 1970s that Mr. Walker claims; the improvements in the Brezhnev years were mostly over by the mid-1970s. Contrary to Mr. Walker's assertion, an arms race in space will definitely not boost the Soviet economy. Mr. Gorbachev is clearer on this when he complains to Ronald Reagan that the American Strategic Defense Initiative is designed to drive the Soviet Union into bankruptcy.    The basic cause of Soviet economic malaise is the command structure of the economy, but the Soviets are also hurt, much more than Mr. Walker acknowledges, by the enormous share of resources taken by the military and related activities throughout the Soviet empire. As Mr. Gorbachev tries to hold down military spending and shift resources into investment, Mr. Walker sees, plausibly, that the surface navy and the Soviet forces along the Chinese border will likely be most affected.    If Mr. Walker deserves good grades for his reportage of Kremlin personalities and the cultural scene, and (at best) an incomplete on economic matters, he flunks on geopolitics. Here his stance is nominally neutral, but it is operationally favorable to the Soviets (or rather to his notion of what Mr. Gorbachev stands for). His arguments are depressingly familiar: The invasion of Afghanistan is just one of those things that empires do; the &quot;For every Afghanistan there is a Vietnam&quot; syndrome. The old Soviet fear of being surrounded by enemies compels the country to break out and dominate its neighbors. Moreover, the West's support for corrupt and brutal regimes in the Third World is the real reason for Soviet expansion there.    Of course we need to try to understand the Soviet Union better, but to those on the receiving end of Soviet bullets and bombs, whether directly or indirectly delivered (no hint at Soviet support of terrorists pops up in Mr. Walker's book), it is present Soviet behavior that matters most, not the terrible past that has warped its collective psyche.    Mr. Walker suggests that the West has an interest in maintaining the &quot;physical and territorial integrity of the Soviet state&quot; and that the failure of Mr. Gorbachev's program might produce a collapse with consequent chaos -- a united Germany, a European crisis and, perhaps, general war.    So let us help Mr. Gorbachev, he urges. We have been hearing this line from West Germany's foreign minister, Hans-Dietrich Genscher, and we will hear more of it from others in coming months. The problem with this line is that the Soviet system is all too stable; that is, too resistant to change. Help from the West simply makes it easier for its rulers to maintain their inefficient system.    ---   Mr. Rowen is professor of public management at the Graduate School of Business and senior research fellow at the Hoover Institution, Stanford University. </TEXT></DOC>