<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880701-0024 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   A COMMUNIST DELEGATE FAULTED longtime Kremlin figures.    In a speech before a national party conference in Moscow, the leader of the Russian region of Komi bluntly criticized President Gromyko and other party stalwarts for promoting &quot;the policy of stagnation.&quot; Citing the &quot;time of perestroika,&quot; he suggested that they weren't fit to hold office any longer. Soviet leader Gorbachev, in a second address to the forum, appealed to the 5,000 delegates to adopt his restructuring proposals, saying &quot;socialism will die unless we reform&quot; the Soviet political system.    Brezhnev and Chernenko were condemned by delegates to the conference, who said the former Soviet leaders were involved in abuses of power.    ---   A REBEL PRELATE DEFIED the pope and provoked a Roman Catholic schism.    The Vatican excommunicated traditionalist Archbishop Lefebvre and four bishops that he consecrated without papal authority. The consecration ceremony at Lefebvre's seminary in Switzerland was performed despite a last-minute appeal by Pope John Paul II. The move by the 82-year-old prelate, who has rejected the revisions of the 1962-65 Second Vatican Council, caused the first formal break with the Vatican since the so-called Old Catholics rebelled in 1870 over the doctrine of papal infallibility.    Lefebvre's Mass was the Tridentine rite in Latin, which has been replaced by the vernacular. He has condemned the &quot;satanic influence&quot; of modernism.    ---   The Supreme Court let stand a federal appeals court's ruling that legislators may be sued for libel for statements made outside their legislative role. The court's action was a setback for Congress. The justices also agreed to consider next term whether to ban the death penalty for crimes by juveniles.    ---   The Reagan administration said it will soon begin mandatory, random drug testing of all 1,600 workers on the White House payroll. It also was disclosed that five employees, three uniformed Secret Service guards and two National Security Council clerks, were relieved of their duties as the result of a months-old drug inquiry.    The National Drug Policy Board sent Reagan proposals to fight drug abuse, including a provision requiring private contractors to introduce &quot;drug-free workplace plans&quot; if they receive federal funds. The proposals aim to toughen legal penalties.    ---   The U.S. has accused Teamsters union President Presser of accepting $300,000 in kickbacks from a Las Vegas advertising agency that was hired by the union in 1972 to improve its public image. The accusation is listed in a Justice Department civil racketeering suit against the Teamsters filed earlier this week.    ---   Turkey's President Evren warned that Ankara might reduce its NATO military forces unless it receives a substantial increase in foreign security assistance. Evren's remarks reflect Turkish frustration over reductions in U.S. aid since 1985. Turkey's 800,000-man force is one of the largest in NATO.    ---   Shultz met with the leaders of El Salvador and Honduras and urged them to protect their democracies. The secretary of state made his remarks during a tour of Central America. In Nicaragua, Ortega extended for another month a cease-fire with the Contras and proposed a new round of peace talks with the rebels later this month.    ---   The AMA approved a package of policies designed to help check the spread of AIDS, including a recommendation that states begin tracing the sex partners of people infected with the incurable disease. The doctors' organization also renewed its call for mandatory testing of all prison inmates to determine carriers of the AIDS virus.    ---   Vietnam withdrew its military high command from Cambodia, a major step by Hanoi to end its nine-year-old occupation. Vietnam has said it will pull out half of its about 100,000 troops from Cambodia this year and the remainder by the end of 1990. A three-faction Cambodian coalition is to hold peace talks with Hanoi later this month.    ---   Four Israelis were sentenced by a magistrates court in Jerusalem to six months in prison and fined $2,000 each for meeting with members of the PLO two years ago in Romania. The four were the first Israelis to be convicted under a law prohibiting contacts with &quot;terror groups.&quot;    ---   Italy's Parliament voted to accept the transfer of U.S. F-16 fighter jets from Spain by 1991. The redeployment of the 72 planes, which Madrid had requested be withdrawn from the Torrejon air base, was approved despite opposition from the Communists and other left-wing parties in Rome.    ---   Iraq said its jets bombed an Iranian natural-gas plant and an offshore oil field during raids in the Persian Gulf. Baghdad Radio also claimed that Iraq's land forces drove Iranian troops from four points along the central sector of the war front. </TEXT></DOC>