<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870810-0084 </DOCNO><HL> How the Iran Initiative Went Wrong---By Michael A. Ledeen</HL><DD> 08/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>      Mr. President:   I had hoped to be able to tell this story in public testimony before the Iran-Contra committees, but they decided not to call me. Since you are preparing a speech on the Iranian affair, I thought you should have the benefit of my own first-hand experiences.    You are quite right to say that we began with a serious effort to change the relationship with Iran, but I believe you do not know the real story of the tragic transformation of the Iran initiative into an arms-for-hostages deal. Had you known, it might not have happened at all.    The story begins with an intelligence failure: We didn't know much about Iran. We had had poor intelligence as far back as the time of the fall of the shah and things got worse after the Ayatollah Khomeini's seizure of power in 1979. By the winter of 1984-85, we lacked even the basic elements of political intelligence, and while there were clues that suggested the existence of competing factions within the regime, we did not know who they were, or the identities of the leading figures.    This systematic ignorance paralyzed any hope for a coherent Iran policy even though we realized that we ought to be striving to increase our influence there. We were not alone in recognizing the urgency of the situation, for leaders from moderate Arab countries, Israel and Western Europe pleaded with us to get involved.    National Security Adviser Robert McFarlane decided to try to learn more about Iran, and since many of the best-informed of our friends believed that the Israelis had good intelligence in the field, it seemed a reasonable idea to ask the Israelis to share their knowledge. I was then a part-time consultant to Mr. McFarlane, had done some scholarly work on Iran in the past, and had gotten to know Prime Minister Shimon Peres while working as special adviser to Secretary of State Alexander Haig. Mr. McFarlane asked me to go to Israel in May 1985 to talk to Mr. Peres about his government's understanding of Iran. Mr. Peres offered to share intelligence with us, and he set up a group of Israeli experts to work with me.    As luck would have it, this was just about the same time that Saudi businessman Adnan Kashoggi introduced an Iranian friend of his -- the now-infamous Manucher Ghorbanifar -- to the Israelis. Mr. Ghorbanifar came with a great number of ideas, proposals, propositions, deals and bundles of information, specifically about the situation within Iran and the prospects for some sort of change there. If you go back and read the original document that Mr. Ghorbanifar wrote (the so-called &quot;Kashoggi report&quot; that was given to you in the spring of 1985) you will see that he encouraged the U.S. to strike a blow at the Iranian organizers of international terrorism. He recognized that relations between the two countries could never improve so long as Iran sponsored so much terrorist activity, and he believed there were many powerful Iranians who were willing to take steps to end the wave of terror emanating from Tehran.    Who was Mr. Ghorbanifar? Lt. Col. Oliver North says he was an Israeli agent, and Mr. McFarlane calls him the most despicable creature he ever met. Retired Gen. Richard Secord considers him a vulgar con man, and arms dealer Albert Hakim has nothing good to say about him either. The CIA found him a chronic liar, and issued a &quot;burn notice&quot; to friendly intelligence services, warning that Mr. Ghorbanifar was not reliable.    Yet, if everyone felt this way about him, why was Mr. Ghorbanifar the only person in the affair from the beginning to the end? There were some good reasons:    --The information that Mr. Ghorbanifar provided the Israelis (and later to me) about Iran in the spring and summer of 1985 was solid. Before they knew the origin of the data, top CIA officials were very impressed; once they heard Mr. Ghorbanifar's name, they changed their assessment.    --The hijacking of the TWA plane in June 1985 could not have been resolved so happily without Mr. Ghorbanifar.    --At the outset of the affair, the Israeli secret intelligence service, the Mossad, pronounced Mr. Ghorbanifar a &quot;wanted man&quot; in Iran, and hence incapable of having the sort of high-level contacts he claimed to possess. Yet we discovered that the contacts were real, when Mr. Ghorbanifar picked up the telephone, dialed the private number of the Iranian prime minister, and spoke to him as only a close confidant can.    --When Mr. Ghorbanifar told us that Iran was in a position to effect the release of American hostages in Lebanon, we were skeptical. Most experts felt only Syria could do such a thing, while the rest argued it was necessary to deal with the &quot;independent&quot; terrorist groups such as Hezbollah. Yet Mr. Ghorbanifar was right, and the experts wrong. If we had not listened to Mr. Ghorbanifar, and if you had not decided to test his bona fides in August and September 1985, the Rev. Benjamin Weir, the Rev. Lawrence Jenco and David Jacobsen would still be hostages today.    The central point is clear enough: Mr. Ghorbanifar knew an enormous amount about Iran, and his contacts with very important and powerful Iranians were beyond doubt. Mr. Ghorbanifar thus had the two essentials any serious Iranian program required: knowledge and contacts. The CIA's opposition to him ostensibly rested on his failure to tell the truth on CIA-conducted polygraphs, yet this is an odd position for a professional intelligence service. If the CIA can't work with someone who lies from time to time -- especially when that person is involved in dangerous activities -- they will end up working with a very small sample of humanity. I suspect that their real motive was a different one: The agency showed a deep antipathy toward working with anyone it could not control.    The bottom line was that Mr. Ghorbanifar was useful, and you were right to move forward. The events of August-September 1985 represented a set of reciprocal gestures on both sides, with each establishing that the other side was acting in good faith and on the highest authority. We were then in a position to explore the prospects for an improved relationship, confident that the channel was legitimate. It was at this point that things started to go off the tracks.    In the course of the summer and autumn of 1985, we established contact with some important Iranians who wished to change the policies of the regime. They realized this might entail a change in personnel as well, and they did not shrink from the sort of conflict that their activities were likely to engender in Tehran. Some of them may well have risked their lives to meet with us.    What did they want? First, they wanted to coordinate their activities with us so that we would know in advance what they planned to do; they did not wish to surprise us, since they saw this activity as laying the groundwork for a long-term relationship between the two countries. Second, they wanted us to inform them of any actions we contemplated that might strengthen the current regime. This was in response to our approval of the Israeli TOW shipments, which our interlocutors violently opposed. They felt that these shipments had strengthened their political opponents -- those who had engineered the hostage-taking in the first place. Finally, they wanted some help in defending themselves against their enemies, should violence erupt.    I recommended that these contacts be expanded in order to answer the basic questions that grew out of the conversations: Was it possible for the U.S. to work with powerful Iranians who wished to change the policies of the regime, and thereby enable our two countries to improve our relations? Were the people who met with us acting in good faith? If they were, could they deliver; was real change in Tehran possible? Alas, the contacts were dropped, and we do not have answers to these fundamental questions. Those Iranians have never heard back from the government of the United States.    This was the situation at the time I was removed from the project in late November 1985. I believe that you were never informed of these contacts and the possibilities they represented. When I asked Mr. McFarlane in the autumn of 1986 if he had ever told you about the contacts, he said no. And when I briefed Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger about the matter in the summer of 1986, he exploded: &quot;Why was I never told about this?&quot;    Since you never knew what had been done, you could not choose among the real policy options. Had these options been presented to you, I trust you would have realized that any policy that enabled Iran to obtain U.S. weapons would have undercut the possibilities for a political breakthrough. Despite your strong feelings about the American hostages in Lebanon, I hope you would have decided that the vital geopolitical interests of the U.S. in the Middle East were far more important, and instructed your cabinet to pursue the political opportunities. But we shall never know what might have been; we must now pay the price of our errors.    Finally, I hope that you will reflect on this sad history to draw some conclusions for the future, for I believe our actions in the Persian Gulf rest on the same confusions that existed at the origins of the Iran initiative. The USS Stark was attacked by Iraqi warplanes, and we responded by confronting not Iraq but Iran.    Two years after the Iranian initiative began, we still have no Iran policy. I suggest that the basis for such a policy must rest on a simple strategic objective: We wish to encourage a change in the Iranian regime. So long as Iran is in the hands of clerical fascists who are driven by intense hatred of the West, our interests in the Middle East will be in jeopardy. You may decide that we should attack Iran, or aggressively subvert the ayatollah, or try to buy him off, hoping that time will bring about some useful change. But these are tactical matters; the strategic goal must be advanced. To stagger into a confrontation with Iran under circumstances in which it chooses the time, place and manner of the conflict is unseemly, and the political consequences are perilous. You can do better.    ---   Mr. Ledeen, a former consultant to the NSC, is president of I.S.I. Enterprises, a consulting firm in Chevy Chase, Md. </TEXT></DOC>