<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870921-0137 </DOCNO><HL> Impact of Bork's Testimony Isn't Clear,But It Gave Him New Wins and Losses---By Stephen WermielStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SUPREME COURT (SUP)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Judge Robert Bork projected a positive personal image during the Senate Judiciary Committee's hearings on his nomination to the Supreme Court, but he left unresolved questions about his judicial philosophy.    Sen. Dennis DeConcini (D., Ariz.), one of four undecided senators on the closely divided 14-member committee, said the effect of Judge Bork's marathon testimony was &quot;really a mixed bag. People know him now, but I certainly am not satisfied with some of his responses.&quot;    The statement sums up the five days of testimony that ended Saturday, a record for a Supreme Court nominee, by the 60-year-old Judge Bork. A federal appeals court judge since 1982, Judge Bork also has been a Yale Law School professor, U.S. solicitor general, and acting attorney general.    Civil rights and civil liberties lobbyists, who oppose the nomination, insisted that Judge Bork failed to persuade any of the undecided senators whose votes may influence other lawmakers when the nomination goes to the full Senate next month.    But Reagan administration officials think the hearings helped, and are confident they have picked up support from among the undecided Judiciary Committee members. A senior White House official said Judge Bork made progress with Sen. Howell Heflin, a conservative Alabama Democrat, and Sen. Arlen Specter, a moderate Pennsylvania Republican. The White House is uncertain about West Virginia Sen. Robert Byrd, the Senate Democratic leader, and is most concerned about Sen. DeConcini, a conservative Democrat, said the senior official, who asked that he not be identified.    The other ten members of the panel appear to be evenly split, with five conservative Republicans supporting the nomination, and five liberal Democrats opposing it.    While the full impact of Judge Bork's testimony won't become apparent for several weeks, it added entries on both sides of the ledger.    Judge Bork was able to demystify himself as an individual, demonstrating through patient, painstaking answers, quick wit and good humor that he isn't personally as menacing as his critics have suggested. To help soften the nominee's image for television audiences, administration lobbyists rearranged the seating behind Judge Bork after the opening day, so that viewers would see a backdrop of his wife, Mary Ellen, and his daughter, Ellen, instead of a coterie of pin-striped lawyers helping him with the hearings.    But Judge Bork left some senators uncertain about his legal philosophy. Spurred by White House strategists, he moved away from some of his highly provocative writings as a law professor -- works that earned him his reputation as a leading conservative scholar -- and took more moderate positions.    For example, he accepted for the first time the long-established Supreme Court view that the First Amendment guarantee of free speech protects persons advocating violence or law-breaking unless there is an imminent danger. He often has criticized that view in the past.    He also said the 14th Amendment right of &quot;equal protection of the laws&quot; bars most forms of sex discrimination, even though in the past he has been adamant that it applied only to racial and ethnic bias. And he said he respects Supreme Court precedents, although he previously has urged rejecting some that he felt weren't based on a proper reading of the Constitution.    &quot;The difference is my role,&quot; he explained. &quot;As a judge, I accept lines of precedent that I criticized as a professor.&quot;    But undecided senators were left grappling with an enigma. Sen. Specter said yesterday on CBS television's Face the Nation, &quot;Judge Bork has made significant shifts from his writings to what he testified about.&quot; Sen. DeConcini said yesterday on the same program, &quot;The problem is predictability.&quot; And Sen. Heflin said last week he wished he were a psychiatrist so he could figure Judge Bork out.    On some points the judge adhered to his views, including his strong criticism of the Supreme Court's decisions that there is a right to marital and sexual privacy implicit in the Bill of Rights. While he said a number of legal doctrines with which he disagrees are so well-established that they can't be overruled, his only assurance about privacy was that he doesn't think it is being seriously threatened by any law enforcement officials.    The Supreme Court's ruling that established a right to an abortion is based largely on its right-to-privacy decisions. Judge Bork offered little guidance about how he would view a challenge to the abortion right.    The Judiciary Committee's hearings will continue this week, with dozens of witnesses on both sides scheduled to testify. The committee isn't likely to vote on Judge Bork's nomination until Oct. 1 at the earliest.    Sen. Joseph Biden (D., Del.), the committee chairman, has said the nomination will go to the full Senate regardless of how the panel votes. So the battle within the committee is to see what kind of momentum the nomination will have when it reaches the Senate floor. If the committee votes against Judge Bork, Sen. DeConcini said last week, &quot;It would be very damaging to the nominee.&quot; A seven-seven tie would provide no recommendation. A vote in Judge Bork's favor would be a strong boost.    Just what strategy will be followed on the floor is uncertain. To be confirmed, Judge Bork needs only a simple majority, or 51 votes. But liberals like Sen. Edward Kennedy (D., Mass.) have talked about a filibuster. Under Senate rules, that could stall the nomination indefinitely, unless supporters of Judge Bork can muster 60 votes to cut off debate.    On Saturday, Tom Korologos, a lobbyist who is helping Judge Bork through the process, said, &quot;I'm confident we have 50 (votes), but not 60.&quot; However, Sen. Biden said recently that a filibuster might be ill-advised because some senators who may oppose Judge Bork wouldn't join such a strategy of trying to defeat the nomination indirectly. </TEXT></DOC>