<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870609-0038 </DOCNO><HL> Hall Says She Helped Col. North Shred,Alter Documents on Iran-Contra Affair---By David Rogers and John WalcottStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Fawn Hall, former secretary to Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North, testified that last November she helped to shred and alter classified documents detailing Col. North's involvement in providing funds and arms to Nicaraguan insurgents.    Ms. Hall appeared yesterday under a grant of immunity before lawmakers investigating the Iran-Contra affair. Her testimony was accompanied by the release of records showing wholesale changes were made in the documents to disguise not only the role of Col. North, who was fired from his post at the White House National Security Council, but also his superiors' knowledge of his activities.    References to the private arms network and a proposal to sabotage a ship in Nicaragua, for example, were eliminated entirely in what apparently was a clumsy cover-up attempt just before the Iran-Contra operation was disclosed.    In one instance, Ms. Hall added to a document a recommendation that President Reagan be briefed on the Contras' financial situation, according to exhibits at the hearing. Last week The Wall Street Journal reported that sources had suggested that she had deleted the president's name.    Hundreds of pages of documents from Col. North's safe were shredded, Ms. Hall told the combined House and Senate committee. She described how she later carried papers out of the White House concealed in her boots and clothing. And she told the panel that Col. North's phone logs were among the items destroyed.    Ms. Hall also told the lawmakers that her former boss had regularly kept notebooks of his own, which she believes she has since seen in his attorney's office.    The 27-year-old part-time model was often vague in her recollection of events but offered revealing glimpses of Col. North to whom she remains loyal.    She contradicted reports of &quot;one-on-one&quot; meetings between Col. North and President Reagan, and instead portrayed the colonel as having a more direct relationship with the late William Casey, former director of the Central Intelligence Agency. Mr. Casey, she said, was in &quot;frequent&quot; contact with the office.    Testifying about a controversial memo written by Col. North in the spring of 1986, Ms. Hall indicated that former National Security Adviser John Poindexter was familiar with plans to divert proceeds from U.S. arms sales to Iran to assist the Contras. The so-called &quot;diversion&quot; memo detailed such a proposal by Col. North. Ms. Hall said that several drafts were prepared and that Adm. Poindexter had read the memo and made some changes in an early version.    Ms. Hall, who is now a secretary at the Pentagon, didn't recall if the memo was ever sent. Her testimony, however, is the clearest evidence yet that Adm. Poindexter knew of the planned diversion, and it raises questions about whether he sought the president's approval.    Ms. Hall's appearance before the congressional investigating committees followed testimony by the White House attorney who wrote a 1985 legal opinion, which said NSC staff was exempted from restrictions on U.S. military aid to the Contras. Bretton Sciaroni, counsel to the president's Intelligence Oversight Board, testified that documents detailing Col. North's covert role were withheld from him at the time he issued the opinion.    Mr. Sciaroni said he had interviewed Col. North at the time for only five minutes. While he remained firm in his legal opinion, Mr. Sciaroni was forced to admit major shortcomings in his own legal background.    Mr. Sciaroni's opinion interpreting the landmark Boland amendment banning military aid was his first attempt as a practicing attorney to analyze legislation. A graduate of the University of California at Los Angeles Law School, the 35-year-old lawyer acknowledged that he had twice failed bar exams in California and Washington, D.C. His appointment to the intelligence board, he said, was his first job as a lawyer after passing the Pennsylvania bar in 1984.    The documents altered by Ms. Hall were among those earlier withheld from Mr. Sciaroni. In identifying sensitive documents, Col. North appears to have worked from a handwritten list of memos prepared in 1985 as part of an internal NSC search.    Robert McFarlane, Mr. Poindexter's predecessor as national security adviser, has also described these documents in testimony before the committees. According to Mr. McFarlane, the documents were found by an attorney on the NSC staff, Navy Cmdr. Paul Thompson, while he was searching NSC files during early congressional inquiries into Col. North's role.    The papers were concealed from Congress as well. According to Ms. Hall's testimony, Col. North would have been aware of this when he sought to alter the contents and replace the originals with modified versions.    The changes were made last Nov. 21, the day before Attorney General Edwin Meese launched an informal inquiry into the Iran-Contra affair. Because the &quot;diversion&quot; memo was prepared long after the review by Cmdr. Thompson, it wouldn't have been on the handwritten list used by Col. North.    The alterations were made hastily. Ms. Hall retyped memos dated in 1985 on stationary that the NSC staff didn't begin to use until 1986. In one case, she testified that she changed the contents of a memo but then left attached to it documents related to early shipments of arms to the Contras by Col. North's frequent ally, retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord.    Ms. Hall's testimony has added to the controversy surrounding Washington attorney Thomas Green, who then represented both Gen. Secord and Col. North and earlier had been paid a finder's fee for his part in one of the Contra arms shipments.    She testified that after she smuggled documents out of the White House, Mr. Green asked her what she would say if she were asked about shredding. When she answered that documents were shredded every day in the NSC offices, Mr. Green replied: &quot;Good.&quot; Mr. Green wasn't available for comment.    Ms. Hall couldn't recall many details of her work for Col. North, and said she didn't question orders he gave her. &quot;I believed in Col. North and what he was doing,&quot; she told the lawmakers. &quot;I had no right to question him.&quot;    Investigators said her recollections have been incomplete and sometimes contradictory, mostly because she didn't read the documents she was asked to alter and destroy.    Sources close to Ms. Hall said that at first, she indicated Col. North had ordered her to delete a reference to President Reagan from a memo giving details of aid to the Contras. But late last week, after more questioning, she indicated that she added the reference to the president, the sources said.    Investigators also said they aren't sure they have obtained all the records of the Iran-Contra affair. They said it's possible that Col. North and Ms. Hall succeeded in destroying all copies of some memos kept in the NSC's registry of intelligence documents. They said the registry has no catalog and no permanant record of when or by whom documents were withdrawn. &quot;There may be stuff we'll never find,&quot; said one congressional investigator. </TEXT></DOC>