<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870703-0144 </DOCNO><HL> Flash Point: Airline Officials ClashWith FAA on Fire-Safety Proposal---By Laurie McGinleyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MD BAAIRLINES (AIR)AEROSPACE (ARO)TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT (TRN) </IN><TEXT>   It was June 1983, and the Air Canada plane was en route to Toronto from Dallas when a flight attendant discovered smoke in the rear lavatory. She rushed to tell the captain, who within minutes began an emergency descent to the Cincinnati airport, his vision badly obscured by smoke pouring into the cockpit.    Upon landing, 23 people scrambled to safety, but 23 others were killed when a flash fire engulfed the cabin. The disaster horrified the public and Congress, and spurred renewed efforts by the Federal Aviation Administration to reduce the lethal threat of airliner fires.    Aviation's fire record &quot;is clearly something we can improve upon,&quot; says Anthony Broderick, associate FAA administrator for aviation standards.    But now a major element of the FAA's program is under attack from manufacturers and airlines. The rule in question, due to take effect in August 1990, requires that certain materials in new jetliners and those undergoing renovation pass a strict test measuring the amount of heat they release when burned. Included are materials used for side walls, ceilings, stowage bins and partitions.    Industry officials say that the rule's practical impact would be to ban virtually all materials currently used for such purposes in airliners. New ones would have to be developed, at considerable expense. The industry, which says it can meet an interim standard that takes effect in August 1988, argues that the final rule is too rigid and that the proposed test requirements be eased.    Industry critics, however, assert that such resistance endangers the public. &quot;The industry has done everything it can do to delay federal regulations in this area,&quot; contends Matthew Finucane, safety director for the Association of Flight Attendants, the union that represents more than 20,000 flight attendants. &quot;In the meantime, we've had some horrible fires.&quot;    At the heart of the debate is how best to prevent or at least delay flash fires and flashovers. In a flash fire, combustible gases emitted by burning materials build up and ignite. In a flashover, a small, localized fire spreads suddenly through the cabin, producing lethal gases and a sharp temperature rise. Both kinds of fires result in &quot;nonsurvivable conditions within a matter of seconds,&quot; the National Transportation Safety Board says.    According to a Boeing Commercial Airplane Co. study of 153 survivable airline accidents, post-crash fires occurred in more than 103 and were responsible for 1,356 -- or one-third -- of the fatalities. Between 1974 and 1984, an average of 30 people a year who survived the initial impact of an accident died in airline fires in the U.S., according to the FAA. Such victims usually are killed by toxic gases rather than the fire itself.    And the fire hazard isn't limited to crashes, as the Air Canada tragedy and others show. In 1985, for example, an engine on a British Airways jetliner exploded during takeoff on a runway in Manchester, England, igniting a fire that killed 55 of the 137 people on board.    The FAA, partly in response to congressional pressure, has taken several steps in recent years to reduce fire risks. Among the most important is a rule requiring that seat cushions be made of fire-blocking material to prevent -- or at least delay -- their going up in flames. Also, the FAA has ordered that airliners be equipped with floorlevel lighting, automatic fire extinguishers and smoke alarms in bathrooms, and protective breathing devices and improved training for crew members.    &quot;If you look at the interior cabin, they have made considerable progress, particularly if they avoid giving industry the usual round of extensions on the 1990 deadline&quot; for compliance with the material-flammability rule, says Mr. Finucane of the flight-attendants union.    But Mr. Finucane and others say the FAA should take other steps as well. They argue, for example, that airlines should be required to furnish smoke hoods, which would provide passengers with several minutes of oxygen and thus increase their chances of making their way out of a smoky airplane.    Last month, the Aviation Consumer Action Project, a group affiliated with consumer activist Ralph Nader, petitioned the FAA to require smoke hoods. (The U.S., France, Great Britain and Canada are currently involved in a joint study of whether the clear plastic devices should be required.)    And some consumer activists say the FAA should resume research on a fire-resistant fuel called anti-misting kerosene. The research was dropped after a December 1984 government test in California's Mojave Desert during which a plane using the new fuel crashed and caught fire.    The FAA says it hasn't officially rejected the idea of smoke hoods. But federal officials, and the airline industry, express concern that smoke hoods might increase the time it takes for evacuation. As for the fuel research, the FAA's Mr. Broderick says, &quot;We financed our development program, and it just wasn't successful.&quot;    Now the FAA is focusing on the mandatory heat-release test, which the agency says is the best indicator of how materials contribute to all three potential problems: fire, smoke and toxic gases. FAA officials say the standard for materials could delay a flashover by more than a minute, greatly enhancing passengers' chances of escape.    Manufacturers argue that they have made great strides in developing anti-fire materials in recent years. But those materials, mainly phenolic -- glass compounds that are a type of plastic, are flunking the new FAA standard.    &quot;The materials that the industry considers to be good, state of the art, the best that we can produce, aren't passing with the consistency that we need,&quot; says Corey McMillan, manager of materials technology at Boeing. &quot;We are willing to make changes, but we have to have the technology available to do it.&quot;    Spearheading the fight against the rule are the Air Transport Association, the trade group that represents major airlines, and the Aerospace Industries Association, the trade group for manufacturers. Officials of the groups say they feel doublecrossed.    When the FAA began work on the rule a few years ago, they contend, the regulatory agency indicated that it wanted to ensure the use of the best materials available, not the development of new ones. The FAA denies such a reversal and calls the matter a &quot;misunderstanding.&quot;    Cost is another source of friction. While the FAA put the total cost of compliance at $2.5 million, the industry claimed the figure would be closer to $400 million. FAA officials now admit that their figure might be too low but insist the industry figure is far too high.    Both Boeing and Douglas Aircraft Co., a division of McDonnell Douglas Corp., are pursuing a two-track strategy -- both fighting to have the rule changed and launching crash research and development programs to find new materials that will comply with the rule in case it isn't.    Still, the industry isn't optimistic about meeting the deadline. &quot;It's an impossible compliance date,&quot; says J. Roger Fleming, an Air Transport Association senior vice president.    The industry argues, moreover, that the proposed testing is flawed. It is prodding the FAA to add a second test -- measuring smoke emissions -- to the heat-release test and to lower the overall score required to pass. That way, industry officials say, the best materials already available could meet the rule. But FAA officials, while indicating that the new standard might be delayed, reject the industry proposal saying current materials simply aren't good enough.    &quot;We'd simply be writing a rule to accomplish what they already are doing,&quot; says Thomas McSweeny, manager of the FAA's aircraft engineering division. &quot;Why would we waste all that time doing that?&quot; </TEXT></DOC>