<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870424-0215 </DOCNO><HL> TECHNOLOGY:New Products May Take PlaceOf Grafts in Bone Treatments---By Richard KoenigStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CGEN BMY PFE MRKPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   BRUCE B. PHARRISS'S interest in finding new ways to mend broken bones stems from more than his work: Since breaking a leg in a motorcycle crash, he has felt occasional pain at a spot on his pelvis where surgeons removed bone to graft onto the fracture site.    Today, Mr. Pharriss, a research executive at Collagen Corp., is among a growing number of researchers who say new products will eventually supersede many grafts in orthopedic surgery. The research aims at two types of products: materials to replace fractured or diseased bone, and so-called induction factors to speed bone healing. &quot;I think we can outperform bone grafts,&quot; Mr. Pharriss says.    Estimates of the number of bone grafts performed annually in the U.S. are speculative, but some surgeons put the figure between 200,000 and 400,000. In addition to replacing grafts, the new products might be used to coat prostheses, such as artificial hips.    Bone grafts, to be sure, remain the standard of care, proven effective in many applications. Yet grafts have shortcomings that are serious enough to spur a search for substitutes. As Mr. Pharriss knows, pain can persist at the site from which material for a graft is taken. Sometimes that site -- often a ridge of the pelvis called the iliac crest -- doesn't provide enough bone. Removing pelvic bone can alter the patient's build; in some cases, men have had to switch from belts to suspenders after the operation.    &quot;God didn't give you an iliac crest to make bone grafts,&quot; says Joseph M. Lane, a surgeon and researcher at the Hospital for Special Surgery in New York.    USING BONE FROM CADAVERS is an alternative, but it, too, has drawbacks. The supply is uncertain. There is some risk of transmitting disease. And an immunological response may weaken the graft, though such a response isn't so threatening as it is in organ transplants.    In the search for substitutes for grafting, two ceramics called tricalcium phosphate and hydroxyapatite have attracted the most attention. &quot;These are really the first-generation materials that will be used as a bone substitute,&quot; says Paul Higham, the manager of materials research at Howmedica Inc., a subsidiary of Pfizer Inc.    Both materials serve as scaffolding into which bone cells and other tissues grow. Hydroxyapatite, which can be porous like the coral from which it is sometimes derived, is a nearly permanent implant. Tricalcium phosphate, in the process of being supplanted by bone, is broken down and assimilated by the body.    Although neither ceramic has been approved by the Food and Drug Administration to be marketed for general orthopedic use, both have been used in clinical trials for several years. (Hydroxyapatite has been approved for oral and facial surgery and for reconstructing bones of the middle ear.) Companies that have said they are sponsoring clinical trials include Collagen, of Palo Alto, Calif., which is collaborating with the Zimmer Inc. subsidiary of Bristol-Myers Co.; DePuy, a Warsaw, Ind., unit of Boehringer Mannheim G.m.b.H. of West Germany; and Interpore International Inc., a closely held company in Irvine, Calif.    DANA C. MEARS, a surgeon at Presbyterian-University Hospital of Pittsburgh, calls results with tricalcium phosphate &quot;very encouraging.&quot; He and his colleagues have used the ceramic in 66 cases for such purposes as bridging narrow gaps at fracture sites and filling cavities after the removal of cysts or tumors. The ceramic typically is applied in granular form, though it is also available as a block that can be sawed and filed.    But Dr. Mears says the ceramics now under trial may be too brittle to replace lengths of bone. One way to strengthen them, he says, might be to use graphite fibers. In any case, hardware such as plates and screws would be used along with ceramics that bridge long gaps, as they are with such bone grafts.    In hope of speeding bone formation, some trials already combine ceramics with bone marrow and collagen in a pasty mixture. Collagen is a fibrous protein in bone and connective tissue.    The products that may interest surgeons most are still further from general use. These are bone-induction factors -- naturally occurring proteins thought to stimulate bone formation. Bone extract containing these factors has already been implanted in patients. But researchers are divided over whether a single protein or several explain the effects of these implants.    IN ANY CASE, the factors occur in human bone only in tiny amounts. Marshall R. Urist, a surgeon at the University of California at Los Angeles, has used a powdery extract he calls bone morphogenetic protein; he says a cadaver's skeleton yields only enough of the powder to coat the walls of a small test tube.    So the race is on to identify induction factors that are truly potent, decode the genes for making them and produce them through genetic engineering. The competition includes several biotechnology companies and such pharmaceutical giants as Pfizer and Merck andamp; Co. Some researchers speculate that an understanding of these factors might lead to remedies for osteoporosis, as well as for fractures.    Researchers caution that these efforts could meet many dead ends before yielding a marketable product. Still, the ferment has sparked imaginations. &quot;In the future,&quot; says Joseph Nichols, a Princeton, N.J., consultant in medical-product development, &quot;orthopedic surgery will be biochemistry.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>