<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870923-0129 </DOCNO><HL> World Bank Confidentially Damns Itself---By James Bovard</HL><DD> 09/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGNBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   The World Bank is preparing to ask the U.S. for an additional $10 billion in cash and guarantees to expand its lending. The bank claims that it must boost its lending in order to encourage market-oriented reforms in Third World countries. But the bank's own confidential reports reveal that its structural-adjustment program has been a dismal failure.    World Bank President Barber Conable and other bank officials are now preaching a private-sector gospel, stressing that the private sector is the key to economic growth and a strong future. They are right on this score -- and it is good that someone at the bank finally recognizes the true source of economic growth.    But every time the bank loudly praises the private sector, it silently damns its own record. The bank financed and approved the massive expansion of government power throughout the Third World. A 1987 World Bank study by Keith Marsden and Therese Belot implied that World Bank aid and other foreign aid was a major culprit in the nationalization of African economies: &quot;Foreign loans have reinforced the heavy public sector bias of African investments.&quot;    The bank's flagship structural-adjustment lending (SAL) program was launched in 1980 to encourage policy reform. SALs have allowed the bank to greatly increase its loans in the 1980s.    But, SALs are often used to perpetuate government control rather to induce pro-market reforms. A 1986 confidential study surveyed 10 countries that received SALs and concluded that only two countries substantially reduced their budget deficits. The report noted that &quot;not infrequently,&quot; World Bank officers were more interested in preparing new loans than in supervising the structural-adjustment process.    What have SALs gone for? In the Ivory Coast, the SAL was used to pay the debts of floundering government enterprises. In Senegal, the SAL bankrolled the budgets of government-owned agricultural companies. In Pakistan, bank aid was used to &quot;rationalize&quot; state-owned companies, but auditors concluded that efficiency had not been increased and that the companies are still inefficient and losing money.    The 1986 report noted, &quot;Under most of the 15 SALs in the 10 countries, restrictions placed on the use of SAL funds were minimal.&quot; It appears that most of the money was used to conduct business as usual, thus perpetuating government waste. The World Bank encourages recipient governments to spend SALs for export subsidies -- which only perpetuates distortions in the domestic economy.    The bank has a very generous measure of success of its SALs. The bank officially judged Bolivia &quot;to have complied with the spirit of the Loan Agreement&quot; in the early 1980s, though bank auditors disagreed, concluding that the SAL &quot;was unsuccessful; reforms were minimal and short-lived.&quot;    The SALs' timid efforts to require reform are often defeated because governments can easily acquire foreign aid elsewhere. The 1986 bank report noted: &quot;The availability of alternative financial sources, often without strict conditionality {including other loans from the World Bank}, reduces the need for the bank to provide a SAL. . . . In Jamaica and Senegal, availability of substantial foreign aid led governments to decide initially that it was not necessary to devalue or to substantially reduce budget deficits.&quot;    A 1985 confidential bank report by leading development expert Elliot Berg and consultant Alan Batchelder concluded: &quot;The SAL's seemingly hard and all-encompassing conditionality is largely illusory . . . the Bank must shrink from the ultimate sanction, cancellation. Cessation of disbursements is too strong a response by the Bank to banal acts of non-performance. In the one case where it was done (Senegal) the SAL was replaced by new {World Bank} credits.&quot;    SALs often neglect key problems because of World Bank fear of offending the recipient government. One bank official who has worked extensively with SALs complained that the Mexican structural adjustment loan made no mention of imposing limits on corruption or on capital flight -- two of Mexico's biggest problems. The bank reportedly did not even push Mexico to install a decent auditing system to control graft.    Yugoslavia received a $275 million structural-adjustment loan in 1983 to improve &quot;the efficiency and competitiveness of the economy.&quot; But the Yugoslavian economy today is a shambles, with hyperinflation, high unemployment and oppressive debt. A 1987 World Bank report concluded that &quot;real interest rates are still negative, and the intended reforms related to financial discipline, investment criteria and foreign exchange and credit allocation are not yet in place.&quot;    Most bank project loans also fail to spur reform. A 1985 bank audit report concluded that, though most recipient governments promise to make reforms when borrowing bank money, the promised reforms are rarely made, and that &quot;a typical reaction by the Bank&quot; to noncompliance has been to conclude that additional loans are necessary to further encourage policy reform.    The bank recently gave Jamaica $34 million to reform its government sugar estates, the latest in a series of loans since 1978. The bank's press release claimed, &quot;Since the early 1980s, the government has been implementing a major rationalization of the state-owned sugar industry as part of its broader economic adjustment effort in order to make it financially viable.&quot; Yet, a 1985 confidential World Bank report on Jamaica concluded, &quot;Despite major effort, little progress has been made at improving management of the government's sugar estates.&quot;    Some foreign-aid advocates imply that a wave of privatization is sweeping the Third World. But a recent 1987 bank study on privatization &quot;found few instances of formal liquidations in the 28 countries reviewed. . . . Sales of large numbers of enterprises are also few, occurring in only two countries, Chile and Bangladesh.&quot;    The bank cannot force governments to reform because the bank is often more eager to lend than Third World governments are to borrow. A 1987 bank audit report concluded that some bank projects suffered from &quot;an unseemly pressure to lend,&quot; and that Third World governments have been pressured by bank officers to borrow money for projects that later turned out to be fiascos.    As more and more countries receive SALs, the bank will likely be able to find a few success stories. Thailand and Turkey received SALs after they had begun pro-market reforms. But the vast majority of SAL recipients continue to have self-defeating economic policies before, during, and after their SALs.    As the 1985 Berg-Batchelder study concluded: &quot;Why don't governments change the policies that are holding back their development? . . . What has money got to do with all this anyway? Why do external donors have to pay money to induce LDC governments to do things that we (and presumably they) believe will make them better off?&quot;    The vast majority of pro-market reforms do not require foreign cash to implement. If governments would only respect the lives and property of their citizens, allow people to start their own businesses, and roll back bureaucratic control, then countries could boost their living standards without boosting their debt load.    If the bank is serious about providing capital only to countries following productive economic policies, how can it justify giving a single dollar to Ethiopia? The bank recently lent Ethiopia $14 million for, among other things, &quot;institutional development of the Ministry of Agriculture.&quot; But the ministry is heavily involved in the government's murderous villagization program, whereby the Marxist rulers are trying to force 33 million peasants (three-quarters of the population) to move their homes and live in government-supervised villages. This is economic development?    If the U.S. does pledge an additional $10 billion for the bank, one of the major beneficiaries could be the Soviet Union, which is currently seeking access to bank-subsidized loans. Barber Conable stated last fall that he would be &quot;happy&quot; to consider Soviet membership, and Undersecretary of State John Whitehead said in March that the U.S. &quot;would like to see the Soviet Union become a member of&quot; the World Bank, the IMF and GATT.    Has the World Bank helped the Third World? Some countries have benefited -- but most of the long-term aid recipients have ended up with heavy debt loads, swollen public sectors and overvalued exchange rates. Instead of spurring reform, most aid has simply allowed governments to perpetuate their mistakes.    If the bank has not straightened out Third World economic policies after handing out over a hundred billion dollars, why should we trust it with more money?    ---   Mr. Bovard is an associate analyst with the Cato Institute. This is adapted from a Cato study to be released Monday. </TEXT></DOC>