<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880613-0115 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Stiffing Jesse </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Michael Dukakis has emerged from the seven dwarfs to cinch the Democratic Presidential nomination, but the plastic of his image has not yet firmed. Governor of a middling state, just smaller than Georgia and larger than Virginia, he was turned out by the voters after his first term but regained office with a narrow primary victory in 1982 and was essentially unopposed for re-election in 1986. He is proud of his Greek heritage, but is married to a Jewish wife, raising his children in &quot;both traditions.&quot; It remains to be seen what, if anything, he believes about such national issues as dealing with the Soviets and coping with Congress, let alone arcane but crucial issues like monetary policy and exchange rates.    Yet his pundit-confounding glide to the nomination makes one thing abundantly clear: Governor Dukakis is a man of no small tactical skill. This is a point especially to be pondered by any Republicans who still believe &quot;the Jackson problem&quot; will prove the undoing of the Democratic nominee. With Jesse Jackson now proclaiming his intention to seek the vice-presidential nomination, Governor Dukakis has already answered that no one has a claim on the second spot and his search will be a wide one. Surely a man who holds an early press conference on his wife's former amphetamine addiction, and fires his campaign manager for releasing tapes showing the truth about Joe Biden, will have no trouble dealing with the Jackson issue. He will immediately recognize that his electoral advantage lies not in accommodating Jesse but in stiffing him, albeit as politely as circumstances permit.    Indeed, the Governor has already profited enormously from running against Mr. Jackson. He could posture to the Democratic activists by opposing every weapons system on the drawing board, suing to take the National Guard away from the commander in chief, releasing prison inmates for weekend furloughs, obstructing the Seabrook nuclear plant and chartering a state prototype of quasi-socialized medicine. But with Mr. Jackson swelling to rhetorical heights about &quot;economic violence,&quot; Mr. Dukakis could also posture as a centrist.    On ABC the other day, in fact, the Massachusetts Governor proclaimed himself a conservative -- more conservative than Vice President Bush, George Will or &quot;this crowd in the White House.&quot; He (sometimes) balanced the state budget, he explained, and believes in law and order. Also, his opposition to offshore oil drilling is conservative because &quot;I want to conserve those resources.&quot; The Dukakis thrust is not shaping up as a campaign of ideas.    Nothing could better suit Mr. Dukakis's purposes, though, than showing in Atlanta that he is personally strong enough to handle Mr. Jackson, is not beholden to the &quot;special interests&quot; and can lead the Democratic activists back into the mainstream of American culture. And our bet is that this time the activists, the special interests and Jesse Jackson will play their part in the script. With a wink and a nod, they will cause just enough commotion to be subdued, then fall in behind a candidate they know in their hearts is one of their own.    In a historic sense this would be no bad thing. Parties that want to win instead of indulge ideology are good for democracies. In particular, Mr. Jackson, despite his heady rhetoric and rapport with Third World thugs, has on net served as an integrating force in American society. All Americans ought to be proud that a black man can mount a serious race for the Presidential nomination. Mr. Jackson's age and ambition clearly suggest his running again in the future, the biggest force likely to keep him behind Mr. Dukakis. In that event, we would hope to hear more about the issues -- such as drugs, teen-age pregnancy and personal responsibility -- on which he has been speaking to his own community with a seriousness and credibility no other national leader can hope to match; whites as well as blacks need to hear these messages.    In 1988, though, we doubt that Jesse Jackson is going to bolt the Democratic Party, or that the party will feel forced to offer him any extravagant concessions. Mr. Dukakis will pocket the votes of liberals and most blacks, and try to expand his vote by confusing the issues and striking media images alternating toughness and apple pie. It is an entirely plausible formula. Rather than count on a split in Atlanta to hand them the presidency, Republicans need to get beyond tactical battles to a strategic vision, sharpening instead of muting the basic economic, security and moral issues on which they won the last two Presidential contests. </TEXT></DOC>