<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881107-0025 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   BUSH STILL LEADS Dukakis, despite the Democrat's recent gains, a poll shows.    According to a Wall Street Journal/NBC News survey, Dukakis has appreciably cut the Republican's lead but still needs a near-miracle to win tomorrow's presidential election. The poll gives Bush 48% to Dukakis's 43%, showing that Bush's lead has dropped from 17 percentage points three weeks ago to only five in the weekend before the balloting. Both candidates crisscrossed the Western part of the nation in a final appeal for support as the presidential race neared its end.    Dukakis sought to portray himself as a fighter to drive home his economic populism, while Bush faulted his rival as &quot;naive&quot; about national security.    ---   MOSCOW APPEARS unwilling to miss a deadline for its pullout from Afghanistan.    A Soviet Foreign Ministry official, citing a worsening military situation in Afghanistan, announced Friday that the Kremlin was suspending its troop withdrawal and supplying its own forces and Afghan army units with new arms to counter rebel attacks. But Western and Soviet officials indicated that Moscow is unlikely to miss the Feb. 15 deadline for withdrawing its soldiers from the country.    The Kremlin has pulled half of its 105,000 troops from Afghanistan under accords reached in Geneva. Gorbachev views the pact as a great success.    ---   Soviet dissident Sakharov arrived in New York for a two-week visit to the U.S., his first trip to the West. The Nobel Peace laureate, who was freed from internal exile less than two years ago, is to attend a human-rights conference in Washington, and see his stepson in Boston. Sakharov, 67, also reportedly will seek medical treatment.    ---   Solidarity leaders threatened broad protests, including strikes, unless Poland's government reverses its decision to close the Lenin shipyard in Gdansk. Walesa said he had agreed to another meeting with Warsaw authorities to prepare for talks on the country's future, but only if the shipyard, birthplace of the banned union, remained open.    ---   Indian commandos rescued 20 hostages and recovered the bodies of four others aboard a crippled getaway ship in the Indian Ocean after 46 gunmen who tried to overthrow the Maldives government surrendered, officials in Male said. Three captives were reported missing from Thursday's bloody coup attempt, authorities said.    ---   Spain released an American convicted in 1987 of cocaine smuggling under an agreement that allows him to serve the remainder of his six-year prison sentence in the U.S. The case against Conan Owen had attracted the attention of then-Attorney General Meese, who made a personal appeal for the 24-year-old photographer's freedom.    ---   Cornell University said an investigation has found unauthorized passwords for entering computer systems in the files of a 23-year-old graduate student whose father is a computer security expert. The student is believed responsible for a computer &quot;virus&quot; that affected computers nationwide last week.    ---   A second federal grand jury is studying the Iran-Contra affair, this time to determine whether witnesses may have lied to congressional panels last year. The latest phase of the two-year-old criminal investigation isn't considered a top priority by independent prosecutor Walsh, sources said.    ---   Israeli helicopters bombed PLO targets in southern Lebanon, and the Jewish state's militia allies killed three gunmen in a clash in Israel's self-declared security zone. In the West Bank, troops fired on Arab youths, killing at least one. And an Israeli newspaper said Shamir plans to break up Palestinian refugee camps to end an Arab uprising.    ---   Algeria's president appointed a new prime minister after voters in the African nation overwhelmingly approved a referendum Thursday calling for constitutional changes. The balloting followed widespread riots last month. President Chadli Benjedid ordered the new premier to form a government aimed at improving the economy.    ---   Voters in New Caledonia supported a peace plan that could lead to independence for the French territory in the South Pacific, returns from a referendum showed. In France, voters approved the plan, but officials said the record low turnout could weaken the proposal's credibility.    ---   Voice of America officials suspect that South Africa may be behind the theft of tapes and program scripts intended for broadcast to Angola and Mozambique, a spokeswoman said. A South African Embassy spokesman denied the charges in a Sunday New York Times article on the disappearance of the material.    ---   Steve Jones of Britain won the New York Marathon, completing the 26.2-mile, five-borough road race in a near-record time of 2:08:20. Grete Waitz of Norway captured the women's title in 2:28:07.    ---   Haitian radio reported that retired Col. Jean-Claude Paul died of a heart attack in a suburb of Port-au-Prince. Paul, 49, was dismissed in September after a coup led by military officers. He had been indicted in Miami last March on drug charges. </TEXT></DOC>