<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881114-0083 </DOCNO><HL> Technology (A Special Report): The Solution --- Ma Bell's Infants: High-Tech Giant Tries Start-Up Ventures to Speed New Products </HL><AUTHOR> Bernard Wysocki Jr. </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> T G.SIE DEC GE IBM </CO><IN> TEL </IN><TEXT>   FOR ALL OF THE TRAUMA of the 1984 break-up of American Telephone andamp; Telegraph Co., there was one consolation for the survivors of the stripped down ATandamp;T.    The Bell monopoly might have disappeared forever, but ATandamp;T still had the crown jewel -- Bell Laboratories, with its thousands of scientists, leading-edge technologies and new ideas. It had research, executives said, that was just waiting to be exploited.    &quot;We thought we could take all these ideas off the shelf, offer them up for sale, and make scads of money,&quot; recalls W. Stanley Brown, an ATandamp;T executive.    To develop these ideas, ATandamp;T set up a group of enterprise units. The theory was that the speed of the small ventures combined with the muscle of the parent company would create a best-of-both-worlds situation. In practice, though, a small company inside a big company sometimes combines the worst of both -- the risks of a small company and the bureaucracy of a large one.    Says Virgina Bellows, a veteran of one Atandamp;T internal start-up company, &quot;Those red-tape antibodies come up and try to snuff you.&quot;    In a $30 billion company such as ATandamp;T, these little ventures are hardly a blip on the financial radar. But Ma Bell's experiences with her infants could be instructive for other high-tech giants as they seek to improve their product development and their competitiveness. Here we look at the difficulties encountered by three of ATandamp;T's seven start-up ventures.    The biggest of ATandamp;T's start-up ventures today is Medical Diagnostic Systems Inc., a unit that is attempting to create a &quot;filmless radiology department.&quot; Its product is a computer that displays, stores and transmits the data contained on an X-ray, computed tomographic (CT) scan or other diagnostic film. One attraction of this business was that ATandamp;T already had most of the necessary know-how on the shelf. &quot;It's pushing almost every technology in our core businesses,&quot; says Harry Bosco, who heads the unit.    But despite its technological expertise and a promising product, ATandamp;T has had trouble gaining the confidence of an unfamiliar market. &quot;We thought when we started back in 1984 that we'd make a million of them and make a lot of money,&quot; Mr. Bosco recalls. &quot;The biggest obstacle seems to be changing people's habits.&quot;    The marketing obstacle was severe enough that ATandamp;T recently joined up with N.V. Philips, the Dutch electronics giant, an old hand in the area. Says Thomas McMaster, head of development for the medical-products unit, &quot;ATandamp;T didn't have the contacts in the radiology departments. Philips has been doing this for over 100 years.&quot;    Meanwhile, it remains to be seen if the other giants on the field will have similar problems. So far, other players include a venture of Siemens and Digital Equipment, a joint project by General Electric and International Business Machines, and an aggressive entry from the Japanese company Toshiba. All are expected to display their wares later this month, at a big radiology conference in Chicago.    The riskiness of the project is both exhilarating and frightening to some ATandamp;T veterans, who aren't accustomed to competition. Says William Proetta, product designer, &quot;In the 1970s, we had the world. This is much more intense. The pressure is really greater on us to succeed. The risk is probably higher than ever before.&quot;    One of ATandamp;T's most successful internal ventures is Conversant Systems. The Columbus, Ohio, unit has developed and is selling a line of machines costing between $20,000 and $80,000 that understand simple commands spoken into a telephone.    The venture has sold 500 systems so far, even though its machine can understand only single words given in reply to a menu of choices. Its customers include the lottery office in Columbus and Ohio State University, which uses it to handle student registrations and course selections.    Managers attribute the unit's success in large part to a close relationship between product managers and researchers -- one researcher even commutes between Columbus and Bell Lab's headquarters in Murray Hill, N.J. And they credit that, in turn, to the elimination of a layer of ATandamp;T bureaucracy. The layer: the one that normally stands between basic researchers and product developers.    As a result, Bell Labs researchers assigned to the project are familiar with the market and anxious to solve the product developers' specific problems. Currently, researchers are trying to find a way to make the machines understand longer strings of words.    Although ATandamp;T officials are calling Conversant a success -- it is close to profitability -- the unit's managers say it probably wouldn't have survived if executives hadn't intervened to bend the system for them. &quot;Some top people at ATandamp;T had enough guts that even a 300,000-person bureaucracy couldn't kill it,&quot; says Kendra VanderMeulen, who recently returned to a more-traditional job inside Bell Labs after five years as president of Conversant.    Audiographic Communications Systems occupies a semi-abandoned ATandamp;T office building in Long Branch, N.J. You can't get much more marginal than that and still be part of the company. And you couldn't get much closer to extinction than Audiographics' brushes with death over the past two years.    At the Comdex '88 trade show that opens today, Audiographics will present a conference-room audio system and a scanning machine that can transmit documents long-distance rapidly. The difficulties of the past couple of years won't be in evidence. But they were real, and nearly fatal.    In a sense, the problems could be described as cultural. The ATandamp;T units that were supposed to supply and support Audiographics didn't appreciate or respond promptly to its small-scale needs. The unit once tried to order 500 telephones, only to have the ATandamp;T manufacturing people laugh at the minuscule number.    Then Audiographics, for its part, was slow to figure out how to play the system. It missed some opportunities, for example, because it hadn't made sure ATandamp;T's salesmen received incentives for pushing its products. And, even though the various research, marketing, sales and manufacturing people assigned to the unit were all working together, they kept missing important deadlines.    The result was a disaster. The big crisis came in 1987. &quot;We were gearing up to sell the product. We were hyping it. The marketplace was waiting with bated breath,&quot; says an Audiographics marketer. &quot;And (then) we couldn't deliver. We lost credibility.&quot;    Today, things are going more smoothly. The unit's sales have totaled several million dollars and its employees say they are working better as a team. The venture still might not survive. Nonetheless, the people involved say they have learned lessons that will be valuable in the future.    &quot;Two or three years ago I didn't have much contact with people&quot; at Bell Labs, says one product designer at Audiographics. &quot;They had no concept that your solution had to be cost effective. Today, at least, people have respect for each others' jobs.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>