<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880316-0035 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO>  </SO><TEXT>   BUSH WON the Illinois GOP primary, as Simon defeated his Democratic rivals.    The victory by the vice president, who ran strongly throughout the state, all but ended Dole's slim hopes for the Republican presidential nomination. Illinois voters left the Democratic race without an established front-runner. Simon thwarted a challenge from Jackson and set back efforts by Dukakis. Projections showed Simon positioned to win well over 100 of the state's 173 convention delegates.    A poll by NBC News showed Bush to be popular with all GOP voters. Jackson had black support, and Simon was the favorite of the white electorate.    ---   WALSH IS EXPECTED to seek Iran-Contra indictments, perhaps as soon as today.    The special prosecutor, moving to conclude his criminal investigation, has instructed aides to prepare the final papers stating the charges. His staff indicated that indictments are imminent. The principal targets are Poindexter, North, Secord and Hakim. Walsh is expected to accuse the four of conspiring to defraud the U.S. by diverting proceeds from Iranian arms sales to Nicaragua's rebels.    The long-awaited move, coming on the heels of McFarlane's guilty plea last week to charges he misled Congress, would cap Walsh's 15-month inquiry.    ---   PANAMA ORDERED the expulsion of a U.S. diplomat as protests continued.    The Noriega government said a U.S. Embassy public-affairs officer must leave the country by tomorrow for activities &quot;incompatible with his diplomatic work.&quot; The U.S. refused to accept the order. As unpaid medical workers joined public employees in often-violent street protests of Noriega's cash-strapped regime, Panama also said services to Americans in the Canal Zone could be cut if the U.S. withholds payments.    At least a dozen people were injured in battles with riot police in Panama City. In Washington, Reagan said the U.S. wanted Noriega &quot;out of there.&quot;    ---   Shultz said he was unable to &quot;bridge the differences&quot; with Shamir over a U.S. initiative for Mideast peace. The secretary of state held talks in Washington with the Israeli premier. Shamir remains opposed to an international conference on the Mideast, saying such a forum couldn't play &quot;any positive role&quot; in ending Arab-Israeli unrest.    Israel imposed a travel ban and cut telephone lines between the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip. Palestinians, meanwhile, began a two-day general strike. Hospital officials said soldiers killed two Arabs and wounded 12 others in continuing clashes.    ---   Nicaraguan forces launched a major offensive against the Contras in the northern part of the country, President Ortega said. U.S. officials said Managua also had sent Sandinista troops into neighboring Honduras. The disclosure came as Reagan launched a drive for renewed rebel aid, saying the insurgents &quot;must be sustained.&quot;    ---   Pakistan and Afghanistan failed to reach an accord on a plan aimed at securing the withdrawal of Soviet troops from Afghanistan. The breakdown focused attention on next week's Shultz-Shevardnadze meeting. Moscow said it would stick to its pledge to begin the pullout two months after the signing of an agreement.    ---   Gorbachev held talks in Belgrade with Yugoslav Communist Party officials, and sealed an accord aimed at boosting economic and political ties between Yugoslavia and the Soviet Union. The Soviet leader, on a five-day tour of the country, also visited the grave of Josip Broz Tito, who severed relations with Moscow in 1948.    ---   About 10,000 Hungarians marched through Budapest calling for democracy and a free press in what was considered the largest anti-government demonstration since the Soviet-suppressed uprising of 1956. Police didn't make any attempt to obstruct the protest. Four prominent activists were arrested earlier, opposition sources said.    ---   Pope John Paul II named Monsignor Eugene Marino as Roman Catholic archbishop of Atlanta. Marino, the first black archbishop in the U.S., called the appointment &quot;a great sign of hope to all our people.&quot;    ---   The Senate passed legislation that would allow a total of 590,000 immigrants to enter the U.S. each year, 100,000 more than the current level. The measure, approved 88-4 and sent to the House, also would limit the number of relatives of U.S. citizens who may move to the country each year to 470,000.    ---   Willie Jasper Darden was executed in Florida's electric chair for the September 1973 murder of a local businessman. Darden, who maintained his innocence through 14 years on death row, became the focus of an international debate on capital punishment, and won the support of Pope John Paul II and Soviet dissident Andrei Sakharov.    ---   The Earth's ozone layer has decreased over the Northern Hemisphere more than previously thought, according a report compiled by more than 100 scientists assembled through NASA. The study suggested that the shrinkage of the layer is attributable &quot;wholly or in part&quot; to gases, most likely chlorofluorocarbons.    ---   India's opposition leaders demanded the resignation of Prime Minister Gandhi as a nationwide general strike gained sporadic support. Violence flared during demonstrations throughout the country. At least four people were reported killed and more than 90 others injured. About 3,000 people were arrested, the United News of India said.    ---   Perez de Cuellar is planning a new round of separate talks with emissaries of Baghdad and Tehran in an attempt to end the Iran-Iraq war, U.N. sources said. In the gulf, Iran and Iraq bombarded each other's cities for the third consecutive day. Scores of civilians were reported killed.    ---   A woman and her daughter returned to Texas after retired U.S. commandos hired for $200,000 reportedly grabbed the girl in Jordan, where she had been taken by her father in a custody dispute. The U.S. expressed regret to Jordan over the incident and recalled a diplomat from Amman for questioning about the affair. </TEXT></DOC>