<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871013-0058 </DOCNO><HL> Cargo Fraud:Theft of Oil ProductsOn the High Seas PosesA Problem for Industry---Loot Is Sold on Black MarketOr Burned as Tanker Fuel;Losses Run Into Billions---Why So Many Ships Explode---By Edward R. Cony and James TannerStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)PETROLEUM (PET) </IN><TEXT>   As chief officer of the oil tanker Octonia Sun, Konstantinos Athanasakos was responsible for overseeing the loading and unloading of the ship's cargo. He was also responsible for stealing it.    The Octonia Sun was fitted with a special pipe -- known on board as &quot;the thief&quot; -- that connected one of the ship's cargo lines to a fuel line. One of Mr. Athanasakos's assigned duties was to divert cargo through the thief to power the vessel's engines. The diversion was so effective that during one three-month period in 1982, the Octonia Sun apparently burned as little as 25% of its own fuel, saving its owners hundreds of thousands of dollars.    The story of the thief was disclosed in a recent maritime arbitration case. It illustrates an important but rarely discussed problem in the oil industry: the pilfering of crude and refined oil products from tankers as they transport their cargo from port to port. Some cargo thieves sell their loot on the black market. Others use the fuel themselves to reduce costs, a practice that may have led to some of the tanker explosions that have killed dozens of crew members over the past two decades. Because of the huge quantity of oil a tanker carries, the theft of a small fraction can be both difficult to detect and enormously lucrative.    Aghelos Boulalas, a maritime arbitrator and oil-industry consultant, calls the stealing &quot;a monumental fraud and a cancer on the entire shipping industry.&quot; In a paper to be delivered this week at the International Congress of Maritime Arbitrators in Madrid, he asserts that annual losses from cargo fraud have averaged $7.2 billion over the past 10 years.    Few in the oil industry agree that the stealing is that extensive, but few dispute that it happens. And there is no doubt that it is costly. This year, tankers around the world will carry about $170 billion of crude and refined petroleum products. If fraud consumed only 1% of this cargo -- a conservative figure -- the loss would come to $1.7 billion.    Widespread acceptance of a margin of error in the size of cargo loads makes pilfering easier. Maritime insurance policies generally cover just 99.5% of a cargo's value. Insurers assume that the rest will be lost, and some losses may be legitimate. For instance, a small fraction of crude oil is likely to evaporate during a voyage. Crude also contains water, which is likely to settle to the bottom of a vessel's tanks en route to its destination. And some cargo usually sticks to the tank and can't be unloaded.    Adjustments are also common for so-called paper losses that reflect such items as meter discrepancies at the loading and discharge ports. A 0.1% calibration error can amount to a difference of several thousand barrels in tankers that carry several million barrels of oil when fully loaded.    Beginning in 1979, when oil prices soared to a record $34 a barrel, stealing cargo became a matter of survival for some tanker owners. That price triggered a record tanker-shipping slump that lasted four years. Meanwhile, Mr. Boulalas says, as a huge surplus of tankers competed for cargoes, the high oil prices pushed the cost of bunkers -- the industry name for the refined fuel oil that tankers burn -- to as much as 55% of a vessel's operating expenses.    Even before the spurt in oil prices, using crude cargo for bunkers had stirred widespread safety concerns in the shipping industry. Crude has a low flash point, which increases the danger of fire or explosion aboard ship. In 1974 the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea forbade tankers to burn bunker fuel with a flash point of less than 60 degrees Celsius.    Between 1970 and this year, Mr. Boulalas says in his paper, 65 tankers exploded, resulting in many deaths and injuries. One of the worst accidents occurred in Singapore in December 1978, when the Spyros exploded in a shipyard, killing 83 and injuring 46. Government investigators in Singapore blamed the disaster on crude oil in the bunker tanks, Mr. Boulalas says.    In 1982, the Haralabos suffered a series of explosions at an Egyptian refinery. The tanker broke up, but the crew escaped without injury. A Liberian board of inquiry reported the flash point of the crude oil found in the Haralabos bunker tanks was four degrees Celsius -- 56 degrees below the legal minimum.    The cause of many such explosions remains undetermined. One such incident -- the explosion of the tanker Elias in Philadelphia in 1974, which killed 13 crewmen -- prompted Mr. Boulalas to assemble a group of industry experts to investigate oil fraud. The group, Mr. Boulalas says in the Madrid paper, worked undercover among tanker owners, charterers, petroleum inspectors, insurers and underwriters. He won't identify the group's members, but he says that &quot;each worked, participated and collaborated in cargo theft activities&quot; and became &quot;thoroughly familiar with all methods of cargo theft and creation of spurious documents.&quot; The purpose of the effort, he says in the paper, was to determine the extent of the fraud and seek ways to prevent it.    Mr. Boulalas used the group's reports to come up with his estimate that cargo theft over the past 10 years totaled $72 billion. He also concluded that &quot;explosions on 11 additional tankers in the 'cause unknown' category {were} attributable to low flash crude oil burned as bunkers.&quot;    Meanwhile, Mr. Boulalas is working on a device that he says &quot;will effectively eliminate oil cargo theft.&quot; He declined to provide further details about the device.    Neither tanker owners nor oil companies are eager to talk about oil theft and its consequences. The president of one tanker company acknowledges that &quot;it's safe to say only a small minority of the tanker owners steal cargo, but it is enough that the cargo owners are rightfully concerned.&quot;    Oil companies don't like to draw attention to pilfering because they think that publicity will lead to a bigger problem. They say that they are reluctant to cite individual cases because theft is difficult to prove. According to people in the industry, the companies also don't want to offend their suppliers.    Nevertheless, oil concerns are stepping up efforts to curb theft. &quot;More losses are being identified because the oil companies have become more vigilant,&quot; says John Lindsell, a vice president of Caleb Brett, a major provider of petroleum inspectors to the industry.    Chevron Corp. hires its own inspectors to survey cargo and bunker tanks and says that it scrutinizes its charter fleet. Another major oil company uses special instruments to &quot;sniff&quot; fumes in the bunker tanks of chartered vessels after the tanker has docked. &quot;We don't have statistics on how often this goes on,&quot; a company official says, &quot;but we have caught people using our crude to run their tankers.&quot; The chairman of Ashland Oil Inc., John R. Hall, says that &quot;if Ashland charters a tanker coming from certain countries, we are very careful to measure the cargo.&quot;    Some companies also maintain blacklists of tanker operators they consider disreputable. &quot;Our advice to our customers is to stay away from certain shipowners,&quot; says Jordi Aloma, the president of Houston-based Unimar International, a maritime consultant and supplier of petroleum inspectors. But even when tanker owners have untarnished reputations, &quot;the chance remains that a captain or a ship engineer may sell barrels on the black market,&quot; says Mr. Aloma. Moreover, blacklisted operators stay in business by submitting low bids for their services, attracting clients who factor anticipated theft into their costs.    Indeed, the new vigilance hasn't done much to curb cargo fraud. Within the past two years, Petroleos de Venezuela, Venezuela's national oil company, sent crude to West Germany via two chartered tankers. The two ships arrived at the refinery 20,000 barrels short, a $300,000 loss. It turned out that the tankers had double bottoms that allowed part of the cargo to be hidden when they were unloaded. &quot;The industry should be alert that this is happening,&quot; says Juan Chacin, the president of Petroleos de Venezuela.    Independent petroleum inspectors, who are responsible for certifying the quantity and quality of cargoes on tankers and at terminals, are another weak link in preventing fraud, according to the report by Mr. Boulalas. He cites a 1983 arbitration case in which one inspector said that his qualifications included majoring in psychology at college, managing a McDonald's restaurant and a movie theater, and training for six months as a petroleum inspector. He had no experience as an engineer or expertise in chemistry or the properties of oil.    &quot;We don't like to talk about our competitors,&quot; says Unimar's Mr. Aloma, &quot;but we feel uneasy about our industry putting people who aren't professionals into {monitoring} the movement of cargoes worth $20 million or $30 million.&quot;    Last month, the decision by Jack Berg, a New York-based arbitrator, in the Octonia Sun case bolstered the cause against cargo theft. Mr. Berg accepted Chief Officer Athanasakos's story that he was ordered to use &quot;the thief&quot; and other means to steal cargo for the tanker's bunkers. Mr. Athanasakos also testified that he had saved his job by threatening to expose the practice if the owners replaced him.    The tanker's owner protested that Mr. Athanasakos was an unreliable witness and that any cargo losses were within a generally accepted &quot;trade allowance.&quot;    But Mr. Berg relied on other evidence. For one thing, the vessel's master had been convicted of cargo theft in federal court in Louisiana. Facing a jail sentence of up to 10 years, the master had fled &quot;and hasn't been heard from since,&quot; Mr. Berg wrote in his decision.    The arbitrator also noted that according to the tanker's records, during one three-month period between mid-April and mid-July 1982, the Octonia Sun consumed an average of only 15 metric tons of bunker fuel a day. During two subsequent voyages, including the one that prompted the arbitration, the ship burned an average of only 39 to 43 tons a day. &quot;The consumption figures are remarkably low for a vessel of this type,&quot; Mr. Berg concluded. According to him, 54 to 60 tons would be normal.    The arbitrator awarded Stinnes Interoil G.m.b.H., the charterer, $139,741 plus $40,000 in legal fees. Then, although punitive damages had never been assessed in a New York maritime arbitration case before, Mr. Berg awarded Stinnes an additional $100,000.    The decision to break new ground was difficult, he wrote, but &quot;I must admit it has been made somewhat easier by the gross nature of the vessel's conduct.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>