<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880622-0008 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   REAGAN SAID that fraud in Pentagon purchasing was &quot;understandable.&quot;    The president, speaking at the close of a seven-nation economic summit in Toronto, said he is &quot;disappointed and upset&quot; at the evidence of wrongdoing in weapons contracting, but noted it is &quot;understandable how such things can happen&quot; given the size of the government. Reagan argued that the administration should be given more credit for investigating evidence of misconduct in arms buying, and confirmed that he wasn't told of the two-year inquiry while it was under way.    Defense Secretary Carlucci reassigned at least five Pentagon officials currently under investigation to jobs that don't involve sensitive data.    ---   A BOMB EXPLODED in northern India, killing at least 24 people.    The powerful explosion in a crowded Hindu market near the Golden Temple complex in Amritsar, the holiest Sikh shrine, reportedly injured more than 45 people. The blast was believed detonated by Sikh extremists seeking an independent homeland in Punjab state. It was the fourth attack since Sunday blamed on Sikh militants. At least 43 people, most of them Hindus, have died in the latest violence.    Indian officials imposed an indefinite curfew on the old walled city of Amritsar after the explosion in an effort to curb further assaults on Hindus.    ---   Dukakis's campaign is conducting public polling of potential Democratic vice presidential candidates. The Massachusetts governor's camp has requested financial and other background information from Jackson and at least one other contender, Sen. Bob Graham of Florida, sources said.    ---   The Soviet Communist Party endorsed the establishment of a political group in the republic of Estonia that is the country's first outside the party. The Peoples Front, which reportedly has more than 40,000 members, said its goal is to promote Gorbachev's restructuring plans. It also supports &quot;cultural autonomy&quot; for Soviet ethnic groups.    Nagorno-Karabakh's legislature asked the Supreme Soviet to grant independence to the disputed territory until Moscow decides whether it belongs to Soviet Armenia or Azerbaijan. Thousands of the enclave's residents demonstrated to support the appeal.    ---   Burma's government imposed a dusk-to-dawn curfew for the next two months in Rangoon after at least six people were killed in street battles between thousands of protesters and riot police. The violence erupted after authorities in the capital closed a university where students had staged a series of peaceful anti-government rallies.    ---   The U.S. will maintain diplomatic relations with Haiti's military government following a coup Monday that returned military leader Namphy to power after four months of civilian rule, the State Department said. Schools, markets and businesses in Port-au-Prince were reopened, and international telephone lines were restored.    Haiti's deposed president called the new government &quot;very fragile,&quot; and he blamed the coup on corruption in the military. He spoke from exile in the Dominican Republic. Manigat also urged international isolation of Namphy's military regime.    ---   The House cleared a $282.6 billion defense-spending bill. The measure, approved 360-53, would fund all Pentagon operations for the year beginning Oct. 1 except military construction projects, civil defense and nuclear warheads, which are covered by other legislation. Similar legislation is pending in the Senate.    ---   Congressional leaders reached agreement with civil rights and real estate industry groups on a long-stalled bill to stiffen protections against housing bias. Under the accord, HUD would be required to investigate complaints of discrimination in the sale or rental of housing, and be authorized to lodge charges.    ---   Canada has ordered the expulsion of 17 diplomats from the Soviet Union on charges of industrial espionage, Prime Minister Mulroney said. He didn't provide details but said they were expelled for &quot;unacceptable behavior&quot; after being given &quot;delicate information&quot; by Canadian security officials.    ---   Botswana announced that it had foiled a South African raid on Gaborone, the capital, and that its security sources had arrested two white South African soldiers after a shootout late Monday. Pretoria's troops have staged a number of cross-border raids on Botswana in the past to attack suspected African National Congress bases.    ---   Prime Minister Shamir urged Israelis to harden their stand against the Palestinian uprising following the slaying of a Jewish farmer. Defense Minister Rabin, who will visit the U.S. in the next few days, said Israel must respond forcefully to the rebellion, and he defended encouraging civilians to shoot Arabs armed with firebombs.    ---   Political officials in Oslo called for a government inquiry into Norwegian sales of heavy water, which can be used to manufacture atomic weapons. The appeal came following allegations that a shipment sold to a West German firm was illegally sent to India and used to make nuclear arms.    ---   Palestinian factions battled in two of Beirut's refugee camps, and Lebanese police said at least 12 civilians were killed and about 45 others were wounded. Supporters of PLO leader Arafat have been fighting guerrillas loyal to a dissident Arab leader for control of the Palestinian camps. </TEXT></DOC>