<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880205-0015 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   REAGAN WARNED Nicaragua to remain on the path to democracy.    Saying he was &quot;deeply disappointed&quot; about the House's failure Wednesday to approve a $36.2 million aid package for the Contras, the president said Managua shouldn't interpret the vote as a &quot;signal permitting a reversal in steps taken&quot; as part of a five-nation Central American peace plan. Last night, the Senate, in a symbolic move, approved the aid package, voting 51-48.    Nicaragua's President Ortega said the House action would strengthen peace efforts in Central America, &quot;but it doesn't make the war disappear.&quot;    ---   NORIEGA WAS INDICTED in Miami on charges of aiding cocaine traffickers.    According to law-enforcement officials, the sealed indictment, handed up by a federal grand jury, accuses Panama's military chief of protecting drug shipments from Colombia in return for bribes. It also includes racketeering and other drug-related charges. Noriega is considered the power behind Panama's civilian government. A second indictment, resulting from an inquiry in Tampa, also is expected.    Officials said it is doubtful that Noriega will stand trial in the U.S. Panama's cabinet has condemned the accusations against Noriega as &quot;slander.&quot;    ---   SHAMIR TOURED two Arab refugee camps in the occupied Gaza Strip.    The Israeli prime minister, the first ever to visit a Gaza camp, pledged that efforts would be made to improve conditions. Shamir has said it would take about $2 billion and 10 years to rehouse the more than 300,000 refugees in the Israeli-occupied territories. In northern Israel, Palestinian guerrillas crossed the border from Lebanon and killed two Israeli soliders. One Arab infiltrator was slain and another captured.    As scattered clashes were reported in the occupied areas, the U.N. said an envoy would be sent to the Mideast to seek a settlement to the unrest.    ---   GOP Sen. Dole confronted Bush on the Senate floor, accusing the vice president of a campaign designed &quot;to impugn my integrity.&quot; The presidential candidate demanded to know if his chief rival for the nomination had authorized a statement by Bush's Iowa campaign chairman, who charged the Kansas senator with &quot;cronyism.&quot;    ---   A former Pentagon official said the Senate should seek changes in the U.S.-Soviet treaty scrapping intermediate-range nuclear arms. Richard Perle, who helped write the pact's major provisions, said the accord contains &quot;drafting errors&quot; involving verification procedures, and should be amended to include some long-range missiles.    ---   A U.S. judge in Washington refused to grant a directed verdict of acquittal on any of the charges against former White House aide Lyn Nofziger, who is accused of illegally lobbying one-time colleagues. The judge, however, said the prosecution's evidence against Nofziger is &quot;weaker on some counts than it is on others.&quot;    ---   Administration officials said data collected by the U.S., Japan, and Bahrain has confirmed South Korean charges that two North Korean agents planted a bomb that killed 115 people aboard a KAL jet last November. Evidence wasn't found to link the son of North Korea's leader to the bombing.    ---   Malaysia's high court declared the country's dominant political party an illegal society. The ruling negates the party's leadership elections last April in which Prime Minister Mahathir was re-elected as the party's president and thereby retained the premiership.    ---   Italy's Defense Ministry said the 72 U.S. fighter jets being evicted from Spain must remain in Europe. Rome didn't make any commitment to U.S. Defense Secretary Carlucci, but Italian officials said it was possible that the planes could be stationed in Italy, despite some political opposition.    ---   A Soviet government panel endorsed steps to promote the culture of Crimean Tatars, but indicated that members of the ethnic group wouldn't be given privileges in the region from which they were expelled in World War II. The commission was formed last summer after hundreds of Tatars staged protests in Moscow's Red Square.    ---   Philippine soldiers captured 20 high-ranking communist rebel leaders in Manila, in what was considered the military's first victory against the insurgents since President Aquino assumed power in 1986. Separately, Aquino announced a $48 million development program for poor Moslem areas, an apparent concession to Moslem rebels.    ---   Cuba said an eventual withdrawal of its troops from Angola could begin only after South Africa pulled out its soldiers from southern Angola and ended its rule over Namibia. In Cape Town, South Africa's foreign minister said the country was prepared to hold talks with Angola's president on possible ways to end the conflict.    ---   Iraqi warplanes bombed an Iranian oil tanker in the Persian Gulf, setting it ablaze. Meanwhile, a Greek-owned freighter crippled by Iranian gunboats sank while under tow in seas churned by a storm. In Washington, the U.S. said it would send a special envoy to the region to reaffirm a commitment to an arms embargo against Iran.    ---   Laotian forces downed a Thai warplane and border fighting intensified, Bangkok announced. The Thai foreign minister directly implicated Vietnam in the conflict.    ---   Died: John Grist Brainerd, 83, engineer who headed a wartime team that designed and assembled the first electronic computer, Monday, in Kennett Square, Pa. . . . Otto N. Miller, 79, former chairman of Chevron Corp., in San Francisco. </TEXT></DOC>