<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861209-0024 </DOCNO><HL> Drexel's High-Yield-Securities ChiefSaid to Retain 3 Top Criminal Lawyers---By James B. Stewart and Daniel HertzbergStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/09/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Michael R. Milken, the head of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc.'s high-yield, high-risk &quot;junk securities&quot; operation, has assembled a team of top criminal lawyers to represent him in connection with the Ivan F. Boesky insider-trading case, according to lawyers familiar with the government's investigation.    According to those lawyers, Mr. Milken has retained Edward Bennett Williams, chairman of Williams andamp; Connolly in Washington, D.C., and Arthur Liman and Martin Flumenbaum, both partners at Paul, Weiss, Rifkind, Wharton andamp; Garrison in New York.    The retention of lawyers doesn't mean that Mr. Milken is suspected of any wrongdoing. It is known that Mr. Milken has been named in subpoenas issued to other people being questioned by the Securities and Exchange Commission in the investigation, and has received a subpoena himself.    The three retained are among the most eminent white-collar criminal lawyers in the country. Messrs. Liman and Flumenbaum also represent Dennis B. Levine, the former Drexel investment banker who earlier pleaded guilty to four felony counts and who implicated Mr. Boesky.    In addition, the government is known to be examining at least nine transactions in which Drexel played an important role and Mr. Boesky amassed large stock positions in advance of news announcements. Mr. Milken, as the head of Drexel's high-yield securities operation in Beverly Hills, Calif., figured prominently as a financier in many of those transactions, although many others at Drexel and other firms were also aware of details of the financings.    The subpoenas mentioning Mr. Milken and identifying the transactions were issued shortly after the government's announcement Nov. 14 that Mr. Boesky had settled SEC charges for a record $100 million, agreed to plead guilty to one felony count, and agreed to cooperate with the government.    Through a spokesman, Mr. Milken declined comment.    Messrs. Williams and Liman were said to be out of town and couldn't be reached. Mr. Flumenbaum declined comment.    Cahill Gordon andamp; Reindel in New York has been retained by Drexel to represent the firm in the government probe. Irwin Schneiderman, the Cahill Gordon partner in charge of the Drexel matter, said that he advised a number of individuals at Drexel to retain their own counsel.    If Cahill Gordon represented both the firm and individuals, an &quot;individual couldn't tell me something in confidence,&quot; he said. &quot;There would be no attorney-client privilege, because I would discuss what they told me with Drexel.&quot; He said that while people at Drexel were free to retain Cahill Gordon under those conditions, none had. &quot;We are solely representing the firm,&quot; he said.    Paul Weiss is understood to have studied the possibility of conflicts of interest before agreeing to represent Mr. Milken, lawyers familiar with the case said. Paul Weiss represents Mr. Levine, who hasn't been sentenced yet and who conceivably could be a witness in any proceedings involving Mr. Milken. However, the lawyers said Paul Weiss concluded there wouldn't be a conflict. While Messrs. Levine and Milken could also waive any conflicts, lawyers said Paul Weiss probably would be reluctant to undertake a joint representation, even with waivers, if the firm believed a conflict was likely.    Mr. Williams recently represented corporate raider and Drexel client Victor Posner on charges of criminal tax evasion. Mr. Posner's conviction was overturned and he faces a retrial.    Because Mr. Posner is mentioned in some of the government's subpoenas in the Boesky case, Mr. Williams also faces a possible conflict of interest if Mr. Milken's and Mr. Posner's interests clash. Again, Messrs. Posner and Milken may have waived any conflict, or Mr. Williams may have concluded no conflict is likely.    Two other prominent law firms have also been retained by unidentified individuals at Drexel, lawyers familiar with the case said. Howard Trienens, a top partner at Chicago-based Sidley andamp; Austin, confirmed that he has been retained in the Boesky investigation.    He referred questions to a partner, Theodore Miller, who was in Beverly Hills yesterday. Mr. Miller didn't return phone calls.    Peter Fleming and Eliot Lauer, partners at Curtis, Mallet-Prevost, Colt andamp; Mosle in New York, who represented Ira B. Sokolow, one of Mr. Levine's confessed conspirators, have also been retained in the investigation, lawyers said.    In Messrs. Williams, Liman and Flumenbaum, Mr. Milken has retained an experienced team. Mr. Williams defended former Texas governor and Treasury Secretary John Connally, and former Central Intelligence Agency head Richard Helms. He also has long represented the Washington Post, and is a former part owner of the Washington Redskins.    Messrs. Liman and Flumenbaum are former federal prosecutors in the Southern District of New York. Mr. Liman also is a former special assistant to the U.S. Attorney for securities fraud, was chief counsel of the New York state special commission on the 1971 prison riot at Attica, and recently represented Pennzoil Co. in its massive lawsuit against Texaco Inc.    Mr. Liman also represented Revlon Inc. in its unsuccessful effort to stave off a takeover by Ronald Perelman. Messrs. Liman and Flumenbaum negotiated the agreement under which Mr. Levine agreed to plead guilty and cooperate with the government. </TEXT></DOC>