<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870323-0040 </DOCNO><HL> Ex-SEC AideLewis Is LinkedTo Jefferies Case---Sources Say Broker UrgedManipulation of StockIn Fireman's Fund Corp.---By James B. Stewart and Daniel HertzbergStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JEFG AXP SBSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK </DATELINE><TEXT>   Salim B. &quot;Sandy&quot; Lewis, a well-known arbitrager and former special adviser to the Securities and Exchange Commission, allegedly asked Boyd L. Jefferies to manipulate the stock of Fireman's Fund Corp. last year, according to people familiar with the government's criminal and civil cases against Mr. Jefferies.    The government announced last week that Mr. Jefferies, who resigned Thursday as chairman of the Los Angeles-based Jefferies Group Inc. securities firm, agreed to plead guilty to two felonies, one of which was related to an alleged scheme to manipulate the price of Fireman's Fund shares just prior to a secondary stock offering by American Express Co. last May 9. The government said Mr. Jefferies is cooperating with the investigation.    In settling related charges, the SEC alleged Mr. Jefferies, acting pursuant to an agreement with an individual who wasn't identified, bought huge blocks of Fireman's Fund at or near the close of trading the day before the offering, thereby boosting the price on the day of the offering.    Mr. Lewis is the individual referred to by the government, the people familiar with the cases said. His name, as well of that of his firm, S.B. Lewis andamp; Co., appeared on subpoenas related to the transaction issued by the government on Friday. Mr. Lewis couldn't be reached for comment.    Subpoenas were received by American Express, Fireman's Fund's controlling shareholder and former parent; Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc., co-manager for the secondary offering and a unit of American Express; and Salomon Brothers Inc., the investment banking firm that was the other co-manager, the companies acknowledged.    Also named in subpoenas were Randall D. Smith andamp; Co., a small securities firm, and Randall D. Smith, the firm's founder.    The government is seeking to determine whether anyone at American Express, Shearson Lehman or Salomon Brothers asked Mr. Lewis to set up the arrangement with Mr. Jefferies, according to the people familiar with the investigation. They said the government is also probing the rise in the price of Fireman's Fund shares that occurred several days earlier in the week before the public offering.    Neither Messrs. Lewis and Smith nor anyone at any of the firms receiving subpoenas has been charged with any wrongdoing. The government said that both SEC and criminal investigations of the matter are continuing. Mr. Smith, who is a former partner of Bear, Stearns andamp; Co., didn't return phone calls. Mr. Jefferies' lawyer, Peter H. Morrison, declined to comment and said Mr. Jefferies wasn't available.    The probe of the $332 million Fireman's Fund offering marks a dramatic widening of the government's probe of wrongdoing on Wall Street. Not only does the offering under scrutiny involve some of the financial community's most prestigious corporations, but it is the first indication that the scandal has spread from takeovers to the more staid world of corporate finance, traditionally the heart of investment banking.    Mr. Lewis, who is 48 years old, has long had close ties to American Express's chairman, James D. Robinson III. American Express helped launch Mr. Lewis's arbitrage firm in 1977 with a $3 million investment, and Mr. Lewis helped arrange American Express's acquisition of Investors Diversified Services Inc. in 1983 and of Shearson in 1981. S.B Lewis andamp; Co. earned a $3.5 million fee from the Shearson acquisition, and American Express remains a major investor in Mr. Lewis's firm. Mr. Lewis has often acted as an informal adviser to Mr. Robinson on matters of corporate strategy.    Mr. Robinson declined to comment on his relationship with Mr. Lewis, but he has told colleagues that he never discussed anything that could be characterized as market manipulation with Mr. Lewis and knew nothing about the alleged manipulation of Fireman's Fund shares.    According to the people familiar with the government's investigation, Mr. Lewis asked Mr. Jefferies to boost the price of Fireman's Fund shares May 8, the day before the scheduled public offering. Fireman's Fund shares, after rising sharply several days earlier, had begun falling as the offering approached. Mr. Lewis agreed to reimburse Mr. Jefferies for any losses incurred on the transactions, the people said.    At or near the close of trading that day, Mr. Jefferies purchased four large blocks of stock, pushing the price of Fireman's shares to $38, at least an eighth of a point higher than the price otherwise would have been, the government said. Mr. Jefferies subsequently sold his holdings at a loss.    As agreed, Mr. Jefferies sent S.B. Lewis andamp; Co. an invoice for about $185,000 for &quot;investment banking services,&quot; the people said. But Mr. Lewis then asked that another invoice for about $150,000 be sent to Smith andamp; Co., which is active in the junk bond market. Smith andamp; Co. subsequently paid the sum to Jefferies andamp; Co., which recorded the payment on its books as &quot;other income.&quot;    People familiar with the Fireman's Fund offering said Mr. Lewis had no formal role in the offering and would have had no direct incentive to engage in market manipulation or to risk his own capital by reimbursing Jefferies andamp; Co. American Express would have been the most obvious beneficiary of the alleged scheme, since the offering was priced at the close of the market May 8, the day before the public offering. The offering was underwritten on a firm commitment basis, meaning that after the price was fixed, the underwriters bore the risk of any subsequent drop in the stock's price.    Mr. Robinson said, &quot;We know of absolutely no wrongdoing by anybody at American Express,&quot; including Shearson Lehman. He said that two law firms hired by the company, Willkie Farr andamp; Gallagher and Skadden, Arps, Slate, Meagher andamp; Flom, worked over the weekend and interviewed everybody involved in the underwriting. Mr. Robinson, a personal friend of Mr. Lewis for many years, added, &quot;I would be shocked if Sandy did anything illegal.&quot;    A Salomon Brothers spokesman said the firm would comply with the subpoena it received and cooperate fully with the SEC. He added that the firm knew nothing about a government investigation of the offering before last week's announcements.    Within certain limits, it is permissible for underwriters to stabilize the price of a security in a public offering for a relatively brief period after the offering is made. However, for anyone to manipulate the price of a security before the offering is made would be illegal.    Mr. Lewis has been a highly successful but maverick player on Wall Street. His father was Salim Lewis, a legendary Wall Street tycoon who ran Bear Stearns until his death in 1978. Sandy Lewis, known equally for his intellectual brilliance, his excitability and volubility and his lack of tact, was hired and fired by several prominent firms before launching his own successful operation. During 1977, he became a special adviser to SEC Chairman Harold Williams. Investors in his firm have included both Mr. Williams and another former SEC chairman, Roderick Hills, and his wife Carla Hills, former Secretary of Housing and Urban Development.    People on Wall Street expressed unusual shock at the news that Mr. Lewis had been implicated by Mr. Jefferies. Over the years, Mr. Lewis has called for strict compliance with the securities laws and for adherence to the highest ethical standards. Mr. Lewis once worked briefly for confessed insider trader Ivan F. Boesky, and ever since, has urged reporters and SEC officials to investigate Mr. Boesky's activities. It was Mr. Boesky who implicated Mr. Jefferies, who in turn has led investigators to Mr. Lewis. </TEXT></DOC>