<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870720-0079 </DOCNO><HL> Treasure Hunt:Adventurers Still TryTo Get to the BottomOf Fabled Money Pit---But Mishaps and Booby TrapsKeep Nova Scotia MysteryUnsolved After 197 Years---Mildred Restall's Assessment---By D'Arcy O'ConnorSpecial to The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> OAK ISLAND, Nova Scotia  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Daniel Blankenship, wiping mud from his face, emerges from the bowels of the earth. It is 2:30 in the afternoon, and for the past six hours he has been working 150 feet down in an eight-foot-diameter shaft known as Borehole 10-X.    He is tired, wet and hungry. Still, he smiles cheerfully. &quot;We're almost there,&quot; he shouts to a reporter over the din of an air compressor, pump and power generator.    The &quot;there&quot; he is speaking of is a subterranean chamber, possibly one of many dug several hundred years ago, perhaps to hide a treasure of immense value on this uninhabited 140-acre island in Mahone Bay, about 40 miles southwest of Halifax. And the rugged 64-year-old Mr. Blankenship has been doggedly pursuing that treasure for the past 22 years.    &quot;There&quot; is also where, 11 years ago, he came within about five seconds of being entombed when the steel casing around the hole started to buckle 50 feet above his head. (With debris raining down on him, he was winched out of the collapsing shaft moments before it closed beneath his feet.)    That was but one of several brushes with death the former Miami contractor has had while serving his &quot;obsession to be part of the team that brings this crazy search to its conclusion.&quot;    The team is Triton Alliance Ltd., a Montreal-based consortium of 48 partners, most of them wealthy Canadian and U.S. businessmen, formed in 1969 to participate in the world's longest-running and most expensive treasure hunt. Mr. Blankenship, whose personal quest began in 1965, joined the Triton group as a director and field manager after he had poured $97,000 (U.S.) of his own money into the project.    Neither he nor Triton, which has invested about $3 million in the search, has yet to come up with a dime's worth of treasure. Nevertheless, both are far from calling it quits.    Triton is now prepared to spend up to $10 million to sink an enormous steel and concrete-encased shaft 180 feet southwest of Borehole 10-X. The hole, 60 to 70 feet in diameter and 200 feet deep, will, according to Triton's president, David Tobias, &quot;in all probability&quot; be the &quot;deepest and most expensive archaeological dig ever made in North America.&quot; And if that project, scheduled to begin next March, doesn't solve Oak Island's 197-year-old mystery, says Mr. Tobias, &quot;then nothing will.&quot;    William Sobey, a Triton director and honorary chairman of Sobeys Stores Ltd., one of Canada's largest supermarket chains, has been waiting half a century for the solution. &quot;I remember as a bug-eyed kid 50 years ago hearing stories about Oak Island,&quot; he says. &quot;Finally, it looks like we might soon find the answer.&quot;    Another Triton director and major investor is Charles Brown III, a wealthy Boston real-estate investor who first learned of Oak Island in a front-page article in this newspaper in July 1970. &quot;I packed my wife and kids in the car and headed up soon after,&quot; he recalls. &quot;I sat up past midnight talking to Dan {Blankenship} on the island, and I was hooked.&quot; He adds: &quot;There's no doubt in my mind that the {original} workings exist. Whether there's a treasure there, we'll see.&quot;    The center of Triton's shaft will be in the so-called Money Pit, where the mystery was born on a summer day in 1795, when three farmboys rowed out from the mainland to explore the wooded island. Near the island's eastern end, they stumbled across an ancient clearing of rotted moss-covered stumps, at the center of which stood a single large oak tree with a sawed-off limb. Directly below the limb, the earth had sunk into a shallow saucerlike depression.    The boys spent the summer excavating beneath the limb, finding themselves in a filled-in shaft, 13 feet in diameter, with tightly fitted log platforms placed across it at 10-foot intervals. With the assistance of others, they eventually dug the hole to 90 feet, where, atop yet another log platform, the workers found a large slab of rock bearing a hieroglyphic inscription no one could decipher. Then, after the 90-foot platform was removed, something very strange happened. Sea water began to percolate slowly through the bottom of the pit. It soon rose to within 30 feet of the surface, and attempts to bail it were unavailing.    Later search groups, convinced that a treasure vault lay just below the 90-foot level, tried to circumvent the water problem by sinking shafts 100 feet and deeper adjacent to the Money Pit, and then tunneling toward their goal. But in every case, water began seeping into their tunnels once they were within a few feet of the Money Pit. Those shafts also filled to 30 feet from the surface, which is sea level.    In 1850, it was discovered that the flooding was no mere geological event. Beneath the beach at Smith's Cove, 500 feet east of the Money Pit, workers uncovered rockwalled tunnels leading from beyond the low-tide mark to the island's interior. The cove's drainage system had been carefully covered with layers of rock, eelgrass and a bed of some mysterious brown fiber, all of which prevented the drains from clogging up with silt. The fiber was eventually analyzed by the Smithsonian Institution and found to be coir, or coconut fiber -- this on an island 1,500 miles north of the nearest coconut tree. (Coir is still being found under various parts of the island by the Triton group.)    The flooding system was apparently designed by the creators of the Money Pit as a booby trap to prevent anyone from digging more than 90 feet. When the tight log platforms, which acted as a hydraulic seal, were removed, the trap was sprung. A second similar system was later discovered leading out to sea on the island's south side. And Mr. Blankenship is convinced that other flood traps are yet to be found.    Through the latter half of the 1800s and well into this century, more than a dozen successive treasure syndicates tried to stem the flow of sea water and dig deeper into the area of the Money Pit. But group after group left the island frustrated, broke and beaten by the ingenious designer of the underground workings.    Those failed treasure hunters left the eastern end of the island a rabbit warren of abandoned tunnels, drill holes and shafts. The island has also claimed the lives of six searchers and has lured millions of dollars in fruitless investment. But their drill probes show evidence of metal, wood and cement deep in the Money Pit.    It wasn't until 1967 that anyone realized just how deep and extensive the original workings are. That was when Triton's Mr. Tobias, then operating on his own, hired professional drillers. That effort and more recent ones have located a labyrinth of flooded tunnels and chambers, some with wood-cribbed roofs, below the 160-foot bedrock level. Some of the cavities are more than 200 feet deep.    Core samples from those depths have yielded pieces of wood, charcoal, cement, iron, brass, china and hand-worked clay. Triton has had these findings examined by independent laboratories in Canada and the U.S. Carbon-14 analysis of the wood dated it to the year 1575, plus or minus 85 years. The cement was found to be a primitive type common to the 16th and 17th centuries, and the metal was reported to have been smelted before 1800. Other Triton discoveries include an ancient set square and a pair of wrought-iron scissors. The Smithsonian Institution declared the scissors to be Spanish-American in origin and perhaps 300 years old.    It is because of these clues that Mr. Tobias, a 62-year-old self-made Montreal millionaire, has invested more than $500,000 in Oak Island during the past two decades. &quot;I was never really interested in anything found above the 160-foot level,&quot; he says, &quot;since that could be stuff from previous searchers' work.&quot; But Triton's drilling, he adds, has proved &quot;beyond a doubt that there's an intricate maze of original man-made underground workings.&quot;    Borehole 10-X began as one of those experimental drill probes. In 1971, the water-filled hole was enlarged to 27 inches in diameter, with the drill churning out bits of metal chain and wood from different levels. Several large cavities were encountered, including one 230 feet down. An underwater television camera was lowered into the chamber, and the observers above saw what appeared to be wooden beams, a pickax and a severed human hand.    Wearing diving gear, Mr. Blankenship had himself lowered into the chamber. But because of the murky, fast-flowing sea water and the instability of the anhydrite rock walls, he was hauled out before he could retrieve any artifacts. (It was in that narrow shaft in 1976 that Mr. Blankenship barely escaped with his life when the entire hole collapsed.)    Today, Borehole 10-X is slowly being reopened with an eight-foot diameter steel and reinforced concrete casing. It is being kept reasonably dry with 24-hour-a-day pumping that spews out 650 gallons of water per minute. Mr. Blankenship says, &quot;10-X could be a shortcut to solving the mystery. We may find something when we get down to those voids, maybe even a tunnel&quot; leading back to the Money Pit.    But Mr. Blankenship's determination to reach the original workings via Borehole 10-X is tempered by Mr. Tobias' conviction that a major excavation of the Money Pit itself is &quot;the only sure way to find out what's down there, where it is and what it is.&quot; He adds that the project, which will include the construction of large cofferdams on the east and south sides of the island to control the water flow, will enable Triton to explore virtually all the areas where previous drilling and excavation indicated evidence of the original works. The flooding problem, he says, will be handled with large-capacity pumps and cement grouting, and, &quot;We'll shore up and follow every single tunnel we encounter on the way down.&quot; The project is currently being designed and engineered by Cox Underground Research of Ottawa.    Mr. Tobias predicts that Triton's chances &quot;are nine out of 10 of finding something of significant archaeological and historical value&quot; during the four to six months that completing the shaft is expected to take. And, he adds, &quot;I think we've got a 50% chance of finding a treasure,&quot; the value of which &quot;may be hundreds of millions, maybe billions of dollars.&quot;    Almost all Oak Island investigators, past and present, agree that the underground complex (which modern engineers say involved at least 100,000 man-hours of work, given 16th- or 17th-century tools and technology) was designed to hide something of great value. &quot;No other explanation makes sense,&quot; says Mr. Blankenship.    But the question remains: Did whoever buried something beneath Oak Island come back and retrieve it before the Money Pit was discovered in 1795? To this, Triton and others reply: If that were the case, surely the early discoverers would have found gaping holes rather than the carefully sealed-up workings.    As for the nature of the treasure-trove, theories range from the booty of individual pirates (&quot;impossible, given the depth and complexity,&quot; says Mr. Blankenship) to the Crown Jewels of France, long-lost Inca gold, Spanish wealth plundered from the New World, and even the original manuscripts of William Shakespeare as written by Francis Bacon.    Mr. Tobias, who for many years believed Oak Island was the site of a pirate communal bank, now has &quot;a strong hunch&quot; that the workings were designed and used by the British admiral and buccaneer Francis Drake as a temporary repository for the loot his ships seized in their frequent attacks on treasure-laden Spanish galleons during the 1570s and '80s. He notes that although no one has found documents to support any of the hypotheses, his own theory does comport well with Triton's carbon-dating results and other findings, as well as with the fact that the Spanish fleets routinely passed 300 to 400 miles south of Mahone Bay on their homeward voyage via the Gulf Stream.    Mr. Blankenship, on the other hand, thinks the Spanish themselves might have engineered the project. &quot;Why they did it, I don't know. But it fits the time frame, and the Spanish certainly had the wealth, manpower and technology to do it.&quot;    To finance the shaft it intends to sink (and related on-site costs), Triton hopes to raise as much as $10 million in the next few months through a public share offering or some sort of limited partnership. &quot;We're still not sure which route we'll take,&quot; Mr. Tobias says.    The current work in Borehole 10-X and the planned excavation of the Money Pit mark the end of a 10-year hiatus, during which very little has been accomplished on the island. Part of the delay, Mr. Tobias says, had to do with his own preoccupation with personal business affairs. But two years ago, he sold his packaging and label-manufacturing business, and he is now &quot;prepared to devote all my time and energy to Oak Island.&quot; (Mr. Tobias and his family are currently the largest Triton shareholder, with 31%; Mr. Blankenship, with 18.7%, has the second-largest stake.)    The delay also resulted from protracted and messy litigation over ownership of the island. In 1977, Mr. Tobias purchased the island from its previous owner, M.R. Chappell of Sydney, Nova Scotia, for $125,000. However, a competing treasure hunter, Frederick Nolan of Bedford, Nova Scotia, has for many years laid claim to seven of the island's 32 lots; Mr. Tobias contested the claim. The case has dragged through the Nova Scotia courts for the past five years, costing the litigants almost $100,000. Last April, in appeals court, the contest was finally resolved in Mr. Nolan's favor.    Mr. Nolan, a 59-year-old land surveyor, has been looking for treasure on his property in a small-scale operation for the past 28 years. He is convinced that the cache lies under his lots, most of which are in the swampy center of the island. &quot;I'm close, really close, to finding it. Maybe this summer,&quot; he predicts.    Mr. Blankenship broodingly suggests that &quot;Nolan has already found some treasure&quot; on his lots. &quot;I'm sure of it,&quot; he says. Mr. Nolan denies that.    There is a good chance the two sides may soon be back in court. They are currently arguing over access rights to the 600-foot causeway that now joins the island to the mainland, as well as over the location of the boundary line on Mr. Nolan's lot closest to the Money Pit. Indeed, that line, less than 600 feet west of the Money Pit, may someday prove crucial if Triton finds itself following a treasure tunnel in that direction.    Meanwhile, in her home on the mainland overlooking Mahone Bay, Mildred Restall describes the feuding treasure hunters as &quot;a bunch of jackasses.&quot; She predicts that &quot;none of them will ever find any treasure on that damn island.&quot;    The 72-year-old Mrs. Restall has good reason to feel bitter about Oak Island. She endured five hard years living there with her husband and two sons in a small construction shack without electricity or indoor plumbing while they desperately tried to find treasure. In August 1965, her husband and 24-year-old son, as well as two other workers, drowned at the bottom of a 27-foot shaft. &quot;And do you know what?&quot; Mrs. Restall says with a sigh today, &quot;I knew from the first day I stepped on that miserable island that there was no treasure there.&quot;    Mr. Tobias offers a different appraisal. &quot;We'll probably at the very least uncover one of the most fascinating archaeological and historical sites in North America.&quot; And, he adds, &quot;How many people in their lifetime get the opportunity to be associated with a project that may turn out to be as exciting as the discovery of King Tut's tomb or the City of Troy?&quot;    It is that possibility, Mr. Tobias says, &quot;that keeps me going.&quot; As for the chance that he will become extremely wealthy should Triton hit pay dirt, Mr. Tobias says, &quot;I wouldn't start living like Adnan Khashoggi.&quot;    But then he pauses, smiles and confesses, &quot;Well, maybe just a little bit.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>