<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870807-0009 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 08/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   SHULTZ INDICATED the U.S. would reject bilateral talks with Nicaragua.    The secretary of state, responding to a call for two-nation talks by Ortega, said the U.S. seeks a &quot;regional approach&quot; to ending Central American hostilities. Ortega, in Guatemala, said U.S. refusal to negotiate directly with his government would make Reagan's peace proposal &quot;a publicity stunt.&quot; The plan, unveiled Wednesday, calls on Managua to agree by Sept. 30 to a ceasefire, Soviet aid cuts and internal changes in return for an end to U.S. Contra aid.    Five Central American presidents gathered in Guatemala for a two-day summit and said they would concentrate on their own peace initiative.    ---   Iran extended its naval exercises in the Persian Gulf for another day as three Kuwaiti tankers waited outside the gulf to be registered as U.S. ships. Washington didn't say when the ships would move into the gulf. United Press International, quoting U.S. intelligence sources, said Navy carrier planes have been jamming Iranian missile radar.    More than 100 Congressmen said they will file suit to force Reagan to invoke the War Powers Act in connection with his Persian Gulf policy. The act would require Congress's approval before troops could be sent to the region for more than 60 days.    ---   Moscow adopted legislation aimed at dismantling much of the government's central-planning power. The laws, which complete the legal basis for sweeping changes Gorbachev ordered at a June meeting of top party officials, were adopted Monday without fanfare. The changes apparently overcame bitter opposition.    ---   The only U.S. AIDS hospital closed, citing $8 million in annual losses. The Institute for Immunological Disorders in Houston, believed to be the only U.S. hospital dedicated exclusively to AIDS research and treatment, didn't attract enough patients and many of those it did treat had exhausted their insurance benefits.    ---   The Soviet foreign minister said that if the U.S. does not agree to scrap 72 Pershing missiles in West Germany, Moscow would consider basing similar weapons in Warsaw Pact countries. The chief U.S. arms negotiator said he doesn't believe the Soviet demand will block an accord on eliminating short-range and medium-range missiles.    The Soviet Union invited Western arms negotiators to visit its largest chemical weapons facility, saying it wants to speed up talks on banning such weapons.    ---   David Owen resigned as leader of Britain's opposition Social Democratic Party after failing to persuade members to vote against merging with the Liberal Party. The parties campaigned as the Alliance in June 11 elections but made a disastrous showing. With 78% of SDP members voting, 57% favor the merger.    ---   Panamanians demonstrated after the government lifted a ban it had imposed on the protest. Five opposition leaders ordered arrested on the eve of the protest remained in hiding. In Washington, legislation was introduced in Congress to halt aid until steps are taken to oust Noriega, Panama's de facto ruler.    ---   Chad said Libyan troops began a fresh advance, moving toward Chadian army positions from Libya to the north and Sudan to the east, but the movements couldn't be independently confirmed. An estimated 8,000 Libyan troops were driven into a narrow strip on Chad's northern border and suffered heavy losses during March fighting.    ---   Opposition leaders united in South Korea and called on the country's military to stay out of politics. Kim Dae Jung, with his political rights restored only a month ago, agreed to join the main opposition party headed by his chief rival, Kim Young Sam. The two Kims will decide between themselves who will run for president.    North Korea welcomed a proposal by Seoul to open talks on uniting the divided nation, but demanded that the U.S. join negotiations on military force reductions.    ---   Sri Lanka ordered the release of 1,700 Tamil prisoners under an India-brokered peace accord aimed at ending a four-year civil war. President Jayewardene said the surrender of arms by Hindu Tamil rebels this week has &quot;brought the peace&quot; in separatist fighting with Sri Lanka's mostly Buddhist Sinhalese majority.    ---   Palauans renounced an anti-nuclear provision in their constitution, clearing the way for a sixth attempt to pass a political and economic pact with the U.S. In incomplete results in a referendum on the change, residents of the Pacific island U.N. trusteeship voted 3,751-1,471 to drop the anti-nuclear provision, with 2,000 votes still uncounted.    ---   Suspected Sikh terrorists killed eight Hindus in two incidents in the northern India state of Punjab. Two people thought to be Sikhs also were killed, police said.    ---   The Education Department came under sharp criticism from the NAACP Legal Defense Fund, which said the agency has failed to comply with a 1983 U.S. court ruling ordering the desegregation of school systems in five states, mostly in the South. </TEXT></DOC>