<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870327-0057 </DOCNO><HL> America's New Cities -- Shallow Roots:Young and Old AlikeCan Lead Lonely LivesIn New U.S. Suburbs---But Some Find Excitement;A Street Sign From OhioIn Gwinnett County, Ga.---'Nothing Here Makes Sense'---By Betsy MorrisStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>      {Second of two articles}   GWINNETT COUNTY, Ga. -- Genese Hessman loves her dream house, a charming country-English mix of stone, brick and leaded glass designed down to the last details -- the sheer curtains that puddle daintily onto the floor, a circular stairway, a picture window above the master bathtub overlooking the woods out back.    Still, odd as it may look against the Georgia pines, Mrs. Hessman is determined to redesign her back deck around a memento from the older, less glamorous neighborhood she moved from more than a year ago: the street sign from Powell and Cassingham in Bexley, Ohio.    The sign is more than a souvenir. It is an anchor to the past, to the familiar, to a tidy, well-defined little community firmly pinned by a school, a Main Street, a family drugstore and longtime families and neighbors.    These days, Mrs. Hessman sometimes wonders where she has landed. &quot;Nothing here makes sense,&quot; says the engineer's wife. &quot;The roads don't make sense. Their names change. Nothing is convenient. Nothing is close -- not Atlanta, not your stores, not your family, not your friends.&quot;    For many people, Gwinnett County is a brave new world. It is a sprawling suburb -- 437 square miles, 10 to 35 miles from downtown Atlanta -- anchored more by the Gwinnett Place Mall than by any downtown. Since 1984 it has been the fastest-growing of any U.S. county of more than 100,000 residents. And while it is one of the most striking examples of a new breed of suburb, life here is very much as it is in similar suburbs that are restructuring America from Phoenix and Denver to St. Louis and Baltimore.    This phenomenon is reshaping not only landscapes but also lives. In subtle ways and not so subtle ones, the change is affecting values, morale, friendships, daily schedules -- even telephone bills.    These suburbs are bigger and more insular than their counterparts of the past, and much more frenetic. Many believe they also put less emphasis on community and more on self. &quot;They are filled with a lot of people who drive alone to work and then drive home and turn on their VCRs,&quot; says Mark Baldassare, an associate professor at the University of California at Irvine who has been studying similar trends in Orange County, Calif. &quot;The way of life is much less centered on community,&quot; he says, &quot;and much more on work, entrepreneurship, the private life.&quot;    Many find these bustling new places unpretentious and exciting. &quot;I don't miss Washington one bit,&quot; says Scott Bartosch, a sales manager who was transferred to Gwinnett last year from Fairfax County, Va. &quot;People here aren't as fakey, and I'm not as cynical.&quot;    Like many other Gwinnett residents, Mr. Bartosch considers the county's housing and land prices, though rising, still a bargain compared with other places. Despite the growth, Gwinnett still has lovely wooded vistas and smokeless industries that often are immaculately landscaped, at this time of year with azaleas and yellow pansies.    People who have come here from older, stodgier suburbs often feel on the edge of a dynamic new future. &quot;I feel like this place is really going somewhere,&quot; says Mrs. Hessman, who, like many, loves some things about the place despite her homesickness.    In its haste to push ahead, the county has forgotten some of its past. It was named for Button Gwinnett, a signer of the Declaration of Independence. But instead of permanence, Gwinnett is pervaded by a sense of rootlessness that is evident on the T-shirts worn by the local mall-goers -- T-shirts touting the Chicago Cubs, the Boston Celtics, the San Francisco Giants -- and the bumper stickers on Pleasant Hill that tout just about any place but Gwinnett.    The color of the carpeting in an overwhelming number of the new homes is beige -- it makes them easier to sell the next time. Since many Gwinnett residents are corporate nomads, they have developed a pragmatic attitude about some things. A house may be less of a home than an asset.    &quot;We've learned that if you can be the first one in a new subdivision and you wait, you can make a killing,&quot; says Wiltrud Prescott. Before moving here a year ago, she had lived in two similarly growing Dallas suburbs.    In Gwinnett, as in many of these new places, prosperity abounds. In the past decade, but mostly in the past five years, it has been transformed from a rural Southern backwater to a sea of office parks and more than 450 subdivisions. In 1980, it had very little office space and a handful of shopping spots, most of them featuring mom-and-pop places like the Tote-A-Poke grocery in Buford. Last year, 81 permits were issued for new office buildings, up from none in 1980, and the county now boasts 80 shopping centers. The average personal income has climbed steadily, as much as 21% some years. &quot;It is a very good time to be in Gwinnett County,&quot; says Lillian Webb, the chairman of the county Board of Commissioners.    But many people who moved to what they thought would be rural paradise feel shortchanged. Orange construction reflectors and mud-stained roads are as common as pine trees, and the air is often filled with the low-level hum of development. Sixty-nine real-estate signs touting nearby homes, lots and subdivisions recently crowded a two-mile stretch of Pleasant Hill Road.    In this kind of place, residents have found, it is everyone for himself. One Gwinnett newcomer came home last fall to find her back-yard pine trees razed -- they stood in the way of the next house in her subdivision. Mrs. Hessman has had to curtain over her bathtub view, which now includes her new neighbor's upstairs. &quot;The big thing I hate here,&quot; she says, &quot;is that one day you have a virgin forest, the next day you get a Waffle House or a Kangaroo {convenience store}.&quot;    There are other factors here that promote this stand-alone attitude -- the physical layout of the place, for instance. New subdivisions with names like Emerald Forest and Cricket Hill and Eagle Crossing line Five Forks Trickum Road almost back to back for miles, but they might as well be in separate states even though they are right next door to each other. The spaghetti streets of one don't mesh with the spaghetti streets of another.    &quot;I wouldn't know if there was a major sewage spill across the street,&quot; says Jewell Meyer, a housewife who moved to the Peachtree Corners area of Gwinnett three years ago. &quot;They're in another civic association.&quot;    Gwinnett doesn't have buses, or for the most part sidewalks or street lights, and major roads like Five Forks are too dangerous for walking. So people stay isolated in their cars. Traffic, once just a problem for city planners, now dictates daily lives.    Not only are county roads -- many of them paved-over antebellum cattle trails -- just plain overloaded; they are also afflicted by a populace that is going in all different directions. Only about 5% commute to downtown Atlanta. About 45% commute to other counties, and the rest scatter to jobs within Gwinnett, which is as much as 28 miles across both ways. Because of the county's vast, decentralized and ever-changing nature, at any given time a good number of people seem to be driving around in circles, lost.    Traffic is so slow and confusing that Mrs. Meyer has given up a volunteer job delivering hot meals to the elderly. (A weekly 45-minute violin lesson in downtown Atlanta for a now college-age daughter used to take her three hours.) Sara Achuff, who moved from the Fort Worth area last year, has cut out things like ballet lessons for her three children and entertains them and herself at home instead. As a result, she says with a sigh, &quot;I am probably depressed more often, think more about the move and more about leaving my friends.&quot;    Of course, it isn't the new suburbs alone that foster this sense of isolation. Such phenomena as the rise in the number of working couples and fragmented families also contribute to it. But Gwinnett lacks many of the traditional suburban underpinnings that used to promote community.    Neighborhood groceries and gathering spots have given way to superstores and franchise places. Doctors, who less than a decade ago still knew which families had bad hearts and which had weak livers, now attract patients by putting huge signs on their grounds and directional signs posted at street corners. The county is also short on grandparents. &quot;We're going to have a street party out here soon,&quot; says Mardel Crum, a widow who moved to Buford to be near her daughters but is lonely for friends her age, &quot;and I can guarantee you I'll be the only grandma there.&quot;    Many of the county's churches are bursting at the seams. Schools, swamped with newcomers, have become more lightning rods than community rallying points.    Despite the nicer homes, fatter salaries, and more-modern comforts that they have in Gwinnett, many residents are nostalgic about more-traditional communities. Mrs. Meyer misses her hometown of Buffalo, N.Y. &quot;My friends laugh at me,&quot; she says. &quot;They say, What's in Buffalo? It's blue-collar, working-class, depressed. But Buffalo had a lot of heart.&quot;    Although 68-year-old Fred Dutton has spent his entire life within a three-mile radius of the Rocky Branch Baptist Church, he, too, is homesick. &quot;Ain't nothing around here the way it was,&quot; says the retired county jailer. New subdivisions have ruined his rabbit-hunting grounds and threaten to run him and his wife, Virginia, out of their little turquoise and white trailer home. Newcomers have ruined his neighborhood. &quot;You'll be out there in the road and one of them'll run over you and won't even speak to you,&quot; he says.    To fill the void, many people cling to their old communities in faraway places. Mrs. Prescott, the former Dallas-area resident, says her monthly phone bill at home routinely tops $200, loaded up with calls to friends and family scattered from Kassel, Germany, to Plano, Texas. Housewife Anita Pennington's house was filled with visitors almost nonstop from Memorial Day to Thanksgiving.    A surprising number of Gwinnett residents are getting their extended families to uproot and join them. Mrs. Hessman's mother and sister are in the midst of moving to Gwinnett from Ohio, and she is now working on a brother in California. A lifesaver, many say, are newcomers' groups like the New Neighbors League. Another, they say, is the subdivision civic association, which usually provides swimming, parties and ready-made, if not always perfectly matched, friends.    For all its affluence, Gwinnett is also hard on its kids. Compared with older, more established communities, it doesn't have much for them to do. Their hottest weekend hangout is the Gwinnett Place Mall, where a favorite pastime is goading the red-coated security guards.    Often the dislocation is especially hard on the young. New kids ache for old friends. &quot;I know it won't be as hard to leave here,&quot; says Matt Dunford, 17, who moved from Dayton, Ohio, last fall, &quot;because I won't make as good friends here.&quot; And youngsters who have lived here longer resent the newcomers. &quot;It is like they are invaders -- foreigners,&quot; says Carolyn Ezzard, a 16-year-old Gwinnett County native. &quot;They come in, stay a few years and move on. You don't know who to trust.&quot;    Schools try to help as best they can. The Five Forks Middle School, for instance, assigns old-timers as buddies to the newcomers to counsel them to smile a lot and make eye contact. Counselors are everwatchful. &quot;It is very important that they have a sense of place,&quot; says Greg Brigman. &quot;We are trying to make each student's world smaller so the kids have a feeling of an anchor -- a group to go around in orbit with.&quot;    Meanwhile, the school is searching for its own comfortable orbit. Its principal, Michael O'Neal, has posted welcome signs at the perimeter of his school's territory in hopes of drumming up some sense of community identity that might, in turn, promote community support of the school.    Public schools have traditionally been built on a vision of the future. So far, Gwinnett residents have consistently approved school-bond issues and supported a $60 million expansion program. But in other ways, many of the newcomers seem to have a shorter-term view.    &quot;There's an urgency of I want what's best and I want it right now,&quot; says Mr. O'Neal. As he and other school officials struggle to provide the basics, they are besieged by parents with special requests. Some want French. Others want advanced placement classes. Many insist that their children be moved ahead a grade.    The pragmatic view extends to other things, such as property values, and residents can be intolerant if something threatens theirs. Mrs. Prescott still fumes about the Dutton lot littered with trailers and bird cages and lawn mowers. The lot sits an embarrassingly short and visible distance away from one of the two brick entryways into Churchill Commons, the subdivision of $200,000-plus homes where she lives. &quot;That should have been cleaned out long before anybody moved in here,&quot; she says. &quot;They should have bribed that guy to get him out.&quot;    Mr. Dutton sees things differently. He has been offered $40,000 for his little slice of land, which he paid $125 for. He agrees that that would be a good profit in dollars and cents, but the way he looks at it, it would still leave him short. &quot;I got everything in the world I want here,&quot; he says. &quot;My dogs, my chickens. A good shop I can go in at night if I want to fool with an old lawn mower.&quot;    He marvels sadly at a county he believes has sold its soul. &quot;It's getting to the point around here,&quot; he says, &quot;where you're going to have to hire somebody to cry at your funeral.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>