<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881018-0013 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   BUSH HAS SURGED to a wide lead over Dukakis, according to a new poll.    A nationwide Wall Street Journal/NBC News survey shows the Republican candidate with a 55%-to-38% margin over the Democratic nominee following their televised debate last week. But the poll also shows mounting public disaffection with the entire campaign. A majority of likely voters said they are displeased with the choice between the two candidates, and don't believe that they will be better off under either Bush or Dukakis.    Bush criticized Dukakis's defense policies, and the Democrat accused the GOP nominee of ignoring the nation's loss of industrial jobs.    ---   Yugoslavia's Communist chief demanded far-reaching political and economic changes to calm ethnic turmoil. The party chief's appeal came at the start of a Central Committee meeting in Belgrade. One regional leader, however, defended the Serbian rallies, and the country's military chief sought to allay concerns of a possible coup.    ---   The Nobel Prize in medicine was won by two researchers from the U.S. and one from Britain for helping develop drugs to treat a range of illnesses. Sweden's Karolinska Institute cited Americans Gertrude Elion and George Hitchings and Briton Sir James Black for work toward drugs to fight AIDS, leukemia, heart disease and ulcers.    ---   The Supreme Court said it would consider reinstating a criminal conviction against a man who burned an American flag at a demonstration during the 1984 GOP convention in Dallas. The justices will review a ruling that the flag-burning was a form of expression protected by the Constitution.    ---   A senior Soviet policy adviser urged the country's military chiefs to drop their strict secrecy policies and called for the establishment of a parliamentary committee to oversee defense. Separately, a Kremlin spokesman said Gorbachev doesn't have a deputy as Communist Party chief, suggesting that Yegor Ligachev has lost his post.    ---   About 1,000 demonstrators attempted to block entrances to the Pentagon to protest U.S. policies toward El Salvador. More than 200 people were arrested during the protest, which snarled traffic in Washington.    ---   A federal grand jury in Atlanta indicted Rep. Patrick Swindall on 10 counts of perjury. The two-term Republican from Georgia, accused of lying to the grand jury investigating a money-laundering ring, is facing re-election Nov. 8.    ---   The U.S. and the Philippines concluded a pact for American use of six air and naval bases in the Southeast Asian nation. The interim accord calls for the U.S. to provide $481 million a year in aid for two years, as well as $500 million in export credits and investment guarantees over three years starting this month.    ---   Authorities in Italy said 31 people were killed when a Ugandan airliner crashed in dense fog while approaching Rome's Fiumicino airport. About 20 people were injured. The Boeing 707, en route to Entebbe from London, via Rome, burst into flames after hitting the tops of several buildings while making its third attempt to land.    ---   Haiti's military government said it had foiled a coup attempt Sunday against the month-old regime of Lt. Gen. Prosper Avril. Radio reports in Port-au-Prince said &quot;several soldiers were wounded&quot; in the failed coup, led by two military officers.    ---   Poland's leaders have delayed the start of talks with the banned Solidarity trade union, political sources told the Reuters news agency. The talks were expected to begin this week. The sources said the Warsaw officials had been wracked by internal divisions over whether to legalize the union again.    ---   Israel's Foreign Minister Peres said that if he is elected prime minister in Nov. 1 elections, Palestinians in the occupied areas will elect delegates to Arab-Israeli peace talks. In Washington, the State Department is trying to quash a planned White House review of complaints that Israel mistreats Arab workers.    ---   Iran agreed to a U.N. proposal calling for the dredging of the Shatt al-Arab waterway, which forms the southern Iran-Iraq border. A dispute over the waterway has stalled Persian Gulf peace talks. Meanwhile, Ayatollah Khomeini appeared in public for the first time in several weeks.    ---   Nancy Reagan has borrowed more than $1 million of gowns from leading designers since 1982, but hasn't disclosed the transactions, Time magazine reported. Her press secretary said the failure wasn't illegal although White House attorneys determined that such items should be reported under a 1978 ethics law.    ---   Three U.S. physicians have concluded that Iraq used chemical weapons against its ethnic Kurdish minority in northern Iraq. A spokesman for the doctors, who visited Kurdish refugee camps, also accused Turkey of covering up Iraq's use of the weapons. </TEXT></DOC>