<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880419-0124 </DOCNO><HL> The Reagan Revolution That Never Was </HL><AUTHOR> Irving Kristol </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   For the past couple of months I have had at least a dozen reporters demanding that I comment on &quot;the failure of the Reagan revolution.&quot; No sooner do I reply that I don't quite see things that way than my interlocutors lose interest.    I believe the sweeping assumptions behind such a question are based more on wishful or fearful thinking than actual fact. There may well have been a fringe of conservative enthusiasts or liberal apocalyptics who truly believed the election of Ronald Reagan portended something like a &quot;conservative revolution,&quot; but I for one never thought any such thing.    It was obvious from the very beginning that what we were going to have -- at best or at worst -- was a conservative administration, and perhaps a bit more. You don't make a revolution by appointing Alexander Haig secretary of state, or Donald Regan secretary of the treasury, or James Baker chief of staff in the White House, or Casper Weinberger secretary of defense. These gentlemen have their virtues, but no one would dream of recruiting them to any kind of revolutionary cabal.    The record of the Reagan administration therefore was especially disappointing to strong-minded conservatives, and in all sorts of ways. In part, this was simply because the Democrats controlled Congress for most of Mr. Reagan's two terms. In part, too, it was because the Republican Party is still dominated by its &quot;traditional&quot; sector, which perceives an energetic presidency as a deviation from the principle of limited government. And in part it was because too many people had fanciful expectations as to what a conservative presidency might accomplish under existing conditions.    The Reagan administration has been haunted by the memories of two political leaders of the past, Franklin D. Roosevelt and Barry Goldwater. Those memories encouraged too many conservatives to think Mr. Reagan's agenda was a reversal of the &quot;FDR revolution&quot; -- a dismantling of the welfare state, the privatization of Social Security, an end to deficit spending, a &quot;hard line&quot; vis-a-vis the Soviet Union and other Communist countries, etc. This was what Mr. Goldwater seemed to be promising in 1964, and a generation of conservative activists anticipated that the nomination and election of Ronald Reagan, representing a victory by the conservative wing of the Republican Party, would see a realization of these promises.    It is possible that Mr. Reagan, in his heart of hearts, shared such a hope. But as his record as governor of California should have suggested, when he is in office he tends to be a conservative Republican who is also a consensus Republican. The election of 1980 did mean that the party had clearly shifted to the right, a shift that I take to be permanent -- just as the nomination of George McGovern in 1972 meant that the Democratic Party had shifted to the left, a shift that I also take to be permanent. But just as the Carter administration could not implement Mr. McGovern's agenda in a way and to a degree that pleased liberal activists, so the Reagan administration was bound to disappoint its more enthusiastic ideological supporters.    The Roosevelt revolution had created a new reality and set new parameters for American politics, and no successful counterrevolution is conceivable. Yet when Paul Weyrich, one of the most thoughtful of conservatives, recently suggested that the welfare state could be reshaped but not dismantled, he was the object of bitter criticism from many of his fellow conservatives. These latter are true-blue Goldwater conservatives, just as the militants of liberalism are true-blue FDR-Americans for Democratic Action liberals. Between them, these passionate believers help establish their parties' ideological self-definition when out of office.    As a consequence, American politics today are more ideologically polarized than at any time since the end of World War II. This seems to be the fate of democratic politics in our time, as the experience of Britain, Germany and most other Western European nations clearly demonstrates. But at the same time that democratic politics have been polarized, our democratic populations have not been. Whether they vote left or right, or both alternatively, these populations always seem to prefer that the center of gravity of their political spectrums not be moved too far or too fast in either direction. This paradoxical situation is one that is bound to provoke considerable anguish among activists, left or right. One used not to hear so many expressions of dismay and disillusionment about elected governments simply because there used not to be so many people active in politics who had aspirations that turned out to be illusions.    I must confess to sharing a fair portion of the dismay that so many conservatives feel about the Reagan administration. After all is said and done, it could have been, and should have been, a lot more effective than it has been. It has displayed too much ineptitude, bumbling, and unnecessary timidity at crucial moments. President Reagan himself has to bear the responsibility for this. One wishes he had had the energy, the strong intelligence and the gritty determination of a Margaret Thatcher. She has not launched any kind of counterrevolution either, but her conservative leadership has been in most (though not all) respects superior.    But I don't think it makes sense to declaim dramatically about the &quot;failure&quot; of the Reagan administration, or to minimize its accomplishments. The major accomplishment, insufficiently appreciated, is in the realm of political economy. In this particular area the Reagan years have indeed witnessed nothing less than a successful counterrevolution.    The supply-side cuts in marginal tax rates instituted under Mr. Reagan have become a model for the world and are being imitated in Britain, Canada, Australia, Germany and other nations. This is because the energizing influence on economic activity and growth of such cuts in tax rates has become obvious to everyone. It is noteworthy that very few leaders of, or spokesman for, the Democratic Party feel inclined to challenge these cuts, presumably because they correctly sense a connection between lower marginal tax rates and declining unemployment. When they do talk about increasing taxes, it is usually taxes on consumption rather than income that they mention.    It is no small political accomplishment for the Reagan administration to have identified Republicans with low taxes, low unemployment and economic growth. This could be of major significance for the future of American politics. But this political importance is nothing compared with its ideological significance.    For the first time in this century, the idea that the progressive income tax should not merely help pay the expenses of government but should also, perhaps even primarily, have the intention of redistributing income and wealth has been repudiated by democratically elected governments. And with the repudiation goes a sharp diminution in the egalitarian ethos that is at the very heart of the ideological left in our era. Without an egalitarian goal, the familiar arguments in favor of a more statist economic order lose much of their force.    I believe it is impossible to underestimate the impact of this successful counterrevolution in political economy on the future of democratic politics in general and American politics in particular. In retrospect it could turn out to be a watershed. Though the Reagan administration has other minor, though not trivial, accomplishments it can point to, this could be the memorable one.    Oddly enough, the most dismaying performance has been in foreign affairs. It is odd because Ronald Reagan seems to perceive himself as the legitimate heir to Theodore Roosevelt's Republican activism in foreign policy, as distinct from the isolationist traditions that have always been so strong among Republicans. In fact, he has done much to counteract the Vietnam syndrome -- except in the Pentagon, which has developed a profound allergy to &quot;small wars.&quot; On several occasions he has struck a healthy, vibrant nationalist chord in the American people. But he has never been able or willing to command our foreign policy in a sustained or coherent way. It is no exaggeration to say that he would have been a far better president had he been a stronger commander-in-chief.    I have deliberately avoided any mention of the budget deficit, which almost everyone else puts so much stress on. Since the deficit results in good part from unconstrained expenditures by a Democratic Congress, I don't see why Ronald Reagan should bear the blame for it. Besides -- and most conservative Republicans would rather die than say this -- if we are to have a Democratic administration in 1988, I'd much rather it inherited a deficit to cope with than a fat surplus with which to implement its increasingly radicalized agenda.    ---   Mr. Kristol is the John M. Olin professor of social thought at the NYU Graduate School of Business and a senior fellow of the American Enterprise Institute. </TEXT></DOC>