<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870209-0115 </DOCNO><HL> Manager's Journal:How to Avoid Conflicts of Interest In the Takeover Game---By Ben W. Heineman</HL><DD> 02/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><TEXT>   Directors trying to make astute buy or sell decisions during corporate takeover battles are often obstructed by strong conflicts of interest involving the management and professional advisers. The conflicts reflect two competing trends: the tendency in takeovers for directors to affirm the chief executive officer's policy decision rather than to initiate policy themselves, and the directors' recognition that the chief executive and his close management associates may have personal motives ranging from protecting their tenures to setting up &quot;golden parachutes&quot; in case they have to bail out.    Any meaningful takeover threat and its Byzantine consequences ultimately involve questions of value, and fairness to the stockholders. The key professionals are investment bankers and special takeover lawyers. Their interests and the goals of the officers who engage them may be closely allied and may conflict with the perceived interests of the directors and stockholders.    The investment banker's function is to give a reliable opinion on value and fairness. Nevertheless, the banker frequently has a conflict of interest that, if faced by a director, would prevent the director from participating in any way in the takeover decision and could compel his resignation. The conflict arises from the millions of dollars of fees contingent upon the completion of the transaction, and if the transaction succeeds from the expressed or implied promise of major future transactions. One could reasonably believe that the potential benefits of the transaction to the investment-banking firm might undermine the detachment and independence of its opinion. Fees in excess of $20 million are not unknown.    Not just years or decades, but centuries of experience have taught us that those with a conflict of interest cannot effectively and fairly represent others. John Alden was not the proper representative for Miles Standish.    What to do?    Investment bankers should remember the history of contingent fees in acquisitions and divestitures. When ongoing relationships rather than individual transactions were the foundation of investment banking, modest contingent fees were designed for the protection of clients and to enhance the relationship between client and banker. The size of an individual transaction was small when compared with the value of the longstanding relationship. The transaction seldom involved the tenure and, hence, the personal self-interest of the chief executive. Today, transactions, and not relationships, are the foundation of investment banking; the value of most traditional corporate relationships pales in contrast to the benefits of a single transaction.    A recent Wall Street Journal story discussed the contingent or &quot;performance&quot; fee of millions of dollars charged by a leading takeover law firm in a major transaction. The fee would be paid only if the transaction took place. The chief executive of the acquiring company is quoted as saying that the lawyers &quot;did contribute much&quot; to the pursuit of the target, and that what they do &quot;goes much beyond legal work.&quot;    Performance fees for corporate lawyers are too recent an innovation to know whether the concept will spread. I would hope that performance fees would die aborning so that directors could be assured of dispassionate and independent advice from their counsel.    Corporate boards should acknowledge the conflicts of interest of their professional advisers and take steps to reform these relationships. As a matter of internal control, these steps should include giving unmistakable policy guidance to the chief executive. The normal deference given by a board to a chief executive functioning in the usual course of business has no application to such extraordinary policy issues as the purchase of a major enterprise in an unfriendly takeover or the sale of the entire business.    When faced with such situations -- with the powerful, and perhaps overriding, conflicts of interest of the lawyers, investment bankers and even management -- the directors' alternatives are difficult but clear: The directors may oppose the transaction as a matter of principle on the ground that the board's professional advisers are as disqualified from participation as the directors themselves would be; they may vote for the transaction with the nagging fear that the professionals' opinions have been unduly influenced by the huge contingent fees and other perquisites; or, they may seek to retain yet more investment bankers and lawyers to review -- exclusively on behalf of the board -- the professional opinions that the corporation already has obtained.    In one widely noted case, &quot;outside&quot; directors at Owens-Illinois chose the latter route, retaining additional investment bankers and lawyers unrelated to the company or its management. The bankers chosen by the directors reached different conclusions from those of the bankers selected by management. Each set agreed with the objectives of its patrons, although each was representing not its patrons but the corporation and its stockholders.    I would urge all those concerned in a takeover to reexamine their corporate relationships with utmost care. It is only a matter of time before a dramatic economic downturn, or some other drastic event, will bring a sea change in current mores. This will call into question many of the transactions that will have taken place, including many that will have seemed secure. The result could easily be external intervention, investigation and regulation, accompanied at the very least by extreme embarrassment to many prominent but shortsighted people.    Whatever their reasons, in initially opposing management and its professionals and following their own independent views, the outside directors of Owens-Illinois have increased the value of the company for the shareholders by at least $180 million.    ---   Mr. Heineman was founder, chairman and CEO of Northwest Industries, a Fortune 500 company, until 1985. </TEXT></DOC>