<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870318-0054 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Stock-Index Prices Rally as U.S. ReportsHigher-Than-Expected Housing Starts---By Scott McMurrayStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK INDEXES (NDX)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PETROLEUM (PET) </IN><TEXT>   Stock-index futures traders saw signs of a strengthening economy in the latest round of economic news and comments from federal officials. Stock-index futures prices received an added boost from traders who bought the contracts after they broke through technical price resistance levels.    Arbitrage-related program trades made in anticipation of this Friday's triple-witching hour played a relatively minor role in yesterday's trading, analysts said.    A greater-than-expected 2.6% increase in housing starts in February and a 4.4% increase in housing permits signaled healthy economic growth and gave the market a boost, said J.R. Fredericks, an analyst with E. David Stephens Commodity Corp. in Chicago.    &quot;The economy is starting to react to lower interest rates,&quot; he added.    A jump in crude oil futures prices also aided the rally in stock-index futures, many of which are heavily weighted with oil stocks, analysts said.    Mr. Fredericks said that testimony from Treasury Secretary James Baker before the House Appropriations Foreign Operations Subcommittee also was interpreted favorably by the stock-index futures market. Mr. Baker said that the dollar is likely to gain stability at current levels, ending the continued erosion of corporate export earnings.    Mr. Baker added that Japan has agreed to take steps to stimulate its economy, which is expected to lead to a pickup in U.S. economic activity.    Courtney Smith, head of futures trading and research at Twenty-First Securities Corp. in New York, said that March Standard andamp; Poor's 500 stock-index futures contracts for delivery Friday traded in a relatively narrow range with the underlying stock index.    Lacking a wide enough price spread to initiate arbitrage trades between the futures and the stocks, most program traders stood on the sidelines, or sold March contracts and bought June Sandamp;P 500 stock-index futures, traders said.    At the close of trading Friday, stock-index futures, options and individual stock options expire concurrently.    In other commodity markets yesterday:    ENERGY: Oil futures prices rose to their highest levels in eight weeks on technical factors, analysts and traders said. On the New York Mercantile Exchange, crude oil contracts for April delivery rose 23 cents, to $18.87 a barrel; it was the fifth advance in the past six sessions. Heating oil and unleaded gasoline contracts also rose. Some traders bought futures contracts on the expectation that a weekly inventory report to be issued after the market closed yesterday would show a continuing decline in U.S. oil inventories, analysts and brokers said. After the market closed, the American Petroleum Institute said U.S. crude oil, gasoline and distillate stockpiles fell for the week ended Friday. Some traders suggested this could lead to further price gains. &quot;For now, the sentiment is still higher,&quot; said Richard Kane, energy trader for Merrill Lynch Futures Inc., New York.    COCOA: Futures prices rose again on increased prospects of a compromise settlement of questions about the management of cocoa buffer stocks. A working group of producing and consumer nations meeting in London was examining a draft compromise proposal last night, wire service reports from London said. The session preceded today's start of formal negotiations on the buffer stock issues. One proposal in the draft called for the buffer stock manager to be open to offers, and hence free to buy various types of beans, reports said. Other proposed elements of a compromise reportedly would allow the manager to pay different prices for various types of cocoa, under an agreed formula and for the manager to limit cocoa from nonmember producers to no more than 10% of the buffer stock. Analysts said they understood the draft proposal had been accepted as a basis for the formal negotiations.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Corn futures prices were stronger on the heels of a higher-than-expected weekly export figure. Corn prices also were strenghtened on rumors that the Soviets purchased more U.S. corn last week and that Argentina may have exhausted its large exporting capabilities for the rest of its current marketing year, analysts said. Soybean prices rose in sympathy with the higher corn prices. Meal was buoyed by reports that meal stocks are low but demand is high, analysts said.    LIVESTOCK AND MEATS: Cattle futures prices rose as traders, who oversold contracts for distant delivery on expectations of a bearish cattle-on-feed report, returned to the market. The report, which the Agriculture Department released after the close, was in line with analysts' predictions. The April cattle contract was strengthened by expectations of tight beef supplies in the coming weeks because of aggressive sales for slaughter, analysts said. Pork belly prices were lower and hog futures rose in tandem with cattle contracts.    SUGAR: Futures prices rose and one analyst traced the firmness to an anticipated Egyptian tender to buy about 20,000 tons of refined sugar for prompt delivery. Egypt is expected to be offered the sugar at relatively high prices as has happened in previous tenders by other countries, particularly India, he said. The focus of attention was on the European Economic Community and its weekly tender to sell processed beet sugar today. Rumors continued that European producers would offer as much as one million tons of sugar into the EEC's intervention fund. Some observers thought this might help support prices, but no one seemed quite sure, because of the complexity of the EEC's sugar policy. One trade house official said the EEC has three alternatives to deal with such a large offer of sugar, but that each would be bearish for prices by varying degrees. The EEC could hold the sugar until next season, beginning Oct. 1, but that would mean the season would begin with a burdensome supply. It could negotiate for higher subsidies with producers, which would cause financial stress on the EEC and the sugar would eventually be sold through trade houses, anyway. A third option would be to accept the million tons and resell it into the market this season, which would severely depress prices, he said. He said the EEC would have three weeks from the time the sugar is offered to try to persuade producers from putting the sugar into the fund. </TEXT></DOC>