<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870128-0020 </DOCNO><HL> High Court to Review New Jersey LawOn Moment of Silence in Classrooms---By Stephen WermielStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXES MHCFINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)SUPREME COURT (SUP)INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE (IRS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court agreed to review a New Jersey law permitting a moment of silence in public school classrooms, setting up a new test of the separation of church and state.    Two years ago, the high court struck down an Alabama moment-of-silence law, ruling by a 6-3 vote that the law was unconstitutional because its aim was to promote religion and prayer in public schools.    But five justices -- a majority of the nine-member court -- said in separate opinions at the time that they might uphold a neutral state law that permitted a moment of silence without openly encouraging prayer in the classroom.    The key to whether a state law encourages religious worship is what the state legislature intended when it passed the law. In the Alabama case, the court said the intent was clear because a law permitting a silent moment for &quot;meditation&quot; was amended in 1981 specifically to permit &quot;meditation or voluntary prayer.&quot;    The New Jersey case presents a tougher call. The law, passed in 1982 over Gov. Thomas Kean's veto, doesn't mention prayer and says the moment at the start of the school day is &quot;to be used solely at the discretion of the individual student.&quot; There was little debate and no official legislative report. Critics of the law say the procedure was truncated, partly to avoid giving the courts any basis for questioning the legislature's motives.    In response to a lawsuit filed by some students and parents, the state legislature defended the law, suggesting that it had a nonreligious purpose of trying to quiet down students for the start of classes.    But a U.S. district court in Newark ruled in 1983 that the explanation of trying to quiet down students was adopted by the legislature after the law's passage in order to defend against the lawsuit. The district court said the law didn't spell out any secular purpose, and thus violated the Supreme Court's test for whether activities violate church-state separation, which the high court has said the First Amendment requires. A federal appeals court in Philadelphia upheld the district court ruling.    Because of the court rulings, lawyers in New Jersey say the law has been used in only a couple of communities.    The case was appealed to the Supreme Court by Alan Karcher and Carmen Orechio, Democrats who were speaker of the New Jersey Assembly and president of the New Jersey Senate, respectively, until the leadership changed after the November 1985 elections. Last spring, the legislature's new leaders said they no longer wished to defend the law and asked that the appeal be dropped.    Messrs. Karcher and Orechio continued the appeal, however. And the justices must first decide whether the two legislators retain a sufficient interest in the case to permit them to pursue the appeal.    If the justices get beyond that procedural question, the stakes will be high. Some 25 states have adopted moment-of-silence laws in the almost 25 years since the Supreme Court said the Constitution bars organized prayer in the public schools.    In the Alabama case, Justices Lewis Powell, Sandra O'Connor, Byron White and William Rehnquist said some moment-of-silence laws might be valid. The fifth such opinion was by then-Chief Justice Warren Burger, who has retired. Mr. Rehnquist became chief justice and his associate justice position was filled by Antonin Scalia. While Justice Scalia's exact views on church-state separation aren't known, he advocates the same reading of the Constitution as those, including the Reagan administration, who believe the First Amendment permits silent prayer in public schools.    Arthur Andersen Appeal   The justices let stand a judgment of $17 million plus interest for Manufacturers Hanover Trust Co. in a lawsuit against Arthur Andersen andamp; Co. over the 1982 collapse of Drysdale Securities Corp.    The damages were awarded by a federal court jury in March 1985, on Manufacturers Hanover's claim that the accounting firm violated federal securities law. The jury concluded that Andersen misrepresented the financial condition of a Drysdale unit in certifying financial statements.    The award was affirmed by a federal appeals court in New York last September. The court concluded that Andersen's review of Drysdale's records had been relied upon by the bank in deciding to enter repurchase agreements with Drysdale. Andersen argued throughout the case that Manufacturers Hanover was responsible for its own losses and that the alleged misrepresentations didn't pertain to the investments made by the bank.    The $17 million award has been earning interest since the 1985 jury verdict. The U.S. district court also had awarded interest dating back to Drysdale's collapse in May 1982, but the appeals court ordered the district court to reconsider whether pre-judgment interest was warranted.    Drysdale collapsed when it was unable to make interest payments of $180 million to Manufacturers, Chase Manhattan Bank, and to other securities dealers.    Tax Information   The justices, in an appeal by the Church of Scientology, agreed to resolve conflicting federal appeals court rulings over the disclosure of tax-return information by the Internal Revenue Service in response to requests under the Freedom of Information Act.    The decision may affect the ability of organizations and closely held corporations to obtain information from the IRS.    Federal tax law prohibits the disclosure of information from specific tax returns in any form that might make the taxpayer identifiable.    Individuals requesting their own files are often exempted from this prohibition. A problem arises when, for example, an organization requests its own tax records but the IRS concludes that disclosure might also reveal information about individual members, or in the case of closely held companies, individual shareholders.    In 1974, Congress amended the law to permit the disclosure of information that can't be linked to a specific person. The question raised by the Church of Scientology and in other lawsuits is whether the law means the IRS should simply blot out names and personal details, or whether it means the IRS should tabulate the information and release it in a different form. </TEXT></DOC>