<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880223-0076 </DOCNO><HL> High Court to Review Statute Covering Inquiries by Independent Prosecutors </HL><AUTHOR> Stephen Wermiel (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM MDEST TAXES UTX LABOR RD SC GTE </CO><IN> MON ARO TEL PET LNG MIN </IN><G> SUP JUS CNG EXE DEF LBR </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court agreed to rule on the constitutionality of a federal law that provides for court-appointed independent prosecutors to investigate alleged wrongdoing by top federal officials.    The justices agreed to hear an appeal by independent counsel Alexia Morrison, whose investigation of former Assistant Attorney General Theodore Olson was ruled unconstitutional Jan. 22 by a federal appeals court here.    The high court set an expedited schedule for the case to ensure that a ruling is issued during the current term, which is scheduled to end in late June. Without special handling, a decision could have been delayed a year or more.    The appeals court ruled 2-1 that a special three-judge court's appointment of special prosecutors violates the constitutional separation of powers between the executive and judicial branches and usurps the authority of the executive branch to oversee prosecutions. The system of court-appointed prosecutors was authorized by Congress in 1978 through the Ethics in Government Act, and renewed in December.    The investigation of Mr. Olson centers on whether he misled Congress in testimony involving the Environmental Protection Agency's refusal to turn over documents to congressional committees.    The high court's ruling probably will also affect the recent perjury conviction of former White House aide Michael Deaver, prosecuted by independent counsel Whitney North Seymour.    It is uncertain what impact the case will have on the recent conviction of former presidential aide Lyn Nofziger for illegal lobbying, or on the Iran-Contra investigation by independent counsel Lawrence Walsh. To avoid constitutional problems, Mr. Walsh and James McKay, the independent counsel in the Nofziger case, accepted backup appointments from the Justice Department.    Meanwhile yesterday, for the second time in little more than a month, the high court rebuffed an appeal by Lt. Col. Oliver North challenging Mr. Walsh's investigation. The court refused to hear Col. North's argument that he had a right to file a separate civil lawsuit last February to challenge Mr. Walsh's criminal investigation, although no charges had been filed against Col. North.    Affirmative Action Appeal   The justices also agreed to decide whether the Constitution permits local governments to require that a portion of their contracts be awarded to minority-owned businesses.    The case may have a major impact on affirmative action plans for public contracts adopted by dozens of state and local governments.    The justices will hear an appeal by the city of Richmond, Va., which, beginning in April 1983, required that companies receiving city construction contracts give 30% of their business to minority-owned subcontractors.    The requirement was adopted because city officials found that almost none of the city's construction funds went to minority businesses, even though the city's population was 50% black. The plan was challenged by J.A. Croson Co., which lost a contract when it requested a waiver of the requirement.    A federal district court and an appeals court, both in Richmond, upheld the plan. But in 1986, the Supreme Court told the appeals court to reconsider its decision in light of another high court ruling. Last July, the appeals court struck down the plan, ruling that affirmative action must be based on evidence that the city itself had discriminated in the past. Past societal bias isn't sufficient basis to justify the plan, the appeals court said in an opinion written by Judge J. Harvie Wilkinson III.    Richmond's appeal was backed by the National League of Cities and U.S. Conference of Mayors, which said some 32 states and 160 local governments have adopted similar plans.    The justices have been closely divided in recent years on affirmative action, with Justice Lewis Powell often casting the deciding vote. Retired Justice Powell's replacement last week by Anthony Kennedy sets up an important test of the court's direction. A ruling isn't expected until next year.    State Telephone Tax   The high court agreed to rule on the constitutionality of an Illinois tax on long-distance telephone calls that are billed to addresses in Illinois. The tax, which took effect in August 1985, was challenged by several individual taxpayers and a unit of GTE Corp.    Last July, the Illinois Supreme Court upheld the tax, a 5% levy on interstate calls made from Illinois or made in other states and charged to an Illinois address or number. The lawsuits challenging the tax argue that it interferes with the flow of interstate commerce.    Offshore Drilling Tax   The justices agreed to decide whether states may tax income that oil companies earn from offshore production of oil and gas on federally leased property. Shell Oil Co., a unit of Royal Dutch/Shell Group, challenged Iowa's corporate tax as it is applied to income from offshore oil and gas. The Iowa Supreme Court upheld the tax.    Shell argues that federal law prohibits states from taxing income from drilling on the Outer Continental Shelf. Iowa officials include offshore oil and gas income in Shell's total gross sales; a portion of the income from those sales is taxed in Iowa because the company sells gasoline and chemicals in the state.    Black-Lung Benefits   The high court will review an appeals court ruling that the Justice Department said could lead to the reopening of 94,000 claims for federal benefits by coal miners disabled by black lung disease, which is caused by exposure to coal dust. The appeals court, in St. Louis, said the Labor Department didn't use the proper legal standard in handling claims filed before 1980.    Military Contractors   The justices ordered another argument on whether military contractors may avoid liability for accidents by claiming that they followed the terms of their contracts. The case was argued in October with one justice missing. The court was apparently split then and chose to hear the case again with Justice Kennedy present. The appeal involves the death of a Marine co-pilot in the crash of a helicopter made by United Technologies Corp.'s Sikorsky Aircraft division. </TEXT></DOC>