<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870710-0069 </DOCNO><HL> US Sprint Will Get a New President,Post Pre-Tax Charge of $350 Million---By Janet GuyonStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GTE UT WNEWSTELECOMMUNICATIONS, BROADCASTING, TELEPHONE, TELEGRAPH (TEL) </IN><TEXT>   Fed up with billing and related problems at their US Sprint Communications Co. joint venture, GTE Corp. and United Telecommunications Inc. replaced its president and said it will take a $350 million pre-tax write-off.    The second-quarter write-off will be split evenly between the partners, resulting in a $55 million after-tax charge against GTE's earnings and a $109 million after-tax charge against United's earnings, giving United a loss for the quarter.    A year earlier, United earned $56.2 million, or 57 cents a share, and Stamford, Conn.-based GTE earned $300 million, or 92 cents a share. GTE said its charges are partly offset by $75 million in pre-tax pension-settlement gains.    The companies said $260 million of the write-off accounts for depreciation and lease costs of their old long-distance networks, which are being replaced by a new, 23,000-mile fiber-optic network.    US Sprint is putting phone traffic on the new network sooner than anticipated, so it has had to accelerate depreciation of the old network, which originally was expected to be in operation through the end of 1988, executives said.    About $14 million of the write-off is for leased office space that US Sprint isn't occupying and $76 million is a provision for uncollectibles because of US Sprint's big billing problems, said William T. Esrey, president and chief executive officer of United.    It was the billing troubles that apparently led to the downfall of Charles M. Skibo, the 47-year-old former president of US Sprint, whose resignation was accepted at board meetings of GTE and United yesterday. He was replaced by Robert H. Snedaker Jr., 61, the tough operational man who was vice chairman and chief operating officer of United.    US Sprint wouldn't say whether Mr. Skibo was asked to resign, but Mr. Snedaker said he was offered the job a week ago Monday. Mr. Skibo didn't return phone calls seeking an interview. But according to the executives involved, he tendered his resignation Wednesday after a meeting in Kansas City, Mo., the headquarters of US Sprint and United, with Mr. Esrey and Allan L. Rayfield, GTE's senior vice president in charge of overseeing GTE's interest in US Sprint.    Late yesterday, Mr. Skibo did issue a brief statement, saying he was &quot;proud to have played a key role in building&quot; US Sprint, which he said he thought would become a case study for business schools on how to build a successful business.    Securities analysts interpreted both the write-off and management changes positively, saying they show GTE and United are pushing US Sprint firmly toward profitability and that construction of the new network is progressing faster than expected.    Glenn Pafumi, an analyst with Eberstadt Fleming Inc., speculated that the moves set the stage for an eventual merger between US Sprint and Washington-based MCI Communications Corp., but other analysts and United and GTE executives said such a merger is unlikely.    According to Mr. Snedaker, he suggested to Mr. Esrey a little more than two weeks ago that the way to solve US Sprint's back office troubles was to &quot;make me president.&quot;    Those problems include bills that have been weeks and sometimes months late in getting to customers. Also, the company hasn't been posting payments received in a timely fashion. In the last six weeks, the concern's computers spewed out erroneous letters to 13,000 customers, saying they owed money already paid or not even due.    US Sprint also has had to take charges against earnings because of illegal use of the company's access codes by the public. In the first quarter, US Sprint posted pre-tax losses of $242 million, including $19 million from reimbursing customers victimized by illegal use of their codes.    Mr. Esrey said yesterday it would take about two months for US Sprint to get its billing problems under control.    Mr. Snedaker said he was offered the job after the partners' committee met recently at GTE's Norwalk, Conn., corporate training center to discuss US Sprint. Mr. Skibo, who continued to act as US Sprint's president at news conferences in New York last week, was apparently told formally of the change Wednesday, according to executives close to the situation.    Mr. Snedaker said he will resign as a United director and his operating duties as United's chief operating officer will be taken by Curtis G. Fields, formerly president of United Telephone Co. of Ohio. Mr. Fields was named a United executive vice president. He won't take Mr. Snedaker's United board seat, Mr. Snedaker said.    In addition, GTE and United named David M. Holland, 50, formerly president of US Sprint's Southwest division, as an executive vice president, with the company's seven division presidents reporting to him. Robert J. Currey, 42, formerly senior vice president, operations, of United, also was named a US Sprint executive vice president in charge of staff functions.    The appointments, which are new positions, will cut down on the number of executives reporting to US Sprint's president, an organizational difficulty that also plagued Mr. Skibo. Mr. Esrey said he had been discussing Mr. Holland's and Mr. Currey's jobs at US Sprint with Mr. Skibo before the decision was made to put Mr. Snedaker in charge of US Sprint.    Mr. Esrey said about 70% of US Sprint's traffic will be running over the fiber-optic network by the end of July, and it will carry more than 90% of US Sprint's traffic by year's end. US Sprint likely will sell the abandoned network, which US Sprint has written down to its salvage value.    When US Sprint was formed, GTE and United took after-tax charges to partly write down their networks of $1.5 billion, with GTE taking $1.3 billion of that charge. </TEXT></DOC>