<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871231-0054 </DOCNO><HL> OPEC Facing Pressure to Make ChoiceBetween Cutting Production or Prices---By James TannerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/31/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST FORGNPETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   Pressures are mounting on the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries to cut either oil production or oil prices.    Analysts and oil economists said that one, or possibly both, will have to fall -- perhaps as early as next week. But on the eve of the New Year, OPEC and its major customers remain in a standoff over petroleum prices for the first quarter of 1988.    With oil markets promising to remain weak into next year, most oil companies are insisting on broad, new pricing incentives before pledging to renew purchases at previously contracted volumes. But at the same time, some short-term factors could temporarily tighten oil markets -- and major OPEC members, including kingpin Saudi Arabia, are refusing to bow to the oil companies' demands for price concessions, at least so far.    &quot;The question is: Who blinks first?&quot; said one oil economist who has sat in on some of the negotiations.    Oil analysts and economists generally agree that oil-market fundamentals remain bearish with further downward pressures expected on oil prices. World oil inventories are considered high enough to be burdensome; petroleum demand could turn sluggish if there is a recession, and OPEC continues to exceed its production ceiling by as much as two million barrels a day.    But there are some new factors that suddenly are beginning to suggest a floor under oil prices, at least for the short term. For example, the new ferocity of the so-called tanker war in the Persian Gulf, a spillover from the seven years of fighting between Iraq and Iran, is beginning finally to take its toll on tanker traffic through the waterway. One big operator of tankers says that he no longer will allow any of his vessels in the Persian Gulf. Several major oil companies also are understood to be keeping their tankers a safe distance from the gulf.    World-wide, oil supplies are plentiful -- and will remain so, with or without shipments through the gulf, oil economists say. But another short-term factor firming prices is a reported &quot;squeeze&quot; on North Sea Brent crude. A trading firm that had bought a significant share of Brent cargos for January delivery is said to be rolling over the strategy into February, traders said yesterday. A squeeze can occur in any commodity market when a single trader holds more contracts entitling him to delivery than the market can easily fulfill.    In addition, OPEC can look forward to two additional upward pressures on pricing -- assuming that the cartel avoids a new round of deep price discounting, which could trigger an outright pricing collapse. For one thing, some industry officials now expect the long-feared decline in production from two major non-OPEC oil-producing regions -- the British sector of the North Sea and Alaska's North Slope -- to begin within the next year. &quot;That will be an interesting signal to the oil markets,&quot; said Alfred Munk, manager of foreign affairs for Amoco Corp. &quot;Non-OPEC supplies have held up longer than most people had guessed.&quot;    OPEC could get an even quicker boost within the next few days from an unlikely source -- the International Energy Agency, the Paris-based organization that represents the world's major oil-consuming nations. Industry sources said the IEA is preparing to revise sharply upward its widely followed world oil demand figures for the past year. That would suggest world oil inventories aren't as high as generally believed and that OPEC isn't overproducing by as much as widely estimated. An IEA spokesman in Washington couldn't confirm the expected revision, and officials of the agency couldn't be reached in Paris for comment last night.    Whatever the figure for IEA's demand estimates, the world's need for OPEC oil is certain to drop sharply as the high-use period of winter nears an end and a seasonal slump begins. Although it has declined somewhat in recent weeks, OPEC output currently is estimated at 18 million barrels a day or more.    &quot;First-quarter production will have to be under 17 million barrels a day for OPEC to have a balance on barrels,&quot; said Lawrence Goldstein, the executive vice president of Petroleum Industry Research Foundation. &quot;OPEC still has a battle on its hands.&quot;    At the moment, however, indications are that most of the exporters hope to muddle through strains of the 1988 first quarter just as they did a year earlier when they let production, rather than prices, slide. Both the United Arab Emirates and Kuwait, two of the chief violators of OPEC's production limits this year, have promised anew that they will be within their quotas by New Year's Day. Although the oil ministers failed at OPEC's mid-December meeting to demonstrate resolve with new production-curbing moves, &quot;we are now seeing this develop on an ad hoc basis, with unilateral moves to support the oil market,&quot; Mr. Goldstein said.    The big puzzle remains the strategy of Saudi Arabia. The Saudis allowed their output to drop below three million barrels a day early this year as demand for OPEC oil plunged. But Saudi officials have pledged repeatedly in recent weeks that the kingdom will maintain production at its quota of 4.3 million barrels a day, thereby refusing to function as OPEC's &quot;swing&quot; producer.    But none of OPEC's 13 members can afford a replay of the oil-price crash of 1986 that resulted from an all-out scramble by the producers for market share. Even the rich kingdom of Saudi Arabia has revenue problems. The Saudi government yesterday announced plans to borrow $8 billion to help finance the country's 1988 budget.    All the OPEC members have some market-related pricing plans in effect or on hold to maintain a minimum level of production. As previously reported, the four U.S. oil companies that operate Arabian American Oil Co. have an understanding with Saudi Arabia that they will be kept &quot;economically whole&quot; through rebates or other pricing mechanisms so long as they maintain their full contract volumes. But other major customers of Saudi Arabia, including the Japanese companies, have been rebuffed in attempts to obtain price discounts.    This is interpreted by some industry officials as a clear sign that Saudi Arabia also will quietly allow its production to come down a bit if necessary to avoid an all-out pricing war within OPEC. &quot;From the first of January, we are going to see a big drop in production in all the OPEC countries,&quot; said one oil economist. &quot;But how low will they be willing to let it go?&quot; </TEXT></DOC>