<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870826-0110 </DOCNO><HL> Nearly All Aboard the Grainy Train---By James Bovard</HL><DD> 08/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTCOMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   With Iowa's caucuses the first major test for presidential candidates, farm issues can be disproportionately important in determining the party nominations. Because the Republicans, unlike the Democrats, at least talk about reducing economic meddling by government, voters may profit from a look at what the GOP hopefuls have to say about agriculture.    Payments and protectionism in the farm sector constitute a $25 billion part of the federal budget deficit and a barrier to imports from some struggling democracies and allies.    Agriculture is the area in which federal policy has deteriorated most drastically since the Reagan-Bush administration took office. Government aid to farmers has increased eightfold during that time. Washington is paying more to encourage plantings now -- and simultaneously paying farmers to leave idle almost 70 million acres of cropland, all new since 1981.    Though farmers are doing better now than a few years ago, it is largely the result of massive federal handouts. Farm programs are our most perverse welfare program, since the average full-time farmer's net worth is more than 10 times that of the average U.S. household.    Though the administration offered two good farm bills in 1981 and 1985, Mr. Reagan and his agriculture secretaries have too often surrendered to the farm lobby, to congressmen eager to buy another bushel of votes, and to a debilitating fear of the veto pen.    Exports lost to tougher competition abroad, and more imports into the U.S. market, have caused many farmers to abandon their traditional faith in free trade. From sugar (long protected) to wheat to flowers, farmers are demanding that borders be closed. The losers, particularly in sugar, are many of the Latin American countries whose desperate economies the U.S. government is otherwise trying to salvage.    The big question facing GOP candidates is whether they should defend the existing agriculture policy or come out for a radical overhaul.    Vice President George Bush, the frontrunner, claims that the current farm program &quot;is providing stability and continuity.&quot; Mr. Bush favors phasing out agricultural subsidies &quot;if, and only if, our trading partners do the same.&quot; This is a safe position: It allows Mr. Bush to support the free market rhetorically while posing little threat of actually cutting federal aid.    Mr. Bush's position is actually less free market than that of the administration he's a part of, which has repeatedly tried -- albeit often ineptly -- to slash agricultural subsidies without a quid pro quo from Japan or the European Community.    The vice president is outspoken in support of increased government subsidies for converting corn into ethanol, the 1980s version of the solar-energy craze of the 1970s. Thanks to generous government subsidies and provision of free corn, corporations can produce an 80-cent gallon of fuel for only $1.45.    Sen. Robert Dole also favors subsidies for ethanol production. Archer-Daniels Midland Co., the largest recipient of government ethanol subsidies, has long been a contributor to Sen. Dole. The senator from Kansas is probably the leading congressional proponent of subsidized wheat sales to the Soviets (and favors increasing subsidies for corn and soybean exports, another Archer-Daniels-Midland interest). If Mr. Dole is elected, American wheat could be cheaper in Moscow than in Kansas City.    Sen. Dole thinks the 1985 Farm Bill, with its $90 billion five-year price tag, is working tolerably well and opposes a radical overhaul of farm programs. In the fight for that legislation, Sen. Dole worked to lower the effective price floor for U.S. crops in order to boost exports, but also strove to preserve high guaranteed-income payments (target prices) for farmers. The senator recently excused farm subsidies by claiming that consumers get an indirect break from the programs (even though U.S. sugar prices are three times world prices and U.S. dairy prices are two to three times world prices).    Sen. Dole also favors creation of a federal Rural Fund for Development, under which the Commodity Credit Corporation would back at least $1 billion in loan guarantees to encourage private investment in small rural businesses.    Sen. Dole's agricultural position consists largely of fine-tuning existing programs. He is not supporting the Reagan administration's efforts to impose a $50,000-per-farmer annual limit on federal handouts.    Rep. Jack Kemp believes that going to a gold standard will solve much of the farm problem. In a recent speech in Ames, Iowa, Rep. Kemp suggested that a reform of monetary policy, authorization of a presidential line-item veto &quot;to prune out waste in government appropriations,&quot; tax cuts in Japan and West Germany, and a reduction of U.S. barriers to free trade could alleviate agricultural woes. Rep. Kemp attributes most farm woes to the 1970s inflation and 1980s deflation.    Rep. Kemp declares: &quot;With the right monetary reform, market prices could recover (i.e., increase) instead of support prices falling.&quot; Federal subsidies (based largely on farm prices) would be sharply reduced and eventually could be phased out. But federal subsidy levels for some crops are so high currently that, unless Europe, Canada and Australia suffer a new Ice Age, market prices will not rise high enough to displace government payments.    Along the lines of the Reagan administration's recent proposal to the European Community to phase out farm subsidies by the year 2000, Rep. Kemp, too, favors tying reductions here to actions abroad. Though this makes good bargaining sense, in practice it could become simply an excuse to postpone permanently meaningful reform. Why must U.S. taxpayers continue to suffer for the foolish policies of governments abroad?    Former Delaware Gov. Pierre S. du Pont 4th's proposals are tougher for those on farm relief to swallow. He proclaims, &quot;We would end deficiency payments, diversions and set-asides, nonrecourse loan rates above market prices, and marketing quotas.&quot;    In line with the idea of decoupling payments to farmers from their participation in various agricultural programs, as suggested by Sen. Rudy Boschwitz (R., Minn.), Mr. du Pont proposes to cash out all benefits to farmers (not an easy accounting task). He would then reduce benefits by 20% a year until they were phased out in five years.    Politicians who favor decoupling as a way to avoid the often-perverse incentives of agriculture policy tend to be vague about how this would save money and about when -- if ever -- the transition payments would end. Mr. du Pont, however, says: &quot;There should be no delay. The time for ending these failed policies is right now.&quot;    Mr. du Pont has taken no specific position on the limits on agricultural imports to the U.S. He does not, however, favor gutting the Treasury to sell a few more bushels of wheat to foreigners: &quot;Our best weapon in international trade is to develop the most efficient and cost-effective agricultural sector we can.&quot;    None of the Republican hopefuls endorse the so-called Harkin-Gephardt plan for establishing widescale marketing-order-type cartels of U.S. farmers to reduce production, a shortsighted ploy to reduce direct federal handouts to farmers by greatly increasing the price of food to consumers.    The remaining GOP candidates -- Alexander Haig, Paul Laxalt and Pat Robertson -- have yet to say anything significant on agricultural policy. So Republicans looking for free-trade positions on the most basic of U.S. industries see two major candidates, George Bush and Bob Dole, who are wedded to &quot;subsidy status quo-plus&quot; in the absence of major action by other nations, and two others, Jack Kemp and Pete du Pont, who have different and rather dramatic remedies.    Republicans have long excelled at explaining farm-policy defects on the campaign trail and repeating the same mistakes in office. Nowadays it's not so easy to find candidates who even talk a good game.    ---   Mr. Bovard is an associate policy analyst for the Cato Institute. </TEXT></DOC>