<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861212-0091 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor:Nuclear Winter Remains a Chilling Prospect</HL><DD> 12/12/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)ENVIRONMENT (ENV) </IN><TEXT>   Russell Seitz impugns not only the nuclear-winter theory but also many of the scientists who have worked on the problem (editorial page, Nov. 5; see also letters, Nov. 18 and 25). His mean-spirited assault is based almost entirely on gossip, innuendo and misinformation, and reveals a superficial understanding of the facts.    While many groups, including ourselves, have stressed that uncertainties remain in the theory, major scientific reviews conclude that nuclear winter is a &quot;clear possibility&quot; (U.S. National Academy of Sciences); &quot;a credible threat&quot; (Royal Society of Canada), and may kill more people than the direct effects of nuclear war (U.S. Department of Defense). A two-year study of the Scientific Committee on Problems of the Environment (SCOPE) of the International Council of Scientific Unions concludes:    &quot;As representatives of the world scientific community drawn together in this study, we conclude that many of the serious global environmental effects are sufficiently probable to require widespread concern. Because of the possibility of a tragedy of an unprecedented dimension, any disposition to minimize or ignore the widespread environmental effects of a nuclear war would be a fundamental disservice to the future of global civilization.&quot;    The basic science of nuclear winter has been comprehensively peer-reviewed and is widely available to anyone interested in obtaining it.    Mr. Seitz's polemics rely heavily on casual and unconfirmed statements collected secondhand and thirdhand, and of questionable fidelity. For example, derogatory quotes are attributed to individuals who forcefully deny them (e.g., Victor Weisskopf). A negative comment on mathematical modeling allegedly uttered by a &quot;Soviet scientist&quot; (indisputably V.V. Aleksandrov of the Moscow-based Climate Modeling Center, the only Soviet at the April 1983 Cambridge review meeting referred to by Mr. Seitz) was never made. The transcript of the meeting shows no such remark, and Kosta Tsipis of MIT, whom Mr. Seitz claims as his source, flatly denies the whole thing.    The scientists Mr. Seitz maligns have all received high professional recognition. For example, the American Physical Society (the primary association of physicists in the U.S.) granted its Leo Szilard Award for Physics in the Public Interest to Paul Crutzen, John Birks and the undersigned team, known as TTAPS, for their research on nuclear winter.    Mr. Seitz fantasizes that the motivation for the nuclear-winter hypothesis arose in 1982 for political reasons among &quot;the inner circle of disarmament activists.&quot; In fact, the first motivation for the TTAPS research arose out of our work in the early 1970s on Martian dust storms and volcanic explosions on Earth. A more proximate cause was a request from the National Academy of Sciences in 1982 to have us consider the environmental consequences of dust generated in a nuclear war. Our expertise and tools for analyzing such problems evolved through a decade of research sponsored by NASA and other government agencies. The National Academy study, in which we participated from the start, was supported by the Defense Nuclear Agency (DNA) of the Defense Department. Only Mr. Seitz would imagine the National Academy of Sciences and the Defense Department to constitute an inner circle of disarmament activists.    None of the nuclear-winter research conducted by the TTAPS group was funded by any of the foundations mentioned by Mr. Seitz, although those foundations did support a large public meeting on the global effects of nuclear war in Washington on Oct. 31 and Nov. 1, 1983. Currently, our group receives research funds from DNA, and one of us chairs an advisory committee for DNA's global nuclear-effects research program. We have been, and continue to be, involved in the basic scientific research on nuclear winter spurred by the National Program on Nuclear Winter that originated in the White House Office of Science and Technology Policy. Institutions active in the research include university teams, the National Center for Atmospheric Research (NCAR), and the Livermore, Los Alamos and Sandia National Laboratories.    Mr. Seitz complains that the large scientific advisory board of the 1983 conference included scientists affiliated with groups he dislikes, such as the Federation of American Scientists. The FAS Board of Sponsors includes 44 Nobel laureates, most of them in physics and chemistry. Characteristically, Mr. Seitz has confused competent judgment with ideological bias.    To demonstrate the vitality of the nuclear-winter theory, we compare our original predictions -- set forth in late 1982 and early 1983 as a series of physical mechanisms -- with the present state of knowledge, bearing in mind that any such complex concept must undergo evolution and refinement: In 1983, we predicted that the burning of urban flammable materials in a nuclear exchange could generate enough smoke to darken the sky over much of the globe. Today, detailed assessments show, through the combination of available fuel types, amounts and smokiness, that global smoke palls could indeed be produced; moreover, the probability of such widespread palls is quite high given the existing nuclear arsenals and targeting plans. (On the other hand, our initial high estimates of smoke production from wildland fires have been lowered substantially through more comprehensive analyses, although the smoke from burning cities has remained the most important contributor to nuclear winter.)    In 1983 we predicted that urban smoke plumes would rise into the middle troposphere, and &quot;firestorm&quot; plumes into the lower stratosphere. New observations and simulations of large-scale fire dynamics confirm these height estimates. In 1983 we predicted that extensive smoke layers could spread over most of the Northern Hemisphere in a matter of days to weeks. Analyses of satellite images reveal that such regional dispersion is a common feature of large wildfire complexes; global-circulation models show initial smoke patches spreading within a week or two to cover the hemisphere.    In 1983 we predicted that land temperatures beneath widespread, elevated smoke clouds could drop rapidly, and that subfreezing continental temperatures could occur in any season. All of the global climate-modeling studies to date -- including the most recent &quot;autumn&quot; calculations from NCAR -- show this effect, with most of the forecasts indicating some freezing temperatures even in mid-summer. In 1983 we predicted that upper-level smoke layers would become heated and thus superstabilized, greatly extending the lifetime of the smoke in the atmosphere. All of the advanced global wind models used to study nuclear winter now show the formation of such a long-lived &quot;smokosphere.&quot; In 1983 we predicted that the transport of smoke and nuclear debris to the Southern Hemisphere could be accelerated by the fundamentally altered nuclear-winter circulation. Subsequent atmospheric simulations fully support this possibility in the case of large smoke emissions. In 1983 we suggested that even a small fraction of the nuclear weapons in the strategic arsenals, if distributed widely over urban targets, might be enough to cause a nuclear winter. It is now found that only a few megatons out of the 12,000 megatons available would be sufficient to destroy most of the world's oil-refining and storage capacity, and induce significant global climatic change.    In 1983 we predicted that the biological impacts of the newly discovered physical effects of nuclear winter implied widespread and unparalleled mortality in humans and other organisms in a post-nuclear-war environment. These concerns are strongly reinforced by an in-depth biological assessment carried out under the auspices of SCOPE. The assessment encompassed the work of more than 300 scientists from some 30 nations over two years.    In other words, most of the unique or important predictions of the original nuclear-winter hypothesis have been supported by later comprehensive and specialized studies. Although the term &quot;nuclear winter&quot; has been avoided in some of these assessments, the phenomenon considered is unambiguously nuclear winter. The fact that all of the principal elements of the concept have survived three years of intense technical scrutiny, have been adopted as the starting point for all major scientific investigation of the problem, and have formed the basis of most of the large national and international research programs in this area, puts to rest Mr. Seitz's absurd charge that the work was not adequately evaluated by our scientific peers.    The current best estimates for the nuclear-winter effect, as expressed in analyses by international groups and individual researchers alike, are qualitatively as serious as the earlier estimates. It is true that if we make more conservative assumptions of low-altitude smoke injection and rapid smoke washout -- assumptions that are not consonant with the greater body of existing experimental data -- we do find less severe &quot;autumn&quot; effects, as has been noted recently by S. Thompson and S. Schneider of NCAR. However, the &quot;autumn&quot; predictions lie at the lower end of the spectrum of possible environmental disturbances, and are similar to some of the milder effects we originally reported among two dozen or so cases studied by TTAPS in which less smoke and dust were injected into the atmosphere. The climate model at the Los Alamos Laboratory, as well as the model at NCAR, using plausible alternative treatments for smoke injection, dispersion and removal, show more severe &quot;winter&quot; effects. Moreover, even the &quot;optimistic&quot; milder effects are found to be catastrophic for the global human population, as spelled out in &quot;Environmental Consequences of Nuclear War&quot; (John Wiley, Chichester, 1986-the SCOPE report, in two volumes). Messrs. Thompson and Schneider themselves state in relation to their milder forecasts that &quot;it is still quite plausible that climatic disturbances, radioactive fallout, ozone depletions and the interruption of basic societal services, when taken together, could threaten more people globally than would the direct effects in a large nuclear war&quot; (Foreign Affairs, Summer, 1986; italics theirs). The 1986 assessment of the Secretary of Defense is similar: &quot;The destructiveness for human survival of the less severe climatic effects might be of a scale similar to the other horrors associated with nuclear war.&quot;    Unfortunately, The Wall Street Journal, under the guise of editorial comment and without checking even his more outrageous claims, has provided Mr. Seitz a platform to spread his political biases and personal invective. Despite Mr. Seitz's ranting, however, nuclear winter remains a vital issue in serious research and policy circles. A problem of such importance for the atmospheric sciences, for strategic policy and doctrine, and for human survival will not disappear simply because its implications are unsettling for certain ideologues.    Richard Turco   O. Brian Toon   Thomas Ackerman   James Pollack   Carl Sagan   Marina del Rey, Calif. </TEXT></DOC>