<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870109-0062 </DOCNO><HL> Inside Job:The Case of Marc FeithShows Corporate SpiesAren't Just High-Tech---Sleuthing for Casket ProducerTo Dig Up Data on Rivals,He Turned on Employer---Rifling the Trash in the Night---By Robert JohnsonStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> HB SRV </IN><DATELINE> BATESVILLE, Ind.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   This quiet community of 4,500 is an unlikely setting for a corporate spy scandal.    Loyalty to the town's biggest employer, Hillenbrand Industries Inc., abounds among residents of the freshly painted houses along tree-lined streets. Most people here depend on the payroll of Hillenbrand, a maker of caskets and hospital beds, based in a one-story building near the cornfields at the edge of town.    The corporate-espionage case of Marc C. Feith, a Hillenbrand financial analyst, came as something of a shock to Batesville. Mr. Feith (pronounced &quot;faith&quot;), a 35-year-old devoted father with a good record as a former accountant and special agent for the Federal Bureau of Investigation, received a two-month jail term after pleading guilty to stealing Hillenbrand documents and trying to sell corporate secrets to the company's biggest competitor.    &quot;I couldn't believe he did it,&quot; says Cindy Meyer, a Hillenbrand office worker whose father, three uncles, aunt and sister also work for the company. &quot;He had a real good job, and he betrayed all of us.&quot;    The bizarre Marc Feith episode may be an aberration, but it is a symptom of the mounting competitive pressures on basic industry. With a general assignment to gather information on the competition, Mr. Feith ultimately adopted cat-burglar tactics: He changed from his expensive dark suits into jeans and a ski mask for nighttime searches of competitors' trash, where he found information on such things as secret merger plans.    Emboldened by his employer's approval, he says, he combed through dumps in the dark and paid a trash hauler for access to his truck, where he risked being crushed in a compactor. His endeavors became so well-known within Hillenbrand that one manager called him &quot;director of covert activities.&quot;    But Mr. Feith wasn't impeded until he turned on his employer and broke the law by raiding Hillenbrand's files and trying to sell the contents to Service Corp. International, Hillenbrand's major competitor. The attempt led to Mr. Feith's downfall.    Corporate espionage has always been a problem in the high-technology companies of California and the Northeast, where fortunes ride on technological advances. In the best-known spying case, Hitachi Ltd. and 13 employees were fined for conspiring to steal trade secrets from International Business Machines Corp.    But many low-tech companies now are stepping up pressures in a race to embrace new technology and cut costs. Most of them, little aware of industry espionage and poorly equipped to guard against it, lack explicit policies or guidelines on corporate spying.    &quot;High-tech companies have long known they need the latest scientific breakthroughs. Now, low-tech companies pursue competitor intelligence to keep their piece of the shrinking pie,&quot; says Leila K. Kight, whose Washington Researchers Ltd. trains companies in legal methods of intelligence gathering.    Hillenbrand provides a case study. Although the company leads the casket industry, competitors in its stagnant market are consolidating into formidable opposition, and the industry abounds in advances for metals coating and factory automation. And while Hillenbrand has a long written ethics policy, it doesn't mention how far an employee may go to find out what the competition is up to.    Mr. Feith went quite far. An ambitious, meticulously dressed man, Mr. Feith seemed a model employee. But his drive to deliver what he thought management wanted led him deeper and deeper into a quagmire of espionage.    That eventually led him into the files of his own employer for information to sell to competitors. At a suburban St. Louis airport one morning last April, Mr. Feith &quot;came out of nowhere in a $500 suit and designer sunglasses,&quot; offering corporate secrets for sale, recalls B.D. Hunter, vice chairman of Service Corp., the Hillenbrand competitor. &quot;He said, 'I have your competitor's five-year plans.'&quot; Mr. Hunter asked Mr. Feith to call him later, and he alerted authorities in the meantime.    Mr. Feith acknowledges in interviews that &quot;no one held a gun to my head&quot; to force spying on competitors. But &quot;I'll guarantee you that if I hadn't been spying for Hillenbrand, I never would have considered going against them,&quot; he says. &quot;Some things I did to competitors weren't ethical. Once you start to sacrifice what you believe, where do you stop?&quot;    FBI records show that Mr. Feith had shown much promise. He was considered an &quot;outstanding&quot; FBI applicant in 1977, with four years' experience in public accounting, including a stint at Arthur Andersen andamp; Co. He had graduated near the top of his class at the University of Cincinnati.    &quot;I felt that the FBI would be something patriotic, more than just helping people make money,&quot; Mr. Feith says. The FBI, which hires fewer than 4% of those who apply, after stringent background checks, took Mr. Feith on and assigned him to its office in Charlotte, N.C. He moved there with his wife, Deborah, his high-school sweetheart. Although his caseload was mostly routine, Mr. Feith distinguished himself when he captured a fleeing bank robber at gunpoint in 1978.    After nearly two years in Charlotte, he left his $22,000-a-year job at the agency, primarily to avoid a transfer to New York City. Mrs. Feith explains that she didn't want to raise their one-year-old son there. So her husband became an auditor with Cincinnati-based Federated Department Stores Inc., and after three years he was recruited by Hillenbrand in 1982 as an auditor. On his application, he claimed expertise in fighting white-collar crime.    In May 1984, he began receiving periodic assignments to gather intelligence on material and labor costs, production volume, and other matters from competitors and potential acquisition targets. The FBI surveillance trick of searching through trash seemed to him the best way to get the information, although it made Mr. Feith uneasy. &quot;It's not what I became an executive to do, but I wanted to get ahead,&quot; he says.    Hillenbrand says it didn't order the trash searches. &quot;Marc was pretty much on his own,&quot; says F. Kristen Koepcke, the company's vice president and general counsel. &quot;When you put good people on projects, you expect them to be ethical.&quot; But Mr. Koepcke concedes he approved the strategy when Mr. Feith asked him about its legality. Robert C. Smith, the vice president of investor relations, adds, &quot;Competitors' trash is fair game once it leaves their offices. That's why there are shredders.&quot;    While Hillenbrand's 10-page ethics policy is specific on many issues, such as conflict of interest, it is silent on informationgathering procedures -- a gray area of corporate ethics, according to some analysts. &quot;Some companies want an employee to go further than they're willing to put in writing,&quot; says Liam Fahey, a Boston University professor who researches competitiveintelligence gathering.    At Hillenbrand, Mr. Feith's interpretation of the company's attitude was simple: &quot;The only good competitor is a dead competitor,&quot; he says. &quot;Hillenbrand's only concern seemed to be getting caught and embarrassed.&quot; Mr. Feith began pre-dawn escapades, wearing the ski mask, rubber gloves and combat boots.    First on his list in May 1984 was Amedco Inc., a competitor based in St. Louis. At the company's steel division in Springfield, Mo., he found discarded corporate papers in a dumpster. He stuffed them into trash bags and hauled them back to his hotel room in his rental car.    &quot;These weren't just tidbits. I found complete information on what Amedco was paying for steel for its caskets, and it was less than we were paying,&quot; says Mr. Feith. That discovery helped Hillenbrand renegotiate steel prices and save nearly $3 million a year, he says. Hillenbrand executives won't comment.    Expeditions to Amedco's headquarters and plants, Mr. Feith says, turned up valuable &quot;cash-flow and operations information,&quot; as well as advance information about plans to merge with Service Corp.a merger that later was consummated. (Hillenbrand doesn't dispute that Mr. Feith found such material.) Unable to cram it all into his suitcases, he stuffed it into several cardboard boxes for the plane trip home.    When Mr. Feith disclosed some of the information at an executives' meeting, he says, &quot;They all smiled.&quot; Hillenbrand executives say they don't recall that meeting, but they say Mr. Feith's data didn't result in &quot;important&quot; corporate decisions.    Mr. Feith says his early trash-hunting success merely whetted the appetite of his bosses. Indeed, a copy of an internal Hillenbrand memorandum dated Dec. 10, 1985, shows that Mr. Feith was assigned to do a &quot;cost summary&quot; of 14 competitors. The memo requests such information as the following, &quot;if possible&quot;: average hourly production rate, plant capacity and shipping methods, and a copy of collective-bargaining agreements.    Mr. Feith paid a trash hauler at one of the offices of another competitor, Aurora Casket Co., $100 on one occasion and $50 on another to allow him to search the truck. After two such daylight rendezvous, the driver refused him. &quot;He wondered how he would explain it if I got crushed in his compactor,&quot; he says. He solved that problem by renting a truck and following the driver to the dump, where he picked up the likely papers. Aurora has no comment on Mr. Feith's activities.    &quot;I had the hell scared out of me a few times,&quot; Mr. Feith says. &quot;Once I was bending into a dumpster&quot; at Amedco, &quot;and suddenly one of their cleaning men was looking right over my shoulder. But he didn't question me. Maybe he thought I wanted cans for recycling.&quot;    Spying became a full-time job for Mr. Feith last February. Until then, his duties had included analyzing public information, such as Securities and Exchange Commission filings, about acquisition targets. But he grew disillusioned when he was told the company would be slowing acquisition plans.    One executive told him he should look outside the company for a job. Other executives now say that Mr. Feith wouldn't have been fired, although it was partly up to him to find a new niche. He says the trash expeditions were beginning to look like a dead end. &quot;It was clear that I wasn't getting ahead. Until then, I spied thinking I was on the way up,&quot; he says. &quot;I stopped believing that.&quot;    Mr. Feith considered quitting. But he worried that matching his $58,000-a-year salary would be hard in Cincinnati, and he didn't want to disrupt his family life by moving. All the while, his bitterness grew. &quot;What made it worse was that other people in the company seemed to know me only for my spying,&quot; he says. &quot;Other executives said they had similar projects for me.&quot;    Last April, Mr. Feith was named to a non-espionage job, essentially a lateral move to be director of financial projects. The company says the job would have involved controller work. But the job wasn't to start until Mr. Feith finished several intelligence-gathering assignments already under way. By this time, Mr. Feith's loyalty had eroded.    Mr. Feith's lawyer, Richard Kammen, claims that after dozens of spying expeditions over nearly two years, Mr. Feith's strange hours, the risk of getting caught and his distaste for spying had taken a heavy toll, blurring his judgment. &quot;Corporate pressure had a corrosive effect on Marc,&quot; Mr. Kammen says.    By the time Mr. Feith's new assignment was announced, he had decided to betray Hillenbrand. He says he was inspired by a television rerun of an old &quot;Superman&quot; episode while he sorted through Amedco trash bags in his hotel room in Chesterfield, Mo. &quot;'Superman' was for justice, and somehow, doing to Hillenbrand what they had me do to others seemed so right,&quot; he says in a trembling voice.    During his lunch hour and after work over several days in late April, Mr. Feith raided Hillenbrand's files, making copies of corporate plans and such research secrets as the company's new epoxy sealing formula. He copied about 5,000 pages of documents. Other executives say they weren't suspicious because they trusted him.    He filed the copies neatly in 22 hardbound folders. He even prepared a four-page catalog list of itemized prices totaling $106,000.    Identifying himself as Clark Kent, Superman's alter ego, he approached Service Corp.'s Mr. Hunter at the suburban St. Louis airport, where he was preparing to board a plane. Mr. Hunter stalled, asking Mr. Feith to call him later. Mr. Hunter then alerted his company's security officers. They hired private detectives, who contacted the FBI. The FBI carried out a plan to secretly film a meeting between Mr. Feith, a Houston private detective and an FBI agent at a Cincinnati hotel last June 18.    Mr. Feith was remarkably calm at the meeting. &quot;Even experienced drug dealers show some nervousness when the deal goes down,&quot; says Assistant U.S. Attorney James Warden. Mr. Feith &quot;seemed to have rationalized that he wasn't doing anything wrong.&quot;    At his trial last September, before he pleaded guilty, U.S. District Judge Sarah Evans Barker wouldn't allow information on Mr. Feith's spying for Hillenbrand as a defense. In October, she sentenced Mr. Feith to 60 days in jail and a $3,000 fine.    But she also scolded Hillenbrand management. Alluding to the company's intelligence-gathering practices, she said she wouldn't &quot;put my stamp of approval on what may have gone on down there.&quot; She urged the company to &quot;get their house in order.&quot;    The casket industry hasn't been quite the same since Mr. Feith came along. Service Corp. is tightening security. &quot;We have shredders now, and we changed janitorial services,&quot; Mr. Hunter says. &quot;Of course, we still wonder if some of our employees are actually Hillenbrand's.&quot;    David Gooch, Service Corp.'s attorney, says he will sue Hillenbrand &quot;if we ever find out that other information they took from our trash is being used to hurt us.&quot;    Mr. Feith despairs of hitting the fast track again. But after his Christmas Eve release from the Howard County Jail in Kokomo, Ind., he is starting to look for work. He says he misses the corporate grind. &quot;Other than my son,&quot; he says, &quot;the company was my life.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>