<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870903-0058 </DOCNO><HL> Tale From the Lab:Long, Winding CourseOf Medical ResearchLeads to Breakthrough---New Heart Drug May FollowInsight on How a CutoffOf Blood Injures Tissue---The Dastardly Free Radical---By Jerry E. BishopStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> DDIX BMY CHIR UPJPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   With thousands thronging an American Heart Association gathering at the Dallas Convention Center last fall and 24 presentations going on at once, a Wednesday-afternoon session in East Ballroom B didn't draw much notice.    A research team told how a substance called superoxide dismutase blocked formation of dangerous chemicals in dogs made to suffer heart attacks. Without a pause, other researchers took the podium to describe the same substance's effect on cells of chicken hearts. Every 15 minutes, another animal or test-tube experiment was hurriedly outlined. Not one involved human patients.    Needless to say, the session didn't make headlines the next day. Yet the experiments marked a scientific advance that soon will change the way doctors treat victims of heart attacks, strokes and scores of other ailments, as well as patients getting organ transplants.    The advance has drawn little notice because it has come in bits and pieces, the significance of which not even the scientists recognized at the time. It has been nearly 20 years in the making, involving, at various stages, presumptuous young researchers, heated scientific controversy, experiments that shouldn't have worked but did, a small drug company whose stock soared and sank, and the overthrow of venerable medical dogma.    Now, after almost two decades, it is about to culminate in human trials of a therapy that may greatly limit the damage suffered by body tissue temporarily deprived of blood. A handful of companies are racing to produce drugs whose effects on tissue normally considered dead are so remarkable that one company calls them Lazarus drugs.    The story begins in the laboratory of Irwin Fridovich, a Duke University specialist in the chemistry of enzymes. These are the proteins that carry out the thousands of daily chemical reactions that maintain all life. Enzymes trigger instant reactions in a microscopic cell that are beyond the scope of the biggest chemical factory.    In the mid-1960s, Prof. Fridovich was testing a theory on how enzymes get cells to make uric acid. Like most professors, he had young graduate students carrying out the tedious test-tube experiments. One was Joe McCord.    &quot;My job was to confirm Irwin's hypothesis,&quot; recalls Mr. McCord. &quot;Nothing worked. I think Irwin was beginning to think he had a real loser for a graduate student.&quot;    In desperation, the young scientist suggested changing his mentor's theory. They knew the uric-acid reaction had to involve an oxygen atom. Since no other combination worked, Mr. McCord suggested it might be a super-energetic oxygen atom known as superoxide.    Superoxide is known as a free radical, a class of atoms and molecules that are missing an electron and thus are unstable. They exist for only a millionth of a second, immediately seizing electrons from neighboring atoms and molecules to regain electronic balance. The result often is chemical chaos, as each atom or molecule robbed of an electron becomes a free radical itself and instantly seeks electrons from still other atoms and molecules.    What made young Mr. McCord's suggestion so daring was that free radicals of oxygen are lethal to cells. In fact, the only time scientists had seen them in living tissue was in cells bombarded with atomic radiation; the free radicals created were what poisoned people exposed to radiation. Such lethal chemical reactions could hardly be a natural part of living tissues, scientists figured.    &quot;But I was 23 years old and wasn't burdened by a lot of preconceptions,&quot; Mr. McCord recalls. The professor let him test the idea. And indeed, some of the test results could be explained by assuming the momentary existence of a superoxide atom.    In the tests, the researchers were using commercial preparations of proteins from horse blood. Some of it seemed to contain an impurity that blocked the action they ascribed to superoxide, grabbing, or &quot;dismuting,&quot; the free radical before it could trigger a chain reaction. The scientists dubbed the mysterious impurity &quot;superoxide dismutase.&quot;    Mr. McCord set about finding it, purifying beef blood again and again until he got a blue-green residue that consistently &quot;dismuted&quot; superoxide. Prof. Fridovich sent other graduate students to scour the biological countryside, and they found superoxide dismutase in all sorts of living tissues, from primitive algae to bacteria to bananas. &quot;We were saying that superoxide dismutase existed in every cell,&quot; Mr. McCord says.    That meant it had evolved very early in the development of life on earth. It also suggested, says Mr. McCord, &quot;that superoxide must be toxic; otherwise, why should there be an enzyme to protect the cell against it?&quot;    The scientific-journal articles they eventually wrote offered a theory explaining the role of superoxide dismutase, or S.O.D. They noted that life arose before there was any oxygen in the atmosphere; with the development of primitive plants that released oxygen, the gas slowly began accumulating in the air, and life forms had to incorporate it into their chemistry. Occasionally, the presence of all this oxygen led to reactions that liberated a few atoms of superoxide.    But if superoxide could set off a chain reaction fatal to cells, the life forms would have needed a defense to survive this air pollution. Thus superoxide dismutase must have evolved to scavenge superoxide atoms, Mr. Fridovich and his student argued.    When the researchers began publishing their theories in 1969, biochemists around the world formed battle lines, launching experiments to prove or to disprove them. Critics charged that superoxide couldn't possibly be involved in cells' chemistry and that, therefore, the blue-green residue that the Duke researchers called superoxide dismutase was really serving some other, unknown function. Even if superoxide was involved, they contended, it wasn't powerful enough to threaten cells. Controversy, becoming acrimonious and even personal, raged for nearly a decade.    &quot;Irwin stuck to his guns through everything,&quot; says Kelvin J.A. Davies, a biochemist at the University of Southern California. And gradually evidence supporting him and Mr. McCord mounted.    It would be a few years, however, before the discovery's implications for human disease were realized -- with one unusual exception. For a separate line of inquiry, by other scientists, was soon to merge with that of Messrs. Fridovich and McCord.    In the early 1960s, a California urologist named Thomas Schulte found that a mixture of beef proteins had an anti-inflammatory effect in the test tube and in animals. He and a biochemist, Wolfgang Huber, isolated the active protein and dubbed it orgotein. In 1968 a small company was started to exploit the discovery. Diagnostic Data Inc. (now DDI Pharmaceuticals Inc.) sold stock to finance development of orgotein as a treatment for arthritis.    Its promise in arthritis excited Wall Street. One analyst called it a breakthrough on the order of antibiotics. Diagnostic Data's stock, offered at $2.50 a share, multiplied eighteenfold.    One day a newly hired biochemist, Mark Saifer, happened to spot Messrs. Fridovich and McCord's report on superoxide dismutase. The company and the Duke scientists traded samples. Orgotein and superoxide dismutase, they found, were one and the same. It was an intriguing discovery, but seemed of little import as far as the company's fortunes went.    The small company continued its effort to prove orgotein effective against rheumatoid arthritis. This is a very tricky task, because it is so hard to know whether a test subject's improvement is due to the drug or is a natural remission. When DDI asked the Food and Drug Administration for permission to sell orgotein in 1978, the FDA said no -- that the clinical trials hadn't been adequate.    The stock price plunged. A proxy fight arose, management was ousted, and by the late 1970s DDI abandoned its effort to use the substance against rheumatoid arthritis.    Part of the difficulty had been that the protein can't be taken by mouth -- it is simply digested -- and even when it is injected, it rapidly disappears from the bloodstream. But based on some success in Germany against osteoarthritis, the kind that afflicts bones instead of soft tissue, DDI now is doing clinical trials in which orgotein/superoxide dismutase is injected directly into afflicted knee joints. SmithKline Beckman Corp. has U.S. rights to license it for this potential use.    No one, scientist or businessman, was prepared for the third discovery. At the University of South Alabama in Mobile, two physiologists were studying an age-old medical mystery, the death of tissue when it is deprived of blood. The most common example is a heart attack, in which a clot suddenly blocks oxygen-carrying blood to a section of the heart muscle and it dies. Similar injury is inflicted on the brain by a stroke, and it also is a problem in organs removed for transplantation.    The physiologists, D. Neil Granger and G. Franco Rutili, observed tiny blood vessels in a piece of cat intestine and found that when blood flow was stopped and then restored, the vessels leaked like a sieve. &quot;One day Rutili suggested that the injury might be caused by oxygen free radicals,&quot; Mr. Granger says. If so, superoxide dismutase might prevent it.    As it happened, Prof. Fridovich's former Duke graduate student was now at South Alabama as head of the biochemistry department. &quot;We realized we had one of the world's experts right in our building, so we went upstairs to see Joe McCord,&quot; Mr. Granger says. He, like Mr. Granger, was dubious, since the blood-vessel damage seemed to be due to lack of oxygen and free radicals can't form without oxygen. To mollify Mr. Rutili, they went ahead with an experiment anyway.    To their astonishment, when blood flow to the cat intestine was stopped and then restarted, with superoxide dismutase injected at the moment the blood flow resumed, the blood vessels weren't damaged. &quot;We knew immediately we were on to something important,&quot; Mr. Granger says.    For decades, doctors treating heart attacks, strokes, blood clots in the lungs and so forth have focused on restoring blood flow as fast as possible, on the assumption that lack of blood was what was damaging the tissue. Cells certainly will die if deprived of blood too long, but the Alabama researchers proposed that in many cases of temporary blockage, the worst of the damage occurred at the moment when the blood flow resumed.    The sudden surge of oxygen-rich blood, they theorized, liberated some superoxide atoms and set off a deadly chain reaction of various kinds of free radicals. They called this reperfusion injury, after the term for a refilling of tissue with blood. A series of articles they and a Johns Hopkins doctor, Gregory B. Bulkley, wrote for the journal Surgery galvanized the medical world in 1983.    The articles suggested kidney transplants as a logical use of the discovery. &quot;About half the kidneys transplanted either fail or have poor function in the first week,&quot; Dr. Bulkley notes, and surgeons commonly blame a lack of blood flow while the organ is being moved from donor to recipient. Experiments with pigs showed that if superoxide dismutase was injected at the moment the blood flow was restored after the transplant, the kidneys immediately began to function perfectly.    And tests by hundreds of researchers now are confirming that many other tissues -- heart, brain, pancreas, lungs, to name a few -- that are deprived of blood momentarily by a clot, an accident or disease suffer reperfusion injury when the blood flow is restored. Superoxide dismutase injected at that moment will limit this damage.    The possible use of superoxide dismutase in heart-attack patients has taken on a new dimension with the advent of drugs that dissolve blood clots in coronary arteries. Many researchers now believe it would be wise to inject superoxide dismutase or something like it along with the clot dissolver to prevent reperfusion injury when the blood again begins to flow.    DDI Pharmaceuticals has linked up with a Canadian biotechnology company, Allelix Inc., to produce human superoxide dismutase and to try to make a long-lasting version of the enzyme. But DDI, which has had superoxide dismutase in its back yard exclusively for almost 20 years, suddenly finds itself with competition.    Genetic engineers have cloned the gene for human superoxide dismutase. BioTechnology General Corp. and Bristol-Myers Co. -- which once turned down a tie with DDI -- are producing the enzyme and testing it in human kidney transplants. Two other companies, Chiron Corp. and Enzon Corp., also are working on genetically engineered human superoxide dismutase. But Mr. Lerman says DDI is further along than anyone else in developing S.O.D.    Yet superoxide dismutase may not be the last word in drugs to prevent reperfusion injury. Upjohn Co. researchers have developed a group of chemicals, related to hormones known as steroids, which also can block free-radical reactions, seeming to resurrect tissue that doctors formerly had considered doomed. The effect has moved Upjohn scientists to give such potions the name of Lazaroids. </TEXT></DOC>