<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870219-0002 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> JAPAN EUROP CANDAMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The U.S. and its allies have reached a modest accord aimed at reducing the dollar's gyrations in return for vows by West Germany and Japan to consider new measures to stimulate their economies.    Monetary sources said finance ministers of the Group of Five -- the U.S., West Germany, Japan, Britain and France -- have scheduled a meeting in Paris for Saturday to decide final details of the proposal. The five ministers will be joined Sunday by their counterparts from Canada and Italy, and the accord is to be unveiled formally on Sunday. Washington has been trying to work out an accord for several weeks, but until recently West Germany, Japan and Britain had balked.    News of the accord was disclosed last night after Japanese Finance Minister Kiichi Miyazawa notified Japan's parliament that he would be leaving the country, a required procedure whenever a Japanese cabinet minister travels abroad.    The accord is expected to fall short of initial suggestions by the U.S. that the major powers establish full-fledged &quot;reference zones&quot; -- upper and lower limits for the dollar, the West German mark and the Japanese yen.    Instead, monetary sources say, the pact essentially will build on the outlines of an accord the U.S. signed with Japan Oct. 31. The finance ministers would declare current exchange-rate levels to be broadly consistent with underlying economic fundamentals, at least for the immediate future.    The Big Five countries also would agree to use abrupt exchange-rate movements as alarm bells to signal when they need to change their economic policies to keep their currencies in line. Such an arrangement, in turn, could strengthen the policy-coordination effort the group pledged at last May's Tokyo economic summit.    In exchange, West Germany and Japan would pledge to consider new measures to bolster demand in their countries. And Washington may reiterate its previous promise to meet current budget-cutting goals.    The U.S. initially had proposed that the three allies agree to intervene in exchange markets to prevent their currencies from breaching specific ranges. But monetary officials said the new accord instead would seek, as the U.S.-Japan pact did Oct. 31, merely to endorse current exchange-rate levels, at least for the immediate future.    The accord most likely would include some private agreement among ministers on how far up or down these rates can move and still be acceptable. But officials said it is unlikely these limits would be made public. And it isn't known yet whether the major powers would pledge to intervene in currency markets if exchange rates were to exceed those limits.    In the Oct. 31 U.S.-Japan accord, there was no guarantee that the U.S. would intervene, but the yen-dollar exchange rate remained stable for almost three months.    It wasn't clear which specific steps West Germany might promise as its part of the accord. West German officials have hinted that Bonn might agree to consider either speeding up already-scheduled corporate tax cuts or moving more vigorously to revise its tax code. Japan's government, which already is having difficulty pushing its new budget through parliament, is expected to be even less specific than West Germany in its pledge.    Washington wants both countries to stimulate their economies so that they can absorb a larger share of the world's exports and thus help relieve the mounting trade imbalances among the big powers. The U.S. ran a trade deficit of $170 billion last year, while Japan and West Germany had surpluses of $89 billion and $63 billion respectively. Analysts warn that these imbalances eventually could plunge the world into a recession.    The establishment of exchange-rate &quot;ranges,&quot; initially sought by the U.S., would have marked a significant step toward returning to a fixed exchange-rate system such as that abandoned by the major powers in 1973. The scaled-back accord comes in the face of continued opposition from Bonn and Tokyo to U.S. demands for substantially more economic stimulus in return for Washington's cooperation in a stronger currency-stabilization pact. Both countries have rejected the U.S. pressure, contending that to spur their economies too rapidly now would rekindle inflation.    At the allies' economic summit last May, U.S. Treasury Secretary James Baker persuaded the major powers to agree to coordinate their economic policies more closely. But the effort has got off to a slow start. The latest accord represents an attempt to speed that process.    This weekend's pact isn't likely to end the Reagan administration's drive to persuade Japan and West Germany to stimulate their economies. The U.S. almost certainly will continue to press the issue at the next seven-nation economic summit, to be held in Venice, Italy, June 8-10.    It isn't known how the exchange markets might react to the new accord. Currency traders have been skeptical in recent weeks about how serious the industrial countries are in trying to resolve the trade problem. Some say that unless West Germany, Japan and the U.S. take major steps to alter their economic policies -- to spur more growth abroad and reduce the U.S. budget deficit -- the dollar may continue to decline.    Still, monetary officials insist that the pact would be a significant signal that the major powers are becoming more serious in attempting to work out their problems.    The negotiations between the U.S. and West Germany have been particularly difficult. Bonn initially declined even to discuss further stimulus measures, contending that its economy already was growing rapidly enough. More recently, the West German economy has been flagging visibly. But the tax-cut question has been tied up in an internal debate as the government of Chancellor Helmut Kohl seeks to rebuild its coalition in the wake of the Jan. 25 elections. Some factions oppose any changes in current tax policies.    In Japan, there has been talk about drafting a new stimulus package, but so far there have been no hints that any new one would be significant.    The debate among the major powers has been heightened in recent weeks by the continued fall in the value of the dollar, which crimps West German and Japanese exports. The U.S. recently has become as concerned as its allies about this. Secretary Baker has been warning in recent days that too sharp a decline in the dollar could prove self-defeating because it might impede the ability of West Germany and Japan to grow rapidly enough to absorb more U.S. products. Both countries depend heavily on earnings from foreign trade. </TEXT></DOC>