<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870721-0058 </DOCNO><HL> Labor Letter:A Special News Report on PeopleAnd Their Jobs in Offices,Fields and Factories---By Jeanne Saddler</HL><DD> 07/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR TAXES NSANYPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)COMPUTERS (EDP)AIRLINES (AIR)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)AUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT)LABOR DEPARTMENT (LBR) </IN><TEXT>   WORKERS' WORRIES about AIDS lead to more training and support.    Boston's Brigham and Women's Hospital will start a support group to help staffers talk about anxieties resulting from working with patients with acquired immune deficiency syndrome; being pricked by used needles is a major concern. Workers at Florida's Orlando Regional Medical Center must attend training sessions. Doctors at Cleveland Metropolitan General Hospital discuss AIDS with employees and help union officials answer workers' questions.    Pittsburgh's Allegheny General Hospital tells workers to treat all blood as if it's infected. At Humana-University Hospital in Louisville, Ky., workers caring for an AIDS patient who kept pulling off a ventilator mask and spraying saliva were told to wear gowns, gloves and masks in his room.    The Labor Department may decide soon whether to adopt mandatory procedures to protect health-care workers.    RAILROAD PENSIONS again draw government scrutiny.    Despite a payroll tax increase as recently as 1983 to shore up railroad workers' pension funds, another increase will be needed to meet obligations to beneficiaries that, by some estimates, could run well into billions of dollars during the next 25 years. A House subcommittee proposes a payroll tax increase of 2% in 1988, along with formation of a commission to study the funding problem; the Reagan administration favors a 4.5% tax increase by 1989.    The railroad industry's problem is that employment has dropped 7% a year since 1982: Taxes on each worker's wages now support three pension beneficiaries. Tax increases lead companies to cut jobs, in turn increasing the need for higher taxes. Possible solutions include lowering benefits or using general tax revenues to pay them.    COMPUTER PROGRAMMERS are in demand for reservation systems.    Companies are offering salaries of up to $75,000 and are recruiting abroad to hire programmers who can run reservation systems and similar systems, such as bank teller machines, says Edward Perlin Associates, a consultant. Amtrak, with salaries pegged to government pay scales, has trouble keeping workers and must use outside contractors. AMR Corp.'s American Airlines recruits in Ireland and India as well as on U.S. college campuses.    When United Airlines announced layoffs recently, &quot;recruiters were on their doorstep waiting to recruit programmers,&quot; says an American Airlines official. Trans World Airlines and Northwest Airlines eased their problem by forming a partnership to run a reservation system for themselves and 5,000 travel agents.    Experts say banks' increased use of automated teller machines in recent years helped create the shortage.    RISKY BUSINESS: In the U.S., 38% of a chief executive's pay depends upon individual or company performance, compared with 19% in Germany and 15% in Japan, says consultant Towers, Perrin Forster andamp; Crosby. One reason why U.S. executives' pay is more at risk: Their pay packages often include stock options and bonuses. Foreign concerns favor bonuses only.    OFFICE POOL: Boston-based Fidelity Investments needed a backup cooling system for its Irving, Texas, computer center. Because the system required enough water to fill a large swimming pool, Chairman Edward Johnson ordered a pool installed for employees. Its water will be tapped in a cooling emergency.    MANDATORY MATERNAL or parental leave laws were enacted by five states this year, says a Bureau of National Affairs report, and unions and women's groups are pressuring employers to adopt more liberal policies. Fifteen states now have laws or rules on pregnancy leave and related issues; 16 are considering them.    THE UAW STEPS UP efforts to organize workers at Nissan Motor Co.'s Smyrna, Tenn., plant. The auto workers' union last week assigned four full-time staffers to handle complaints about the plant. The UAW abandoned efforts to organize Honda Motor Co.'s Marysville, Ohio, plant last year.    A LABOR SHORTAGE isn't likely, says a new study.    Although the falling unemployment rate and the nation's changing demographic profile have recently spurred worries about whether a labor shortage is at hand, a Conference Board report says the concern is unwarranted. Projections by Richard Belous, the group's labor economist, show that growth in the number of jobs by the year 2000 is likely to be smaller than in the period from 1972 to 1986.    But shortages within some occupations are possible, he predicts. There will be a demand for skilled workers who can use computer-assisted equipment instead of craft workers, such as tool-and-die makers. And part of an increased demand for professionals will mean the use of paraprofessionals in accounting and law.    Faced with tighter labor markets, some industries might press for changes in the recent immigration law, Mr. Belous says.    THE CHECKOFF: Personnel Journal magazine, Costa Mesa, Calif., plans to offer an AIDS information clearinghouse to direct employers to educational and other resources, beginning on Labor Day. . . . Working Mother magazine lists Apple Computer Inc., Hoffmann-La Roche Inc. and Digital Equipment Corp. among 1987's best employers for working mothers. </TEXT></DOC>