<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861205-0110 </DOCNO><HL> Egypt Charges 4 Army Officers, OthersIn Extremist Plot to Overthow Mubarak---By Barbara RosewiczStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/05/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST </IN><DATELINE> CAIRO, Egypt  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Egypt, in a low-key announcement, exposed a plot by a group of Islamic extremists, including four army officers, to overthrow the government of President Hosni Mubarak.    The government disclosed the plot in the routine filing of an indictment, apparently indicating that it didn't consider the plot a serious threat. Cairo's English-language news broadcasts didn't mention the case, and even some top generals said they weren't aware of it.    Still, because of the country's acute economic woes, Egypt is worried about the growth of Islamic fundamentalism -- especially the threat that it could spread in the army. This was the first time that soldiers have been implicated in a religion-linked plot against the government since Anwar Sadat, then president, was gunned down in 1981 by Moslem extremists led by an army lieutenant.    The government formally charged the four low-ranking army officers and 29 civilians yesterday. They had been arrested weeks or months ago, but details weren't released until yesterday. The defendants -- who the Reuters news agency said included junior officers and civilian doctors, engineers, teachers and farmers -- were charged with stealing weapons from the army to train conspirators &quot;in violent tactics in combat to fight the present state policy.&quot; They are accused of having links to the Islamic Jihad, or Holy War, group blamed for Mr. Sadat's death.    Judging by Cairo's calm reaction, the plot doesn't appear to have involved officers of high-enough rank or enough people to seriously threaten the government. But it shows that President Mubarak's Egypt is vigilant in reining Islamic zealots who want the mainly Moslem nation run under strict Islamic law.    It also emphasizes the importance Egypt attaches to keeping Moslem extremists from infiltrating the powerful army, where they would have access to weapons and men.    After Mr. Sadat's assassination, the army tried to mute fundamentalism's appeal in its ranks through an economic program meant to keep its officers satisfied. The program has been so successful, Defense Minister Abdel Halim Abu Ghazala declared in a September interview with The Wall Street Journal, that &quot;inside the armed forces we don't have any fanaticism now.&quot;    To buffer officers from the temptation of Islamic extremism, the army allows them to buy new army built apartments at cut rates and import cars and motorcyles cheaply. Many get frequent paid trips abroad. Army officers also can use special clubs and commissaries. Also, senior army officers acknowledge they watch younger, poorer-paid soldiers for signs of extremist tendencies.    Like many analysts, Mr. Abu Ghazala believes Egypt's stability is tied mainly to repairing the country's troubled economy. If the economy worsens and already poor living conditions deteriorate, he said, the appeal of the Islamic alternative would grow. Although a shift toward Islamic fundamentalism wouldn't necessarily mean violence, the government worries that the small core of Moslem extremists, who advocate violence to change the government, would spawn new leaders.    Given the size of Egypt's army -- about 450,000 men -- and its system of conscription that calls every Egyptian male to serve in the army or security police, it isn't surprising that soldiers with extremist tendencies would appear.    But the army can point to the uncovering of this latest plot as evidence that it is astute at weeding out fanatics, even at low levels.    Most political analysts say the army proved its loyalty to Egypt's current civilian leadership during riots by Egypt's security police in February. A government investigation later attributed the simultaneous riots in Cairo and other cities to the policemen's low pay and a rumor their conscription would be extended.    The government didn't accuse fundamentalists of sparking the trouble, although traditional Islamic targets, such as nightclubs, were attacked. The army calmly and efficiently took control and ran the country for more than a week.    Egypt's most severe problem with fundamentalism lately hasn't involved the army, but civilians who burned down some video clubs in Cairo, sheiks who criticized the government and students who want to impose Islamic rules on campuses and in the country.    In late October, a bloody confrontation erupted between Moslem mosque goers and hundreds of police in Assiut, a town 235 miles south of Cairo, known as a center of Egyptian fundamentalism. More than 100 fundamentalists in Egypt are awaiting trial for fomenting unrest and trying to overthrow the government. </TEXT></DOC>