<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870901-0032 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Oil Prices Climb to Nearly $20 a BarrelOn Mideast Tension, Then Retreat a Bit---By Michael SiconolfiStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS)PETROLEUM (PET)COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD) </IN><TEXT>   U.S. oil prices spurted to near $20 a barrel amid an escalation of Persian Gulf tensions, although the day's advance was pared a bit by the close of trading.    Further gains are unlikely if the flow of oil from the gulf isn't disrupted, analysts said.    Following a 45-day reprieve from direct aggression in the gulf, Iraq resumed attacks on Iranian shipping facilities during the weekend, precipitating Iranian reprisals. The Iraqi attacks were the first since the United Nations Security Council passed a resolution in late July calling for a cease-fire in the seven-year-old Iran-Iraq war.    Yesterday, as the Iraqi raids continued, Iranian speedboats retailated by attacking a Kuwaiti-flagged tanker, triggering a rally in oil prices at the New York Mercantile Exchange.    Some oil specialists, however, questioned the rally and suggested that further price gains were unlikely.    The resumption of bombing is a &quot;reminder that there is always a threat of supply curtailment&quot; from the Persian Gulf, said Michael Smolinski, economist and director of Data Resources Inc.'s fuel procurement service in Lexington, Mass. However, Mr. Smolinski said, further significant price rises were unlikely in the coming weeks as long as the gulf war doesn't exapnd into a larger confrontation.    Yesterday's rally was &quot;simply psychology at work,&quot; said Francis H. Schott, senior vice president and chief economist at the Equitable Life Assurance Society of the U.S. in New York. &quot;Everyone buys a little in anticipation of potential problems (in the Persian Gulf), but it's not long-lived.&quot;    And the oil-price advance, in fact, was pared throughout the day. Crude oil prices for October delivery, after an early surge to the day's high of $19.95 a barrel, closed at $19.73, up 34 cents. Gasoline and heating oil prices also had increases but eased later in the session.    Meanwhile, a computer failure at the Commodity Exchange Center, which houses the five New York futures exchanges, triggered a 43-minute halt in trading at the Merc in the late afternoon. The cause of the failure wasn't immediately known, a Merc spokeswoman said.    On the spot, or noncontract, market, the price of West Texas Intermediate, the benchmark U.S. crude, rose 30 cents a barrel to $19.70.    Despite the rally, some oil specialists said the current threat of a renewed tanker war in the gulf actually increases the chances of decline in prices in the coming weeks.    &quot;Because the recent incidents increase the threat of a cutoff of tanker traffic, it creates a higher incentive for producers to export as much as possible in the near term,&quot; said Robert Boslego, executive vice president of Boslego Corp., a Winchester, Mass., oil consulting firm.    If there is no disruption in the flow of oil, Mr. Boslego said, the increase in exports would create a bulging oversupply of crude oil in the marketplace, heightening the possibility of weaker prices.    In any case, yesterday's movement in prices continues the roller-coaster of recent months, during which prices have oscillated between $18 and $22.    For instance, after rising to more than $22 a barrel early last month, prices have eased in the past three weeks as traders focused on apparent above-quota production by OPEC.    Yesterday, some analysts noted that OPEC above-quota output is continuing, leading to oil-market selling that will help offset Persian Gulf tensions.    &quot;We're not going to have any significant sustained rallies if OPEC continues to overproduce,&quot; said Rick Donovan, head of the international energy department at E.F. Hutton andamp; Co. in New York.    In other futures markets yesterday:    PRECIOUS METALS: Futures prices were narrowly mixed despite settlement of the three-week miners strike in South Africa that affected many of that nation's gold and coal mines. After early advances, gold prices finished just slightly lower on the Commodity Exchange in New York. Platinum prices on the New York Mercantile Exchange also had modest decreases, while silver prices at the Comex rose slightly. Some analysts and traders weren't surprised by the muted response to the settlement. &quot;The tone of the negotiations had indicated that the strike wasn't going to get into a supply-threatening situation, and that was built into the current price structure,&quot; an analyst said. What was surprising, some traders said, was that precious metal prices didn't react more strongly to yesterday's surge in oil prices amid an escalation of tensions in the Persian Gulf. Precious metal prices, particularly gold, often rise in response to higher oil prices, which typically portend a higher rate of inflation. Many traders hold precious metals as a hedge against inflation. &quot;The fact that gold didn't respond to the (Persian Gulf) situation was a major disappointment,&quot; a New York trader said, and it increases the likelihood that prices will ease further in the coming weeks.    FOREIGN CURRENCIES: Futures prices eased in thin trading as traders kept an eye on heightened tensions in the Persian Gulf and on possible central bank intervention in support of the dollar. The session was relatively quiet, though, with London banks closed for a holiday. Flare-ups in the Middle East -- such as Iraq's renewed attacks on Iranian targets over the weekend -- tend to bolster the dollar, in part because the U.S. is considered less vulnerable to an interruption in the flow of oil from the region than, for instance, Japan and West Germany. The possibility of intervention by the Bank of Japan and European central banks to support the dollar was equally important in holding down foreign currency futures prices yesterday, some analysts said. This morning's scheduled report on U.S. leading economic indicators and Friday's employment report could further support the sagging dollar with evidence of a strengthening U.S. economy, said Dennis Gartman, president of Gartman Financial Services Inc. in Portsmouth, Va.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Most grain and soybean futures prices fell. Forecasts of dry weather for the Corn Belt squelched last week's talk that the harvest might be delayed by rain, analysts said. Soybeans and soybean oil futures prices dropped as rain finally fell in drought-stricken India, the world's largest importer of vegetable oils. The rains may revive some of that country's crops and lessen import needs, said Victor Lespinasse, a floor broker with Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. in Chicago. </TEXT></DOC>