<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870616-0083 </DOCNO><HL> Dream vs. Reality:Harvard MBAs FindInvestment Banking IsA Mixed Bag at Best---Many in Class of '69 ConsiderPersonal Sacrifice Too Big,But Class of '87 Plunges In---Bull Market Remains a Lure---By Selwyn FeinsteinStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><TEXT>   Harvard Business School graduates venturing into investment banking this summer are a charmed group, and they know it. What other new recruits, after all, have immediate access to the inner circles of corporate power along with eye-popping starting salaries?    But earlier inductees into the elite club -- Harvard M.B.A.s who preceded them into the field 18 years ago -- have found that the glittering prizes are by no means guaranteed and often come only at a huge personal price.    Interviews with members of the classes of 1987 and 1969 present a classic contrast of youth's boundless optimism with the sobering experience of maturity. And because both groups embarked on their careers during a booming stock market and torrid investment-banking growth, the past may hold some sobering lessons for the freshly minted M.B.A.s.    To graduates of this year's class, investment banking offers a chance to deal as peers with client senior managers while earning as much as $100,000 the first year. They are prepared to work 80-hour weeks, but insist that personal relationships needn't be sacrificed. They enter a field soiled by scandal but are confident ethical conflicts can be avoided. Success, they are convinced, is theirs for the grabbing. The Potential Rewards Members of the Class of 1969 were afire with the same ambition and assurance when they started out, and many haven't been disappointed. The work is exciting, and compensation can top $1 million a year. But some were forced from jobs in the intervening years by a slumping stock market that dried up the mergers, acquisitions and corporate financings that are the lifeblood of their business. Some found they didn't like the work. Others paid for career success with failed marriages.    Navigating the pressures and temptations and emerging a winner &quot;isn't that simple,&quot; observes Richard S. Pechter, the 42-year-old chairman of the Financial Services Group of Donaldson, Lufkin andamp; Jenrette Securities Corp. &quot;I'm glad they have the self-confidence,&quot; he says of the Harvard M.B.A.s moving into investment banking, as he did in 1969. But, he says, success &quot;requires a lot of things to come together, a lot beyond their control.&quot;    The class already has had a brush with scandal, from the indiscretions of a classmate while working as a junior financial analyst at Lazard Freres andamp; Co. in the two years before he even went to the school. Randall D. Cecola, 25 years old, was suspended indefinitely by Harvard after pleading guilty in December to filing false tax returns and agreeing to settle a Securities and Exchange Commission complaint that he leaked and traded on confidential information. Without admitting or denying guilt, he settled with the SEC by agreeing to disgorge $21,800 in trading profits. On his guilty plea to the tax charges, he was sentenced to six years' probation.    Despite the span of years, the two classes have much in common. Both completed their second years of business school to the tempo of a surging stock market; the Dow Jones Industrial Average then, as now, was near a record high for the time. Mergers and acquisitions grabbed business headlines back then, as they do today. For investment-banking firms, these were times of rapid growth.    Salaries in 1969 were relatively modest, with starting pay for Harvard M.B.A.s near $14,500 a year and bonuses adding perhaps 10%. Today, the median base salary for a starting investment banker from Harvard approaches $50,000, and bonuses can bring the first year's compensation to $75,000 or $100,000.    Even with the relatively small remuneration back then, investment banking upstaged consulting as the field of choice for Harvard M.B.A.s in 1969. Eighty-seven members of that year's class were drawn to the field, or 21% of the graduates responding to a Harvard survey. This was a record percentage that stood until 1986, when 29% were recruited. This year's tally isn't expected to be much less.    If the similarities persist, the Class of 1987 could be in for some career-jolting shocks. In a bruising initiation rite for their predecessors, the Dow Jones average slumped 13% in June and July of 1969. Even steeper stock slides, securities-house failures, an Arab oil embargo and brokerage-rate deregulation followed.    For many of the 1969 graduates, personal fortunes have since rebounded, apace with a soaring stock market and the corporate financings and acquisitions that have followed in its wake. But none of the M.B.A.s are betting the good times are here to stay. &quot;Sooner or later there is going to be some form of correction,&quot; declares Edward B. Whitney, 42, a managing director and head of corporate finance at Dillon, Read andamp; Co.    Competition, moreover, is growing. If commercial banks are allowed a major role in underwritings, as has been proposed, investment-bank &quot;profit margins and salaries just won't be there,&quot; says H. Bruce McEver, the president of Berkshire Capital Corp. in New York. The current class, he predicts, &quot;has a real shock coming.&quot;    William J. Wheeler, a 25-year-old from Grand Island, Neb., acknowledges that the clock may be ticking on Wall Street's current boom. &quot;I know there's going to be a downturn,&quot; he says as he prepares to begin an investment-banking career with the corporate-finance department of Donaldson, Lufkin andamp; Jenrette. But not knowing when or how severe the market drop will be, he says, &quot;it's easier to project up.&quot;    Like most of his classmates headed into investment banking, Mr. Wheeler is confident of future success. &quot;The business is still growing,&quot; he says. And if only one of seven makes partner or officer in a firm, he figures he will be one of the select few &quot;if I want to be.&quot;    Money will be one measure of that success. Claus Moller, 24, who grew up on a family farm in Aabenraa, Denmark, allows that the pay &quot;is an important part&quot; of the lure that drew him to the corporate-finance department of Morgan Stanley andamp; Co. But the money is only secondary, he says. &quot;I want to create. I want to manage. I want to have impact. If you like the word, power.&quot;    For Melinda Mount, 27, of Oconomowoc, Wis., who is headed for Morgan Stanley's mortgage-backed-securities unit, the enticement is the chance to &quot;invent a new financial product.&quot;    The current class members insist that money, when it comes, won't corrupt them. &quot;It's going to be lucrative,&quot; says Charles Edelstein, 27, who will be working in corporate finance at First Boston Corp. in Chicago, his hometown. But he doesn't plan to spend it all. Still, this summer he will be shopping for a condominium, and his car of choice is a Jaguar.    The class is prepared to work long and hard. Greg Fullmer, a 27 year old from Rexburg, Idaho, who is going to corporate finance at Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co., anticipates plugging away &quot;13 hours or more a day, six days a week, possibly seven,&quot; in such chores as reading, analyzing and client meetings. Such effort &quot;will take a toll on my personal life,&quot; he concedes. &quot;There is nothing you can achieve without a great deal of sacrifice.&quot; Personal and business life, though, can be balanced. &quot;I'm going to find the right wife,&quot; he vows.    William S. Buchanan, 29, a U.S. Naval Academy graduate who spent five years on a fast-attack submarine before going to Harvard, has already been married for seven years and sees no conflict between career and family. He rejected Wall Street for a corporate-finance post at Alex. Brown andamp; Sons in Baltimore because he doesn't view New York as a fit place to raise children. If marital or ethical conflicts arise, &quot;I believe I will recognize them as such and be able to address them,&quot; he says. &quot;If I can't, I'm smart enough to ask for help.&quot;    But the Class of '69 has discovered that problems aren't always immediately obvious, and finding solutions can be wrenching.    Gerald J. Koerner started out in corporate finance at Goodbody andamp; Co. in the summer of 1969 making $13,500 a year. &quot;You felt you were on the front line of financing,&quot; he recalls. &quot;It was exciting because you were dealing with senior management. You were working with a variety of businesses. You had a direct impact on companies.&quot; By April 1970, however, he was out of work, a victim of dried-up financings.    Mr. Koerner bounced back fast, first with a venture-capital firm, then a series of investment-banking houses. But the 12-hour days took another toll. &quot;I had a wife and small children, and they bore the brunt&quot; of his long hours, he says. &quot;You just don't spend enough time at marriage.&quot; He was divorced in 1974.    Now, at 44, he is an investment banker at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., doing well but working hard. &quot;I don't regret anything,&quot; he says. &quot;You're going to have frustrations no matter what you do.&quot;    Stephen L. Joseph, 44, a senior vice president and head of mortgage-backed securities at Drexel Burnham, doesn't know whether his long hours and weekends of work led to the breakup of his marriage of more than 20 years. But his three children, he says, have all told him they aren't sure they want to follow him into investment banking &quot;because of the sacrifice of personal life.&quot;    In persisting and succeeding with investment banking despite the problems, Mr. Koerner and Mr. Joseph are exceptions among their classmates. Of 87 who entered the field in 1969, only 33 were still employees of the nation's top 25 investment-banking firms in 1986, according to Harvard alumni records.    Rudolf V. Ganz, 45, dropped from the field in a year. He knew his first job at Glore Forgan Staats Inc. was in jeopardy when a travel agency started dunning him directly for business travel expenses charged to the firm. Glore Forgan soon sought refuge in a merger that created F.I. duPont, Glore Forgan andamp; Co., but he was no happier there. Three-quarters of his time, he recalls, was spent knocking on doors looking for business; only 25% was spent arranging deals. &quot;That was the problem. They didn't have enough to do.&quot; Now he is the president of Membrex Inc., a new company in Garfield, N.J., that is testing systems for separating biological materials.    Connie Cox, 41, says she had to overcome sex discrimination to break into investment banking back in 1969. Despite her Harvard M.B.A. (she was one of 14 women to graduate in her year), she says, &quot;nobody in investment banking wanted women then.&quot; It took a call from her father, an executive of what was then Armour andamp; Co., for her to gain entry into Wertheim andamp; Co. Ultimately, she decided that arranging corporate deals wasn't for her. She left to work for corporations and as a consultant, and now heads Stress-Less Step, selling massages in New York for $45 an hour.    Today's Harvard women are finding a considerably easier passage into investment banking. Of the 783 graduates of the Class of 1987, a quarter are women and about a quarter of them are going into investment banking, roughly the same percentage as male graduates, estimates Samuel L. Hayes III, professor of investment banking at the school.    Probably the most tortuous route to investment banking was traveled by William H. Brown, now 57. He was a Jesuit priest from Japan when he entered Harvard. The order &quot;thought it would be useful&quot; to have someone trained in business, he explains. With his 1969 M.B.A. degree, however, he left the priesthood, married and joined a consulting firm. &quot;Business,&quot; he decided, &quot;was more interesting.&quot;    His knowledge of Japanese -- his father, an Army man, took him to Japan in 1947 -- led Goldman Sachs to him when it decided to open a consultative office in Tokyo in 1973. For a dozen years he sold the firm's corporate-finance services to major Japanese concerns, putting in the same grueling hours as his New York colleagues. In 1985, he gave it up to become commercial counselor of the U.S. Embassy in Japan.    For all the disruptions caused by cyclical markets and family conflicts, some members of the Class of 1969 have fashioned from investment banking what appears to be an enviable life.    Dillon Read's Mr. Whitney, one of 36 managing directors at the firm, has a home in New York City's Brooklyn Heights and a weekend house up the Hudson River in Cold Spring, N.Y. His wife of 14 years, Martha Howell, is an associate professor in medieval history at Rutgers University in New Jersey. They have twin seven-year-old boys. Either he or his wife &quot;usually goes to the things the kids want us to go to,&quot; he says, and &quot;we try to spend an uninterrupted weekend with them.&quot;    His life style, he says, is &quot;very conservative,&quot; though he quickly concedes that the description may not bear close inspection. His clothes come from Alfred Dunhill of London, where suits range from $795 to $1,000. &quot;I buy them on sale, but they're still expensive,&quot; he says.    His advice to this year's newcomers: &quot;Stay on the gravy train for as long as you can, but sooner or later the real world will catch up.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>