<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871230-0101 </DOCNO><HL> Pakistan's Teeming Commercial CapitalIs Beset by Violence, Inadequate Services---By Anthony SpaethStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> KARACHI, Pakistan  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When Gen. Charles Napier left British India in 1847, he had a special farewell for Karachi, the city he helped place on the map.    &quot;You will yet be the glory of the East,&quot; he said. &quot;Would that I could come again to see you, Kurrachee, in your grandeur!&quot;    Glory did descend on Karachi 100 years later. On Aug. 14, 1947, two chunks of India became the Islamic nation of Pakistan. Karachi, a somnolent seaport, became its capital and business center.    Its population, about 600,000 in 1946, quickly doubled. And though Pakistan moved its capital to Islamabad in 1959, Karachi has never stopped mushrooming. With an immigrant-swollen population of eight million -- the government says it could be 15 million by the year 2000 -- it is one of the world's largest cities.    But the city is deficient in water mains, sewage pipes, buses, schools and electricity. And, as immigrant groups have begun to clash rather than coexist, it is a city of frequent massacres and curfews.    Pakistan was dictated into existence by Indian Moslems who wanted their own separate state. Its premier city was intended to be a Moslem melting pot. Instead, it is a roiling stew whose residents appear disgruntled with their country's restrictive political system and its slow economic and social progress. &quot;It's a disturbed city,&quot; says Akhtar Hameed Khan, an academic and social worker in Orangi, one of Karachi's poorest districts.    The British conquered Karachi and the surrounding province of Sind in 1839. They widened Karachi's fine natural harbor and discovered a tappable underground river. The desert town bloomed with cricket fields and English gardens.    Today, downtown Karachi retains much old world charm, with sturdy stone churches and gracious, palm-lined boulevards. The cricket fields have given way to sports stadiums, but donkey carts continue their nighttime races across the city's glittering bridges.    Prosperity is palpable in the business district, along with an international air absent in the cities of neighboring India. The glitter resides in central Karachi, the preserve of tourists and civil servants. But out from the center Karachi's slums extend across a desert plain and form a crust upon the inhospitable hills that ring the city. This is the troubled Karachi: slums and squatter colonies whose inhabitants live in fear of their neighbors.    Half of Karachi's residents came from elsewhere. First came the Indian Moslems after partition; then the poor, upcountry Pakistanis, attracted to the rich beacon of Karachi. Then came the migrants from Bangladesh, the former East Pakistan that became an independent state in 1971. About 56,000 immigrants arrive in the city every year from all over Pakistan.    The city's neighborhoods are checkerboards of ethnic and language groups. In some slums, a different language is spoken on each side of the street. Certain groups control whole industries. The migrants from India, called mohajirs, control many white-collar jobs. The rugged, clannish Pathans from the Afghanistan border drive the buses -- recklessly -- and work as musclemen for the drug syndicates. (Adding to its other problems, Karachi is a major exporter of Central Asian heroin.)    &quot;This ethnic divide runs through every aspect of life in Karachi,&quot; says Talat Aslam, a local magazine editor.    One thing the different ethnic groups share is a decrepit, jerry-built city. A third of the residents are squatters; only half of the city's dwellings are connected to water mains; the mains are frequently dry. Blackouts are common, but the city won't admit a shortage of electricity. A recent blackout was blamed on drizzle. Also in short supply: buses, sewers and schools.    Karachi barely has a local government. In effect, the city is tightly controlled by the national government. In the mid-1980s, the city percolated with citizen movements demanding more electricity, more water, sewers and buses, rights for squatters, and a crackdown on drugs. Pakistan's worried government crushed each movement.    &quot;These were movements of the young,&quot; says Arif Hasan, a local architect. &quot;They were rough, militant movements. All of them were thrashed by the police.&quot; National politics, revived somewhat since President Mohammed Zia-ul-Haq ended eight years of martial law and convened a parliament in 1985, are widely viewed as the feudal sport of the country's old rich. They offer few opportunities for up-and-comers from places such as Karachi.    It is against this background -- squalor, ethnic jitters, plutocratic politics -- that Karachi last year witnessed the Orangi massacre. On Dec. 12 and 13, 1986, Karachi police raided a neighborhood known to be a center of the Karachi heroin trade. The operation didn't net any drug lords or even much heroin or arms. But it did rile the Pathans, the migrants from the Afghan border, who are often employed by the drug syndicates.    The Pathans are the most separate of all Karachi's provincial groups. They interpreted the police operation as a strike against them and, possibly, the start of a mass eviction of Pathans from the city.    On Dec. 14, several hundred Pathans armed with rifles and fire bombs descended on Orangi, another squatter area, and for five hours went on a house-to-house killing spree. Some 200 are estimated to have died, and the police didn't intervene until the killing mob had departed. Riots broke out across all of Karachi and have been flaring since.    Karachi has long suffered from ethnic tension, residents admit, but until Orangi violence was infrequent. The strife that blossomed this year, they say, is an expression of the city's deeper woes.    One theory is that Karachi has simply grown too big, too smart, too modern and now, too troubled for its conservative Islamic government. Karachi's citizens are young, half of them under 25, and much better educated than the rest of Pakistan. &quot;This section of the population is modern,&quot; says the architect, Mr. Hasan. &quot;It doesn't believe that Islam is the fountainhead of scientific values. It doesn't believe in an Islamic economic system.&quot;    Now that the city's frustrations have been translated into combat, many residents despair of a return to more peaceful days. The drug syndicate continues to operate freely. Arms keep pouring into Karachi from the Afghan border.    Mr. Khan, the Orangi social worker, thinks he knows what will happen to Karachi: &quot;I was in Detroit in 1966. That's what we've got now: a huge number of unemployed youths and the conviction that there's no place for them. They're about to cry, 'Burn, baby, burn!'&quot; </TEXT></DOC>