<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870306-0168 </DOCNO><HL> Gettys Take Aim at Family Trustee in Renewal of Feud---Clan Members Battle Again FollowingThe Pennzoil-Texaco Judgment---By Frederick Rose and Thomas Petzinger Jr.Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TX PZL GEPETROLEUM (PET) </IN><TEXT>   A long-running feud among the heirs of oilman J. Paul Getty -- nearly resolved once -- has erupted anew in the wake of the multibillion-dollar dispute over the takeover of Getty Oil Co.    The fighting within one of the nation's richest family dynasties over its $3.5 billion trust has been carried on in Los Angeles courts in almost total secrecy, a stark contrast to the enormously public Texas court fight in which Pennzoil Co. has won $10.2 billion by convincing a jury that Texaco Inc. unlawfully interfered with Pennzoil's planned merger with Getty Oil.    But court documents and sources close to the family suggest that the Gettys are deeply concerned that adverse judgments arising from the titanic Texas case could drain their private fortune. &quot;The Texaco-Pennzoil litigation is casting a very deep shadow over the family's financial affairs,&quot; says Vanni Treves, a solicitor representing J. Paul Getty Jr., of London.    At the center of the Getty family travails is the sole trustee of the family fortune: 53-year-old Gordon Getty, of San Francisco, whose controversial dealings with Pennzoil and Texaco have subjected him to attack from his brothers, nephews and nieces.    Recently, at the behest of Gordon Getty's relatives, a California state court judge quietly agreed to strip Mr. Getty's power to represent the trust in the welter of litigation spilling from the Pennzoil case. Citing &quot;irreconcilable conflicts of interest&quot; on the part of Mr. Getty, Judge Norman Epstein, of Los Angeles, appointed a special trustee to guard the family's fortune following the Texaco-Pennzoil case. Mr. Getty has appealed.    Two questions lie at the core of the reawakened family feud -- and both pertain directly to the activities of Mr. Getty.    First: Did he renege on a merger contract with Pennzoil in order to sell the family's 40% interest in Getty Oil to Texaco? Mr. Getty faces this allegation on several fronts. In derivative lawsuits filed in New York, Texas and Delaware, Texaco shareholders essentially claim he aided and abetted Texaco's alleged interference with Pennzoil's planned merger with Getty Oil. In addition, Pennzoil refuses to withdraw a three-year-old breach-of-contract suit in Delaware against Mr. Getty and others -- preserving the suit as a second bite at the apple should Texaco succeed in reversing the $10.2 billion judgment. Also, Mr. Getty was a director of Getty Oil and the J. Paul Getty Museum, both of which are being sued in Delaware by Texaco holders and by Pennzoil.    The second question is far more complicated: If Pennzoil's judgment withstands Texaco's appeals, will Texaco stick the Getty family with part of the bill? Texaco has renounced, on what appears to be a technicality, a promise extracted by Mr. Getty that Texaco would pay for judgments arising from its purchase of Getty Oil. In court records filed as recently as December, Texaco has instead threatened to sue the family trust as well as the family-founded Getty Museum for getting it into the whole mess in the first place.    Mr. Getty can't seem to satisfy all of his kin no matter what decision he makes. No sooner had he reached the merger pact with Pennzoil, for instance, than one branch of the family sued to stop it. Then, after he reached an agreement to sell the family's shares to Texaco, another branch of the family sued to stop that transaction in order to bring the Pennzoil pact to fruition.    Gordon was raising family hackles long before Pennzoil or Texaco came along. The fourth of J. Paul Getty's five sons, Gordon remains the target of a family lawsuit that since its start in 1983 has cost millions of dollars in legal fees, has accumulated tens of thousands of pages of mostly secret briefs and depositions, and has yet to go to trial.    The suit seeks to deal with a problem that arose in 1982, when Mr. Getty became sole trustee of the family fortune after a second trustee, his billionaire father's lawyer, died.    A power struggle broke out between Mr. Getty and the non-family managers of Getty Oil; they solicited a family lawsuit against Mr. Getty, seeking to neutralize his unilateral control over the trust's 40% ownership of Getty Oil. The lawsuit was filed in the name of 15-year-old Tara Gabriel Galaxy Gramaphone Getty at the behest of Tara's father, J. Paul Getty Jr. The suit sought the appointment of Bank of America as Gordon Getty's co-trustee. But later, a suit by three of Gordon Getty's nieces -- sisters Anne Getty Earhart, Claire E. Getty and Caroline M. Getty -- sought Mr. Getty's ouster as trustee altogether.    In 1985, Mr. Getty and his relatives announced a preliminary settlement in which the trust would be equally divided among the four remaining bloodlines of J. Paul Getty. Officially, that is still on the table; but, as a practical matter, lawyers familiar with the case say it is dead. If the trust were to be split up now as earlier proposed, Mr. Getty might end up bearing the entire legal liability -- to Pennzoil, to Texaco, or to the Texaco holders suing derivatively -- while controlling only one-fourth of the trust.    If Mr. Getty permitted the settlement to go through, and if Texaco tried to slough its liability on him, &quot;Gordon would find himself at the receiving end of a claim with insufficient assets left to meet them,&quot; says a lawyer for a different branch of the family. Adds another knowledgeable source, &quot;This case isn't going to be settled as long as Texaco-Pennzoil and all the other litigation is still outstanding.&quot;    The Gettys' legal feud has been conducted in almost total secrecy. Most of the lawyers decline to comment and Mr. Getty didn't return phone calls.    While documents in the trustee suit are sealed, a separate lawsuit by Mr. Getty's three litigious nieces hints at some of the family's cause for concern. This second case, filed in state court in Santa Ana, Calif., alleges that Gordon Getty has refused to sue Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co., an investment banking firm, and Lasky, Haas, Cohler andamp; Munter, a San Francisco law firm. Both advised Mr. Getty throughout his dealings with Pennzoil and Texaco.    The suit contends that Mr. Getty has been remiss in not pursuing claims against the two advisers and worries that potentially, &quot;the entire corpus of the trust could be eliminated,&quot; should Pennzoil ultimately collect billions from Texaco. If that occurs, the advice rendered by Kidder Peabody and the law firm should be considered &quot;inconsistent with, and below the standard of practice for competent legal counsel and competent investment bankers,&quot; the suit charges. The nieces' suit appears designed to preserve claims against Kidder Peabody and Lasky Haas in case the legal tower topples on the trust.    When Kidder Peabody entered the picture in late 1983, it was Martin Siegel who took the account -- the same investment banker who last month pleaded guilty to two counts and became one of the biggest fish yet hooked in the government's investigation of insider trading. Mr. Siegel admitted to leaking inside information about the goings-on at Getty Oil to arbitrager Ivan Boesky, though nothing in the record to date suggests that the leaks harmed Mr. Getty's relatives in any way. Mr. Siegel, whose firm earned a fee of $15 million from the trust, had strongly urged Mr. Getty to accept a takeover offer from Texaco, breaking the complex merger pact with Pennzoil of which Mr. Siegel himself had been the principal architect.    The Lasky Haas law firm has advised Mr. Getty in many matters, including his long-running fight with the rest of the family over his control of the trust. It would be difficult, of course, for him to sue his closest legal advisers. &quot;Some attorneys think they have to create some commotion by creating some lawsuits,&quot; says Moses Lasky of Lasky Haas, who says the nieces' second lawsuit hasn't even been served on Mr. Getty. A spokesman for Kidder Peabody says in response to the suit that the investment banking firm gave &quot;responsible and legal&quot; advice to Mr. Getty.    Another potential case that Mr. Getty has yet to take to court concerns Texaco's refusal to honor the indemnity that it promised Mr. Getty and the Getty Museum at the time that they sold their Getty Oil shares. Texaco points out that it agreed to hold the trust and the museum harmless against any judgment arising from the &quot;Pennzoil agreement&quot; of &quot;January 2, 1984&quot; -- but that the Texas jury found that Pennzoil's &quot;agreement&quot; came into being a day later. Nevetheless, the museum, headed by former Securities and Exchange Commission Chairman Harold Williams, is suing Texaco, demanding that it make good on its indemnity. That suit, now in federal court in Los Angeles, also seeks unspecified damages.    Some lawyers are baffled by the absence of the trust and Mr. Getty from this case, in which the family's concerns closely parallel the museum's. Mr. Lasky says he doesn't see any point in suing Texaco. &quot;If, as and when Texaco fails to pay under the indemnity agreement, there'll be time enough to sue,&quot; he says.    Another lawyer close to the case, however, suggests that Mr. Getty may recognie the poor appearance of a suit against Texaco. For now, at least, the trust and Texaco are on the same side: united against Pennzoil. To engage in litigation would suggest that Mr. Getty and Texaco are fighting over who will write a check to Pennzoil.    Mr. Getty also has failed to respond to the lawsuits brought against him and the trust in Delaware, New York and Texas by Texaco holders. Others in the shareholder suits -- among them Getty Oil and its investment banking firm, Goldman, Sachs and Co.; Texaco and its investment banker, First Boston Corp., and the Getty Museum -- have consented to jurisdiction at least in Delaware, stopping the litigation against them in Texas.    Lawyers familiar with these shareholder lawsuits speculate that Mr. Getty and his counsel are gambling that he can sidestep all the suits by arguing that Gordon can't appropriately be sued in those jurisdictions. Mr. Lasky says simply, &quot;If they want to sue us, let them come out here where we live and sue us here.&quot;    Some lawyers close to the case appreciate Mr. Lasky's point. &quot;Sometimes long shots come in,&quot; says one. On the other hand, this lawyer says, by failing to answer lawsuits elsewhere, &quot;Gordon could wind up before a jury in Texas.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>