<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890828-0108 </DOCNO><DD> = 890828 </DD><AN> 890828-0108. </AN><HL> Acts to Save Elephant Imperil Other Breed@  ---@  Bans on Ivory Threatens 1,000@  Hong Kong Carvers, Traders@  ----@  By Steven Jones@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/28/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> CANDA AFRIC EUROP JAPAN FREST </CO><IN> MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   International efforts to save the African elephant from extinction threaten to put Hong Kong's ivory carvers and traders out of business, industry officials say.    Since June, the U.S., the European Community and Japan have banned ivory imports, stripping the Hong Kong industry of its three major export markets. The government of this British colony suspended ivory imports in June. An international conference set for October could lead to a world-wide ban on ivory trade.    Hong Kong is a major center for ivory carving. About 1,000 craftsmen are employed to whittle the tusks of African elephants into traditional Chinese figures, jewelry and tourist gewgaws.    The colony also is heavily engaged in trading ivory, and conservationists accuse some traders of encouraging poaching of elephants in Africa, which they say is the major reason for the rapid reduction of herds.    According to a recent study by the Ivory Trade Review Group, there are 625,000 elephants left in Africa, half the number of a decade ago. The group estimates that at the current rate of decline, the elephant will be extinct in 10 to 15 years.    &quot;The prospects are very grim,&quot; says David Western, director of Wildlife Conservation International, a division of the New York Zoological Society.    Mr. Western recently visited Hong Kong and Japan, along with other members of the Ivory Trade Review Group, to hold seminars on the status of the elephant and on Asia's prominent role in the ivory trade. The review group was established by the World Conservation Union, and its study was funded by Wildlife Conservation International, the World Wide Fund for Nature and the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.    Critics say the study is biased, but others consider it to be the most complete survey of Africa's elephant population in eight years. Its bleak findings and outlook helped persuade individual EC countries and the U.S. to impose total bans in June. The 12-nation EC formally banned ivory imports last week.    Japan, the world's largest consumer of ivory, said in June that it would only import ivory directly from Africa's producing countries. Conservationists don't expect Japan to impose a complete ban on imports because of its own large community of carvers and strong demand for traditional ivory products such as chops and chopsticks.    The Ivory Trade Review Group calls Hong Kong &quot;the center of the world's ivory trade.&quot; In 1988, according to Hong Kong government figures, the colony imported 264 metric tons of raw ivory, valued at HK$190 million (US$24.4 million). Singapore, another prominent middleman in the ivory trade, was the main source of the imports, accounting for 112 tons. Less than half of Hong Kong's ivory imports come directly from Africa. Belgium and other European countries with former colonial ties to Africa are major suppliers of imported ivory.    Very little of the ivory imported in Hong Kong stays in the colony; domestic retail sales are only a small part of the export-oriented business. Hong Kong exported HK$248 million in worked ivory in 1988. The colony also exported 115 tons of raw ivory, valued at HK$157 million, in 1988, with Japan the main importer.    Hong Kong's suspension of imports wouldn't immediately hurt the local industry, providing it can find export markets. Colony traders, carvers and retailers are sitting on a huge stock of legally imported ivory -- an estimated 500 tons of raw ivory and 170 tons of worked ivory with a total value variously estimated at US$100 million to US$400 million. A government survey is under way to produce a clearer inventory.    What happens to this stock may depend on the October meeting in Switzerland of the Convention on the International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild Fauna and Flora, known as Cites.    The 102 member nations in Cites will decide whether to place the African elephant on Appendix I of its protected-species list, beginning in January. That would prohibit trade among member nations in ivory and other products made from the African elephant, such as elephant-skin shoes. The Asian elephant is already listed on Appendix I.    While international conservation groups such as the World Wide Fund and Friends of the Earth support a total ban on trade in elephant products, African countries are sharply divided on the question.    At a preliminary conference on the elephant held last month in Botswana, southern African states, which have a better record of managing their elephant herds than central and East African states, argued that a total ban on ivory trade would penalize them. They want an exemption from any Appendix I listing.    But conservationists and African states supporting a total ban say that southern African states serve as conduits for smuggled ivory and that smuggling would increase if those countries aren't included in the ban.    The southern states, including South Africa and Zimbabwe, and the Hong Kong industry also argue that the Ivory Trade Review Group's study is biased because its researchers focused on blighted East African states, and Kenya in particular.    As a result of the Botswana meeting, another review of the elephant population is now being conducted jointly by Cameroon and Canada. The two countries will make their report to Cites in October.    Not surprisingly, Hong Kong's ivory industry opposes the Appendix I listing. Lee Chat, chairman of the Hong Kong and Kowloon Ivory Manufacturers Association, says that &quot;transferring the elephant to Appendix I will only end legal trade in ivory; it won't stop illegal trade.&quot; His view is shared by others, who fear that an outright ban on legal trade will only cause ivory prices to rise and poaching to increase.    Conservationists charge that 80% of all ivory traded began as poached ivory and was made to appear legitimate by being smuggled or bribed through several intermediate destinations.    If Cites should decide to place the elephant on Appendix I, the Hong Kong industry wants some type of dispensation to allow for the trade in existing stock. &quot;If they will allow us to sell the existing stocks, it will permit a gradual retirement for the workers,&quot; says Dominic Ng, manager of Nathan Ivory Factory Ltd. Most carvers are older men, he says.    The Hong Kong government also will ask Cites for relief for the local industry. The government's suspension of raw-ivory imports is contingent on the outcome of the October meeting.    &quot;We support in general terms the upgrading of the elephant to Appendix I, providing we can dispose of existing stocks,&quot; says Tony Clark, principal assistant secretary for economic services.    David Melville, a conservation officer with the World Wide Fund in Hong Kong, says the organization might go along with a plan to let the colony's ivory companies sell existing stock over a set period of time, provided the government imposes stricter controls on the stock.    What conservationists fear is that unscrupulous local merchants would enlarge their stock through smuggling. Mr. Melville suggests that the government could monitor supply levels by establishing a bonded warehouse to house all privately held ivory. Both the government and industry are opposed to the idea and say the government-mandated inventory should be sufficient protection.    Japan stands to gain from Hong Kong's dilemma, Hong Kong traders and conservationists say. In announcing that it would only import ivory directly from Africa, Japan eliminated its usual Hong Kong middlemen. Japanese ivory carvers also will benefit from not having to compete with imported products from Hong Kong.    Even if Cites places the elephant on Appendix I, conservationists and Hong Kong traders expect that Japan will take out a &quot;reservation&quot; that allows it to continue to import ivory to supply a traditional craft. Japan used similar cultural arguments to justify whaling, despite protests from environmentalists.    Southern African states also are expected to take out reservations to continue exporting to Japan. &quot;Japan is being incredibly clever,&quot; says a conservationist. &quot;They may well end up with a monopoly on the ivory trade.&quot;    Indeed, there is already concern in the Hong Kong ivory trade that with the U.S. and European markets already closed, Japan could end up as the only consumer nation willing to buy the bulk of local stock, and would likely get it cheap.    To counter that possibility, Hong Kong plans to lobby European countries to see if they would buy part of the local stock.    Since joining Cites in 1976 and beefing up colony laws, Hong Kong's reputation on the treatment of endangered species has improved greatly. But there are a few ivory traders who reputedly are major figures in the poaching business. &quot;There are companies who are involved in illegal trade,&quot; concedes Mr. Lee of the ivory manufacturers association, &quot;but they operate outside Hong Kong.&quot;    Whatever the outcome of the current controversy, Mr. Ng of Nathan Ivory says Hong Kong ivory carvers are as committed to conserving the elephant as anyone. &quot;We have only one material to work with, so our concern for the elephant is deep.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>