<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880504-0002 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   POLISH STRIKERS DEMANDED reinstatement of the outlawed Solidarity union.    As Lech Walesa called on thousands of striking workers at Gdansk's Lenin shipyard to make their walkout a &quot;decisive protest,&quot; the strikers demanded the legalization of the banned labor federation nationwide. Warsaw called the demand for recognition of Solidarity, banned in 1981, &quot;not negotiable.&quot; The workers, who began striking Monday, also are seeking higher pay, release of political prisoners and reinstatement of fired activists. Riot police cordoned off the shipyard.    Workers at a railroad-car plant in Wroclaw staged a brief work stoppage as Poland's labor unrest, involving at least four strikes, appeared to spread.    ---   ISRAELI TROOPS CONDUCTED house-to-house searches in southern Lebanon.    The Israeli forces and their militia allies stormed the houses in search of Palestinian and other Moslem gunmen after advancing into southern Lebanon and occupying four villages. Dozens of people reportedly were detained. Security sources in Lebanon said the Israelis had pushed within a few miles of Syrian troops. Damascus ordered its estimated 16,000 soldiers in the Bekaa Valley on &quot;maximum alert&quot; shortly after Israel launched the operation.    The White House expressed concern about the Israeli incursion into Lebanon and called for the withdrawal of all foreign troops from Lebanese territory.    ---   DUKAKIS DEFEATED Jackson in Democratic primaries in Ohio and Indiana.    Partial returns showed the Massachusetts governor with 65% of the vote in Ohio to Jackson's 24%. In Indiana, Dukakis was ahead 68% to 24%. Jackson, however, won the presidential contest in the District of Columbia by a wide margin. The results brought Dukakis's delegate total close to 1,500, fewer than 600 short of the 2,081 delegates he'll need to capture the Democratic Party's nomination.    Vice President Bush, who clinched the GOP presidential nomination last week, was unchallenged in the three Republican primary elections.    ---   The Government Ethics Office launched an investigation into a letter signed by Attorney General Meese and sent to 30,000 people encouraging them to attend a conference in Japan. The U.S. sponsor of the forum is a profit-making organization. The letter was written on Justice Department stationery.    ---   Reagan said he has never based any policy or decision on astrological forecasts, but didn't deny consulting the writings of astrologers. The White House also acknowledged that Nancy Reagan has an &quot;interest in astrology&quot; that influences the advice she gives about the president's activities.    ---   Immigration officials reported a surge in applications by undocumented aliens seeking legal residency under an amnesty program that expires today. Nearly 1.4 million illegal immigrants, mostly Mexicans, have applied for amnesty with claims of near-continuous residence in the U.S. beginning before Jan. 1, 1982.    ---   The House Foreign Affairs panel cleared legislation barring all U.S. investment in white-ruled South Africa and imposing a near-total trade embargo against that country. The measure, approved 27-14, was sent to the full House for debate.    ---   Twenty-four federal agencies presented to Congress drug-testing plans for government employees, ranging from the White House chief of staff to secretaries and butlers. A group of Justice Department attorneys threatened legal action to overturn the program requiring random tests.    ---   A Philadelphia grand jury declared that Mayor Wilson Goode and his aides displayed &quot;morally reprehensible behavior&quot; in a 1985 siege and police bombing of a home occupied by the radical group MOVE. The panel, however, didn't return criminal indictments. Eleven people were killed and 61 houses in the area were destroyed in the incident.    ---   Sotheby's auction house completed a 10-day sale of more than 10,000 items owned by artist Andy Warhol, who died in February 1987. The auction of Warhol's vast collection fetched $25.3 million, considerably higher than the $10 million to $15 million that Sotheby's had anticipated.    ---   Angolan peace talks opened in London, with delegations from South Africa, Angola, Cuba and the U.S. describing the negotiating session as friendly and constructive. The region's two rebel groups weren't invited to the two days of unprecedented talks, aimed at finding a formula to withdraw South African and Cuban troops from Angola.    ---   Philippine President Aquino said Manila would consider a request by the ailing mother of ousted leader Marcos to allow him to return from exile in Hawaii. Marcos's mother, hospitalized with pneumonia and diabetes, made her &quot;dying wish&quot; in a letter to Aquino's office. The U.S. said it wasn't aware of Marcos's plans.    ---   The EPA reported that more areas have failed to meet federal clean air standards for ozone, a major part of smog. The agency's annual list of cities violating the national standards showed that 68 cities didn't comply with ozone goals last year. Carbon monoxide pollution, however, has declined slightly, the EPA said.    ---   Boris Yeltsin called for &quot;revolutionary ideas&quot; to spur political and economic changes in the Soviet Union. The ousted Moscow Communist Party chief, in an interview with a Soviet newspaper, said that Gorbachev's modernization process had entered a &quot;decisive stage,&quot; and that people were awaiting tangible changes.    ---   Pro-French loyalists warned of full-scale conflict with Kanak separatists in the South Pacific island chain of New Caledonia if Melanesian gunmen fail to release nearly two dozen hostages. The captors have demanded talks with the Paris government aimed at independence for the French territory. </TEXT></DOC>