<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880902-0149 </DOCNO><HL> Living With AIDS: Thanks to New Drugs, Patients Are Surviving And Working Longer --- They Are a Greater Presence In the Workplace Today; Employers Are Adapting --- The Costs of Chronic Illness </HL><AUTHOR> Roger Ricklefs (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> PHA </IN><TEXT>   Last year, Adrian Kellard lost 30 pounds, spent two weeks in a hospital -- and learned he has AIDS.    But since then, the 29-year-old sculptor hasn't laid eyes on a sickbed. Relying on the drugs now used to treat AIDS, he continues his art work full time. To supplement his income, he spends one day a week making salads in a restaurant. He has enough energy left over to lift weights in a gym.    &quot;AIDS is very different from what I expected,&quot; says the husky New Yorker, who has regained the weight he lost. &quot;I don't even feel sick.&quot;    As Mr. Kellard's experience suggests, many people with AIDS are living -- and staying active -- longer than once seemed possible. For patients, that can mean hope of surviving long enough to see a cure. For society, the improving prospects of AIDS patients mean living more closely with AIDS than ever before. Quite often now, AIDS isn't the gaunt young man dying in a hospital. It is the guy you work with sitting next to you at lunch.    &quot;We find very close to 100% {of employees with AIDS} now return to work after diagnosis,&quot; says Robert N. Beck, an executive vice president of Bank of America in San Francisco, a unit of BankAmerica Corp. Four or five years ago, only 20% or 30% ever saw their desks again, he says.    While comprehensive national figures don't exist, it is clear that people are living longer with AIDS.    In San Francisco, one of the cities hit hardest by the disease, the median survival period after diagnosis has increased to 15 months from 10 months or so through 1985, says George Lemp, who heads the AIDS surveillance branch of the San Francisco Public Health Department. As of last year, 26% to 28% of the city's AIDS patients were surviving two years or more, up from just 14% in 1985. A study of New York patients concluded that more than 15% would survive five years, and some already have lived longer than that.    Many patients still die relatively quickly. And some doctors speculate that earlier diagnosis in certain instances can make it seem that patients are living longer. But physicians agree that the drug AZT, introduced as an AIDS treatment early last year and currently taken by 20,000 patients throughout the world, is prolonging lives. Other drugs are improving the treatment and prevention of specific ailments associated with AIDS, especially pneumocystis carinii pneumonia, or PCP, the biggest killer. Among PCP patients in the New York study, the chances of surviving for one year after the onset of AIDS increased from 18.2% for those diagnosed in 1981 to 48.5% for those diagnosed in 1985.    &quot;When people were diagnosed two years ago, they prepared themselves for death,&quot; says Lewis Katoff, the director of client services at the Gay Men's Health Crisis in New York. &quot;Now they are preparing to live with AIDS.&quot;    At present, longer survival may simply postpone debilitation and terminal suffering. But patients hope that medical advances will turn AIDS into a manageable disease like diabetes. Their goal is to become chronically ill.    Nick Pippin is one of the AIDS patients who are staying active years after diagnosis, and who feel that this is the most constructive time of their lives. As a freckle-faced all-American-boy type, Mr. Pippin once earned as much as $60,000 a year acting in commercials for Stove Top Stuffing and Nathan's Famous hot dogs. But three years ago, he fell ill. And he says he was told he would die within 18 months.    &quot;I was frantically living with issues of death. Then came anger and depression,&quot; he says. &quot;And after all this Sturm und Drang, you are left watching reruns of 'I Love Lucy.' You wonder, what do I do now?&quot;    Mr. Pippin's answer was to start an acting group, the People With AIDS Theater Workshop, whose members all have AIDS. When Mr. Pippin was hospitalized at New York University Medical Center, he found space in the hospital to continue rehearsals. With a blend of serious and sardonic skits, the group aims to show audiences what AIDS is like in daily life. The company has performed in schools, churches and a New York cabaret.    The 33-year-old Mr. Pippin must struggle with his company's financial needs and his own AIDS-related conditions: chronic bronchitis, anemia, arthritis so severe that he needs a wheelchair, and a loss of peripheral vision that may lead to blindness. But, he says, &quot;This project has kept me going. My life is worthwhile because of it.&quot;    The treatments that have made it possible for Mr. Pippin to live and work and look forward to the future are having their effects on U.S. employers, too. Besides keeping patients in the work force longer, they are lowering the medical costs of AIDS -- at least for the time being. Three years ago, studies of early patients estimated the medical cost of an AIDS case (from diagnosis to death) could run as high as $147,000. But in a new government study, costs have declined to about $57,000.    Shorter hospital stays, better medicines and the aggressive use of home care all have reduced the bill for some employers even more, especially in the West. Bank of America says its lifetime medical costs per AIDS case plunged to $17,000 in 1986 from twice that figure the previous year.    But improved treatments are also dealing a financial wild card. Given the widespread use of AZT since early last year, Bank of America's per-case figure rose for 1987 to $25,000. (The drug currently costs a patient about $8,000 a year.) With new drugs and treatments available to stave off death, patients eventually may live for many years -- at what dollar cost nobody can estimate. &quot;We expect costs to continue to rise,&quot; says Bank of America's Mr. Beck. &quot;This is one of those uncontrollable things.&quot;    As AIDS patients live longer, they are more in evidence in the workplace. Nathaniel H. Pier, a New York physician, says 60% to 70% of his AIDS patients are still at work a year after diagnosis, compared with 20% two years ago.    Even more AIDS patients are on the job than their co-workers imagine. Unsure of how his colleagues would react, a broker at a large New York securities firm says he has kept his illness a secret from colleagues for a year and a half. A New York marketing consultant says he sometimes discloses his illness to clients he knows well -- but only after he sounds them out.    Some patients, such as a New York salesman, are driven to keep working. &quot;In the examination room, he was one big Kaposi's Sarcoma lesion,&quot; says the salesman's doctor, Peter A. Seitzman, referring to the purple skin lesions formed by the AIDS-related skin cancer. &quot;He had his whole face covered with makeup {to cover the lesions}, and he had lost a lot of his hair.&quot; Yet the salesman continued working until three days before he died, Dr. Seitzman says.    Leon Washington, a New York chef, adds: &quot;If I hadn't gone back to work, I wouldn't be {alive} today.&quot; Diagnosed two years ago, Mr. Washington says he spent three months in a hospital and stayed off the job a year. &quot;I felt I had become a burden to my friends. I would go a whole week without talking to anybody,&quot; he says. &quot;I thought about death constantly. A lot of times, I was afraid to go to sleep for fear I wouldn't wake up.&quot;    But with AZT and other drugs, Mr. Washington says he gained strength and &quot;got bored staying at home.&quot; Besides his full-time job supervising a meal program for AIDS patients, he now does volunteer work for the AIDS programs of two churches; he swims and rides horses. &quot;The harder you fight, the better your chances,&quot; he contends.    Many who have to quit full-time jobs still try to keep their hand in. A year after he contracted AIDS in 1985, physician Barry Gingell gave up his medical practice for lack of energy. But now Dr. Gingell works as part-time director of medical information for the Gay Men's Health Crisis, editing a medical-treatment newsletter. (The association has several AIDS patients on its staff of nearly 100.) So as not to dissipate his energy commuting, Dr. Gingell often works at home on his computer. &quot;Those who keep working seem to do better,&quot; he says.    Having observed the therapeutic value of work in treating AIDS, two New York University Medical Center physicians recently founded an organization, Multitasking Systems Inc., which plans to employ AIDS patients to perform office copying and desktop publishing services.    Workers with AIDS still must deal with widespread discrimination and fearful colleagues. At a wholesale flower business in New York, a florist who had contracted AIDS suddenly found his workbench moved to the end of the room, away from his coworkers. After enduring that indignity for several days, the florist lost his temper and smashed a flowerpot against the wall, says Leon J. Warshaw, the executive director of the New York Business Group on Health, an employer group. The next day, the man's bench was moved back where it belonged.    As more AIDS patients seek to go on working, many companies are trying to adapt. For starters, they are less inclined than employers were in the first years of the AIDS epidemic to rid themselves of AIDS patients by putting them on disability right away and pushing them out the door, says B.J. Stiles, the president of the National Leadership Coalition on AIDS in Washington.    To keep those flowerpots from flying, companies more and more try to prepare employees for working with AIDS patients. Digital Equipment Corp., in Maynard, Mass., has a man running its AIDS efforts full time. The computer maker offers managers a day or half a day of AIDS-education, which often includes question-and-answer sessions with AIDS patients.    More typically, Morgan Guaranty Trust Co., in New York, has a one-hour education program to assure employees that AIDS isn't casually transmissible, says William J. Schneider, the company's health services director. Like Bank of America and many other companies, Morgan Guaranty, a unit of J.P. Morgan andamp; Co., also restructures jobs and working hours to help employees with AIDS continue to work as long as they feel able to.    Levi Strauss andamp; Co., in San Francisco, often provides individual and group counseling to help employees deal with coworkers returning from the hospital with AIDS. &quot;People wonder what to say and what to do,&quot; says Yvonne Ellison-Sandler, the clothing maker's director of employee assistance. &quot;AIDS raises all kinds of issues about one's own death,&quot; she adds.    Employers say anxiety about working with AIDS patients has diminished, particularly where workers have had direct experience with the disease. Jacqueline Taeschler is an associate manager of the department of the Metropolitan Museum of Art that reproduces artworks for sale. She says that none of her staff members &quot;expressed any anxiety about contagion&quot; when David A. Baughman, a highly regarded master craftsman who has AIDS, wanted to stay on the job.    &quot;We are in New York, and practically everyone knows someone with AIDS now,&quot; Ms. Taeschler says. Mr. Baughman says the museum's eagerness to keep him on the job sharply improved his morale -- and probably his health. In a year he has missed less than two weeks' work. </TEXT></DOC>