<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870922-0088 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PNH GOVMTNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)UTILITIES (UTI) </IN><DATELINE> MANCHESTER, N.H.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. prides itself on its ability to sell junk bonds for almost any company. But Drexel met its match last May when it tried to help Public Service Co. of New Hampshire.    Drexel set out to raise $150 million in short-term debt for the utility, the principal owner of the stalled Seabrook nuclear plant. But even at a lofty interest rate of 17.5%, Drexel could raise only $100 million -- and of that Drexel itself had to chip in $21.5 million.    PS of New Hampshire is rapidly becoming the Brazil of utilities. After more than a decade of lending money to keep Seabrook alive, Wall Street has finally slammed the door on the company. Unable to get new loans, PS of New Hampshire says it is &quot;likely&quot; to default next month on interest payments due on some of its $1.5 billion debt.    Unless debt holders agree to take interest payments in common stock and make other concessions as part of a restructuring proposal that the utility unveiled last Friday, PS of New Hampshire will become the first major utility to file a bankruptcy petition in nearly 50 years, it says. &quot;We are in a heap of trouble,&quot; says Robert J. Harrison, its chief executive.    Causing the trouble, of course, is Seabrook. PS of New Hampshire has a 35.6% stake -- which amounts to 70% of its total assets -- in a finished nuclear plant that generates neither electricity nor revenue. When PS of New Hampshire broke ground in 1976, the cost of building two reactors on the New Hampshire coast was pegged at less than $2 billion. One reactor was scratched last November, and the tab for the remaining unit, swollen by financing charges, has soared to $5 billion.    For PS of New Hampshire investors, for its customers and for other New England utilities, a filing for protection against creditors would make a bad situation worse. It would eliminate what little value remains in PS of New Hampshire shares, which have plunged 50% in the past 18 months and haven't paid dividends for three years. It could force the company to sell its stakes in plants that produce some of its cheapest power -- pushing up its electric rates. And it would add to uncertainty over the future of Seabrook, an already-uncertain project that New England utilities say is crucial to meet the region's growing demand for electricity.    What's more, a bankruptcy filing would raise a host of unanswered questions. Who would set rates? What would happen to Seabrook's pending application for an operating license? How would a bankruptcy judge weigh the competing interests of creditors and consumers?    &quot;There's a tremendous amount of uncertainty,&quot; says Samuel Huntington, the chairman of New England Electric System, of Westborough, Mass., which owns 10% of Seabrook. (Seabrook is owned jointly by 11 New England utilities, but none of the others has as much of its assets committed to it as PS of New Hampshire.)    PS of New Hampshire -- now scrambling to avoid going to court -- describes bankruptcy proceedings as a catastrophe. It is buying newspaper ads carrying a photo of a glum-looking Mr. Harrison -- &quot;They told me to look stern,&quot; he says -- over a headline that warns in inch-high type: &quot;New Hampshire's Well-Being Is Now At Risk.&quot; (Complains Paul McEachern, a Democratic gubernatorial candidate: &quot;What kind of company is it that spends a quarter of a million dollars in high-powered PR to tell us it is broke?&quot;)    Despite close calls, PS of New Hampshire has avoided bankruptcy court before -- and it may again. But this time, some of its main backers among New Hampshire politicians are running for cover. The president and majority leader of the state senate are demanding Mr. Harrison's resignation. Max Hugel, a Republican activist and former Central Intelligence Agency official, is calling Seabrook a &quot;monument to stupidity, arrogance and mismanagement.&quot; Even Gov. John Sununu, a longtime PS of New Hampshire defender, is distancing himself from it.    Surprisingly, some utility executives, regulators and analysts say the ill effects of a bankruptcy filing on financial markets would be limited largely to PS of New Hampshire securities. For securities of other utilities, Peter Bradford, the chairman of the New York Public Service Commission, comments, &quot;The impact? Virtually none.&quot;    Mark D. Luftig, a Salomon Brothers analyst, agrees: &quot;It would have some repercussions on the companies finishing nukes, but not major ones,&quot; he says. Adds Mr. Huntington: &quot;Three or four years ago, it would have had a severe impact because we'd all be tainted. Wall Street no longer puts all utilities in the same basket.&quot;    Still, predicting the market's reaction is risky. A PS of New Hampshire filing &quot;would raise questions about whether the regulatory system works,&quot; says Douglas C. Bauer, senior vice president of Boston Edison Co., which hasn't any financial interest in Seabrook. Despite all the forewarning, he says, &quot;The industry and investors would be surprised. So many other companies so perilously close at the 11th hour avoided it.&quot;    Whatever happens to PS of New Hampshire, &quot;Seabrook&quot; is destined to be one of those long-lived names, like Edsel or Chernobyl, that convey gobs of history. Once just the name of a blue-collar beach resort, &quot;Seabrook&quot; now conjures up another turning point -- and the clouded future -- of nuclear power in the U.S. Uneasy investors, unsympathetic regulators and persistent foes of nuclear power have stopped its advance. Today, no utility would dream of beginning a nuclear project.    So, the battle has shifted to plants that are finished but not yet in commercial operation: Long Island Lighting Co.'s Shoreham as well as Seabrook. Neither can get final clearance from the Nuclear Regulatory Commission because the governors of New York and Massachusetts, respectively, refuse to cooperate with evacuation planning. And although neither plant is dead, a successful campaign to kill either one would bolster efforts by nuclear foes to shut plants already in operation.    &quot;There's a certain contagion in all this,&quot; says Harold Finger, president of the U.S. Council for Energy Awareness, a nuclear-industry group.    Seabrook is undeniably unpopular. A PS of New Hampshire poll of its customers last month found 56% against operation of the plant and only 27% in favor. Nevertheless, it may yet go into service. Even if PS of New Hampshire seeks bankruptcy-court protection, a judge would surely protect its major asset, Mr. Harrison says.    And, after all, Seabrook -- at least Unit 1 -- has been the nuclear plant that refused to die. When PS of New Hampshire had a brush with bankruptcy court three years ago, construction stopped. But the utility survived by suspending dividends on common and preferred stock and selling junk bonds. After a new construction manager was hired, Seabrook began to meet cost and schedule targets. For a time last year, it seemed to be in the home stretch.    Then came Chernobyl. Citing the Soviet nuclear disaster, Massachusetts Gov. Michael S. Dukakis last fall stopped his staff from working on an evacuation plan, on the ground that safe evacuation from Seabrook was impossible. Because the plant is just two miles north of the Massachusetts line, the governor's move blocks the NRC from granting a final license.    New England utility executives predict that eventually the NRC will change its rules and eliminate the governor's veto power. But even if they are correct, the tenacity of Seabrook's opponents is likely to delay commercial operation at least until 1989 -- and time is running out for PS of New Hampshire.    More than five years ago, New Hampshire utility regulators warned that the company's &quot;financial brinksmanship&quot; might someday trigger a bankruptcy filing. But the company didn't heed the warning. Since then, it has more than doubled its long-term debt.    Perhaps the most devastating in a series of devastating developments for PS of New Hampshire was a 1979 New Hampshire law prohibiting it from billing consumers for &quot;construction work in progress.&quot; Unable to charge customers for Seabrook, the company borrowed more and more. Today, because of that law, the state sets electric rates as if PS of New Hampshire had only $600 million invested in its business even though the company's costs reflect its full $2.9 billion investment. The company itself concedes that raising rates now to cover its full Seabrook investment would induce big customers to generate their own electricity. (In fact, the company says it expects to write off as much as $500 million of its Seabrook investment because regulators aren't likely to permit it to pass along all the costs of the project to consumers.)    Yet despite belt-tightening, the company says its cash won't last much beyond year-end without some action. It is making a last-ditch attempt to avoid bankruptcy court. From the New Hampshire Supreme Court, the utility wants a ruling that the 1979 law is unconstitutional. From regulators, it wants a $71 million, 15% rate increase on top of a 5% increase earlier this year. From holders of $1.1 billion in third-mortgage bonds and unsecured debt, it wants an agreement to accept interest payments in common stock and zero-coupon bonds until Seabrook goes into service.    These are substantial hurdles. In person, Mr. Harrison exudes confidence about avoiding a bankruptcy filing. In Securities and Exchange Commission filings, however, the company has said it will be &quot;extremely difficult&quot; to implement all those steps in time. And even if it can do so, it says it may still end up in bankruptcy court in a few years. Even if it gets all that it is seeking from courts, regulators and investors, it says its cash will drop as low as $17 million in some months, a slim margin for a $500-million-a-year company unable to get a bank loan.    Some New England utility executives are betting that the company will avoid the filing, citing its awesome financial agility in the past. Says Mr. Huntington of New England Electric: &quot;We've been impressed over the years how well they have managed to skirt the edge of disaster.&quot;    Others aren't so sure, given the size of the problems and the number of players involved. &quot;It certainly doesn't look like they can put it together,&quot; says Paul Tsongas, a former U.S. senator from Massachusetts long interested in energy issues.    Still, the state supreme court has agreed to hear the company's case promptly. The Public Utilities Commission, which begins hearings on the rate-increase petition early next month, has surprised even the company by ruling that it legally could grant a temporary emergency rate increase no matter what the court ruled. And for winning concessions from holders of its $1.2 billion in unsecured debt, the bankruptcy threat may be PS of New Hampshire's best weapon.    &quot;Bankruptcy traditionally isn't a profitable way {for creditors} to deal with this. It takes a long time. It's expensive,&quot; says Felix Smith, who manages a $2.6 billion junk-bond portfolio for Boston-based Putnam Cos. His portfolio includes PS of New Hampshire securities with a current market value of more than $30 million.    Nevertheless, it isn't clear whether enough debt-holders will go along with the utility's complex restructuring plan. The company wants holders of 85% of the debt involved to accept the plan -- though it might settle for somewhat less, if necessary. Mr. Smith, for one, says the proposal &quot;doesn't sit well with me,&quot; and he indicates he will seek modifications. &quot;This isn't the final act by any means,&quot; he adds. &quot;We are going to have to establish some kind of negotiations here.&quot;    Over the past few years, Wall Street has reacted slowly to PS of New Hampshire's worsening condition. Since 1984, junk-bond mutual funds, insurance companies and other institutional investors have lent the company more than $750 million. But as Drexel ran into trouble raising short-term money last spring, prices of PS of New Hampshire securities tumbled. A 17.5% debenture with a face value of $1,000, which had been as high as $1,118 in March, fell below $700 in late June and plunged below $490 yesterday. Conceding the obvious, PS of New Hampshire this summer canceled plans to sell more long-term debt and instead began to draft a bankruptcy petition -- just in case. </TEXT></DOC>