<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880429-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE WHITE HOUSE BACKED AWAY from insisting that Noriega leave Panama.    In an apparent policy shift, the administration suggested that it would settle for the Panamanian strongman's resignation as military chief. A top State Department official was reported to be visiting Panama for the second time in two weeks for talks with Noriega. In Panama, authorities seized 30 opposition activists accused of planning a violent anti-Noriega campaign, and U.S. personnel were warned to avoid travel as protesters set up barricades in Panama City.    A federal judge in Miami ruled that Noriega could challenge a drug-trafficking indictment against him without surrendering to U.S. authorities.    ---   POLAND'S POLITBURO SENT its senior labor official to the scene of a strike.    The appearance at the Lenin steel mill of the Communist government official and a top aide signaled Warsaw's growing concern over mounting labor unrest at the plant near Krakow and a threatened strike at a heavy machinery plant in a southeastern town. Management at the steel plant, after an unsuccessful 15-minute negotiating session, threatened to call in riot police, but strike leaders refused to end the work stoppage.    Police in Krakow dispersed students demonstrating in support of the workers, witnesses said, and opposition activists held a similar rally in Wroclaw.    ---   Iran-Contra defendants rejected a compromise in their attempts to gain access to classified documents, and the special prosecutor in the case said disclosure of the material could jeopardize lives. Judge Gerhard Gesell has warned the administration that charges against Lt. Col. North and three others may be dropped if access is denied.    ---   Najibullah said that Soviet military advisers would stay in Afghanistan following Moscow's troop withdrawal and that U.S.backed rebels would never be allowed to assume power. Separately, the Soviet Union accused the U.S. of violating recently signed Afghan accords by shipping new arms to rebels fighting Najibullah's regime.    ---   White House Chief of Staff Baker said he has kept Reagan informed of problems surrounding Attorney General Meese and allowed critics access to the president. A senior administration official said the Meese issue will reach a &quot;crossroads&quot; when a special prosecutor's report is released, probably in a few weeks.    ---   The Senate approved a $1.1 billion authorization bill to fight AIDS, setting out the first national strategy to combat the fatal disease. The bill would declare AIDS to be a &quot;public health emergency&quot; and require the Department of Health and Human Services to submit an annual plan of action to fight the disease.    ---   A midair explosion injured at least 59 of 94 people aboard an Aloha Air inter-island flight over Hawaii. A radio report said one person was sucked out of the jet before it landed in Maui, and 12 were missing.    ---   Managua proposed a 30-day extension of a two-month cease-fire as peace talks resumed with Contra leaders in the Nicaraguan capital, but rebels immediately rejected the offer. A spokeswoman said the current truce doesn't expire until the end of May and the Sandinistas should propose an extension then if one is needed.    ---   Israeli military officials debated the effectiveness of their security zone in southern Lebanon following two clashes this week with Arab guerrillas who had managed to slip through the zone. Five guerrillas and two Israeli soldiers were killed in the fighting. Separately, Israeli troops killed a Palestinian in a violent West Bank protest.    ---   The Senate Armed Services panel voted to approve the administration's $299.5 billion fiscal 1989 military budget, but juggled funding among various arms projects within the plan. The budget matches spending levels hammered out in last year's budget summit. The spending plan must now be reconciled with a House version.    ---   The Red Cross recommended that donated blood be screened, once an effective means of testing is devised, for a virus linked to a form of adult leukemia. The Red Cross said that, based on a screening of the nation's blood supply, blood transfusions in the U.S. carry a small but &quot;not insignificant&quot; chance of transmitting the virus.    ---   The Senate blocked a seven-month extension of the amnesty program for undocumented immigrants, which is to end at midnight Wednesday. The House last week narrowly agreed to extend the program through Nov. 30. Nearly 1.2 million undocumented immigrants, about 30% fewer than had been projected, have applied for the amnesty.    ---   China is increasing cash subsidies to city residents to offset rising food prices and prevent urban unrest. The program begins next week in Shanghai.    ---   Carlucci strongly criticized a resolution passed by Denmark's Parliament that requires all ships entering its territorial waters to disclose whether they are carrying nuclear weapons. The defense secretary was speaking on the last day of a NATO policy meeting at which the allies agreed to modernize short-range nuclear forces.    ---   A Japanese cholesterol drug can block the binding of the AIDS virus to its human target cells, thwarting infection, laboratory tests indicate. The drug, dextran sulfate, has been sold over-the-counter in Japan for two decades. A report on the test results was published in this week's edition of the journal Science.    ---   Pravda said ideology chief Yegor Ligachev, the Kremlin's No. 2 leader, has been absent from two policy meetings he normally would have been expected to attend. A Politburo member who is a close aide to Soviet leader Gorbachev attended in his place, reviving speculation that Ligachev may have lost an internal power struggle.    ---   Shell Oil Co. acknowledged that an illegal practice allowed 175,000 gallons of crude oil to seep into bird sanctuaries and bays north of San Francisco, killing some waterfowl and threatening others during their nesting season. Shell said it left open a valve on an oil-tank rainwater drainpipe, which broke and allowed the oil to escape. </TEXT></DOC>