<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870430-0030 </DOCNO><HL> House Clears Gephardt's Trade-Retaliation Measure;Markets Fall in Response on Fear of Renewed Inflation---Item Passes on 218-214 Vote,Is Likely to Fail in SenateBut Sponsor Will Benefit---By Monica LangleyStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN FRESTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The controversial trade-retaliation amendment sponsored by Rep. Richard Gephardt passed the House by a razor-thin margin as lawmakers continued work on sweeping trade legislation.    The Missouri Democrat, with crucial support from House Democratic leaders, succeeded in persuading colleagues to approve his proposal, which would force countries that achieve large trade surpluses with the U.S. through unfair trade practices to reduce those imbalances by 10% a year or face retaliation.    The outcome was uncertain until the final seconds of voting on the amendment, which was approved 218-214. Seventeen Republicans voted for the amendment, and 55 Democrats voted against it.    In its current form, the Gephardt amendment is less likely to become law than to become a political vehicle for Rep. Gephardt's presidential candidacy. The Senate is unlikely to approve the Gephardt amendment, although a variation could survive a House-Senate conference before final congressional passage.    The Reagan administration, however, which had lobbied vigorously against the amendment in recent days, probably will veto any trade legislation containing the Gephardt amendment or a close substitute.    The House is continuing to vote on amendments to the trade package, and final House passage is expected today without significant changes in the bill. The legislation is aimed at opening foreign markets to U.S. companies and requiring greater presidential action to resolve trade problems. It also would expand programs to aid workers displaced by imports and loosen export controls on high technology.    Yesterday's passage of the Gephardt amendment, aimed largely at Japan, came as Japanese Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone arrived here for two days of talks with President Reagan and top administration policy makers in an effort to resolve a bevy of U.S.-Japanese trade and economic disputes.    The Gephardt amendment would require the administration to identify foreign countries that have huge trade surpluses with the U.S., including Japan, Taiwan and South Korea. If those surpluses have been achieved through a pattern of unfair trade practices, the president would have six months to negotiate an end to trade barriers or retaliate on a dollar-for-dollar basis against remaining barriers. He also would be required to force countries that hadn't removed their market barriers to reduce their surpluses 10% a year through 1992 by imposing tariffs or quotas.    The administration has criticized the automatic-retaliation mechanism as unduly tying the president's hands in resolving trade disputes. U.S. Trade Representative Clayton Yeutter said, &quot;The closeness of the vote on the Gephardt amendment indicates there are many members of both parties who recognize its dangers.&quot;    President Reagan, who had invited more than a dozen legislators to the White House hours before the vote in a final effort to block passage, said in a statement that he was &quot;pleased by the size and strength of the vote against protectionism and mandatory retaliation.&quot; He pledged to work for a bill that won't &quot;ignite a series of trade wars.&quot;    Privately, however, White House officials acknowledged that the outcome increases the chances that President Reagan may have to take the politically difficult step of vetoing whatever trade bill emerges from Congress. The House bill currently is unacceptable to President Reagan, and White House strategists fear the Senate version ultimately may contain even harsher protectionist provisions.    But the narrowness of the vote on the Gephardt amendment increases the likelihood that Congress's final trade package will include a more moderate provision proposed by Ways and Means Committee Chairman Dan Rostenkowski (D., Ill.).    That proposal, like the Gephardt amendment, would require the president to identify countries that have huge trade surpluses with the U.S. and to negotiate an end to those imbalances. If no agreement is reached, the president would be authorized to retaliate on a dollar-for-dollar basis against a country's trade barriers. But unlike the Gephardt amendment, Rep. Rostenkowski's proposal wouldn't mandate automatic reductions of 10% a year.    Following almost two hours of debate on his amendment, Rep. Gephardt gave a powerful speech. &quot;Look at the trends and we are beginning to be in a state of decline,&quot; the presidential candidate said on the House floor. &quot;We've got to motivate our people. The first step in making this country competitive again is to say you have an equal chance, that those foreign markets are open.&quot;    But on a voice vote after his speech, the &quot;no&quot; votes appeared to have won. Rep. Gephardt asked for a roll-call vote. At one point, it looked as if the amendment would be defeated. Many lawmakers delayed their vote until the last few minutes of the roll call; House Speaker James Wright (D., Texas) voted in favor of the amendment in the final seconds. Rep. Rostenkowski led the 55 Democrats who voted against the measure.    Rep. Gephardt, at a news conference following the vote, insisted that his amendment wasn't protectionist despite being branded so by some Republicans. And he said: &quot;I just don't buy this idea that one action will throw financial markets. We can't go tip-toeing around worried about reaction in financial markets.&quot;    While some business groups said they were disturbed by the amendment's passage, organized labor claimed victory. Passage is &quot;a victory for self-defense and common sense on trade,&quot; United Auto Workers Union President Owen Bieber said in a statement. He added that the move is &quot;a strong signal that the political tide is turning toward fashioning an active, effective trade policy.&quot;    In other action on the trade bill yesterday, the House rejected a Republican-led attempt to strike most of the bill's banking section. Among other things, the bill would create a multilateral debt-management authority to purchase less-developed countries' debt from commercial banks at a discount and sell these loans in a secondary market. Republicans labeled this so-called international debt facility a bailout for the big banks.    The GOP effort also targeted a provision that would bar foreign companies from becoming primary dealers in U.S. government securities unless their governments give U.S. companies the same right in their countries. It is aimed at Japan, because the Federal Reserve Board recently accepted two Japanese firms as primary dealers.    The Republicans won backing from Georgia Democratic Rep. Doug Barnard, who said the securities provision would take &quot;key players out of the government bond market,&quot; thus hurting the Treasury's ability to sell securities and raising interest rates.    The challenge was defeated 239-187 on a largely party-line vote.    The House accepted an amendment to provide U.S. trade officials with a negotiating objective of granting trade benefits to countries that give American companies the same market access that the U.S. gives to those countries' companies. It also approved an amendment instructing the U.S. trade representative to report to Congress on ways to improve enforcement of restrictions against imports from Cuba. Imports from Cuba are banned under U.S. law.    As the House wraps up work on the trade bill, Prime Minister Nakasone is expected to unveil details of a $34.5 billion economic-stimulus package that the U.S. has been urging Tokyo to enact so that Japan can absorb more imports. He also is likely to announce specifics of a Japanese plan to provide between $20 billion and $30 billion to help developing countries and relieve the Third World debt problem. Tokyo already has agreed in principle to both proposals.    Meanwhile, the administration continued asserting that the U.S. won't lift its sanctions on Japanese electronic products and power tools until Tokyo provides &quot;hard evidence&quot; that Japanese companies are complying with the semiconductor trade accord signed by the two countries last summer. U.S. officials said the tariffs probably will remain in effect at least until June.    (See related story: &quot;Bond Prices, Futures, Dollar Drop Sharply on News; Stocks Lose Some Gains&quot; -- WSJ April 30, 1987) </TEXT></DOC>