<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871002-0057 </DOCNO><HL> Eight-Justice Supreme Court to DealWith Major Issues as New Term Starts---By Stephen WermielStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 10/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CSP UTX DJ KMTENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)AEROSPACE (ARO)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)PUBLISHING (PUB)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)RETAILING (RET)SUPREME COURT (SUP) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   When the Supreme Court opens its new term on Monday, it will be missing one justice, but it won't be lacking important issues.    Questions about antitrust, disclosure of merger negotiations, insider trading, liability of government contractors for injuries, and gray market imports highlight the court's agenda of important business cases.    For the first time since October 1971, the high court will begin the term with less than the full complement of nine justices. Justice Lewis Powell retired June 26, and President Reagan's nomination of Judge Robert Bork to take his seat has become a heated political battle in the Senate.    The Senate is unlikely to vote on the nomination until at least late October. By that time, the justices will have heard arguments in some 20% of the roughly 155 cases to be decided in the term that will end next June. If Judge Bork's nomination is rejected, the delay will be even longer.    The impact of a vacancy on the court is uncertain. But when Justice Powell missed 11 weeks due to illness in 1985, the high court tied 4-4 on five cases and ordered three others argued again.    Much of the debate over Judge Bork centers on whether he would tip the moderate-to-liberal balance of the court in a decidedly conservative direction. As a result, attention is also focused on the Supreme Court's three oldest members, who are also its most liberal: Justices William Brennan, 81 years old; Thurgood Marshall, 79; and Harry Blackmun, 78. All three were hospitalized during the summer for different problems, but they are all back at work and reported to be in better health.    Age and health weren't an impediment earlier this week, when the justices raced in record time through their first closed-door conference of the term, at which they voted on whether to hear argument or deny review to some 1,000 cases. Court sources say the conference, which in recent years lasted three or four days and last year lasted two days, was completed in one day.    The change of chief justice last year from Warren Burger to William Rehnquist is the main reason for the faster pace, court sources said. The results of the conference will be announced Monday.    But the justices have already filled half of their argument calendar, and these cases include a number that are of considerable importance to business and industry:    --Merger negotiations: The justices will decide when information about merger negotiations between companies is &quot;material&quot; to shareholders and must be disclosed under federal securities laws. The case arose from a shareholder suit accusing officials of Basic Inc. with making false statements before it was taken over in May 1979 by Combustion Engineering Inc. A ruling against Basic could impose significant new obligations on corporate officials to disclose preliminary merger talks.    --Contractor liability: The court will rule on when manufacturers of military equipment may avoid liability for accidents by asserting that they followed the details set by their government contracts. The case began as a lawsuit for damages filed against United Technologies Corp.'s Sikorsky aircraft division by the family of a man who drowned when the Marine helicopter he was co-piloting crashed.    --Antitrust issue: An important antitrust dispute presents the question of whether agreements between manufacturers and distributors to shut out other distributors, called vertical restraints, are automatically illegal, even where there is no evidence that any price-fixing is intended. The dispute is between Sharp Electronics Corp., a Sharp Corp. unit, and one of its former retailers in Houston, Business Electronics Corp.    The high court has ruled that price-fixing is automatically illegal, while some other practices, alleged to be anti-competitive, are unlawful only if they are unreasonable. The question for the court is whether an effort by a manufacturer to stop dealing with a price-cutting retailer is price-fixing or is simply sound business practice.    --Insider trading: In a case with great potential impact for the securities industry, the justices will review an appeal by R. Foster Winans, the former Wall Street Journal reporter for the &quot;Heard on the Street&quot; column, who was convicted of misappropriating information from the newspaper. The case may redefine the terminology of insider trading and affect a number of pending prosecutions against prominent brokers.    --Gray market imports: Customs regulations that permit the importation of some &quot;gray market&quot; goods into the U.S. raise another important legal issue for the high court. Gray market goods are those bearing international trademarks and imported by U.S. companies without the permission of companies holding similar or identical U.S. trademarks. The importers buy and sell gray market goods at reduced prices. The court will hear appeals by importers, including K mart Corp. and 47th Street Photo Inc. </TEXT></DOC>