<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880226-0136 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas: New Guerrilla Group Increases Peruvian Pressure Cooker </HL><AUTHOR> Carol Graham </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><DATELINE> LIMA, Peru  </DATELINE><TEXT>   On Jan. 27, the Lima office of the Associated Press was invaded by armed members of the Tupac Amaru Revolutionary Movement -- a fledgling guerrilla group named after an 18th-century Peruvian Indian revolutionary. AP personnel were forced to broadcast a message condemning the government and declaring support for a general strike, led by the Communist Party -- affiliated General Workers Confederation of Peru. The strike also was supported by the United Left, a coalition of Marxist parties.    Despite the unvarnished radical credentials of the strike force, it was not quite extreme enough for some Peruvians. The next day members of the nation's more established guerrilla group, Sendero Luminoso (Shining Path), disrupted a rally of the strike leaders in one of Lima's central plazas, throwing Molotov cocktails and shouting condemnations of the government's &quot;fascism&quot; and of the nonviolent left's &quot;revisionism.&quot; Such is today's Peru, rated third in a January U.S. State Department listing of countries with the greatest number of terrorist incidents. And the Tupac Amaru band -- known by its Spanish acronym, MRTA -- may boost this country's rating a notch higher.    Peru's political and economic situation has been in virtual turmoil since July when President Alan Garcia, in a poorly conceived measure, attempted to take the political initiative from the left by nationalizing the nation's banks. The measure caused widespread political reaction, and disrupted desperately needed private-sector cooperation. With inflation surging to triple-digit figures, reserves dwindling and labor unrest on the upsurge, the economic outlook is grim at best. As a result, Peruvians increasingly have turned to the informal economy, which employs at least 40% of the population. However, the extent to which the informal economy can act as the nation's social security system is limited, and out of frustration the poor and young increasingly are attracted to insurgent activities.    The urban activities of the Sendero Luminoso are steadily increasing. In late 1987, intelligence forces discovered the existence of one of the Lima headquarters of Socorro Popular (Popular Help), a group that since 1982 has served as a logistical arm for Sendero, providing lodgings and storing weapons. The group is rumored to have as many as 600 members. Meanwhile, Sendero members' activities during the general strike point to a new strategy of increased visibility and direct confrontation, tactics that previously were limited to the Andes region.    Despite its growing numbers, Sendero is an aberration in Peruvian society, due to its Pol Pot-like operations. The more people know about the movement, the more they are appalled by it. Some of its most recent victims include: the administrator of a successful cooperative in an impoverished sierra province, the head of a Lima communal kitchen and 24 Ayacucho men who, accused of being informers, were stabbed to death in front of their wives and children. Sendero asserts that it has no use for neutral peasants, particularly those who are too old to indoctrinate. Says one prominent leftist leader (who is justifiably afraid to be quoted by name): &quot;The more Sendero succeeds, the more society will be opposed to it.&quot;    Less extreme and, until now, far less active than Sendero Luminoso, the MRTA has more popular appeal. It is very open to the press, and has received a great deal of sympathy from youth movements, including the radical wing of the governing Apra party. So far it has been careful to project an image very different from Sendero, avoiding on principle the spilling of blood. When a policeman was killed during an MRTA attack on the Uruguayan Embassy, for example, the MRTA sent a note of apology.    A June 1984 armed bank robbery was the MRTA's premiere engagement. Leaflets found at the scene proclaimed the beginning of &quot;the war against the anti-popular government and Yankee imperialism.&quot; Populist President Garcia is labeled: &quot;The most dishonest and demagogic president in the nation's history.&quot;    Ironically, the movement's current leader, Victor Polay Campos, is a former member of the Apra party and participated in an Apra youth-leadership program with Mr. Garcia. Like Mr. Garcia, Mr. Polay Campos spent most of the '70s studying in France and Spain. In 1985, the year Mr. Garcia took power, Mr. Polay Campos returned to Peru a Marxist convinced that Apra was not the solution.    The membership of the MRTA is primarily young, urban and middle class, not unlike Colombia's M-19 guerrillas. In fact, that similarity is in substance as well as style. The MRTA publicly has declared its allegiance with the M-19 as well as with the Ecuadoran guerrilla group, Alfaro Vive. Also, most MRTA weapons confiscated by the Peruvian police are M-16 rifles, used by neither the Peruvian army nor the police. These rifles are used, however, by the M-19, most notably during the Palace of Justice raid in which half of Colombia's Supreme Court were killed. The U.S.-manufactured M-16s used in that attack were identified by their serial numbers as ones left behind in Vietnam and shipped to the Colombian subversives via the Nicaraguan Sandinistas.    As Sendero has been increasing its exposure in the cities, the MRTA has been increasing its activities in the countryside. In November, under the new leadership of Mr. Polay Campos, the MRTA launched into guerrilla warfare with its operation in the jungles of San Martin. It began planning on Oct. 4 -- the anniversary of the death of Che Guevara -- and then launched operations on Nov. 4 -- the anniversary of Tupac Amaru. The group believes that the San Martin jungle is for it what the Sierra Maestra was for Fidel Castro.    On Nov. 5, the group was able to take over the village of Juanjui virtually unopposed by the town's police. The entire operation was aired on the popular news program &quot;Panorama&quot;; the MRTA gleefully permitted journalists to accompany them during the operation. Mr. Garcia censored further showings and called a state of emergency in San Martin.    The military command in the region now claims that the MRTA suffered as many as 40 casualties, and that Mr. Polay Campos escaped to Colombia. However, the rest of the group has dispersed throughout the San Martin area, and in early January conducted a successful raid on a police post in Huacrachuco, making off with a large quantity of arms and munitions. The government's ineptitude, the desperate economic situation and the sympathy for the MRTA among radical political groups -- as well as its apparent logistical support from international Communists -- point to the probability of its support base increasing substantially.    All of this paints a dismal forecast for Peru. The nation's politicians, embroiled for months in in-fighting over technicalities in the bank-nationalization law, seem to lack the sense of responsibility and consensus to deal with the nation's pressing economic and social problems, much less the complex problems posed by the insurgent movements.    ---   Ms. Graham is a Ph.D. student in political science at Oxford University. </TEXT></DOC>