<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861203-0031 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> LATAM MDEST WNEWSAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Reagan administration, under growing political pressure, agreed to seek an independent counsel to investigate possible criminal violations stemming from secret arms sales to Iran and diversion of funds to the Nicaraguan rebels.    The decision, which was expected, came as President Reagan separately named Frank Carlucci, a former deputy secretary of defense, to succeed John Poindexter, who resigned last week as national security adviser amid the growing scandal.    Mr. Poindexter appeared at the second day of Senate Intelligence Committee hearings on the Iran imbroglio, but only briefly. It isn't known what transpired, but sources said he gave little or no testimony, and they reported that the committee planned to subpoena him in order to make him return, possibly as early as today. Mr. Poindexter reportedly was the focus of the Justice Department inquiry that led to the decision to seek a special prosecutor.    &quot;If illegal acts were undertaken, those who did so will be brought to justice,&quot; Mr. Reagan vowed during a nationally televised speech announcing the decision to seek a special prosecutor. Attorney General Edwin Meese, whose own preliminary investigation of the matter has been a focus of controversy, asserted that Mr. Reagan &quot;wants a full disclosure of all the facts&quot; and is committed to ferreting out &quot;any criminality whatsoever.&quot;    The decision to seek a special prosecutor was hurriedly announced even before a special federal appeals court panel here received the formal request from Mr. Meese. But it isn't likely to end the crisis gripping the administration, or to quiet critics who are demanding a further shake-up of senior White House aides.    Even some Republican congressional leaders, including Senate Foreign Relations Committee Chairman Richard Lugar (R., Ind.), contend that the Iranian arms affair has crippled U.S. foreign policy and badly damaged the administration's credibility.    By moving quickly to seek appointment of a special prosecutor with a broad mandate to look into every aspect of the widening scandal, the president and his top aides hope to demonstrate that they are determined to see all leads pursued thoroughly, and anyone found guilty of criminal wrongdoing prosecuted. The complex probe is certain to last for at least several months.    Senate Majority Leader Robert Dole (R., Kan.), who praised the call for a special prosecutor, suggested that &quot;the next step is up to Congress.&quot; Sen. Dole has been pushing for a special session of Congress to establish a select committee to look into the Iranian arms affair. The president, who alone could call a special session, has been noncommittal on the idea, but yesterday he did call on Congress to consolidate its own investigations of the situation under one committee.    Already, the Senate Intelligence Committee has been digging into the matter. On Monday, Lt. Col. Oliver North, Mr. Poindexter's aide whom President Reagan fired last week for his part in the arms scheme appeared. But sources close to Lt. Col. North said the former official invoked the Fifth Amendment, refusing to testify on the ground that doing so might be self-incriminating.    These sources suggested Lt. Col. North may have had another motive: they said he hopes that if criminal charges are brought against him, he can use knowledge he reportedly thinks he has implicating others to bargain for better treatment for himself.    President Reagan, Vice President George Bush and Chief of Staff Donald Regan have all flatly denied knowing that profits from Iranian arms sales were being funneled to the Contras. Nonetheless, White House officials admit they have been nearly paralyzed by the growing disclosures, and many Republican officials continue to demand Mr. Regan's resignation. Longtime Reagan political adviser Stuart Spencer and former Deputy Chief of Staff Michael Deaver have both been advising the president to clean house.    Mr. Regan has argued that his presence is necessary for the White House to maintain &quot;continuity.&quot; And one friend of President and Mrs. Reagan said, &quot;The president is dug in. He's crazy about Don Regan.&quot;    Mr. Regan's staff yesterday started a public offensive to counter criticism of their boss. &quot;The chief of staff has functioned very well,&quot; said Dennis Thomas, one of Mr. Regan's top aides. &quot;This is one of the best years the president has ever had, excepting Iran.&quot;    Mr. Meese, during a news conference to explain his reasons for seeking a court-appointed prosecutor, spent much of his time defending the Justice Department's handling of the case. He tried to play down allegations that Lt. Col. North may have destroyed certain documents before department investigators realized that criminal violations may have been involved in the diversion of millions of dollars to the Contras battling the Nicaraguan government.    &quot;We are satisfied that we obtained copies of all the evidence that was available&quot; in the National Security Council's files, Mr. Meese told reporters.    A three-judge panel has the final say over choosing an independent counsel and defining the scope of investigation. It also has full discretion about whether and when to release the Justice Department's formal request. But the judges are almost certain to grant the broad authority sought by Mr. Meese and to authorize release of the documents the department submitted in support of its request. That could come as early as the next few days. Justice officials still were drafting their submission to the court yesterday afternoon.    Mr. Meese suggested that his preliminary investigation uncovered evidence that at least one senior administration official may have broken the law in connection with the Iranian transactions. More generally, the attorney general went out of his way to emphasize that appointing an independent prosecutor would be the only way to avoid any &quot;possible conflict of interest,&quot; or &quot;even any possible implication&quot; of such a conflict that might arise if the Justice Department were to continue to run the investigation.    Six previous independent counsels have been appointed under the Ethics in Government Act of 1978. But yesterday, unlike the earlier instances, Mr. Reagan and Mr. Meese disclosed plans to invoke the law before filing a detailed request with the court.    Justice Department officials also said they believed it was the first time any attorney general publicly talked about a forthcoming investigation covered by the law without first obtaining explicit approval from the court to make such statements.    Senior Justice Department aides, who have been under increasing pressure from lawmakers, White House staff and other law-enforcement officials to make such an announcement, apparently decided to break with tradition in an attempt to defuse criticism and show that the administration has regained the initiative in dealing with the foreign policy scandal.    ---   Also contributing to this story was David Rogers of the Journal's Washington bureau. </TEXT></DOC>