<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881007-0153 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas: What Is Behind the Return of Peronism? </HL><AUTHOR> Manuel Mora y Araujo </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><DATELINE> BUENOS AIRES  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In its August primary, the Peronist Party opted to turn back the clock by nominating Carlos Menem as its candidate for next year's presidential election. Mr. Menem came from behind as leader of the internal opposition in the Peronist Party. His victory was due to his personal charisma and his ability to put together a broad coalition of various factions opposed to those inside the party who were trying to move Peronism away from its neofascist roots.    Mr. Menem's triumph follows a revival of the Peronist electoral strength, after its defeat by Raul Alfonsin in 1983 and 1985. The Peronist Party was then able to win the congressional election in 1987, and today it is favored to win the 1989 presidential elections.    To many observers, this situation is a disturbing indication that Argentina is turning again to the sources of its serious political and economic problems: populism, state intervention and protectionism in the economy, and the all-powerful trade unions, a system that Peronism supported and developed through various decades. However, a careful examination of the trends in public-opinion indicators suggests that Argentines are not going back to the old recipes.    Polls conducted by my firm (as well as by Gallup and others) show a sustained growth of those who support a free market and an ecomony open to the world. According to a a poll taken in June, more than half the adult population thinks that Argentina should improve links with Western countries, and accept negotiation with the International Monetary Fund to deal with the foreign-debt problem. And the issue of greatest concern to Argentines is inflation brought on by massive government spending. Old models of income redistribution based on class hatred are rejected outright by most Argentines polled.    Also reflected in the polls is a growing skepticism among the people about the role of government in their lives. Traditional politicians, and their capacity to produce solutions, are held in low esteem. Concurrently, there is a marked increase of the public's confidence in entrepreneurial activities, private investment and personal effort. While there are expectations that the armed forces and the rest of society can resolve their conflicts, there is little &quot;nostalgia&quot; for either past military governments or the military in general.    But why the Peronist resurgence? Since 1983 Peronism has been the major opposition force, maintaining its majority in the Senate. And since 1987 it has controlled most of the provincial governments. Conservative parties are still weak, even though Alvaro Alsogaray's Central Democratic Union has exhibited the highest growth rate of any Argentine party -- practically doubling its approval rating in the past year, from 14% to 22%. Marxist parties are very weak, and their potential supporters mainly vote Peronist. And since the electorate is looking for an alternative to President Alfonsin's Radical government, the Peronist revival, with or without Mr. Menem, was inevitable.    As for Mr. Menem, his victory probably represents little more than a general dissatisfaction among the electorate with party machinery. Professional politicians -- irrespective of the political party to which they belong -- are viewed as unreliable people. They are inextricably linked to a state sector that is both inefficient and corrupt, and they are accustomed to a style of governing that consists of talking too much and doing very little. Mr. Menem, the rebel, does not appear as one of these politicians. He is therefore very popular, despite his being at odds with the public on ideological issues.    So, a Peronist victory in the election should not surprise anybody. But this must not be interpreted as an indication that Argentines are demanding a return to the policies of the past. People might vote Peronist once again, but voters' expectations have changed drastically. In different districts, for example, the politicians achieving the higher levels of popularity have one thing in common -- no matter which party they represent: They are not linked to the professional machinery of the major political parties.    Argentina suffers at present from a serious illness: very high inflation directly related to a fiscal deficit that seems out of control. However, there also are some positive signs: an agrarian boom; a strong growth in nontraditional exports; a significant increase in the informal (or underground) economy -- estimated by the Institute of Contemporary Studies as including 55% of the working population. In this context, it seems unlikely that people could tolerate a return to public policies aimed at redistributing income, closing the national economy and increasing taxes.    Peronism is therefore confronting a major challenge: to reconcile the political demands of the poorest Argentines -- where it finds its strongest electoral base -- with the expectations of a moderate electorate demanding modern answers to the old problems of its country. Whether the Peronists will be able to meet that challenge remains uncertain. But it is hoped that, should they fail to do so, Argentines will continue to search for satisfactory responses to economic and social problems through democratic means. This would be the surest indicator that Argentina's relatively new democracy is secure.    ---   Mr. Mora y Araujo is co-chairman of Socmerc Inc., a polling and consulting firm based in Buenos Aires. </TEXT></DOC>