<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870102-0079 </DOCNO><HL> Year-End Review of Markets and Finance:Many Economists PredictSteady, Moderate Growth---By Alfred L. Malabre Jr.Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   In a very ordinary sort of way, the current economic upswing is becoming most extraordinary.    Its pace has been thoroughly mediocre, with annual growth rates drifting well below the 3% mark in many quarters. Yet its durability -- which many economists predict will see it through the new year and beyond -- is truly exceptional.    As 1987 begins, the expansion is two months into its fifth year. That makes it already longer than all but two of the eight previous such phases of the business cycle since World War II. At 50 months, moreover, it exceeds by 17 months the average length of 30 expansions tracked by analysts since the middle of the last century.    If the prevailing 1987 forecasts prove correct and growth persists for at least another year, this upturn will become the longest peacetime expansion in U.S. history, though it will still be far shorter than the 1961-69 boom. That expansion, which went into the Vietnam War years, kept rolling for 106 months, more than twice the length so far of the current one.    Economists aren't predicting another such blockbluster now, but by and large they do look for sustained, if unexciting, growth in the coming months.    Reasonably typical is the view of Edgar R. Fiedler, an economist at the Conference Board, a nonprofit research group in New York.    &quot;The U.S. will experience moderate but steady economic growth in 1987,&quot; he predicts, summarizing the consensus of the group's Economic Forum of 14 noted business analysts.    Mr. Fiedler also says that &quot;not a single member&quot; of the forum, to which he belongs, expects a recession this year and that most of them see no slump in 1988 either. &quot;Most believe it will not arrive until 1989 or later,&quot; he says.    Similar forecasts of moderate, recession-free growth throughout the new year show up in recent surveys conducted by Blue Chip Economic Indicators, a Sedona, Ariz., newsletter that polls about 50 prominent forecasters each month. Using inflation-adjusted gross national product to reflect overall business activity, the Blue Chip economists predict an average 2.5% gain in real GNP for 1987, about the same as the latest estimates of 1986 growth.    Such a rate is decidedly subpar for a time of expansion. Throughout the postwar era, counting recessions as well as expansions, real GNP has climbed at an annual average of roughly 3%, analysts say.    Of course, no one knows now whether 1987 growth will come in anywhere close to the pace predicted by the Blue Chip consensus. In the best circumstances, economic forecasting is hazardous. And now, to a greater extent than usual, huge imponderables overhang the outlook.    High on the list are record deficits in both the federal budget and the trade balance. Another large uncertainty is the impact of overhaul of the tax system.    Many forecasters say the tax overhaul will prove an economic plus in the longer run, channeling investment away from tax-sheltered areas that are relatively unproductive, such as certain types of real estate, and into plants and equipment that should eventually improve the U.S.'s competitive position in world markets.    There is, however, considerable concern that tax overhaul, whose provisions include eliminating the investment tax credit and tougher depreciation rules, may serve in the near term to deter business growth.    This concern is reflected in the accompanying chart, which breaks down the Blue Chip consensus forecast on a quarterly basis and shows the economy's actual performance in recent quarters. It indicates that the most sluggish quarter of the new year is expected to be the first.    Besides reflecting tax overhaul's impact on capital outlays, analysts say this early-year sag will reflect a post-Christmas letdown in consumer spending that's greater than usual. Some buying that would normally occur now, it's widely believed, took place late last year, when interest charges and state and local sales taxes on consumer purchases still could be deducted from tax bills.    If the expansion does survive this initial droop and slowly strengthens, as most forecasters expect, how are particular sectors of the economy likely to perform?    With no recession in sight, the prevailing view is that jobs will continue to increase, but not rapidly enough to pare unemployment significantly. The brighter side of the slow-growth coin is that substantial inflationary pressures are unlikely to reappear soon, and most forecasters expect only a modest speedup in price increases. Inflation normally accelerates in the later stages of an expansion. Its dormancy through much of the past year is widely seen as something of an aberration, reflecting both the relatively sluggish growth rate and an unprecedented surge in comparatively inexpensive imports.    Slightly farther down the road, most forecasters expect a gradual pickup in capital outlays. This sector normally is most vigorous when the economy has been on the rise for a long period and production facilities are operating at ever-higher percentages of capacity.    Most unusually this time around, the cyclical climb in plant usage hasn't yet occurred. As the expansion keeps rolling, however, this is expected to come. When it does, forecasters look for brisker capital spending as well, regardless of the new tax rules.    Business-cycle experience, it should be added, also teaches that federal budget deficits tend to diminish and foreign trade deficits to worsen as an expansion ages. So far in the current upturn, this pattern has only half held. The shortfall in trade has indeed grown worse, reaching a record monthly level of $19.2 billion in November.    However, the budgetary red ink is greater now than when the recovery from the 1981-82 recession began. This is unprecedented, economists say, and there is no consensus on what will happen now. But on one point there is considerable agreement: Any serious efforts to reduce the budget deficit by cutting federal spending, as called for by the Gramm-Rudman budget-balancing law, are more likely to retard overall economic growth than to spur it.    There also is wide agreement among economists that the Gramm-Rudman targets of far smaller deficits this year and their elimination over the next few years are most unlikely to be met, even if the economy remains recession-free far into the future.    If the consensus turns out to be wrong and a recession does set in this year, the budget deficit could deepen considerably. In recent recessions, this has been the inevitable pattern: Tax collections decline with falling earnings, while governmental outlays for unemployment relief rise substantially. The upshot has been more and more red ink. </TEXT></DOC>