<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880728-0082 </DOCNO><HL> East Bloc Germans Invade Germany </HL><AUTHOR> Amity Shlaes </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP FREST </CO><DATELINE> FRIEDLAND, West Germany  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Francis Josef, age 36, comes from Poland. He speaks, reads and understands only Polish. Today, though, he sits in a small room in a resettlement camp and fills in a form that says he is German. &quot;There,&quot; says an official when the document is signed. &quot;Now your name is Franz.&quot;    &quot;Franz&quot; is part of a wave of ethnic Germans washing West Germany as a result of laxer emigration policy quietly promulgated by East Bloc governments of the Gorbachev era. Not counting East Germans, some 3.5 million people of German ancestry live in countries behind the Iron Curtain, the result of historic migrations, forced resettlements and the shifting borders of the last World War. Over the past 18 months, they have begun arriving in West Germany in unexpected numbers.    This year West Germany expects to welcome at least 160,000 such newcomers from the Soviet Union, Poland and Romania, the three non-German East Bloc nations with the largest ethnic-German populations. That figure is up from 85,000 in 1987, and compares with a total of about 100,000 Soviet Jews the U.S. took in between 1972 and 1983. Soviet Germans alone crossing into West Germany number more than 3,000 this month.    These numbers represent more than compelling human drama. Like the Armenians who have been marching in Azerbaijan or the Hungarians protesting in Romania, the ethnic Germans are the expression of the nationalism Mikhail Gorbachev unleashed after decades of suppression under Brezhnev and Stalin.    For West Germany, their voyage has international significance as well. Seen in the context of Mr. Gorbachev's recent proposals to pull back conventional forces in Central Europe and plans for the Soviet and West German leaders to exchange visits, the German arrivals must be recognized as an invitation to new levels of intimacy with Moscow for this already Soviet-crazy country. And although the German government insists on classifying the ethnic Germans separately from its East German refugees, their arrival can't help but represent a provocative way to pose the question of German reunification.    The case of the ethnic Germans also tells a lot about domestic Germany. Like a number of other highly developed nations, West Germany faces a shrinking population; the government has complained loudly for more than 15 years about the difficulties its few young people will face supporting a sea of pensioners. Yet citizenship is difficult to obtain, and the government is in the process of making it harder for arrivals from the Third World to live in the Federal Republic. The ethnic Germans are the big exception -- like refugees from East Germany, they receive good treatment, financial subsidies and citizenship.    To witness the Soviet Germans' arrival in West Germany is to watch the transfer of a people from one of the world's poorest social welfare states to one of the world's richest. On a July evening, 107 Soviet Germans step off Lufthansa flight 1373 into freedom -- and are rounded up at the gate by Red Cross workers assigned to escort them through Frankfurt's glittery international airport. Plump grandmothers from Kazakhstan bunch up in groups to stare in the windows of airport shops advertising nine-band radios and cellular phones. Grandfathers from Novosibirsk gaze surprised at displays of $400 outfits made entirely of leather. Before they can dally, however, escorts herd them out for transport to a resettlement camp -- in a doubledecker bus equipped with toilet, air conditioning, and a miniature TV.    At the Friedland camp, the government lays on the hospitality. After a night's rest under duvets, the arrivals step out of prefab dormitories into a flower-bed lined complex resembling a Midwestern summer camp. Two groups currently are overloading Friedland's 1,200-bunk capacity: Germans from the Soviet Union, whose families' history in Russian territory can date back as far as Catherine the Great, and Germans from Poland, who come from places like Silesia that were part of the territory Germany lost in the last war. The Soviet Germans generally are simple people with little education -- like America's Pennsylvania Dutch, they've stuck together in small Protestant communities and speak an antiquated German. The Polish Germans usually can say no more than &quot;ja&quot; or &quot;nein,&quot; but may have advanced degrees as teachers or engineers.    Both groups now face several days of waiting in line, with stops at the Red Cross, at social workers -- and at a cashier who hands out $108 in pocket money to each arrival. The newcomers' biggest test is proving they are German.    Family by family, they are called into rooms for questioning -- and pull out documents that recount German history. Edward, from Katowice, produces an eerie sampling: a blue Polish passport, valid identification for his own government, and a brown, aging booklet emblazoned with a swastika. The Nazi document is his father's Wehrmacht recordbook, complete with information about rank, blood group and gas-mask size. This Third Reich evidence satisfies the official, since only those of German ancestry were admitted to Hitler's army. He discusses with Edward how the man can make a home in the West German town of Karlsruhe.    Nearly every family in the line behind Edward will get over this hurdle. The reason is Germany's special definition of what makes a citizen. A baby born in America is an American. But in Germany, blood is what counts. This philosophy has caused some major tragedies -- the racism of the Third Reich was its most violent expression. More recently, it's hindered the integration of West Germany's many foreigners, for even a baby born to a woman who's spent most of her life here is not automatically a German. Yet the Germans stick to their principle, and refuse to use the words &quot;emigrants&quot; and &quot;foreigners&quot; for the ethnic-German families.    The ethnic Germans have a reason beyond family roots for &quot;coming home&quot;: economics. After all, they have steered away from a German nation on their side of the East-West divide. According to West German statistics, virtually no ethnic Germans have made the move to East Germany recently -- except in cases where families hoped that going there would facilitate a journey westward.    Politics, as well as pocketbook, of course plays a role here. But the material attraction of West Germany is particularly evident among the Polish Germans, whose numbers at Friedland have surged this year in concert with Poland's latest economic troubles. Their government's relatively liberal border policy means many of them can come over for vacation several times to scout before deciding, again on a vacation visa, to stay for good. The Filiciak family from Warsaw, dressed in designer jeans and jewelry, is a good example. &quot;We thought in the West with all the computers everything would be faster than it is,&quot; says Maria Filiciak. She expresses disappointment that the government has installed them in a dorm hall -- the family expected an apartment.    By international standards, that welcome is more than generous. Beyond the initial help and cash at Friedland, German arrivals are entitled to subsidized housing, loans and 10 months of remedial German language classes. If they can't find work, they receive unemployment compensation -- or study at West Germany's inexpensive vocational schools or universities. Authorities report relatively few integration problems. Because they often are less picky about jobs than are the natives, these Germans in some regions even have a lower-than-average rate of unemployment.    Their economic contribution is part of a larger postwar tradition. The guestworkers, foreigners from such countries as Turkey and Yugoslavia, kept the German engine at full steam in the late 1960s when labor shortages threatened to halt the Economic Miracle. An even bigger help was the first giant wave of ethnic Germans from the East -- some 12 million driven into the Germanies by the Soviets as they pushed back Hitler's empire after the war. Most of the 12 million ended up in what is now West Germany, but in those days, the young government couldn't afford the kind of lavish resettlement policy it now pursues. Yet statistics show that by 1958, these arrivals had an unemployment rate no higher than the rest of the population.    For some West Germans, the short-term costs of hosting arrivals outweigh other benefits. Stefan Weil works for the Red Cross service that meets the Moscow flights. He, like other youths questioned, feels too much of his tax money is going toward caring for the new groups. &quot;Gorbachev may have done a lot of wonderful things,&quot; he says. &quot;But when it comes to border policy and letting people out, I'd rather have Lenin.&quot;    For other citizens, though, the arrivals have a more positive -- and political -- meaning. Officials here view the new arrivals in a separate class from the few East German refugees who manage to jump the German-German border. The ethnic Germans and the East Germans &quot;have nothing to do with each other,&quot; insists Detlef Kuehn, who heads a government institute dedicated to the study of German-German affairs. The government sees its largesse as the price of the West German commitment to the German people. But the Soviets' new liberalism toward ethnic Germans inevitably bolsters the enthusiasm of a nation already high on Gorbomania. Officials explain the new arrivals as a &quot;benefit of glasnost.&quot; Like the rest of Mr. Gorbachev's concessions, their presence gives fuel to the detentist Free Democrats, the junior partners in the increasingly wobbly Bonn coalition.    Meantime, every morning and every evening, Soviet Germans arrive in Frankfurt in a scene of culture shock and tears. Lilli, a grandmother from Novosibirsk, tells a reporter: &quot;My mother always told me a people belongs together.&quot;    ---   Miss Shlaes is editorial features editor of The Wall Street Journal/Europe. </TEXT></DOC>