<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871012-0147 </DOCNO><HL> Manager's Journal:Poorly Served Employees Serve Customers Just as Poorly---By Robert E. Kelley</HL><DD> 10/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Sears recently advertised a special sale on its new top-of-the-line vacuum cleaners. I called our local Sears to buy one. The sales clerk had never heard of the product and was unaware of the advertised sale. I asked to speak to the boss, who said that the product was not in stock nor did she anticipate receiving it. She suggested that I call around to other Sears stores to find one. I suggested that she do the calling for me, but she said she was too busy for that kind of service.    Undaunted, I asked for the customer-service department. A representative there offered to order the vacuum cleaner but said I would have to drive to a distant Sears warehouse to pick it up. With my blood pressure rising, I asked to speak to the store manager. He said he would look into the situation and get back to me. Four days later, a sales clerk called, inquiring if my wife might be interested in buying a vacuum cleaner.    The U.S. &quot;service economy&quot; is in big trouble. The reason: The quality of much service today, like the quality of many manufactured goods 15 years ago, stinks. When you do encounter the rare, high-quality service, the experience stands in stark and lonely contrast to the undifferentiated mass of miserable service.    This poor service has been of minor importance in the past -- mostly a customer irritant. However, the service sector now faces a double-barreled competitive threat. First, the White House Office of Consumer Affairs recently released some alarming statistics: 96% of dissatisfied customers do not complain about poor quality directly to the company. Instead, they simply never buy at that company again and broadcast their dissatisfaction to friends and acquaintances.    Second, in July, Congress's Office of Technology Assessment warned of a coming onslaught of international competition in services that will challenge U.S. dominance. For example, foreign airlines are taking away market share from U.S. carriers, as witnessed by the rise of JAL and Swiss Air at the expense of Pan American. Given these realities, U.S. service providers must learn the lesson that was hammered into the manufacturing sector -- either shape up or face three possibilities: 1) be replaced by a competitor, probably foreign; 2) get taken over; 3) go bankrupt.    Why is the quality of service so lousy? Executives blame the poor quality of people who are willing to work in lower-paying service jobs. But this argument does not explain why higher-paying manufacturing jobs turned out poor-quality goods for many years. High pay does not equal good service, and, as McDonald's has shown, low pay need not result in poor service.    These executives next blame deregulation and the ensuing competition. But a reasonable person would think that increased competition among banks or airlines would motivate higher-quality service. They also argue that they are providing services that are no worse than that of their competitors. That, at least, is truthful -- but the standard hardly is worth aspiring to.    There are two explanations that are more compelling. First, too many providers do not understand the nature of a service. Most are intangible: You cannot see a lawyer's advice nor take home a waiter's behavior. Services are generally consumed when provided: Unlike a defective car that can be recalled, you cannot recall a blundered heart operation or a demeaning comment to a customer.    The second and more powerful explanation for poor service is management. Service providers treat customers similar to the way they, as employees, are treated by management. In many such organizations management treats employees as unvalued and unintelligent. The employees in turn convey the identical message to the customer. If management treats employees' concerns with indifference, then employees will not care about the customers' complaints. It is a rare employee who can rise above the effects of such poor management.    In poorly managed organizations, a pecking order exists. The boss gets the most respect and receives the widest degree of tolerance for less-than-social behavior. If the top executive treats a middle manager with rudeness and disrespect, then that manager mimicks the executive by acting similarly toward his subordinate. This process continues until the last person in the organizational chain has no one to dump on. And that person is usually the airline ticket agent, the order taker at the fast-food chain, the bank teller or the nurse's aid. Since he has no one to abuse inside the organization, he treats customers as if they were the ones on the next rung down.    If managers want to improve service quality they must treat employees the same way they want employees to treat customers. Managers are the servants of the employees, not just the bosses. They must provide services to the employees in a friendly, helpful and efficient manner that will enable those employees to better serve the customers. Customers thus become the beneficiaries of high-quality service that mirrors the organization's inner working.    ServiceMaster Co., an Illinois-based provider of support services in housekeeping and food service, exemplifies this approach. Employee illiteracy in these jobs is high. ServiceMaster understands that illiteracy handicaps their employees' job performance and self-image, resulting in poorer-quality service to the clients. The company offers education programs; develops pictorial, color-coded instructional material to improve job productivity; and provides performance-based promotion opportunities to improve self-respect and upward mobility. The results: low turnover in these traditionally high-turnover jobs; productivity levels higher than industry averages; and an average of 30% return on equity after taxes from 1973 to 1985. Most important, clients are pleased. A company with a billion dollars in annual revenue, ServiceMaster now exports its services -- its customers include 15 hospitals in Japan.    High-quality service depends on high-quality management. If U.S. providers fail to learn this lesson, they should not be surprised if Americans have accounts at Japanese banks, fly Singapore Airlines or eat in French-owned restaurants.    ---   Mr. Kelley teaches management at the Graduate School of Industrial Administration, Carnegie-Mellon University. </TEXT></DOC>