<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870415-0035 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 04/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   GORBACHEV OFFERED to abolish Soviet short-range missiles in Europe.    The Soviet leader made the surprise proposal, contingent on the West's agreeing not to build up its own short-range rockets, in Moscow talks with Secretary of State Shultz. In his &quot;last efforts&quot; to reach an arms-control agreement, Gorbachev said he is ready to include the dismantling in &quot;a relatively short&quot; period as part of a superpower accord on medium-range missiles. In a 4 1/2-hour session with Shultz, Gorbachev proposed significant compromises on Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative, and on nuclear testing.    Shultz gave a Reagan invitation to visit the U.S. to Gorbachev, who said he was prepared for a summit if accords on disarmament issues and medium-range missiles were ready to sign.    ---   NICARAGUAN REBEL LEADER Alfonso Robelo said he intends to step down.    Robelo, who lives in exile in Costa Rica, said he will resign from the three-man directorate of the Contras' main political umbrella group. His announcement, just a month after Arturo Cruz resigned, was viewed as a severe blow to the U.S.-backed Contra movement. He acknowledged the action could revive rightist rebel forces.    Robelo, like Cruz, is a moderate whose popularity in Washington has been pivotal to the efforts to win continuing U.S. support for the rebels.    ---   Moscow has agreed to rent three oil tankers to Kuwait, the Soviet Foreign Ministry said. The Soviet Union is willing to provide an armed naval escort to prevent Iranian attacks on the vessels. Kuwait has sought protection of foreign flags, especially the U.S. and U.S.S.R., against Persian Gulf attacks related to the Iran-Iraq war.    ---   The U.S. said it recalled four Marine guards from Austria for questioning, widening the Moscow embassy sex-spy scandal. They are suspected of improper socializing with foreign women while posted in Czechoslovakia, Hungary and Bulgaria. The Pentagon said an internal study recommended changes in embassy guards' supervision.    ---   Bonn asked Moscow to explain higher radiation levels detected in five European nations last month that scientists linked to a minor Soviet nuclear mishap. The Kremlin denied it. Analyses of the fallout, which didn't pose a health threat, didn't indicate a nuclear arms test but allowed for a reactor leak or improper waste incineration.    The Soviets will continue to build nuclear plants similar to the Chernobyl reactor in trying to double reliance on nuclear power by 1990, Moscow's atomic power engineering minister told an international conference in Tokyo. He said the Soviets are adopting new safety measures after the worst nuclear accident ever last April 26 at Chernobyl.    ---   South African President Botha refused to lift an order banning campaigns against detentions without trial, citing public safety. Foreign Minister R.F. Botha rejected the new U.S. envoy's criticism of the policy. Pretoria also blamed striking black railroad workers for commuter-train arson attacks that widely disrupted travel in Soweto.    ---   Italy's prime minister-designate failed to form a new coalition government, the president's office said. Oscar Luigi Scalfaro couldn't resolve the six-week political crisis, which politicians said makes June elections, a year early, a near-certainty. Scalfaro was the second senior politician to try to replace the five-party coalition that collapsed.    ---   The Justice Department decided against prosecuting Sen. Mark Hatfield (R., Ore.) for promoting a proposed pipeline while his wife received $55,000 from the project's Greek sponsor. But sources said the agency had obtained a bribery indictment of the Greek in the payments to Mrs. Hatfield; the indictment was sealed.    ---   South Korea's political mire deepened as President Chun's opponents indicated they probably will boycott any election held under the current constitution. Church leaders joined the attack on his hard line against direct presidential elections. But leading business groups backed Chun's dropping of the campaign to revise the political system.    ---   Syria sent troops along Lebanon's coast road to Sidon's outskirts, in its farthest southern deployment since the 1982 Israeli invasion of Lebanon, officials said. The move was aimed at ending the 23-month war for control of Palestinian refugee camps, as Lebanon's civil war entered its 13th year.    ---   Arafat called for a global conference on the Mideast under U.N. auspices. The PLO leader and Zimbabwe's Prime Minister Mugabe said this offers the only hope of resolving the region's crisis. They addressed the opening in Harare of a two-day meeting on the Mideast, attended by nine states of the 101-nation nonaligned movement.    ---   A toxic chemical spilled at Hodson Laboratories Inc. in a North Salt Lake, Utah, industrial park, killing the company president's son, injuring six people and forcing the evacuation of about 1,000 from businesses and homes, officials said. In Gary, Ind., a hydrochloric acid leak in a storage tank hurt 93 and forced 1,000 to flee.    ---   A surrogate mother had a reunion with the year-old girl she bore under a disputed contract, after the New Jersey Supreme Court allowed such visits pending an appeal. It was Mary Beth Whitehead's first visit with the girl since a lower court awarded custody to William Stern, the father, and terminated Whitehead's parental rights.    ---   Dynamite exploded outside the U.S. Embassy in La Paz, injuring at least nine people including an American official, as about 12,000 people marched in a protest against Bolivia's economic policies, officials said.    ---   Austria's President Waldheim received invitations to visit Egypt and Hungary, his spokesman said, as his diplomatic isolation apparently eased. Waldheim was elected last June after allegations linking him to Nazi war crimes, which he has denied. The ex-U.N. secretary-general's first state trip abroad, to Jordan, is scheduled for July. </TEXT></DOC>