<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871023-0061 </DOCNO><HL> Corporate Leaders Remain on OutlookFor Problems, But Few Fear Recession---A Wall Street Journal News Roundup</HL><DD> 10/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> HPC AMR FQA MOB AMX HCA MCABUYBACKS, REDEMPTIONS, SWAP OFFERS (BBK) </IN><TEXT>   Leaders of American corporations, hunkering down to avoid the stock market's flak, are buying back their own stock and looking out for corporate raiders on the prowl. But few are retrenching in anticipation of a recession.    Although the gloom and apprehension over stock prices is evident almost everywhere, executives commenting on the mood of their executive suites yesterday showed little hint of any desperation.    At Mobil Corp. in New York, top executives are &quot;concerned&quot; but not depressed, says Allen E. Murray, chairman. The oil giant hasn't cut back or even held up any business plans. The company's only financial reaction to the market crash and its reverberations has been to &quot;pick up a little intermediate-term borrowing at cheap rates,&quot; Mr. Murray says.    Mr. Murray doesn't think the market crash foreshadows a recession or depression, and he believes the administration is trying to deal with the financial and economic problems reflected in the market action. &quot;But these problems aren't fixed with a pencil, you know,&quot; Mr. Murray says. The budget, trade and payments deficits are longstanding ills.    Allen Born, chief executive of Amax Inc. in Greenwich, Conn., says the natural-resources company started buying back its own stock after Monday's market tumble. Since Monday, over 200 companies -- including more than 60 yesterday -- have announced such plans, reflecting their belief that the rout made bargains out of their shares.    Because Mr. Born didn't have authority to repurchase more than a million shares, he rushed back from a meeting in Colorado Tuesday and called a meeting of Amax's board via conference call Wednesday. He got authorization to buy back up to three million shares of Amax at 9:30 a.m. Wednesday, and the repurchasing was under way by 10:30 a.m. &quot;Any distressed blocks of Amax out there, we'll buy them,&quot; Mr. Born says.    Some of the loudest gnashing of teeth is coming from companies that fear their depressed stock prices will attract takeover sharks.    Thomas Frist Jr., chairman of Hospital Corp. of America in Nashville, Tenn., says the company's main concern is protecting itself from a takeover. &quot;We've evaluated all the alternatives, how we can protect and maximize the value of our shareholders. We have contingency plans in place for all different circumstances. We've updated and modified them to reflect the conditions now in the marketplace.&quot;    Mr. Frist has a large stake in his company but he says chief executives who don't have a large ownership interest &quot;in many cases must feel quite threatened.&quot;    Increased liquidity and similar measures, he says, &quot;would seem to invite a takeover.&quot; He adds that following the company's recent restructuring it is in its historically most liquid position. The company realized $1.64 billion in net proceeds from the recent sale of 104 of its hospitals to the newly created HealthTrust Inc.    Hard times are said to help show business. But MCA Inc.'s president, Sidney J. Sheinberg, says his company isn't specifically gearing up to entertain throngs of dispirited Americans in search of escape from the stock market plunge and its consequences.    Neither, however, is it hunkering down for a major economic crisis that might hurt the corporation.    Although he says he has a &quot;gut instinct&quot; that the country is heading for a recession, the company hasn't been agonizing over that or over what to do about the precipitous plunge in MCA's stock. Mr. Sheinberg generally doesn't discuss the takeover rumors that have swirled around MCA in recent years, but the reduced price of MCA shares has had company employees buzzing about the subject since the stock's decline.    &quot;I think we've been living in a fool's paradise for a considerable period of time in this country. Nowhere has that been more evident than on Wall Street,&quot; Mr. Sheinberg says.    It is too soon, he says, for MCA to consider layoffs or other drastic action. But the company will try to buy back 10 million shares of its stock and will continue trying to control costs.    &quot;We've really been focused on the opportunity aspect of it,&quot; he says. &quot;If the world falls apart and we go to 25% unemployment, and we've got 1932 or whatever, then we're in a radically different situation.&quot;    Fuqua Industries Inc., which makes consumer products and owns a thrift institution, is also considering buying back some of its own shares. But it is waiting to see where the price will settle.    &quot;You go through shock, disbelief, dismay,&quot; says Lawrence P. Klamon, president, &quot;But there's no gnashing of teeth or wringing of hands here now; it's a question of what we do from here.&quot;    Other companies worry primarily about what will happen to consumer spending if recession fears worsen.    American Airlines, a unit of AMR Corp., says it is very concerned about the market uncertainty and its possible effects on travel plans.    &quot;It's not much different than if a war developed in a part of the world that had some major implications for us, or if there was a major tragedy or a natural disaster that had implications for us,&quot; says Michael W. Gunn, American's senior vice president of marketing.    Mr. Gunn says he and his marketing group have held several ad hoc sessions to discuss the possible implications of the market crash and has set up &quot;enhanced monitoring&quot; of how much its traffic and bookings deviate from their expected performance over the short-term.    He says American is particularly worried about the possible impact on discretionary travel, which constitutes a major portion of its business.    If the market crash does signal economic troubles that will slow discretionary travel, Mr. Gunn says American would have to reassess the number of flights it offers in markets that depend on that kind of travel, such as Florida, Mexico and Hawaii.    But Mr. Gunn says it is still too early to assess the effect of the market crash on people's travel patterns. &quot;It is too early to reach any definitive conclusions about what the impact will be because the game is not played out,&quot; he says. Mr. Gunn says the company is watching its Thanksgiving and Christmas bookings for a better indication of consumer sentiment.    Some companies are actually counting their blessings. Hercules Inc. is even planning celebrations of its good fortune.    In early September, the Wilmington, Del., aerospace and chemicals concern sold its stake in Himont Inc. for $1.49 billion and received $1 billion in cash. When the company's stock plummeted Monday morning, Hercules accelerated the stock buy-back it started after the Himont sale. To top things off, the company announced Tuesday that it had been awarded a $500 million contract to build rocket boosters for the U.S. military's Titan IV space launch vehicle.    &quot;We're in a fantastic mood,&quot; says William Bewley, Hercules's chief economist. &quot;In fact, we are celebrating. We're in the best shape we've been in since Oct. 23, 1973, when OPEC raised oil prices.&quot;    The company is planning between $150 million and $200 million in capital expenditures, mostly to expand its Bacchus West rocket production plant near Salt Lake City, where the boosters will be made.    Here is a list of companies announcing repurchase plans yesterday:    AEL Industries Inc., American Television andamp; Communications Corp., Aristech Chemical Corp., Artistic Greetings Inc., Bank of Boston Corp., Bindley Western Industries Inc., Campbell Soup Co., Carmike Cinemas Inc., Cherokee Group, CenCor Inc.    CIMCO, Cineplex Odeon Corp., CML Group Inc., Comair Inc., Comcast Corp., Continental Materials Corp., Crestar Financial Corp., Philip Crosby Associates Inc., Devon Energy Corp.    R.R. Donnelley andamp; Sons Co., Durr-Fillauer Medical Inc., Ecolab Inc., Engineering Measurements Co., Federal National Mortgage Association, Foodmaker Inc., Forest Laboratories Inc., Golden Nugget Inc., Gradco Systems Inc.    High Voltage Engineering Corp., Imo Delaval Inc., James River Corp., Knogo Corp., Kysor Industrial Corp. of Cadillac, Michigan National Corp., Nalco Chemical Co., National Distillers andamp; Chemical Corp.    National Hardgoods Distributors Inc., NESB Corp., Northeast Savings F.A., Northrop Corp., PepsiCo Inc., Pic 'N' Save Corp., Policy Management Systems Corp., Providence Energy, Raytheon Co., Reynolds andamp; Reynolds Co.    Ryan, Beck andamp; Co., Sabine Corp., R.P. Scherer Corp., Sierra Health Services Inc., Southmark Corp., SouthTrust Corp., Standard Commercial Tobacco Corp., Sterling Bancorp, Systems andamp; Computer Technology Corp., Tech Data Corp.    Temple-Inland Inc., Town andamp; Country Jewelry Mfg. Corp., TransTechnology Corp., TRW Inc., TSO Financial Corp., West Point-Pepperell Inc., Whittaker Corp., Wolverine Technologies Inc., F.W. Woolworth Co., URS Corp., Zayre Corp. </TEXT></DOC>