<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880330-0052 </DOCNO><HL> Two Top Justice Department Aides Quit, Putting More Pressure on Meese to Resign </HL><AUTHOR> Andy Pasztor and Ellen Hume (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> WNEWS </CO><IN> ARO BCY </IN><G> JUS </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Two top Justice Department officials, including the second-highest ranking appointee, quit abruptly in an effort to force Attorney General Edwin Meese to resign.    The departures of Arnold Burns, deputy attorney general, and William Weld, who headed the criminal division, along with their four top aides, illustrate Mr. Meese's increasing political isolation. Sources familiar with yesterday's events said the two officials felt that the department's work was at a standstill and its credibility compromised by Mr. Meese's continuing legal problems.    A number of Republican politicians flatly predicted last night that Mr. Meese won't survive the latest blow and will be forced to resign shortly. Several others were more cautious, saying they don't believe the fallout from the resignations will be enough, by itself, to push the attorney general out of his job.    But yesterday's announcement shocked agency officials and lawmakers, fueling speculation about the future of the Justice Department under the Reagan administration.    Mr. Meese's aides reiterated that he has no intention of leaving and doesn't expect to face any criminal charges. Despite signs of increasing resentment against the attorney general -- within the Justice Department, in the White House and among some Republican politicians -- Mr. Meese apparently retains the president's support.    Mr. Reagan and his aides continued to send signals that the president wouldn't consider removing Mr. Meese, who is one of his oldest and most trusted advisers. The Meese issue also has embarrassed Vice President George Bush, who has identified himself closely with the president in his bid to succeed him. But a friend of the vice president said Mr. Bush isn't taking any active role to resolve the problem. Instead, he is expected to stick with a general campaign theme that he is &quot;personally disturbed&quot; at ethical breaches he has seen recently in government and is determined to maintain high ethical standards.    Pressure has been mounting on the administration as independent prosecutor James McKay has pressed his investigation of the attorney general's involvement with a proposed Mideast oil pipeline and Mr. Meese's efforts to help Wedtech Corp., a bankrupt defense contractor.    In a move emphasizing their frustration, Messrs. Burns and Weld informed White House Chief of Staff Howard Baker Monday about their decision to resign, the day before they told a surprised Mr. Meese.    Neither official would comment yesterday. But according to sources familiar with the chain of events, the two men first went to Mr. Baker about two weeks ago, to warn the White House that the drawn-out criminal investigations focusing on the attorney general had made it impossible for the Justice Department to function properly.    Both officials also had complained to aides and friends that Mr. Meese and his close associate and counselor in the department, William Reynolds, had cut them out of some top-level agency decisions.    Mr. Baker, however, is said to have told them that the president wouldn't consider removing Mr. Meese. When it became clear that the White House wouldn't act, said one source familiar with the events, the two men saw their resignations as a powerful way to step up the pressure on Mr. Meese. Mr. Weld felt that something had to be done to highlight the issue, the source said.    Mr. Weld, a former U.S. attorney in Boston who had been complaining about Mr. Meese's problems privately for months, according to sources familiar with the matter, also was upset because he was passed over for more-senior department positions. Mr. Weld built his reputation on cases involving white-collar crime and public corruption, and he is believed to have political aspirations in his native Massachusetts.    Mr. Burns, previously a New York lawyer with little political experience, was hand-picked by Mr. Meese as his chief administrator less than two years ago. But Mr. Burns, according to some current and former Justice Department officials, was disturbed about the criminal investigations of Mr. Meese and increasingly disappointed that the attorney general continued to rely on Mr. Reynolds for many decisions. For example, Mr. Burns didn't find out about the appointment of a new head for the agency's civil division earlier this month until he read about it in a newspaper.    Coming after the recent departure of Associate Attorney General Stephen Trott, who was named to a federal appeals court judgeship, the defections leave the department with a void of top managers and could impede critical investigations.    Some administration officials said additional agency resignations may be announced shortly, but Justice Department spokesmen said they weren't aware of any plans by senior officials to leave. Speculation centered on Solicitor General Charles Fried, but, in an interview, Mr. Fried said he hadn't had a chance to consider what the resignations meant and didn't have any plans to leave.    Mr. Weld's resignation was effective at the end of the day yesterday, and officials said Mr. Burns will leave April 22.    The disarray at the department's highest levels comes as Mr. McKay, the independent prosecutor, hopes to wrap up the current phase of his criminal investigation in the next few weeks. Mr. McKay doesn't have enough information at this point to seek charges against Mr. Meese, according to law enforcement and other sources. But they said the prosecutor is considering seeking charges against Robert Wallach, Mr. Meese's longtime friend and former attorney, as part of a strategy to press him for new evidence, if he has any, against the attorney general.    Mr. McKay, these sources said, wants to determine, among other things, why a 1985 financial disclosure form filed with the Senate Foreign Relations Committee by Mr. Wallach failed to include a $150,000 payment from Bruce Rappaport, a major backer of the proposed Mideast oil pipeline. Mr. Rappaport has acknowledged the payment was a legal fee for work on behalf of the pipeline, but the disclosure form signed by Mr. Wallach doesn't list Mr. Rappaport as a client.    Mr. Wallach was required to file the form before being confirmed to an advisory position at the U.S. Information Agency. His attorney couldn't be reached for comment.    While some of the president's longtime associates are concerned that Mr. Meese has become a political liability, no effort has been mounted by them or by first lady Nancy Reagan to persuade the president to take action, as they did, for example, in engineering the resignation of White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan, sources said.    ---   Stephen Wermiel contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>