<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871229-0057 </DOCNO><HL> The Crash of '87 -- The Aftermath:Crash Could WeakenWall Street's GripOn Corporate America---Takeover Activity May Slow;Executives See a ChanceTo Plan for Long Term---'Piece of Cake' Gets Tough---By Steve Swartz and Bryan BurroughStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><TEXT>      {Third in a series}   NEW YORK -- Merger mania. Corporate raiders. Arrogant young Wall Street millionaires. In the wake of Black Monday, these symbols of the bull market are slipping out of the spotlight, and some corporate executives can hardly contain their glee.    &quot;I'm looking forward to the day soon when all this merger stuff comes to an end,&quot; says Marvin Gearhart, the chief executive officer of Gearhart Industries Inc. in Fort Worth, Texas. &quot;I'll be doing a little jig right here,&quot; he adds.    CEOs aren't doing Fred Astaire acts on their boardroom tables just yet, but after five years of cowering before Wall Street, Corporate America clearly sees Financial America on the run. The stock-market crash is changing Wall Street's relationship with thousands of companies -- a relationship that has been a major force in the American economy. Junk bonds, the rocket fuel of corporate raiders, have lost their zip, and even some raiders expect what T. Boone Pickens Jr. calls &quot;a slowdown&quot; in the takeover game.    Thus, many corporate executives discern a golden opportunity to get back to business basics. They say they long to foster long-term growth rather than fret over the next quarter's earnings and over whether they should restructure their companies to ward off takeovers. &quot;Corporate America has got to get back to its knitting,&quot; Texas entrepreneur H. Ross Perot says.    But Carl C. Icahn, the takeover artist cum airline executive, worries that corporations might get too smug. &quot;I just hope this doesn't mean {bad} corporate managements will become more entrenched,&quot; the Trans World Airlines chief says.    Takeovers aren't the only aspect of American business roiled by the stock market's crash. The reverberations from Black Monday are likely to be felt by Corporate America in many ways:    --With the market for new stock offerings shrunk, money may well become scarcer for start-up companies and well-capitalized corporations alike.    --Companies determined to raise funds may have to turn to debt rather than sell stock, and the additional borrowing could weaken what some observers consider an already-over-leveraged economy.    --Commercial banks, long the main corporate lenders, may recoup some of the market share lost to Wall Street.    From a broader perspective, the foremost question in many minds is whether the Oct. 19 crash foreshadows a recession that would beat down American industry just when several major sectors -- especially the manufacturing base -- have been rebounding.    Already, individuals, suddenly deprived of a stock market in which almost no investment turned sour, have lost a lot of confidence in what had been a major vehicle for financing retirement and other needs. And politicians, especially the Republicans, can no longer bask in the glory of a bull market.    Of all the changes, perhaps the most striking one is in corporate finance. Over the past five years, the symbiotic but often-antagonistic relationship among the stock market, investment banks and corporations &quot;has been very important,&quot; says Fred Carr, the chairman of First Executive Corp., an insurer based in Los Angeles. &quot;Wall Street played a big role in marshaling the capital to help American business restructure.&quot;    But marshaling capital isn't so easy anymore. Chrysler Corp. Treasurer Frederic Zuckerman says that now no financial man asked to line up money for a major project &quot;can step up to his chairman and say, 'Piece of cake.'&quot;    Wall Streeters themselves are resisting any notion that their role has faded. Some even predict a smashing rebound in takeover activity next year as the weak stock market makes companies cheaper, especially to cash-rich foreign multinationals.    &quot;Wall Street's relationship with Corporate America could be closer than ever,&quot; suggests Robert S. Pirie, the president of Rothschild Inc., an investment bank. &quot;The easy-money days are behind us; Corporate America will need Wall Street as never before&quot; to find new ways to raise capital.    But there are some signs that Corporate America is looking away from Wall Street for capital, toward more traditional sources such as commercial banks and insurance companies. Investment banks &quot;are going to get some strong competition from some of the commercial banks,&quot; comments Nolan Archibald, the chairman of Black andamp; Decker Corp., a big appliance maker.    During the investment-banking boom of the 1980s, Wall Street worked both sides of Main Street. In an offensive role, investment bankers aided takeover artists who unseated managements, broke up companies and laid off thousands of workers. But as defensive advisers, they helped some target companies entrench managers by taking on extra debt, selling valuable assets and designing golden parachutes -- lucrative compensation packages for executives facing dismissal in any takeover.    Many chief executives don't regard this period fondly, of course. &quot;Remember in Vietnam, when a guy said we had to destroy a village to save it? We're almost to that&quot; with the restructuring movement, says Mr. Perot, the founder of Electronic Data Systems Corp., now part of General Motors Corp.    Nonetheless, many companies and investors benefited from Wall Street's link to industry. Aided by computers and mathematical whizzes lured away from universities, Wall Street created exotic financing vehicles that allowed corporations to raise money in new ways -- such as auto loans packaged into securities. Stocks, issued at a moment's notice, provided instant cash that could be further leveraged with new debt offerings. Companies that hadn't ever raised a dime became cash-rich thanks to high-yielding, low-rated junk bonds.    Now, however, the financing party may be over.    &quot;Is merger mania past its peak? The answer has got to be yes,&quot; says Donald G. Drapkin, vice chairman of Revlon Group Inc., the acquisitive consumer-goods concern. &quot;The financing environment is very difficult. The initial-public-offering market is dead. The leveraged-buy-out guys are all out. Investment bankers are petrified, and I think rightly so.&quot;    Along Wall Street, merger-and-acquisition specialists, whose days used to be filled jetting to meet corporate clients and huddling with raiders in strategy sessions, are now adjusting to a slower pace. &quot;Nothing's happening,&quot; one leading investment banker laments. Adds a First Boston Corp. official: &quot;A lot of people are sitting back waiting and watching.&quot;    Though the takeover business is widely expected to recover somewhat, many professionals believe that it will never return to its glory days. Several suggest that overall activity next year could decline 10% to 20%, depressed by worries about the economy and the slump in the junk-bond market.    Moreover, some takeover experts say that in an uncertain environment a number of Wall Street firms are wary of risking their capital by making bridge loans to facilitate leveraged buy-outs. Such loans usually are advances by investment bankers to companies wanting to buy back their stock and go private. The loans, which typically are refinanced with junk bonds, will be fewer and used more conservatively in the wake of weeks of delays in a major Southland Corp. junk-bond offering, investment bankers say.    Of course, with stock prices way down, a few cash-rich raiders, especially foreign concerns, may find a feast of takeover bargains. The recent elimination of several anti-takeover tax proposals should remove a potential barrier to many mergers. And if financial markets calm down, a burst of takeover activity could erupt next year.    But many corporate executives are holding their breath and hoping that takeover activity will stay depressed. If so, some say, the emphasis on short-term profits could fade, and companies could again focus on long-term internal growth rather than hostile acquisitions. &quot;The restructuring of Corporate America will go on more in the old-fashioned way; executives are getting back to basics, looking at their businesses and seeking the most frugal way to run them with a weak dollar,&quot; Chrysler's Mr. Zuckerman says.    But although takeover pressures may ease, financing pressures will surely rise. With the stock market lower and increasingly uncertain, many companies don't want to issue new shares, and many investors don't want to buy them.    Investment bankers say many stock offerings that were on the drawing boards before Oct. 19 are now in the waste can. In addition, companies that were offering bonds convertible into stocks also have shifted gears.    The worst headaches will be suffered by privately held companies wanting to go public. Without a long period of stable stock prices, the market for initial public offerings is likely to be closed to many companies -- at least at prices they would find acceptable, says Barry S. Friedberg, who heads investment banking at Merrill Lynch andamp; Co.    A drop in equity financing also will impede corporate spending on plant and equipment. &quot;Capital spending will be reduced somewhat because of the bulk of it is financed by equity&quot; rather than debt, according to Jerry Jasinowski, an executive vice president of the National Association of Manufacturers.    Companies with strong balance sheets, of course, will still be able to rely on debt for much of their financing. In fact, the market for highly rated debt of blue-chip companies has strengthened since the crash. &quot;The cost of debt looks better&quot; because interest rates have declined, says Lynn Michaelis, the manager of economic analysis at Weyerhaeuser Co., a forest-products giant. Just before Black Monday, yields on the 30-year Treasury bonds -- a benchmark for pricing other issues -- were running above 10%. Now, they are just under 9%.    However, many companies have already gone heavily into debt for such purposes as financing -- or warding off -- acquisitions. Now, they could be turning to debt financing even though they already are too much in hock, some observers worry. According to Salomon Brothers Inc. estimates, the amount of publicly issued corporate debt outstanding has almost doubled during the five-year bull market to $705 billion from $367 billion.    What's more, many heavily leveraged companies now may find the debt market prohibitively expensive. They will be thrust &quot;into the arms of the banks&quot; and forced to finance their operations with short-term, rate-sensitive bank loans, says Donald Ratajczak, who heads the Econometric Forecasting Project at Georgia State University in Atlanta.    Banks have made a comeback in other ways as well. GAF Corp. Chairman Samuel Heyman dropped most of the junk-bond financing and turned to bank loans for his planned leveraged buy-out of the chemicals and building-materials company. When many U.S. corporations began buying back their own stock after the crash, they borrowed the money from banks. Merger players, despairing of the junk market, are placing some of their first financing calls to Citibank, Bankers Trust and Manufacturers Hanover.    All this bolsters the widespread belief that Wall Street itself was by far the biggest loser in the crash. &quot;People on Wall Street have been hit dramatically in their own pocketbooks,&quot; says Gary L. Wilson, the chief financial officer of Walt Disney Co. &quot;We've searched high and low to find signs that Main Street is as concerned {about the crash} as Wall Street, and we can't.&quot;    Perhaps rightly so. Wall Street is quickly facing up to the fact that virtually all post-crash indicators are going against it. The corporate shift away from equity financings and merger-and-acquisition business cuts right at the heart of Wall Street's biggest profits.    As profits fall, investment firms are slashing staff, freezing salaries, cutting other expenses and quitting marginal businesses. E.F. Hutton has fallen into a shotgun wedding with Shearson Lehman Brothers. L.F. Rothschild, a medium-sized trading and brokerage firm, is on the ropes after big losses, healthy firms are already acquiring specialist firms at the stock exchanges, and other consolidations are expected.    To some, Wall Street's troubles mark a tidy ending to the restructuring age that Wall Street helped usher in. &quot;It's hit the oil patch, the Rust Belt, everywhere,&quot; says David Dougherty, who heads mergers and acquisitions at Bankers Trust Co. in New York. &quot;Now, we've moved into a final period where the last industry, financial services, is going through it. Merger Mania seems to have come full circle.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>