<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871028-0129 </DOCNO><HL> Europe:The Swiss Case on Insiders, Taxes and Evidence</HL><DD> 10/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP TAXESSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><TEXT>   Switzerland's minister of justice, Elisabeth Kopp, is scheduled to travel to Washington in November to meet with the U.S. attorney general, Edwin Meese. The two countries have been writing, in secret, a memorandum designed to improve their cooperation in the transfer of evidence in criminal cases. Such procedures -- or lack thereof -- have been a source of bitter feuding between the U.S. and Switzerland in recent years in a number of celebrated cases -- the Marc Rich tax case, the Santa Fe International and St. Joe Minerals insider-trading cases. As she was preparing for the visit, Mrs. Kopp was interviewed by The Wall Street Journal/Europe's editorial-page editor, Seth Lipsky. Excerpts follow:    WSJ: What do you hope to achieve through this increasingly cooperative effort?    Mrs. Kopp: Let's start with what you call the increasingly cooperative effort. Our cooperation with the United States in law enforcement is based on our bilateral assistance treaty from 1973 and on our federal act on mutual assistance in criminal matters from 1981. These instruments have not been changed. So I don't think it is correct to speak of growing cooperation if you mean the quality of assistance. Increasing economic interdependence has led to increased numbers of requests and to requests regarding new forms of criminality. International mutual assistance is, contrary to the popular perception in Switzerland, not a one-sided process. Although U.S. authorities have made three times as many requests as the Swiss, our authorities have been able to obtain search and seizure or freeze orders in the U.S., too.    WSJ: Regarding what we sometimes call the lex Americana, Switzerland has introduced an anti-insider-trading law into Parliament.    Mrs. Kopp: Two things are usually neglected in the discussion. First, even under the Swiss penal code in force now the misuse of inside information is in certain cases a crime. The insider revealing a business secret to the tippee violates penal code. But we have this strange situation now in Switzerland that the tippee may be punished, while the real insiders may not be. This doesn't seem to make sense, and so that's one of the reasons why we're going to change our penal code by the amendments. Already in 1982 the Swiss Bank Association created a convention called Convention 16, under which the {U.S.} Securities and Exchange Commission may seek information on insider trading effected in the United States but ordered through Swiss banks. The creation of an insider-trading section in our penal code means for relations with the U.S. only that the law would replace the private procedure by the official procedure of the treaty between the U.S. and Switzerland on mutual assistance in criminal matters. . . . The difficulties recently in the mutual assistance proceedings between the U.S. and Switzerland -- for example, in the Santa Fe case and the St. Joe Minerals case at the end of 1981 -- may hide the fact that even before, and I would say years before, proposals for an insider-trading law quite similar to the actual bill were elaborated in my department. This bill is based on our own needs. Neither its aims nor contents nor forms were dictated by the U.S. It's obviously wrong to call it a lex Americana.    WSJ: The impression that there is pressure from the United States, where did that come from?    Mrs. Kopp: Well, we had some difficulties -- in the Santa Fe case, for instance. We want to avoid further conflicts of jurisdiction. As we Swiss people also feel that insider trading is a crime, let us also make this amendment to our penal code. I think that the situation has changed much in the past few years. If you ask an older banker, perhaps {he's} not going to consider it a real crime. But the younger generation definitely is of the opinion that insider trading is a crime.    WSJ: What about cooperation in tax cases -- {is tax evasion} a crime or a civil, an administrative, matter?    Mrs. Kopp: That's exactly the point. By the way, that's one of the reasons why we have difficulties with the United States. In Switzerland tax evasion is not punished by the penal code but is prosecuted by administrative authorities. This is certainly not going to change. But there exists the tax fraud, and this is something different. When you have a case of tax fraud, you may also get legal assistance. For instance, if you just file your tax return with wrong numbers, this is from our point of view not tax fraud. But if you try to deceive the authorities, it may be a fraud, and then you could be prosecuted by the penal authorities. We are not going to change anything concerning our system of tax cases.    WSJ: There is an effort in the OECD and Council of Europe on the mutual assistance treaty for tax matters. How far is Switzerland willing to cooperate, if at all?    Mrs. Kopp: Cooperation with our European neighbors is governed by the European Convention on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters of 1959 -- which, by the way, was the model for the treaty which we have with the United States -- and {by} our federal act on mutual assistance in criminal matters. Aside from the exchange of information under the convention -- we have this convention on the avoidance of double taxation -- there you can exchange under certain limits information. Otherwise, no cooperation is available in all those areas. Tax avoidance is not an offense in Switzerland. Tax evasion is usually subject to administrative sanction. There are virtually no restrictions on foreign exchange here. If there is clearly a criminal offense in our view, the offender cannot hide his activity or his assets by invoking our laws that are meant to protect the lawful customers.    WSJ: {Concerning} the treaty on mutual cooperation on taxes in the OECD and the Council of Europe, why has Switzerland not voted yes?    Mrs. Kopp: Switzerland has opposed the Multilateral Convention on Mutual Administrative Assistance in Tax Matters from the outset. The text contains a number of structural weaknesses and diverges fundamentally from the principles of the Swiss public orders and our international cooperation policy in this field. In spite of these fundamental reservations the Swiss government decided not to oppose a possible consensus alone and thereby prevent a cooperation among the other Council of Europe and OECD countries. By doing so Switzerland wishes to underline its basic support of multilateral cooperation within the Council of Europe and the OECD. According to us, the convention is, however, contrary to fundamental rules of the Council of Europe, especially with regard to the rights of the individual and taxpayer. Tax avoidance and tax evasion should be dealt with in the first place by national fiscal law and not by a European convention. We think moreover that the convention does not distinguish between mutual administrative assistance and mutual assistance in penal matters. In addition, it does not guarantee the principle of specialty, which is an essential concept of the Swiss public order. </TEXT></DOC>