<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880907-0097 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Back to School </HL><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT </CO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   What kind of schools will the nation's students find as they return to their classrooms this fall? With education a live issue in the presidential election, this is a good time to review the bidding on the nation's schools.    There is much to cheer. Departing Education Secretary William Bennett's calls for increased accountability, especially to constructive pressure from parents, is finally getting a response. The most important reverberations come from the states and localities, which of course actually control public school systems.    Minnesota wins this year's top prize for innovation. While carefully avoiding the word &quot;voucher,&quot; the state's &quot;choose a school&quot; program comes close to breaking down the education monopoly. Minnesota parents can send their children to any of the participating public schools anywhere in the city or even state. By 1991, this option will be available throughout the state. For the first time, public schools are forced to compete with one another for students.    Losing in this competition for students carries a penalty-loss in state aid of up to some $3,500 per student, which is transferred to the winning school. Perhaps not surprisingly, the Minnesota Federation of Teachers tried suing to stop such a dramatic program. Most unions nowadays learn to cope with the competitive marketplace; some day teachers unions will also learn the same lesson.    South Carolina may deserve the award for best improvement. Special remedial classes have helped staunch the dropout problem. The state is using both financial incentives and punishments to improve schools, and to encourage tougher testing for graduation. Other states have revised the qualifications for teachers so that people who have knowledge of a subject outside teaching can qualify.    In Massachusetts, the blue collar area of Chelsea has arranged for Boston University to take control of its schools. A high school in Washington state has instituted a homework hotline for students to call each other for help. Texas has a &quot;no-pass, no-play&quot; rule that forbids extracurricular activities for flunking students.    As the states experiment, they sometimes come to different conclusions. Arizona began a mandatory test program for first graders, but dropped it for fear the test put too much pressure on the youngsters. On the other hand, Georgia now has a test kindergartners must pass to get into the first grade.    A recent report by the National Governors' Association takes special aim at the dropout problem, which is serious not just in the big cities but in many rural areas. The group stresses that this isn't a problem for the feds. Instead the report notes that &quot;states directly or indirectly fund many of the services for at-risk youth&quot; and must make sure the money is spent wisely. The governors' group urges that state agencies recruit private sector help and advice. With the growing shortage of qualified workers for many jobs, business already is spending millions to pick up where the public schools fell off.    The new emphasis on making schools work has pushed aside some other, longstanding school debates. Desegregation of public schools remains a goal, but is entirely elusive in many areas. Many families that could -- white or black -- fled to suburban, private or parochial schools as busing alone became a more discussed issue than school curricula. With a few exceptions, such as Yonkers and Kansas City, federal judges have learned to eschew their tragic social engineering. Most now leave school systems alone to attract students back, not drive them out.    Mr. Bennett deserves much of the credit for raising the level of the education debate. Last week he offered a suggested reading list for elementary school students; it includes everything from Rudyard Kipling and Carl Sandburg to a collection of black folk tales and Isaac Bashevis Singer's stories from Eastern Europe. Not every state would opt for such a core curriculum, but we suspect many parents would opt for an approach, responsive to such critics of the system as Allan Bloom, that tried to open the minds of even the youngest Americans.    As to the federal government's role, it can lead education reform best by using the bully pulpit to open the debate, rather than handing down unending rules and mandates to local systems. Messrs. Bush and Dukakis should be asked to clarify where they stand on this important distinction, for it's clear that the real work of fixing the schools will fall to local politicians and school boards. With parents now demanding improvements, the states obviously aren't waiting for the next presidential election to get the ball rolling in the right direction. </TEXT></DOC>