<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881020-0180 </DOCNO><HL> Law: Selling Interests in Syndicated Lawsuits Raises Cash -- and Questions Over Ethics </HL><AUTHOR> Richard B. Schmitt (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> FIN </IN><TEXT>   When Charles Prior Hall decided to take on a company that he says infringed on his patent for the water bed, he chose to give other people a piece of the action -- by letting them buy a stake in his lawsuit.    Through an investment-banking friend, Mr. Hall raised $750,000, which he is using to pursue the case. The Santa Rosa, Calif., inventor will get his day in court next March -- and the investment group, if Mr. Hall is successful, stands to get a share of damages and royalties on the patent that could total $100 million.    If you thought limited partnerships were only good for buying oil wells or shopping malls, think again. These days, litigants such as Mr. Hall are selling interests in partnerships and other ventures that essentially invest in lawsuits.    These syndicated suits, which aren't always fully disclosed because of investors' concerns about confidentiality, are drawing plenty of attention in legal circles. Although most of the reported cases have been in California, similar suits have been filed in other states.    Proponents say the arrangements are fair because they give individuals with large legal claims -- but puny resources to pay for litigation -- the chance to take on better-heeled foes in court.    &quot;Suddenly things got a little bit equal,&quot; says Mr. Hall. His adversary, a plastic-products concern, has about $200 million in annual sales and the help of industry trade groups in paying legal costs.    Others, however, say the financial arrangements can lead people to pursue lawsuits that otherwise would be settled out of court. As a result, when lawyers for the litigant have a stake in the suit, they can run afoul of ethical considerations over the stirring up of unnecessary litigation.    In 1986, for example, a California Superior Court judge in Alameda County declared that a syndicated suit against William Millard, the founder of ComputerLand Corp., was illegal because the financial arrangement discouraged a settlement. The syndicators have appealed the ruling, and a decision is expected early next year. Meanwhile, Terry Giles, a lawyer for Mr. Millard, has vowed to sue the syndicators for malicious prosecution.    Some lawyers and syndicators say the Millard decision won't have a sweeping effect, though, even if it's upheld.    &quot;It has always been true that clients can assign their claims to other people,&quot; says Stephen Gillers, a legal-ethics specialist at New York University School of Law. Only when the arrangements encourage frivolous suits or discourage settlements are courts likely to disapprove, he adds.    Syndicated suits have brought big payoffs in some cases. Patlex Corp., of Chatsworth, Calif., for instance, has essentially been investing in a string of related lawsuits for 10 years. In 1979, the investment firm that later became Patlex bought a stake in patent rights belonging to laser inventor Gordon Gould. Since then, the company has negotiated lucrative royalty agreements with alleged infringers. The efforts have made Mr. Gould a multimillionaire and have produced about $7 million in annual income for Patlex.    The suits don't always turn out the way investors expect, though. Perhaps the best-known syndicated suit -- and one in which investors have had to greatly reduce their expectations -- was another case against ComputerLand. The case resulted in a $125 million judgment and a major equity stake being awarded in 1985 to Micro/Vest, a group bankrolling the suit. The group had acquired a promissory note ComputerLand issued in its start-up days.    A California Superior Court jury held that the note was convertible into ComputerLand stock; it also awarded the investors substantial punitive damages because of ComputerLand's earlier refusal to honor the note. For a while, after the big verdict came in, a private market developed in which stakes in the investment group were traded for as much as $750,000 each, up from the original $10,000 offering price.    The case, however, has turned into something of a Pyrrhic victory. Partly because of the jury's decision, the estimated value of closely held ComputerLand's stock has sunk from a high of $1 billion just before the verdict to a low of $250 million recently. Appeals -- one of which was heard yesterday -- and disputes over how to settle could mean further delays before investors get all the money they are due.    In addition, one of the main organizers of the investment group filed for Chapter 11 protection last month under the federal Bankruptcy Code, citing $5.5 million in assets and $1.69 billion in actual and potential liabilities. Most of the liabilities are lawsuits over the big judgment, including one from the original holder of the note, who claims fraud. Meanwhile, the organizer, John Martin-Musumeci, is left with some strong opinions about lawsuit investing: &quot;I would never again put myself in a position where I had to depend upon lawyers and the judicial process to get a return on my investment.&quot;    Mr. Hall, the inventor, is hoping for a happier ending. His suits stem from a 1971 patent on his &quot;liquid support for human bodies&quot; -- the first major patent granted for the water bed -- which he invented while he was a graduate student in design.    Over the years, Mr. Hall has tried to work out private licensing arrangements with water-bed makers and distributors. One company that wouldn't budge was closely held Intex Plastics Sales Co. of Los Angeles, a major importer of water beds from Taiwan. Intex filed suit in federal court in San Francisco in 1985, seeking a ruling that Mr. Hall's patent was invalid. Mr. Hall responded with his own suit -- funded by investors -- charging Intex with patent infringement. The claims will be heard in a single trial next spring.    Whether Intex will make an issue of the financing scheme in court hasn't been decided, says Francis Utecht, a Long Beach, Calif., lawyer for the company.    Advisers to Mr. Hall concede that lawsuit investing isn't for everyone. Indeed, many of his supporters say they consider the venture to be less of a business proposition than a virtuous attempt to vindicate one man's rightful claim. Myron Wick, a San Francisco investor, equates his support for Mr. Hall with a charitable gift, albeit one with an important difference: &quot;It has the added appeal that I can get my money back, plus a return.&quot;    Morgan Chu, a Los Angeles attorney representing Mr. Hall, says syndicated suits have much related precedent. An investor with a stake in the outcome of a lawsuit, he says, is like a lawyer whose contingency fee rides on how much money is recovered for the client.    Also, he says, what Mr. Hall has done in soliciting investors is the equivalent of what companies do when they seek help for legal expenses from industry colleagues also affected by the litigation -- a course that Intex itself is following.    &quot;I bet they thought they could put on brass knuckles and a blackjack and beat him up legally,&quot; says Mr. Chu, who with the help of Mr. Hall's investors is now looking forward to a fair fight. </TEXT></DOC>