<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870209-0072 </DOCNO><HL> Board of Contributors:Toward World Economic Disintegration---By Paul W. McCracken</HL><DD> 02/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGNMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   When finance ministers, central bankers, presidents and prime ministers congregate this year, their major challenge (whatever the specific items on the agenda for economic policy) will be to counter another one of modern history's major surges toward international economic and financial disintegration. The forces pushing toward fragmentation are coming close to being irresistibly strong.    Some earlier history is useful to recall here because, as Santayana has reminded us, those who ignore the past may be condemned to repeat it.    A major reversal occurred in the mid-19th century when the domestic adjustments required by the movement toward an internationalization of economic life proved to be beyond the boundaries of the politically possible. Another came during the interwar years, when the structure built after World War I collapsed. So complete was this collapse that, as Gottfried Haberler pointed out in his great presidential address to the American Economic Association almost a quarter of a century ago, world trade in industrial products on the eve of World War II was less than on the eve of World War I, though world output of these products had almost doubled. One need not adhere rigidly to some sort of materialistic interpretation of history to believe that this disorder in the international economy played a part in the origin of World War II.    A review of that history provides no easy answers to the problems of international trade and financial policy that we now face, but it is instructive. Three major underlying developments seem to have been associated with these reversals. One was that developments producing large and rapid changes in the pattern of trade produced pressures for direct protectionist actions so powerful that the political process could not counter them. The growing internationalization following the formation of modern nation states came to a halt in part because of disruptions caused by the rapidly enlarging imports of grain into Europe from the New World.    A second disruptive force pushing the world economy toward disintegration, not surprisingly, is stagnation of the domestic economies. In the 1870s and 1890s, for example, there were sharp reversals as rates of economic growth decelerated sharply. That this would produce protectionist political pressures is not surprising. Employees of firms abroad do not elect many members of Congress or Parliament, and those with domestic jobs do. (There is, of course, a shadow electorate of sorts in most capitals, the army of lobbyists skilled in the arts of influencing, and many foreign firms are well-represented there indeed!)    Historically, it has also been a difficult period when a once-dominant economy -- which could by this dominance give shape and direction to the world economy -- was losing its overarching hegemonic power. In the decades prior to World War I, the power and dominance of the British Empire enabled it to exercise this stabilizing hegemonic effect. Whether the good record internationally of that period reflected the stability provided by the gold standard or by the world economy's being organized around London is still a matter of debate. What in retrospect is clear is that Britain could not exert that stabilizing influence following World War I. And it found itself trying to pass this baton to a U.S. not all that dominant and certainly not all that eager to receive the baton. The U.S. lacked both the economic power and the political maturity to play this role. This wobbliness made its own contribution to the disintegration of the world economic order in the two decades between the wars.    All three of these fundamental disintegrating forces and conditions are present today. While no blueprint that would represent a balanced or &quot;correct&quot; pattern of world trade can be laid out, it is clear that large changes in the pattern of world trade must occur.    In a more balanced world, the U.S. should probably run with exports and imports about equal, and perhaps with a net export surplus. It is now internationally a debtor nation, and as a high-income economy it ought to be a source of capital for the developing world. If a balance between U.S. exports and imports is to be achieved, there must be some combination of increased exports and reduced imports equal to about 4% of gross national product. That is a large adjustment. Those in Japan who say that the U.S. must accept a reduction in its standard of living if a better balance in the world economy is to be achieved are correct. However attractive reducing or closing the trade deficit may sound, and it obviously has its attractive aspects, it also means less output for domestic use than would otherwise occur.    If a better balance in the world economy is going to require some combination of increased U.S. exports and reduced U.S. imports, it follows that there must be some combination of increased imports and reduced exports somewhere else. While governments since governments began have been trying to find a way for all of them to operate with a net export surplus, that breakthrough has yet to be achieved. And the major adjustments will clearly have to be made by Japan, the European Economic Community, and such newly industrializing nations as South Korea, Taiwan and Hong Kong. In a sense, they have the attractive adjustment to make -- a more rapid increase in their standards of living than would occur if current trade trends were to continue. A better-balanced world economy means an increase in their output available for domestic use through some combination of increased imports and reduced exports. Once again, however, those producing the increased imports do not vote, those experiencing a shrinkage of export markets do and the generalized advantage to consumers is not usually a major political force.    That such adjustments must be part of a better-balanced world economy seems clear enough. Japan's trade surplus with the U.S. last year was equal to somewhat more than $50 billion. If the U.S. announced as a trade objective achieving a proportionately large net export surplus with Japan, and it looked as if we were on that path, we could assume that the government of Japan would take whatever drastic action would be needed to prevent it. The lopsided pattern of our trade with such nations as Taiwan and South Korea is prima facie evidence of an imbalance needing some adjustment. And our exports to Western Europe are actually lower than at the beginning of the decade.    Clearly, also, the U.S. economy no longer possesses such dominance and hegemonic power that it can itself determine the shape and course of the world economic order. In a sense this is good. The objective has never been a world economic order with one super-economy and all others forever behind. This diminishing relative size of the U.S. does, however, make for a more complex international economic order. As the American colonies found two centuries ago, loose confederations of essentially sovereign political entities are not a model for decisive actions. And today there is the intermediate problem of a European Economic Community that at times seems to resemble the definition of a committee (a group that individually can do nothing and collectively can agree only that nothing can be done).    The problem for governments is what can be done. One approach would be direct measures to reduce the large U.S. trade deficit by brute force. Something like this seems to be shaping up in Congress. Such actions could range from the extreme of legislated requirements for bilaterally balancing trade to, perhaps, giving the president authority to impose tariffs selectively against products or nations deemed to be making an undue contribution to the U.S. trade deficit. This was, in fact, an element of the package of economic measures adopted in August 1971.    There are, of course, two problems here. Unilateral actions would almost certainly trip off retaliatory responses by other governments. Moreover, no one knows what the &quot;right&quot; trade pattern would be for the U.S., or what array of trade restrictions would produce this pattern even if we knew what it ought to be.    We know, however, some things to do that would help along the process for getting there. The most fundamental element of a program to deal with the present disequilibrium in the world economy is to remember that the pricing system works, and attempting to fix prices always produces mischief.    In the 1970s, the U.S. saw gasoline prices as the problem and thereby imposed on itself long lines at filling stations. Rent controls to ensure cheap housing instead ensure unavailability of housing. Exchange rates are prices. If the current problem is seen as trying to enforce some pattern of these rates, to &quot;control&quot; these prices, two results can be predicted. One is an acceleration of actions for the direct control of trade. The second is that such intervention will ultimately fail. History is replete with efforts by central banks to buy up weak currencies with their own strong money, hoping thus to avoid an appreciation, only to take a bath on their vault full of the weak currency as fundamental market forces finally prevail.    There are, of course, some important things that all governments could do in their own interest to reduce disintegrating pressures on the world economy. As for the U.S., it would be helpful if both ends of Pennsylvania Avenue would spend less energy deploring the budget deficit and more on getting together to do something about it. Obviously European governments cannot be proud of sustained high unemployment rates in their countries. Japan still shows little inclination to develop a credible replacement for its export-led strategy for economic progress -- in short, a credible strategy to lift material levels of living more rapidly at home. The problem is that each government has more enthusiasm for preaching to others about their sins than to quit sinning itself, but the liberal international economic order that since World War II has made a major contribution to both prosperity and peace is now at stake.    ---   Mr. McCracken is Day distinguished professor emeritus of business administration, the University of Michigan. </TEXT></DOC>