<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870921-0029 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 09/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   ARIAS SAID a Central American peace plan would fail if a deadline isn't met.    The Costa Rican president and architect of the regional plan, signed last month, also said he opposed any extension of the Nov. 7 deadline. &quot;Time is our worst enemy, and I think we should be acting with more speed,&quot; he said. The plan calls on the five leaders who signed the pact to implement ceasefires, give amnesty to some opponents, restore civil liberties and deny sanctuary to guerrillas. Some officials say the deadline may be unreasonable.    Managua said it would allow the opposition newspaper La Prensa to reopen immediately. The move came as Arias left for the U.S. to meet with Reagan.    ---   U.S. OFFICIALS HOPE an arms-control accord will lead to detente with Moscow.    The two sides last week agreed in principle to ban all intermediate-range nuclear missiles in Europe and Asia. Reagan and Soviet leader Gorbachev likely will sign the treaty at a summit meeting around Thanksgiving. U.S. officials are convinced opportunities exist for improved relations and that an accord on reducing long-range nuclear arms might be concluded by spring. Progress has also been made on 13 other bilateral issues.    The Senate Foreign Relations panel said an attempt by Reagan to reinterpret the ABM treaty could affect consideration of a superpower arms pact.    ---   Bork's testimony left unresolved questions about his judicial philosophy. At the end of the Supreme Court nominee's five days of testimony before the Senate Judiciary Committee, Sen. DeConcini (D., Ariz.), one of four undecided panel members, said he was &quot;not satisfied&quot; with some of Bork's responses.    ---   Lt. Col. North explored using Iran armssale proceeds to fund the Contras as early as December 1985, a month prior to the date he gave in congressional testimony, an Israeli government account indicates. The account says talks with an Israeli official occurred more than a month before Reagan authorized the sales.    ---   The White House is seeking two changes in legislation pending in the Senate on catastrophic health care. The changes, which the administration hopes will avert a showdown with Congress, would tie increases in the deductible to the rising cost of the Medicare program and require Medicare participants to pay the deductible.    ---   An Iranian gunboat fired on a Saudi Arabian oil tanker in the Strait of Hormuz, ending Iran's 10-day lull in Persian Gulf shipping attacks. Iraq said it responded with an attack on a ship off Iran's Kharg Island oil terminal. Meanwhile, Arab League foreign ministers agreed to hold a summit on the Iran-Iraq war in November.    ---   South Korea has renewed its anti-leftist campaign, imprisoning more than 50 opponents of President Chun in the past two weeks. The campaign has dismayed some moderates and diplomats, who see it as a return to tactics employed before Chun agreed to democratic changes in July following massive protests.    ---   Philippine communists vowed to avenge the assassination Saturday of leftist leader Leandro Alejandro, which rebels charge was part of a U.S. plot to reimpose martial law and ensure the future of its military bases. Meanwhile, Shultz reaffirmed support for President Aquino and denied that her government was in danger of collapse.    ---   Pope John Paul II visited an Indian settlement in Canada following a nine-day tour of the U.S. At a farewell ceremony in Detroit Saturday, he reiterated his theme of strict compliance with church rules by Catholics, calling on them to &quot;defend life from conception until natural death.&quot; The pope was due to return to Rome today.    ---   Reagan is to address the U.N. General Assembly today and aides say that while the theme of his speech will be the global spread of democracy during his term, he is certain to discuss the arms agreement in principle reached with Moscow last week. He is also expected to exert pressure on Nicaragua to implement democratic changes.    ---   Militant Solidarity members challenged Walesa to help the banned union formulate a new strategy against Poland's Communist government. Several members were arrested following a Mass, attended by 100,000 workers, at which the call was made.    ---   British coal miners were to begin a ban on overtime work today to protest British Coal's new disciplinary code, which would give government tribunals control over grievance procedures. The ban is the National Union of Mineworkers' strongest show of strength since its unsuccessful yearlong strike, which ended in 1985.    ---   Died: Emil Schram, 93, former president of the New York Stock Exchange, Friday, in Peru, Ind. . . . Einar Gerhardsen, 90, former Norwegian prime minister, Saturday, in Lilleborg, Norway. </TEXT></DOC>