<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870421-0006 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 04/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. DEPORTED an accused Nazi war criminal to the Soviet Union.    Karl Linnas, who faces a death sentence on charges of supervising mass executions at a concentration camp during World War II, was placed on a Czech airliner in New York, which departed for Prague. Linnas is to be transferred to an Aeroflot jet for the flight to the Soviet Union. The move was cleared by the Supreme Court, which refused by a 6-3 vote to block the deportation. The retired land surveyor, who has been in custody for a year, is the first accused Nazi sent to the Soviet Union against his will.    Attorney General Meese had sought a country other than the Soviet Union to accept Linnas after officials in Panama reportedly suspended such an accord.    ---   ALFONSIN DISMISSED Argentina's army chief in the wake of a revolt.    The Argentine president, who Sunday defused the military rebellion that threatened the country's fledgling democracy, named Gen. Jose Dante Caridi as his new army commander, replacing the ousted Gen. Hector Rios Erenu. Alfonsin obtained the surrender of the rebels after personally conferring with the leaders of the mutiny at a military camp outside Buenos Aires. The rebel soldiers had demanded amnesty for officers accused of human-rights violations under military rule.    The U.S. lauded the peaceful end to the four-day army rebellion and said Alfonsin's government had &quot;emerged stronger from the events.&quot;    ---   Interior Secretary Hodel proposed full oil and gas leasing of the coastal plain of Alaska's Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. Despite objections by environmentalists, Hodel, in a formal recommendation to Congress, called for less restriction on drilling in the area than had been suggested in an earlier, draft proposal.    ---   Yasser Arafat opened a congress of the PLO's parliament-in-exile with a speech calling for a Palestinian state &quot;with Jerusalem as its capital.&quot; The meeting in Algeria was the first in four years by the 426-member council, and marked a reunification of ranks as seven PLO groups, including four Syrian-backed ones, attended the session.    ---   Reagan returned to Washington to consult this week with congressional leaders about what he believes are promising armscontrol talks with the Soviet Union. The president, ending a vacation in California, also is expected to give instructions to his arms negotiators, who are to begin a new round of discussions Thursday in Geneva.    NATO experts gathered in Washington to discuss Western nuclear strategy and consider Kremlin leader Gorbachev's proposal to eliminate U.S. and Soviet midrange and short-range missiles from Europe.    ---   Tamil rebels killed at least 18 Sinhalese villagers in the same area of eastern Sri Lanka where about 127 people were killed last week by the separatist guerrillas. The new killings came despite a curfew, which the government extended indefinitely.    ---   Thousands of students staged demonstrations across South Korea protesting government and campus administration policies. Meanwhile, police said more than 350 students and dissidents were held for questioning following Sunday's violent clash with police during a rally marking a 1960 student uprising that toppled the government.    ---   South Africa posted soldiers at rail yards and stations to prevent renewed violence against the country's railway system and threatened striking transport workers that they might be dismissed beginning today. Meanwhile, Pretoria rejected a U.N. statement calling for the withdrawal of a ban on protests against detention without trial.    ---   Prime Minister Gandhi defended the government and challenged opposition lawmakers to produce evidence of payoffs to officials in recent arms deals. The New Delhi government also said there was insufficient evidence to justify an inquiry into reports that a Swedish arms firm bribed Indian officials to win a defense contract.    ---   Philippine troops battled communist rebels about 30 miles north of Manila, and at least 15 guerrillas were reported killed. In the capital, Aquino appealed for unity following Saturday's brief coup attempt, which a spokesman termed the &quot;convulsions of a dying beast.&quot; Sources said opposition politicians may have taken part in the mutiny.    ---   A central spy-scandal witness recanted an earlier statement that Marine Sgt. Clayton Lonetree allowed Soviet agents to roam the U.S. Embassy in Moscow, a lawyer of Lonetree said. The witness, one of six Marines brought back to the U.S. for questioning in the case, reportedly said he had been threatened by investigators.    ---   Toshihiko Seko of Japan won the 91st Boston Marathon in 2:11:50. Rosa Mota of Portugal won the women's race in 2:25:21.    ---   Died: Maxwell D. Taylor, 85, retired Army general and former chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff, Sunday, in Washington. . . . Vernon Furrow, 78, former chairman of Payless Cashways Inc., Friday, in Tucson, Ariz. . . . Services for Glen P. Brock Sr., 90, ex-chairman of Illinois Central Gulf Railroad, will be held today in Mobile, Ala. </TEXT></DOC>