<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870909-0036 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Oil Prices Tumble Below $19 a BarrelAs Iran Appears Willing to Seek Peace---By Michael SiconolfiStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PETROLEUM (PET)MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS)STOCK INDEXES (NDX) </IN><TEXT>   U.S. oil prices tumbled below $19 a barrel on spot and futures markets amid signs that Iran is willing to negotiate a peace settlement to end its seven-year-old war with Iraq.    Also contributing to the slide were early weakness in the European oil market, further indications of above-quota output by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, and continued strains between the cartel's two largest producers, analysts and traders said.    United Nations Secretary General Javier Perez de Cuellar said Friday Iran has agreed to negotiate a U.N. peace plan to end the Persian Gulf war. He also said the 15-nation U.N. Security Council plans to ask Iran and Iraq to observe a cease-fire during his visit to the two nations this week.    &quot;If an end to the war is negotiated, both countries would want to raise production to rebuild their economies, and other OPEC members won't likely make room for that output,&quot; said Michael Rothman, senior energy analyst at Merrill Lynch Capital Markets in New York.    For the near term, however, the focus in the market remains on OPEC output, traders said. And a report issued by the International Energy Agency over the weekend supported the widely held view that the cartel is producing well beyond its official quota. The IEA represents 21 Western oil-consuming nations.    The Paris-based agency, in its regular monthly oil-market report, estimated that the cartel produced 19.7 million barrels a day for August and said Saudi Arabia, Iran and Iraq, among others, have violated the cartel's production limits. Under OPEC's current output pact, the cartel's production ceiling is 16.6 million barrels.    Moreover, the Petroleum Intelligence Weekly, a respected oil journal, reported yesterday that OPEC output in August soared to a one-year high of 19.8 million barrels a day in August, although the publication said output is expected to fall back this month.    While the estimates weren't new, traders said, they reaffirmed widening concern about the cartel's lack of production control.    Crude oil for October delivery on the New York Mercantile Exchange slipped 38 cents a barrel to $18.94, after falling to as low as $18.72 early in the session. The last time prices fell below $19 was Aug. 25, when they stood at $18.64 a barrel. Petroleum product prices also tumbled yesterday.    On the spot, or noncontract, market, the price of West Texas Intermediate, the U.S. benchmark crude oil, fell 35 cents a barrel to $18.95. And the spot price of North Sea Brent, the widely traded European crude, fell five cents a barrel to $17.65 in late trading.    The combination of bearish factors has sharply changed market sentiment, which only recently was bullish amid concern about a disruption in the flow of oil from the Persian Gulf, analysts said.    &quot;We've changed the fulcrum,&quot; said Eric Bolling, vice president, energy futures and options, at Geldermann Inc. in New York. &quot;The balances have started to be weighted toward the sellers.&quot;    At the same time, however, some analysts were skeptical of the Iranian peace overtures.    &quot;It's probably nothing more than a ploy to take the heat off of them,&quot; said Nauman Barakat, energy futures analyst at Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co. in New York.    Meanwhile, traders are likely to focus on the short-term outcome of this week's OPEC committee meetings in Vienna and on long-term implications of the growing rift between the Saudis and Iranians, the cartel's two largest producers, oil specialists said. Both factors probably will lead to gradually lower prices, some analysts said.    &quot;Right now,&quot; said Andrew Lebow, energy analyst at Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. in New York, &quot;the market is not on strong fundamental footing.&quot;    In other futures markets yesterday:    STOCK INDEXES: Futures prices initially plunged in response to Friday's increase in discount and prime rates, then recovered much of their losses by the close of trading. Futures on Standard andamp; Poor's 500 stock-index for September settlement ended down 1.25 at 314.10, after trading as low as 308.70. The rally is likely to continue today and send most financial futures prices higher, analysts said. The turnaround in investor sentiment came too late to aid bond futures, though, as September futures on U.S. Treasury bonds dropped 1 22/32 to 83 7/32. For stock-index futures, &quot;This may be the end of the correction, or at least the deepest part of it,&quot; said John Gustafson, a futures analyst at Discount Corp. of New York Futures in Chicago. &quot;Interest rates have moved high enough to attract dollar buying,&quot; which should support bond and stock futures prices, said J.R. Fredericks, a futures analyst at E. David Stephens Commodity Corp. in Chicago.    COPPER: Futures prices surged to life-of-contract highs amid continued tightness in supplies and technical factors, analysts said. The supply fundamentals were underscored by figures released last week by the American Bureau of Metal Statistics indicating that world-wide copper mine output and stockpiles in the first half ran below the levels a year earlier. &quot;There's just not that much physical copper available,&quot; said Ben Hanauer, a broker at Rudolf Wolff andamp; Co. in New York. Chart-guided technical buying accelerated the price rise, analysts and brokers said. The tightness in supplies, coupled with the strong demand that typically occurs late in the year, portends further price increases, said Frederick Demler, metals economist at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. in New York. Said Robert Wylde, president of R.J. Wylde Metals Inc. in New York: &quot;We still think it's a bull market.&quot;    PRECIOUS METALS: Gold, silver and platinum futures prices sank amid the disinflationary implications of lower oil prices, analysts said. Long liquidation, or selling of contracts bought earlier, fueled the price tumble, an analyst said. Weaker oil prices typically portend lower inflation, and many traders hold precious metals as hedges against inflation.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Most grain and soybean futures prices finished higher, with soybean meal leading the way. Tight supplies of meal in Brazil continued to boost U.S. export opportunities, helping lift prices. Stronger domestic demand in Brazil should translate into more world demand for U.S. meal, said Mickey Luth, an analyst at Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. in Chicago. Meanwhile, a lack of farmer selling boosted soybean prices. Lower stock and bond prices also gave the market a lift, analysts said, in expectation that investors will shift funds into commodities as hedges against inflation. </TEXT></DOC>