<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870910-0086 </DOCNO><HL> Public Service or Blackmail? BanksPressed to Finance Local Projects---By Richard B. SchmittStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> I GOVMT FUNCBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><TEXT>   First Interstate Bancorp considers itself a good citizen. It recently sponsored a program to teach California school children about finance, and it bankrolled a casino operator's antique-car museum in Nevada, among other causes.    But some people aren't impressed with the bank holding company's idea of charity. &quot;Cosmetic,&quot; says Alberto Nieto, leader of the Fresno Organizing Project. The group is threatening to bottle up a plan by First Interstate to expand into Texas, unless the company starts financing more low-cost housing for the poor and loans to minority small businesses.    The Los Angeles banking concern can't afford to ignore such demands. Increasingly, community activists are taking banks to task -- and winning large financial concessions -- under the federal Community Reinvestment Act.    The law requires that banks and thrifts prove to regulators that they &quot;serve the convenience and needs&quot; of local communities. By charging that banks haven't provided adequate community services, the activists can threaten to stall any merger. To avoid such delays, banks often agree to pledge millions of dollars in financing to community projects if the groups will drop their objections.    This year alone, banks are expected to pony up $1 billion in low-cost loans and other aid for such causes as housing for the poor and the development of inner-city businesses. Wells Fargo Bank is providing low-cost financing for a shelter for battered women. First National Bank of Chicago is helping finance work on the headquarters of the National Training and Information Center, a major community-action group.    As bank mergers have increased in recent years, community groups have stepped up their protests under the Community Reinvestment Act. &quot;Mergers have provided a forum for groups to raise grievances to get banks to spell out commitments which they wouldn't otherwise make,&quot; says Allen Fishbein, general counsel for the Center for Community Change, a Washington, D.C., group that organizes community protests.    Most bankers take a dimmer view of the process. They say the activists are stretching the intent of the law, which they criticize as vague. Some bankers say they are being forced to take on duties that government agencies should provide. Others contend that they have capitulated to demands that amount to extortion -- just to avoid delaying a proposed merger.    &quot;Banks see it as a payoff&quot; to prevent the postponement of mergers, says Robert E. Mannion, a Washington banking lawyer and a former Federal Reserve Board official. &quot;Pure blackmail&quot; is how Edward E. Crutchfield Jr., First Union Corp. chairman and chief executive officer, described the process at a banking conference last fall.    But regulators say the activists play an important role in seeing that community-service requirements are met. Jim Lowell, community-affairs manager for the Federal Reserve, says the activists are helpful in assessing how well banks are meeting their obligations. Moreover, he says, the filings have rarely delayed mergers.    About $5 billion in concessions have been won since Congress enacted the law nine years ago, including $1 billion last year, activists and academic groups estimate. Since 1984, when the surge in bank mergers began, there has been an estimated five-fold increase in the number of mergers that community groups have formally protested.    Mr. Nieto, head of the community group that has taken on First Interstate, says federal data show that the bank has made few recent mortgage loans in West Fresno, a low-income and predominantly black and Hispanic area. Among other demands, his group wants the bank to pledge $28 million in favored-rate residential and commercial loans over three years for borrowers in West Fresno.    So far, First Interstate, which denies Mr. Nieto's charges, has offered to increase its marketing in West Fresno and has promised to give special consideration to any loan requests from there. But it has balked at setting aside a specific amount for low-income loans, especially at preferential rates. &quot;We are a bank,&quot; says Jerry Loeser, a First Interstate lawyer. &quot;We can't give away money.&quot;    Other banks virtually have done that in the concessions they granted. Three banks in Chicago agreed to waive closing fees or other loan costs on a $153 million project to rebuild old homes and finance small businesses in several Chicago neighborhoods. The project settles several merger challenges filed by community groups. Charlotte, N.C.-based First Union agreed to give cash rebates totaling 5% of annual loan payments to certain low-income customers who pay home-improvement loans on time.    This year, First National Bank of Chicago will make more than $500,000 in grants for community activities, for instance -- more than double the amount given before its settlement. The aid includes seed grants for fledgling inner-city businesses, including a telephone-answering company, a contract-sewing business and an apartment-maintenance firm. The bank is also giving $30,000 to help the National Training and Information Center, a leading organizer of Community Reinvestment Act protests, rehabilitate a Chicago beauty school as its main office.    As part of its $1.1 billion acquisition of Crocker National Bank last year, Wells Fargo Bank promised to provide $41 million in low-cost financing for community projects. Wells Fargo won't comment on terms, but sources say the bank has provided low-cost financing for ventures including low-income apartments in the San Francisco Mission district and the shelter for battered women.    Banks often voice support for such projects and some -- including Wells Fargo -- say they would have provided much of the aid anyway to fulfill their obligations under the Community Reinvestment Act.    But many banks say the concessions they are being pressured to make go beyond the act's intended requirements. The law was passed at a time of congressional concern over &quot;redlining,&quot; in which banks refuse to make loans in certain areas -- mainly poor or minority neighborhoods. &quot;It is an act that encourages outreach&quot; to all communities, says Marion Cowell, First Union general counsel. &quot;It is not an act that requires bad loans or contributions.&quot;    Regulators conduct periodic reviews to see that Community Reinvestment requirements are being met. Mr. Cowell and other bank lawyers say banks receiving passing grades shouldn't face merger delays if community groups suddenly object.    But activists say that regulators -- swamped by bank failures and other financial problems -- can give only cursory attention to community concerns.    Some banks have begun to balk at the groups' demands. New Orleans-based Hibernia Bank, for instance, refused to negotiate with the Association of Community Organizations for Reform Now, or ACORN, which objected to Hibernia's acquiring another Louisiana bank last year. Hibernia won Fed approval, but after a nine-month delay, and subject to several conditions -- including an unusual arrangement in which the bank will report to the Fed about its community activities.    Other banks have become more enthusiastic. Richard Hartnack, a senior vice president for Chicago's First National, thinks neighborhood lending is good business, noting that none of the bank's recent community-development loans has gone bad. But he adds, &quot;I may be the last bleeding-heart liberal in the banking industry.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>