<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880212-0114 </DOCNO><HL> A Plank Bush Should Stand On </HL><SO> </SO><G> CNG EXE </G><TEXT>   The following advice to George Bush is excerpted from a letter to the vice president from Stephen Glazier, a New York lawyer who has written on the veto clauses of the Constitution. The Constitution establishes the veto in Article I, Section 7, Clause 2. Clause 3 specifies that it applies to &quot;Every Order, Resolution, or Vote to which the concurrence of the Senate and House of Representatives may be necessary (except on a question of Adjournment). . . .&quot; A related editorial appears today (see: &quot;Go for it, Mr. Bush&quot; -- WSJ Feb. 12, 1988).    Dear George:   Thank you very much for your kind letters of Dec. 23 and Jan. 13, regarding my article in The Wall Street Journal, Dec. 4, 1987, entitled &quot;Reagan Already Has Line-Item Veto.&quot;    In response to your question in your Jan. 13 letter, &quot;if there is some practical way to test your theory on interpretation, I would be most interested in hearing more,&quot; there is an answer. The only way to test the interpretation is to precipitate a test case or series of test cases. And, of course, there can be no test cases without, first, actual use by the president of a Clause 3 line-item veto. Actual use by the president of the Clause 3 veto is the only way to test it because there are no hypothetical lawsuits, there are no Supreme Court advisory opinions, and no number of law review articles are dispositive of the issue.    Conceivably, the president could delicately veto one item in one bill, and then wait to see what happens. But time and the nation would be better served if the president would fully commit himself and start vetoing all bad parts of all good bills, and not just budget line items. (Clause 3 has no limit regarding subject matter. The Clause 3 veto applies to any part of any bill.) This approach would, in effect, create a flood of distinct &quot;test cases&quot; in short order. In any case, if the president never acts, the court can never rule.    Actually, the proper approach on this issue is not &quot;What does Clause 3 mean? Let's test it.&quot; The approach is &quot;Clause 3 means what the president says it means, until the Supreme Court may rule otherwise, if ever.&quot; Or perhaps even more to the point, &quot;Clause 3 means what the president does in its name, until the court reverses him on it, if ever.&quot;    The executive has a greater role in interpreting the Constitution than does the judiciary, because the executive has the virtue of affirmative action. The judiciary can only negate executive action, and only when the judiciary may review a specific case. Hence, it is off the mark for the president to be concerned with creating a &quot;test case&quot; for the court to review. Instead, the president should decide that he knows what the Constitution means, that he knows what the country needs in policy, and that he must execute this knowledge with commitment at every opportunity. And if the Democrats do not like the resulting Republican achievement, it will be for the Democrats to get in the way and challenge results with &quot;test cases.&quot;    From a political point of view, you might also bear in mind the lesson of FDR and the New Deal. The core of the New Deal programs was voided as unconstitutional by the court. However, FDR's efforts in the controversy and in response to the Depression were such that he was locked into three landslide re-elections. He won that war while losing the Constitutional battle. And the only cost was infliction of the legal status quo on a narrow range of issues. In the worst case, a Clause 3 veto controversy could have a similar result for a Republican president. In the best case, and perhaps the most likely case, the Clause 3 veto would be upheld by the court.    For the president to apply the Clause 3 veto now would barely be controversial, outside of Congress and professional political circles. Aside from the language of the Constitution, and Madison's notes of the convention, note that 43 states have explicitly given their governors the line-item veto. And, Congress itself, in the past when it had the chance, has explicitly given the line-item veto to the executives of Puerto Rico, Guam, Alaska, Hawaii and the Philippines. Everyone knows what good government requires.    Although I have usually assumed that Democrats would sue to overturn presidential assertion of Clause 3 vetoes, this may not be the case. It could be very costly politically for the Democrats to challenge in court certain possible item vetoes. For example, if with the last 1,100 page Omnibus Budget Bill (whatever that means) Mr. Reagan had used a Clause 3 item veto on Teddy Kennedy's last-minute bill of attainder against Rupert Murdoch and his paper in Boston, the Democrats might well have decided that a court challenge would have been too embarrassing. Other possibilities abound. And of course, unchallenged use matures into consent by acquiescence.    Note that unilateral application of the Clause 3 veto is far more conservative than the proposal for a constitutional amendment for a line-item veto. Calls for an amendment could lead to a runaway Constitutional Convention and disaster. Unilateral assertion by the president of the Clause 3 veto could lead only to a very narrow range of legal results, and could not affect any other provision of the Constitution.    Your impulse in your Dec. 23 letter to pursue a consensual arrangement with Congress on this issue is understandable but not practical. Since the Vietnam War era, Congress has made a broad-based sustained attack on the power of the executive, including foreign policy as well as budgetary issues. Congress will not now voluntarily reverse itself at its own expense. The only way to restore government in this country is for the two other branches, the executive and the judicial, to gang up on the wayward third branch, the legislative, and take back the item veto.    The best way for you to prepare public opinion on this issue would be for you to adopt the item veto (the Clause 3 part-of-a-bill veto), without further constitutional amendment, as a plank in your campaign. It would be a high-profile way to show leadership and energy, without disagreeing with the policies of Mr. Reagan that you support. It would also be a good way for you to run against the Democrat-dominated Congress, and to show that you are really the only nominee with new ideas. And the people would be enlightened quickly, and become very supportive. </TEXT></DOC>