<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870717-0003 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 07/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   POINDEXTER SAID a record wasn't kept about withholding fund-diversion data.    The former national security adviser told the congressional committees investigating the Iran-Contra affair that he resigned his post last fall without telling the president or top advisers that he was responsible for approving the diversion of Iran arms-sales profits to aid Nicaragua's rebels. The admiral said he told Reagan that he was &quot;generally aware&quot; of the plan, and that he never prepared any written record of his intentions regarding the diversion issue or confided in officials.    The congressional panels disclosed that they had obtained transcripts of tape-recorded telephone conversations relevant to the affair, including at least one with former CIA chief Casey.    ---   Nofziger was indicted by a federal grand jury in Washington in connection with his lobbying activities for New York-based Wedtech Corp., the former White House aide has told close friends. Nofziger has been the subject of an inquiry into possible conflict of interest. The indictment is expected to be announced today.    ---   A U.S. judge postponed the perjury trial of former White House aide Deaver until Oct. 19. The judge in Washington ordered the delay to allow defense lawyers time to seek Supreme Court review of an appellate court ruling requiring that jury selection proceedings be open to the public.    ---   Six Americans were killed when their helicopter crashed in a rainstorm outside San Salvador, a U.S. Embassy spokesman said. The second-in-command of the U.S. advisers in El Salvador was among the military personnel killed. Involvement by leftist rebels fighting the U.S.-backed Salvadoran government wasn't suspected in the crash.    ---   Opposition leaders in Seoul demanded that South Korea's four-day-old cabinet resign in favor of a neutral government that can ensure fair elections. Dissidents Kim Young Sam and Kim Dae Jung also urged President Chun, who resigned last week as head of the country's governing party, to relinquish his party membership.    Rescue workers searched for victims after a typhoon caused floods, mud slides and stormy seas that killed at least 68 people and left 101 others missing along the southern coast of South Korea.    ---   Iraq's president said Baghdad would reject any resolution by the U.N. security council seeking a cease-fire in the Persian Gulf war unless it provided for a comprehensive settlement. U.N. action is expected next week. In Washington, the Coast Guard cleared the first two Kuwaiti tankers to fly the U.S. flag in the gulf.    ---   The Philippine government filed a civil suit against Marcos and his family for $22.6 billion in damages, including $10 billion they allegedly acquired illegally during Marcos's 20-year rule. An Aquino spokesman in Manila also said that government lawyers were preparing a criminal case against Marcos.    ---   Pakistan denied any connection to an alleged plan to obtain materials from the U.S. that could be used to develop a nuclear bomb. A Pakistani was arrested in Philadelphia last week and charged in the alleged plot. A Foreign Ministry spokesman in Islamabad expressed concern that the issue could hurt ties with the U.S.    ---   Thatcher arrived in the U.S. for a 12-hour round of talks today with Reagan and other administration officials. A spokesman for the British prime minister said Thatcher was expected to discuss Mideast peace, arms control and international trade.    ---   Police in Beirut detained a Christian technician in the Lebanese army in connection with the June 1 killing of Prime Minister Karami, a Sunni Moslem. It was the first arrest in the case. Separately, U.S. envoy Walters expressed optimism that recent talks with Syria's Assad could lead to the release of some hostages in Lebanon.    ---   An official in Athens said a dispute was settled between the U.S. and Greece over allegations that Greek authorities had contacts with Arab terrorists. Greece, which had sought a withdrawal of the accusation before negotiating a new military base pact with Washington, said the U.S. had sent a &quot;satisfactory&quot; note on the matter.    ---   Transportation Secretary Dole ordered the FAA to crack down on airlines that don't properly screen passengers and carry-on luggage. Dole, releasing a task force report, recommended imposing civil penalties if lax procedures were found at airports.    ---   Hundreds of firefighters battled wind-whipped blazes in Washington, Idaho, Oregon and Utah. At least two loggers have been killed, about 30 houses destroyed and thousands of acres of timber and rangeland burned by the fires, which apparently were ignited by lightning earlier this week.    ---   Iran threatened to sever ties with France as the French government refused to lift a police cordon around Iran's Embassy in Paris, where a diplomat is wanted to answer questions about bombings last year in the French capital. In Johannesburg, South Africa recalled its ambassador-designate to Paris in a dispute over credentials.    ---   Lawmakers in New Delhi elected Prime Minister Gandhi's candidate as the country's new president. Vice President Ramaswamy Venkataraman, 77, is to assume the largely ceremonial office next week. </TEXT></DOC>