<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880520-0145 </DOCNO><HL> Venture Capital's New Look </HL><AUTHOR> Michael Schrage </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TAXES FORGN </CO><IN> MON EDP ELE </IN><TEXT>   What makes Kubota, an Osaka-based tractor company, smarter than Congress and the White House?    That's easy: a sense of risk, a genuine appreciation of American high technology and an understanding of capital formation -- a few things Washington seems to have ignored even as the politicos chant election-year pieties about &quot;making America competitive.&quot;    Kubota looks smart because it became the largest investor in two well-regarded high-tech start-ups in the U.S. -- MIPS, a leading microprocessor design house, and Ardent Computer, a superminicomputer firm run by several of America's brightest computer architects. Kubota now has direct access to these world-class technologies.    While the cheaper dollar certainly made it easier for Kubota to buy American, Washington's misguided tax policies have put U.S. investors at a disadvantage when it comes to investing in America's future. This is particularly true in the case of emerging technology companies.    The 1987 elimination of the capital-gains differential by the Tax Reform Act of 1986 has undermined U.S. investment in new business financing at precisely the time when the foreign appetite for high-technology growth companies in the U.S. has been stimulated by both strategic desire and currency opportunity. It is becoming easier for a talented American high-tech entrepreneur to get seed money from a Japanese, Korean, German or British firm than from Silicon Valley or New York.    The U.S. &quot;removed the incentive for American venture capital to make start-up investments,&quot; asserts Hsu Ta-Lin, who handles venture-capital investments both in the U.S. and in Pacific Rim countries for Hambrecht andamp; Quist in San Francisco. &quot;The trend is not good.&quot;    &quot;The type of deals being done is very much affected by the Tax Reform Act,&quot; asserts David Marquardt, a general partner at Technology Venture Investors, a Silicon Valley venture-capital firm. &quot;There's been a very big shift to later-stage stuff.&quot;    While other industrialized countries have been lowering capital-gains taxes for individuals in the past few years, or have never had them, the U.S. has been the exception. The picture for corporate investors, however, is quite different. Most foreign firms don't enjoy a capital-gains differential at home, which helps explain the relative lack of seed capital there. In the U.S., capital gains by corporations and individuals are treated equally.    Once a uniquely American preserve, venture capital has been quickly joining the ranks of globalized industries. The success of such venture-backed companies as Apple Computer, Genentech, Tandem Computer, Sun Microsystems and Lotus Development Corp. has spawned a tremendous amount of interest and investment from overseas. European and Asian nations alike recently have been trying to create homegrown versions of Silicon Valley -- and aggressively participate in America's new ventures.    Nothing ominous here -- except that America's venture-capital industry has been restructuring itself in a way that is eroding its historic role as a source of seed money. This has created an enormous opportunity for foreign companies to both fill the gap and get in at the start of new technology cycles. Venture capital's new look is due in no small part to the absence of a capital-gains differential.    &quot;You might as well go for the safer and more current return because you do have the time value of money,&quot; says Steven Gilbert, who heads Chemical Bank's $250 million-plus venture fund. &quot;I am being penalized for being a long-term investor. . . . We're hesitant to look at start-ups under the current tax system.&quot;    Outside of portfolio diversification, there is no economic incentive for an investor to take a long-term position in an emerging technology company instead of buying shares over the counter or funding a leveraged buyout.    So venture capitalists have been putting a greater share of their money in later-round financings and LBOs. In 1985, according to Venture magazine, the top venture funds put roughly $481 million in LBOs; in 1987, that number totaled more than $1 billion. Late-stage financings totaled $540.6 million in 1985; in 1987, the volume was $988 million. While seed funding in that period rose from $432 million to $550 million, much of the new money went into non-technology start-ups, such as specialty retailing chains and consumer goods. High-tech funding was flat. Essentially, America's venture capitalists have been substituting financial risk for technical risk.    &quot;There's no marginal incentive for start-ups,&quot; says TVI's Mr. Marquardt, who funded Sun Microsystems and Microsoft in their earliest stages. In addition, the initial successes of the venture industry in the first half of the decade have led to an excess of &quot;megafunds&quot; -- venture pools with hundreds of millions of dollars to invest. The sheer size of these funds has, in many instances, transformed seed capital from a primary activity to a marginal one. William von Meister, a Washington-based entrepreneur, recalls one New York venture fund declining seed deals in 1987 with the argument: &quot;No way -- it takes just as much time and attention doing a $500,000 deal as it does a $5 million deal.&quot;    Mr. Gilbert of Chemical Bank says: &quot;To a certain extent, the abandonment of the seed-capital market has made the entrepreneur more receptive to foreign capital. If I'm an entrepreneur who's been walking around with a business plan and there's a Japanese firm willing to fund it . . . well, why not?&quot;    &quot;Foreign investors are much more sophisticated now,&quot; says Hambrecht andamp; Quist's Mr. Hsu, who notes that as recently as three years ago, most foreign investors shunned risky start-up opportunities in favor of apparently safer investments in more established technology firms. Today, these investors want to get in on the ground floor.    Another fundamental shift has been a trend toward disintermediation and direct investment by foreign companies in startups. In the past, foreign investors were more than happy to reap the generous returns that America's top venture-capital funds could yield.    &quot;We are dealing with different kinds of investors now,&quot; says Sumiko Ito, who formerly handled U.S. venture-capital activities for Nomura Securities and now works with Japanese investors for Alex. Brown, the Baltimore investment bank. &quot;Large companies have an appetite for new technologies-they prefer direct investment.&quot;    Ms. Ito sees Japanese investments driven mainly by strategic concerns, not just the strong yen or tax considerations. She anticipates a &quot;doubling or tripling over the next year or so&quot; of seed investments in the U.S. The companies want access to technology they can get only in America.    &quot;The game has completely changed,&quot; declares Hambrecht andamp; Quist's Mr. Hsu, &quot;because these investors aren't solely concerned with return on investment.&quot;    What's more, international tax accountants note that foreign investments in the U.S. can be structured to bring the capital-gains tax bite closer to zero than 28%. &quot;As long as you avoid real estate, foreign investors can usually avoid paying significant capital-gains taxes, depending upon the exemptions in the tax treaties,&quot; says Andre Fogarasi, an international accountant with Arthur Andersen andamp; Co.'s Washington office. Consequently, tax considerations have only a marginal impact on a foreign corporation's decision to invest.    By contrast, U.S. venture-capital funds, corporations and their investors are more bottom-line oriented. Success is measured by return on investment.    The issue is as much one of philosophy as economics: Should tax policy reinforce the U.S. investment community's predilection for short-run returns? Or should it encourage longer-term investments that hold the promise of wealth creation?    If all income shouldn't be treated equally, then simply creating a capital-gains differential isn't enough. The tax should be crafted to encourage investors to be rewarded for taking the longer view. One approach would be to create a sliding-scale capital-gains tax over seven years that would have a two-year holding period at the 28% level and then would ratchet down to 10% by the end of the seventh year. Harvard Business School Profs. William Sohlman and Howard Stevenson, who have informally proposed a variation of this, believe a sliding scale would encourage more direct corporate investment in new ventures, as well as rekindle the interest of venture-capital firms.    Clearly, America's entrepreneurs are going to explore all their options when they launch their companies. It would be wise policy to encourage American investors to take the long view for investment opportunities.    ---   Mr. Schrage is a senior editor at Manhattan, inc. magazine. </TEXT></DOC>