<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870812-0033 </DOCNO><HL> He Had Little to Do in White House, His Rivals Say---By Ellen HumeStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   With the Iran-Contra hearings over, Vice President George Bush's political supporters are buoyant that he has come through the inquiry unscathed. &quot;Literally everywhere I go, people are saying it looks like the vice president is in the clear now,&quot; says Lee Atwater, his campaign manager.    The hearings provided no evidence that Mr. Bush actively pushed for the Iranian arms deal, knew about the diversion of profits to the Contras or played an important role in raising private aid for the Nicaraguan rebels.    But the flip side is that the congressional investigation, on top of the Tower Commission report, shows a vice president uninvolved in key decisions -- something his political opponents will eagerly exploit as he attempts to use his vice presidential experience as a springboard to the presidency. &quot;It's pretty tough for the vice president to say that he has been at the epicenter of the Reagan foreign policy for eight years and then turn around and say that he had nothing to do with foreign policy in this recent episode,&quot; fellow GOP presidential aspirant Jack Kemp said recently in a Cable News Network interview.    The broader question of the vice president's involvement in administration decision making is certain to become an issue in 1988. Administration officials, White House insiders and Bush confidants say that he has performed far more ably than his low profile might suggest. In an interview, Mr. Bush said he has carefully defined his role: &quot;I'm not trying to make decisions or shape a decision before it gets to the president.&quot; Rather, he said, he has been deeply involved as a personal confidant and channel of communication for Mr. Reagan, though he is loath to provide specifics.    But even some prominent Capitol Hill Republicans say that his role has been largely passive, rather than one of substantive participation. And doubts persist about how courageously he tests the Oval Office access that he has undeniably achieved.    Mr. Bush wins plaudits from many White House insiders for his work as an effective trouble-shooter and stand-in for the president. In the past seven years, he has traveled to 74 foreign countries and throughout the U.S. As chairman of the White House crisis-management team, he quietly handled first-line reaction to a number of crises that occurred when President Reagan was out of town: the Polish crackdown on Solidarity, the unraveling of the Lebanese government in early 1984 and the death of Soviet head of state Yuri Andropov.    His trip through Europe in early 1983 helped defuse the concerns of North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies about deploying missiles there -- &quot;He carried the mail very well,&quot; said Richard Haass, a former State Department official who now teaches at Harvard -- and he more recently served notice on the European Community that the U.S. wouldn't shy away from a war over pasta tariffs unless trade accords were reached.    The Iran-Contra hearings yielded another example of Mr. Bush's achievements -- helping to curb the Salvadoran death squads. Lt. Col. Oliver North recounted how Mr. Bush rejected his Secret Service detail's strenuous objections and met in a showdown talk in San Salvador in December 1983 with armed officers linked to the squads. &quot;It is, in my humble opinion, one of the bravest things I've seen,&quot; Col. North said.    And within the White House, he has reportedly sided with Labor Secretary William Brock and against Attorney General Edwin Meese on affirmative action policy, and helped convince Mr. Reagan to water down a lie-detector testing program that had stirred resignation threats from Secretary of State George Shultz.    Mr. Bush lunches with the president once a week, bringing Mr. Reagan political gossip from abroad, the cabinet and Capitol Hill -- where he's a frequent racquetball player in the House gym and a regular at weekly GOP leadership lunches in the Senate. &quot;Some senator will come up to me at those Tuesday lunches and say, 'Please tell the president this,' and I'll tell him,&quot; Mr. Bush said.    Those private sessions are also the prime opportunity for Mr. Bush to assert himself, offer advice and speak his mind freely. Mr. Bush contended that he &quot;absolutely&quot; says what he thinks when the two men are alone. But the privacy of Mr. Bush's counsel is so complete, &quot;He doesn't debrief me or other staff&quot; afterward, said Bush's chief of staff, Craig Fuller.    Mr. Bush is seldom viewed by lawmakers as important in resolving substantive disagreements with the White House. Even in foreign affairs, Mr. Bush's strong suit as a former head of the CIA, &quot;it didn't occur to me&quot; to line up the vice president's support, said former Senate Foreign Relations chairman Richard Lugar. &quot;In terms of congressional interplay in developing Central America, South Africa, arms-control policy or what have you, George Bush has really not been a player,&quot; the Indiana Republican said.    Critics say that Mr. Bush goes too far to avoid any policy-making role. Ever concerned about imposing on the president's generosity, Mr. Bush is depicted by some White House insiders as a man reluctant to press too hard or too often for anything.    For example, one former White House aide cited vain efforts to get Mr. Bush interested in the administration's farm legislation, even though it will be an issue in the early Iowa presidential caucuses. And White House insiders said Mr. Bush also wasn't receptive to his staff's idea that he head the space shuttle investigating committee.    The vice president did speak up late last year when the Iran-Contra affair erupted, urging the president to let then-Chief of Staff Donald Regan go. But aides said that when the president snapped, &quot;I don't want to hear any more about Don Regan,&quot; the vice president hastily withdrew and didn't raise the matter again until Mr. Regan's fate had already been sealed.    To Mr. Bush's defenders, his critics don't understand the inherent limits of the vice president's job. &quot;The proper role of the vice president is to be a loyal supernumerary,&quot; said Treasury Secretary James Baker, a longtime Bush associate who also served as President Reagan's first chief of staff. &quot;I think George Bush has been a perfect vice president in that respect.&quot;    Mr. Bush himself argued that while he keeps away from policy making, he is extraordinarily well-prepared as the president's understudy. &quot;If something were to happen to the president, I'd be the best-informed vice president in terms of foreign affairs or what's going on,&quot; he said.    But he has trouble squaring that with the Iran-Contra scandal; he said that he really didn't know what was going on even though he was in a group of four top officials who supposedly oversaw the policy on a day-to-day basis from its inception to its exposure last November. As head of the administration's terrorism task force, Mr. Bush issued a report in February 1986 pledging, &quot;We will make no concessions to terrorists,&quot; even though he knew, according to officials' testimony, that the U.S. had approved sending arms to Iran and he had been told months before, according to notes by his chief of staff, that the Iranians getting the arms were radicals, not moderates.    &quot;I'm catching the dickens from friends who say, 'Well, heck, you were there; why didn't you do more about it?'&quot; Mr. Bush said during a March political swing through Iowa. While he has said he expressed &quot;reservations&quot; about the administration's Iran policy as it unfolded, official testimony indicates he generally approved of the arms deliveries to Iran at critical strategy meetings with the president.    The pressure is building now on Mr. Bush to come out from Mr. Reagan's shadow, to tell the world where he disagreed with the president. But that just doesn't sit right with George Bush, his aides insist. &quot;He feels he owes the president more than that,&quot; said Mr. Fuller. </TEXT></DOC>