<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880229-0068 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor: Do Soviet SS-20s Really Exist? </HL><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><IN> NUK ARO </IN><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   Re your editorials and articles on the INF treaty: There's something terribly unreal and worrisome about the treaty.    We have an agreement unprecedented in the history of U.S.-Soviet arms-control negotiations where the Soviets seem to be giving up far more missiles and warheads than the U.S. President Reagan, backed by the Defense Department and the Joint Chiefs of Staff, went out of his way to emphasize this as a cardinal advantage of the treaty. Yet it was Mr. Reagan who a decade earlier had condemned harshly SALT II as &quot;fatally flawed&quot; because of the large military advantage it seemingly gave to the Soviets. One wonders why he now is so willing to accept the Soviets' word on their beneficence in signing the INF treaty.    The Reagan administration previously had declared that it would never trust the Russians, but now it has done exactly that. The Soviets, not U.S. intelligence, have provided the administration with the critical data on the numbers, kinds and deployments of the missiles covered by the INF treaty. The principal nuclear missile involved is the SS-20. How much do we know about this missile? Despite Reagan administration inferences, we know very little about it.    The Soviets have tested the SS-20 under cover of darkness and encrypted telemetry, denying the U.S. critical information on missile performance. U.S. technical surveillance has been able to determine the SS-20's range; but even here the observed range -- only 10% short of intercontinental ballistic missiles -- is not necessarily the true range of the missile. The Soviets could very well have designed the SS-20 as an ICBM but tested it only as an intermediate-range weapon to mislead us as to their true intentions. In other words, this may have been a massive deception.    In fact, there are convincing, even compelling, reasons for believing this is what the Soviets had in mind in the first place, considering that when the SS-20 development was initiated they were building an arsenal of theater nuclear weapons capable of destroying key NATO targets many times over. Most likely, the SS-20 is a mobile strategic ballistic missile -- a weapon for which the Soviets long have stated requirements. In which case, the U.S., in negotiating the INF treaty, has concerned itself with a weapon that by our definition never may have existed. Thus, we will be giving up a key element of NATO's nuclear deterrent in the Pershing IIs and cruise missiles, when we really don't know what the Soviets are giving up because the treaty terms for SS-20 dismantlement do not allow us to verify actual missile destruction.    Regarding the SS-20 deployment, it should be realized that U.S. satellites never have observed actual missiles being deployed. Rather, our satellites have photographed base facilities containing sheds in which we have convinced ourselves the SS-20 missiles and their launchers are stored. But we never have told ourselves what the Soviets long have told themselves -- namely, that the purpose of deploying mobile missiles is to prevent the other side from finding out where they are and thus being able to destroy them.    For the Soviets to have been so obliging as to deploy their weapons at fixed sites so readily identifiable by our satellites flies in the face of the military logic once expressed by Nikita Khrushchev: &quot;We locate our missiles in such a way as to ensure a double and even treble margin of safety. We have a vast territory and we are able to disperse and camouflage them well.&quot; What U.S. satellites have seen may have been little more than a nuclear Potemkin Village.    There is no doubt that the INF treaty will be ratified by the Senate, overwhelmingly. And even the leading critics of the treaty mainly favor ratification, pointing out that one way or another our Pershing IIs and cruise missiles are going to be withdrawn from Europe. However, the Senate, if it can summon the political courage to do so, would do well to ask itself just what this treaty is all about. Why have we negotiated and consummated it? What is it that we will be ratifying? And why have we so willingly, even compulsively, rationalized the treaty at face value rather than explore the Soviet motives behind it?    To conduct such a debate before the treaty is ratified is something the Senate owes to the American people; not so much because the treaty is all that important to U.S. security but because ratification without such debate will set a terrible precedent for concluding and ratifying a strategic nuclear treaty (START), which will be of the utmost importance to U.S. security.    If U.S. intelligence determining the INF treaty has been woefully lacking, the same can be said about a possible START agreement. We have no way, employing our spy satellites, of determining in any convincing way that Soviet ICBM silos contain actual missiles in any appreciable numbers, and there are many ways that these missiles could be hidden and deployed elsewhere. Were we to sign a START treaty where the reduction of Soviet ICBMs would be verified by observing the destruction of silos, we would be seriously risking our security and the credibility of our nuclear deterrent.    For the reasons given here on the efficacy of the INF treaty, verifiability and compliance for a START agreement could be meaningless. We could be verifying the reduction of a missile force whose numbers and locations we have accepted on faith from the Soviets, and it goes without saying that the Soviets would be delighted to comply with the terms of such an agreement -- involving the destruction of missiles that didn't exist.    The administration already has been put on warning that a START agreement will not get the ready acceptance given to the INF treaty. Fine. But one should keep in mind that past agreements on strategic nuclear missiles have met considerable resistance only to be accepted. What should be thrashed out starting immediately is whether the U.S. has the intelligence base to allow us to proceed responsibly in START. If this means divulging some of our intelligence techniques, well so be it. We'll be far safer with the knowledge of our intelligence limitations, which in all probability the Soviets have known for many years and exploited to our great disadvantage.    Sam Cohen   Los Angeles   ---   (Mr. Cohen, a former nuclear analyst, is the inventor of the neutron bomb.) </TEXT></DOC>