<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881025-0029 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   DUKAKIS ACCUSED Bush of resorting to &quot;outright lies&quot; in the presidential race.    With about two weeks until Election Day, the Democratic nominee said Bush has been &quot;running a campaign based on distortions and distractions&quot; to avoid discussing &quot;real issues.&quot; Dukakis also criticized Bush's plan for a capital gains tax credit, saying it would benefit only the wealthy. The Republican candidate, meanwhile, denied that his campaign advertising was aimed at inflaming racial fears, calling the Democrats' allegations a &quot;desperation kind of move.&quot;    Both Dukakis and Bush intensified their campaigning, setting tight schedules for the final fortnight without any breaks until the Nov. 8 balloting.    ---   The Islamic Jihad disclaimed any link to a Lebanese woman arrested in Italy with photographs of U.S. hostages. The pro-Iranian group holds at least two Americans. In Milan, police said a U.S. organization was the intended recipient of the hostage photographs. The newspaper Il Giornale said U.S. diplomats were to receive the photos.    ---   The PLO urged the Israeli electorate to vote for &quot;the forces that represent the real peace choice&quot; in the Mideast. It didn't cite any Israeli political party. The appeal, issued by a PLO official in Tunis, was viewed as an unprecedented attempt to influence the outcome of Israel's Nov. 1 elections.    ---   West German Chancellor Kohl arrived in Moscow and met with Kremlin leader Gorbachev. They are expected to discuss political and economic relations and disarmament strategy during Kohl's four-day visit to the Soviet Union. Kohl's entourage included about 50 industrial officials who are to sign business accords with the Soviets.    ---   Medicare will pay for flu shots for about 400,000 people in 10 areas of the U.S. as part of a $100 million program aimed at preventing infectious diseases, an official with the Centers for Disease Control said. The project is the first time that Medicare will be used for such inoculations.    ---   The EPA estimated that new regulations for drinking water and waste treatment could cost homeowners an average of $100 or more in additional municipal fees by 1996. The agency's study also said that U.S. farms and some small businesses could face significant costs from the new rules.    ---   The White House denied that deposed Philippine President Marcos made campaign contributions to Reagan, saying earlier investigations of the allegations had found &quot;no evidence&quot; of such donations. Newsweek magazine said this week that a House panel was investigating charges that Marcos illegally gave Reagan $12 million.    ---   Authorities in New York said one of two Mexican police officers charged with planning to ship heroin into the U.S. said he was among the first investigators on the scene of the 1985 slaying of a U.S. drug agent in Mexico. The two suspects were arrested Saturday in Manhattan after offering heroin to undercover officers.    ---   Bombs exploded in Colombo, killing at least four people and wounding about 50 during a meeting of Sri Lanka's ruling party, police said. The attack came after the government, citing reports of possible rebel violence, imposed a curfew in the capital and in Sri Lanka's southern province. Police were ordered to shoot curfew violators.    ---   The Kremlin published a draft election law that calls for multiple candidates, but limits what they can advocate. The proposal, first made by Gorbachev at a party conference in June as part of a government overhaul, also appears to rule out political groups other than the Communist party.    ---   An Afghan rebel leader rejected an offer from President Najibullah for peace talks in the Saudi Arabian holy city of Mecca. In a letter to the U.N. secretary-general, the Pakistan-based chairman of the guerrilla alliance also accused a U.N. mediator of partiality toward the Kabul government.    ---   El Salvador and Guatemala declared alerts as Tropical Storm Miriam neared their Pacific coasts. The storm killed at least 111 people in Central America as the Atlantic's Hurricane Joan. Hundreds of thousands were left homeless. In the Philippines, Typhoon Ruby killed at least 13 people and left about 50,000 without homes.    ---   Justice O'Connor was reported in good condition at Georgetown University Hospital, where she is recovering from surgery for breast cancer. Officials wouldn't provide details about the 58-year-old Supreme Court justice's surgery, which took place Friday, or her post-operative treatment.    ---   The U.N. said that despite the U.S. Senate's failure to authorize as much as $150 million for international peacekeeping operations there wasn't any reason to believe that the funds wouldn't be forthcoming. The Reagan administration had sought to transfer the money from other programs before the Senate adjourned Saturday. </TEXT></DOC>