<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880712-0031 </DOCNO><HL> Approved Drugs Find Unapproved Uses --- Wide Latitude In Prescribing Raises Concerns </HL><AUTHOR> Frank E. James (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> PHA </IN><G> FDA </G><TEXT>   Indomethacin is a drug approved by the Food and Drug Administration for the treatment of joint pain. Some doctors, however, also prescribe it to treat certain eye conditions. Minoxidil, approved for hypertension, is also used to promote hair growth.    Although many patients don't know it, doctors are largely free to prescribe drugs to treat conditions other than those for which they were designed by their makers or tested by the FDA. The FDA does approve specific uses for a drug, but except in a few limited cases, doctors aren't bound by this.    The conventional wisdom in the medical community is that tighter regulation might impede scientific progress. Sometimes, innovative medical therapies come from originally unintended uses -- as when it was discovered that lidocaine, a powerful local anesthetic used by dentists, could control an irregular heartbeat.    But some medical specialists, citing potential harm to patients, question the current freedom of doctors to prescribe drugs as they see fit. For one thing, they note that FDA approval of a drug for a particular condition takes into account whether the risks of using the drug are outweighed by the benefit. A drug known to cause cancer, for instance, might nevertheless be approved to treat illnesses that pose an immediate threat to life. Using the same drug to treat a more benign illness might be medically irresponsible.    &quot;Once in a while, we do find a new use for a drug through serendipitous, unapproved use,&quot; says Henri Manasse, dean of the pharmacy school at the University of Illinois in Chicago. &quot;But this is a kind of Russian roulette that can be very dangerous.&quot;    A lawsuit filed last November by Monica Shannon in California Superior Court in Fresno suggests just how dangerous. The suit charges that three years ago, Anthony Montana, a doctor at a medical clinic, injected the 30-year-old mother with DepoProvera, a powerful hormonal compound approved in the U.S. as a treatment for uterine cancer. Dr. Montana was allegedly using the drug because it can also have long-lasting contraceptive properties.    According to Ms. Shannon, her body reacted violently after three injections. She says she had such severe bleeding that her uterus was removed last year. Drastic mood and weight swings have accompanied nearly constant breast-milk production, even though she gave birth four years ago.    &quot;I can't believe he had the right to do this to me,&quot; says Ms. Shannon, who in her suit alleges, among other things, fraud, misrepresentation and negligent medical services on the part of Dr. Montana, the clinic and Fresno County, with which the clinic is affiliated.    Carey Johnson, an attorney for Dr. Montana and Fresno County, says, &quot;Our position is that neither the county nor the doctor was negligent.&quot;    Anti-psychotic drugs such as thioridazine are used extensively on people who aren't suffering from psychotic disorders, especially in nursing homes, says Sidney Wolfe, director of Public Citizen Health Research Group, a Washington-based activist organization. Often, the drugs are employed in an unapproved manner as sedatives, he notes.    &quot;What you see,&quot; Dr. Wolfe says, &quot;are drugs whose use is perfectly fine in schizophrenia, even though there are serious side effects like parkinsonism (a neuromuscular disorder) and irreversible tardive dyskinesia (involuntary movements of the face and limbs). But when used as a sedative in healthy people, there's a very unfavorable benefit-to-risk picture.&quot;    Perhaps the most common unapproved use of prescription drugs is when doctors prescribe antibiotics for patients who have viral rather than bacterial infections. Even though antibiotics aren't effective against disease-causing viruses, some doctors will prescribe them for a flu or cold merely to placate a patient.    &quot;The doctor wants to give you something, when in truth you'll get over the cold in seven days anyway,&quot; says Evelyn Goldstein, a lawyer-pharmacologist in Philadelphia who has written extensively on drug-related issues.    Antibiotics are among the safest drugs known, but they, too, can some times cause serious side effects. Moreover, many doctors fear that widespread use of them can have larger consequences. Marc Lappe, a professor of health policy and ethics at the University of Illinois in Chicago, says that a doctor who prescribes an antibiotic for an unapproved use may believe the impact is confined to individual patients. However, he explains, the decision could &quot;very rapidly&quot; give rise to &quot;more serious, resistant microbes&quot; in the community, a growing medical problem.    Also permitted under the current system are therapies considered by most medical authorities to be on the far fringe of traditional medicine. Chelation and DMSO therapies, for example, are both approved by the FDA for rather narrow uses -- the former in the treatment of heavy-metal poisoning, the latter for treating a rare bladder disease. But some doctors tout chelation as a cure for atherosclerosis (hardening of the arteries) and claim that DMSO can, among other things, alleviate the pain of arthritis.    &quot;There are a lot of prescribers who have way-out ideas as to what a drug can do,&quot; says Paul Doering, a clinical pharmacologist with the University of Florida's Drug Information Center. &quot;In many cases, patients are serving as guinea pigs to prove somebody's experiment.&quot;    Supporters of the current approach counter that doctors, kept in check by the fear of malpractice lawsuits, don't arbitrarily experiment on patients. They point out that those who prescribe medications for unapproved uses generally rely on drug-research findings, as well as on studies published in medical journals or presented at conferences. Critics, however, often question the validity of such studies, which may involve only a few patients.    While the FDA doesn't control doctors' prescribing habits, it does address itself to drug makers and their products. The agency will review a drug to assess its safety for specific uses and to determine if it lives up to its maker's claims. If the results are favorable, the FDA approves the drug's labeling.    &quot;The label isn't meant to be a straitjacket,&quot; says Stuart Nightingale, the FDA's associate commissioner for health affairs. Besides not wanting to stifle innovation, the FDA concedes it can take years to approve additional uses. And if a drug maker doesn't apply to have other uses approved, the agency won't consider them.    As for prescribing abuses, the FDA leaves the handling of these to state regulatory and licensing boards, which have rarely been aggressive about disciplining bad doctors. Occasionally, however, states have taken legislative action to bar the use of certain drugs for unapproved uses.    For instance, certain amphetamines that are approved to treat narcolepsy and childhood attention-deficit disorders have been prohibited in many states for use in treating obesity, a problem for which they were once frequently prescribed. And some states have banned the use of anabolic steroids, which are approved to aid in post-surgery weight gain, for such non-medical reasons as body building.    Health-care facilities, too, sometimes get involved. In an announcement that raised public outcry, Cook County Hospital in Chicago recently disclosed that it is investigating the actions of two staff physicians who, it claims, injected hundreds of unsuspecting women in labor with Dilantin, a drug approved to control epileptic convulsions. A hospital official says the doctors were attempting to gauge whether the drug has any beneficial effect on problems that can be caused by hypoxia, or lack of oxygen, during difficult deliveries.    The main issues, the hospital says, are compliance with hospital rules and the ethics of administering the drug without the women's consent. Lawrence Lavine, one of the doctors under investigation, last week filed a slander suit in Cook County Circuit Court against the hospital, in which he denies violating either hospital rules or medical ethics.    Drug makers generally aren't liable for what happens when doctors use their products in unapproved ways. Rather, it's the prescribers who must usually take the heat -- in the form of malpractice suits -- if trouble arises. But sometimes companies do step in.    Last year, Upjohn Co., the maker of minoxidil, threatened to bring patent-infringement lawsuits against pharmacists who, on doctors' orders, were grinding minoxidil tablets into powders that could be used in unapproved scalp lotions. Upjohn says that it sent the letters out to protect its minoxidil patents. A company spokeswoman adds that Upjohn was also concerned that there was &quot;no guarantee on how much minoxidil was going into these things, so there was no guarantee as to the safety and efficacy of those products.&quot;    Some large insurers refuse to pay for drugs used outside FDA-approved purposes, a practice that a number of doctors say is increasing. Blue Cross and Blue Shield plans have long denied claims where they can prove the prescribed drug isn't indicated for the diagnosis. &quot;It's not just a matter of not paying for things to save money, but good medical practice,&quot; says Charlotte Cresson, a spokeswoman for Washington, D.C.-based Blue Cross and Blue Shield Association. &quot;We have to do something that protects the people we insure, and when it comes to drug safety, we defer to the FDA.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>