<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880729-0077 </DOCNO><HL> Quiet Time: Peace Is Proliferating In Many Troubled Spots From Mideast to Asia --- Weary of Third World Strife, Soviets Now Turn Inward; The Persian Gulf Respite --- Vindication of Reagan Policy? </HL><AUTHOR> Robert S. Greenberger and Tim Carrington (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST LATAM AFRIC MDEST </CO><G> EXE </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In trouble spots across the globe, some of the world's bitterest enemies, exhausted by their wars, suddenly are suing for peace.    Vietnam is promising to end its nearly 10-year occupation of neighboring Cambodia by 1990. Angola, South Africa and Cuba have agreed in principle to disengage from a conflict that has spread across southern Africa. Iran and Iraq, after a brutal, eight-year struggle that left one million dead, are edging toward a cease-fire. And in Afghanistan, the Soviet Union has begun withdrawing its troops in a move similar to the U.S. retreat from Vietnam.    Several common threads link these seemingly disparate developments, offering hope that the still-fragile peace overtures will take hold and that the world can look forward to a period of reduced tensions.    The Soviet Union, determined to address domestic economic problems, has grown wary of supporting expensive Third World revolutions. Moscow's political successes in the 1970s -- Angola, Vietnam and Nicaragua -- are its economic burdens today. At the same time, the U.S. has pursued a huge military buildup, coupled with a display of renewed resolve in troublespots such as Afghanistan and the Persian Gulf. And regional combatants across the globe have sunk into economic exhaustion, in part a reflection of the high costs of buying -- and suffering attacks from -- sophisticated modern weapons.    The combination of U.S. resolve and Moscow's recognition of its own limits is changing the perceptions of some smaller nations. Those countries that look to the Soviet Union are now beginning to realize they no longer can count on Moscow's automatic support or America's passivity.    &quot;There's a real watershed change going on in the world now,&quot; says David Packard, formerly the deputy secretary of Defense and a co-founder of Hewlett-Packard Co. &quot;The confrontational climate is going to shift.&quot;    Nobody is suggesting that the world's lions are ready to lie down with its lambs. Age-old regional hatreds live on, and even as peace talks proceed, continuing bloody skirmishes threaten to undercut negotiations, particularly in the Persian Gulf. Some skeptics contend that peace initiatives, such as Iran's agreement to a United Nations-sponsored cease-fire resolution, are tactical ploys designed to provide breathing space to re-equip. As the Soviets withdraw from Afghanistan, internecine warfare could break out among various Islamic groups striving for control of the country. So too in Cambodia, where the coalition fighting Vietnam is rife with internal distrust and hatred.    Still, the proliferation of peace talks signals that fundamental changes are afoot, changes that carry with them broad consequences:   Moscow's apparent disillusionment with Third World adventurism could help reduce its involvement in regional conflicts and temper the ambitions of its clients. Vietnam's decision to pull its troops out of Cambodia was announced several months after a senior-level Soviet official visited the region and pointedly observed that the same principles involved in Moscow's decision to withdraw from Afghanistan also applied to Southeast Asia.    A possible reduction in tensions around the world, accompanied by the growing prospect of U.S. and Soviet conventional arms reductions, also could lead to a diminished appetite for weapons -- at least in some regions and at least temporarily. Arms-makers already see a contraction of the aerospace and electronics industries, in part because of a drop in demand. Former Navy Secretary John Lehman, who presided over the Reagan administration's big naval buildup, now hopes to cash in on the collapsing demand for arms by heading a special group at Paine Webber Inc. that offers help in restructuring and merging defense companies around the world.    &quot;There is overcapacity globally&quot; in the arms industry, says Robert Costello, undersecretary of defense.    In the Persian Gulf, peace would permit both Iran and Iraq to rebuild their ravaged economies chiefly by increasing their oil exports, which have been disrupted by the war. Such a move would add to the world's current oil surplus and put a downward pressure on prices, most analysts believe.    In the U.S. presidential campaign, the enhanced prospects for peace could, in the minds of voters, lend credence to the Reagan philosophy of negotiating from strength and could obscure some of the administration's foreign-policy blunders, such as its inability to oust Panama's Gen. Noriega. This could play to Vice President George Bush's advantage in the November election, assuming he is able to convince voters that he deserves some of the credit for the peace. Already, Mr. Bush is stressing his extensive foreign-policy experience -- and highlighting the relative inexperience abroad of Democrat Michael Dukakis.    The relaxation of tensions, however, could trigger new concerns for American policy makers. Soviet leader Mikhail Gorbachev's decisions to leave Afghanistan and to prod Vietnam to do the same in Cambodia are steps toward a Sino-Soviet rapprochement. A deeper friendship between China, which has opposed Vietnam's expansionism, and the Soviet Union may not serve Washington's long-term interests; American presidents for decades have played on the hostility between China and the Soviets.    Further, a winding down of the Iran-Iraq war promises new problems for Israel, America's prime Mideast ally. Israel has benefited from the draining conflict between its two adversaries. Now it fears that the resources Iran and Iraq used against each other could one day be turned against Israel. Moreover, other Arab nations have spent the last eight years preoccupied with the fundamentalist threat from Tehran. With that threat largely exhausted, at least for now, these countries will be able to refocus their attention on the Arab-Israeli conflict.    But on balance, the cooling of global hotspots is obviously good for the U.S. and for other nations, since it reduces the risk that regional conflicts will flare into superpower confrontations and gives war-torn countries a chance to rebuild tattered economies.    Most significantly, it reflects the improvement in U.S.-Soviet relations. The two superpowers are making progress on arms control, and seem interested in calming regional, as well as global, tensions. This new inclination to cooperate has, for the moment, reduced the superpowers' interest in fighting ideological battles through Third World surrogates.    At the 25th Communist Party Congress, in 1976, Soviet officials bragged about their resounding successes in the Third World. Marxism-Leninism was flourishing, they noted, the West was on the run and the &quot;correlation of forces&quot; was shifting in Moscow's favor.    At the 26th Party Congress 10 years later, the new Soviet leader, Mr. Gorbachev, said little about the Third World and for the first time talked about Afghanistan as &quot;a bleeding wound.&quot;    Mr. Gorbachev's decision to withdraw from Afghanistan was &quot;a seachange in Soviet policy,&quot; says Michael Mandelbaum, director of the Project on East-West Relations at the Council on Foreign Relations. &quot;It represented the willingness to abandon a Communist regime, to say it is worthwhile to sacrifice them (Afghanistan) for the sake of other goals,&quot; such as reviving the Soviet Union's economy.    Clearly, though, this seachange has its limitations. The Soviets have no intention of abandoning all their client states. Indeed, they recently agreed to double their subsidy to Vietnam over the next five years -- to some $4 billion -- and continue to support governments in Cuba and Nicaragua that are thorns in America's side. But, says Francis Fukayama, a senior social scientist at the Rand Corp., &quot;the clients can read the handwriting on the wall. Times are changing and the Cubans and Vietnamese are deciding on their own that they have to retrench the way the Soviets are.&quot;    In Vietnam, adds Paul Kreisberg, a senior associate at the Carnegie Endowment for International Peace, &quot;the Soviets were pushing on a partially open door. Vietnam was in a state of collapse and army resentment over casualties in Cambodia was mounting.&quot;    U.S. officials also believe that Moscow has been encouraging Cuba to enter into a regional agreement in southern Africa under which Cuba would withdraw some 50,000 troops from Angola, where they are protecting a Marxist regime from South African pressure. Under the agreement, brokered by the U.S., the Cubans would leave in exchange for South Africa granting independence to Namibia, which South Africa occupies illegally.    The Reagan administration meets regularly with the Soviets to discuss developments in southern Africa. This weekend, for instance, Chester Crocker, assistant secretary of state for African affairs, will meet with Soviet officials in Geneva, Switzerland, before the next round of meetings between South Africa and its adversaries begins there Tuesday. &quot;My guess is the Soviets have been telling them (the Angolans and Cubans) that a military resolution isn't in the cards,&quot; says a U.S. official.    Clearly, the Reagan administration's more activist policies have made the Soviet Union's commitments in the Third World particularly costly. In Afghanistan, resistance fighters armed with U.S. Stinger missiles began downing Soviet aircraft and attack helicopters at an astounding &quot;kill rate&quot; -- believed to be about 90%.    Moreover, the U.S. publicly condemned the Soviet occupation and kept the issue on the agenda of superpower talks. &quot;We kept the international pressure on the Soviet Union for their Afghan adventure,&quot; says assistant Defense Secretary Richard Armitage. The Soviets found that &quot;it was impossible in the long run to force an unwanted regime on the people,&quot; he says.    The covert shipment of Stingers to rebel forces in Angola has also created a toll of downed helicopters and lost pilots for the Socialist forces. According to analyses in Washington, the American shipments produce disproportionate leverage: The Soviets pour $1 billion a year into propping up the Socialist government there, while the U.S. helps to destabilize it with $15 million of arms. &quot;The impact that Stinger missiles have had on Soviet operations is incredible,&quot; says Christopher Lay, a special assistant for policy at the Pentagon. And the U.S. could duplicate that leverage in similar situations around the world, he says.    In the Gulf, the U.S. stuck with its Navy convoy operations for a year despite Iran's mine-laying and small-boat attacks. The show of resolve dissuaded Tehran from thinking that the U.S. would cut its losses and go home, as it did in Lebanon in 1983.    The U.S. hasn't shown such resolve everywhere, however. In Nicaragua, Congress's on-again-off-again funding and the administration's messy Iran-Contra scandal has left the anti-communist guerrillas in a cloud of uncertainty. The war there has been inconclusive, and peace talks have stalled.    As the decade draws to a close, more nations are realizing that fighting wars requires expensive high-technology weapons that they can't afford, particularly if their economies are in shambles. In the end, tensions may be easing simply because of financial exhaustion.    &quot;What we are seeing in the second half of the 1980s is the political and economic bankruptcy of Marxism-Leninism,&quot; says Mr. Mandelbaum of the Council on Foreign Relations. &quot;These countries simply don't know how to run their economies and they're doing so badly that they just have to cut back.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>