<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880422-0140 </DOCNO><HL> Medicine andamp; Health (A Special Report): Pressure Cooker --- The Company as Shrink: As Costs Soar, Employers Get More Involved In the Personal Problems of Workers </HL><AUTHOR> Rhonda L. Rundle </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LABOR </CO><IN> PHA INS </IN><TEXT>   SO, YOU'RE UP to your ears in mortgage payments, your daughter is skipping school and your wife's about to lose her job. Now, your boss says he is cutting your staff, changing your hours and not giving you a raise.    It couldn't have happened at a worse time, so it occurs to you that your employer is an insensitive ogre who doesn't care about your personal life. On the first point, you may be right. But don't let that mislead you.    Solving employees' personal problems is costing companies a lot of money these days. So your boss most definitely is interested in yours.    Most employer's insurance programs cover some mental-health benefits. As many as 25% of working adults also are covered by company-paid employee-assistance programs that offer counseling on alcohol and drug abuse as well as gambling, depression, bereavement and marital and financial problems. There aren't any figures that show exactly how much companies are paying for these benefits, but managers say it's clearly a growing portion of their total health-care spending. And it is worrying them.    &quot;Six years ago if you asked benefit people what they thought they were paying for mental health, they might have guessed 6% or 7%&quot; of their total health-care costs, says Willis B. Goldbeck, president of the Washington Business Group on Health, a research and consulting concern. Now, he says, those &quot;gut-check&quot; guesses have climbed to as much as 20% to 30%.    Costs for &quot;substance abuse and mental and nervous disorders are a big problem for everybody,&quot; says Earl Mink, group insurance manager at Lockheed Corp.    In one survey, five large employers in Los Angeles did find that in 1986 40% of their covered hospital days and 22% of their total hospital charges were for psychiatric diagnoses. The average charge per admission was $15,240, compared with $9,099 for surgical admissions. The survey was based on an analysis of actual claims provided by Security Pacific National Bank, First Interstate Bancorp, TRW Inc., the City of Los Angeles, and the Southern California Rapid Transit District.    According to benefits consultants and executives, the high costs reflect several elements. Social changes have made it more acceptable to seek outside help for such traditional workplace problems as alcoholism and stress. And new ones, particularly drug abuse, are burgeoning.    Although &quot;it wouldn't always be obvious to a supervisor or fellow employee,&quot; as many as 10% of working adults have a drinking problem, estimates Henrick Harwood, who directed a recent alcohol and drug abuse study at the Research Triangle Institute. Mr. Harwood, an economist at a nonprofit research concern near Durham, N.C., said the study also found that alcoholism costs the nation as much as $117 billion a year, mostly from lost productivity, health-care treatment costs, and premature mortality.    In a 1985 study, however, the National Institute on Drug Abuse found that 30% of workers aged 20 to 40 had used an illegal drug at least once in the previous year, 19% of them in the preceding month. And, when a large West Coast police academy did pre-employment urine tests on its 1985 class, 75 of 182 recruits were &quot;dirty.&quot;    But some benefits specialists say that the biggest cost increases are coming in the area of caring for family members, whose problems may be only indirectly related to an employee's job.    &quot;It's mostly dependents -- children and adolescents -- who are driving up costs&quot; says Karen E. Miller, health-care administrator at Tenneco Inc.    A generation ago, behavior problems usually stayed in the family. But, with today's dual career families and single-parent households, that is less likely, says Anthony L. Kramer, vice president for employee assistance programs, Security Pacific National Bank in Los Angeles. When children turn sour on school, start smoking dope and seem depressed or withdrawn, many parents feel they have to turn to outside help. And it's a lot easier to do if their employers are footing the bill.    So far, most companies aren't responding to the high costs by directly cutting back on the kinds of coverages and services they offer. But increasingly they are taking a more active role in setting up treatment plans.    When the 15-year-old, marijuana-smoking son of a Southern California aerospace worker was arrested for attempted robbery, his father turned to his company's employee-assistance program for help. The program's counselors assured him that his insurance would pay for therapy, but they also noted that there was a limit on the total payout. So, at their suggestion, the boy was sent to a special treatment facility that charged $8,550 for a 90-day stay. Now, he has returned home and is seeing a therapist every week. A shorter, 28-day stay in a hospital chemical dependency unit could have cost as much as $20,000 and left almost no money for continuing therapy.    Companies are aided in such cost-saving case-management efforts by a whole new industry of consultants who specialize in providing and managing mental-health care. Unlike corporate personnel and benefits officers who traditionally have deferred to medical practitioners, these specialists often question the doctors. A few companies have even ventured to require that employees get the consultants' approval before undertaking a course of treatment.    &quot;The call (from employers) for programs to manage care is growing,&quot; says Gregory P. DeLapp, administrator of employee-assistance programs at Carpenter Technology Corp., a specialty-steel maker in Reading, Pa. Initially, EAPs were simply information and referral services that explained an employee's treatment options and the company's insurance package. Today, he says, companies are turning to them to be &quot;gatekeepers&quot; who will determine &quot;medically appropriate&quot; treatment alternatives and channel employees into them.    The tools and techniques used by such companies are modeled on those developed to manage general hospital costs. To get maximum hospitalization coverage available within a certain benefit plan, for example, the employee and covered family members must obtain approval in advance to use a specific type of facility and stay a certain number of days. Typically, the patient must pay a larger share of the cost if the actual treatment plan isn't the one recommended by the reviewer.    To be sure, employees' personal physicians don't always agree with the companies' consultant doctors. So some patients opt to forgo some financial benefits to follow their own doctor's orders.    Earlier this year the 28-year-old wife of a bank executive in Los Angeles was hospitalized for anorexia, an eating disorder. After a week, a doctor with the Holman Group, a Canoga Park, Calif. mental health-care management firm, recommended that the patient be transferred to a residential facility with a six-week treatment program. However, her personal physician recommended a specialized rehabilitation unit within the hospital.    &quot;The family and the patient were convinced that if she didn't complete six weeks at the hospital, she might die,&quot; so she rejected the Holman treatment plan, recalls Loris Fusco, a Holman nurse who administers the bank's review program. But the decision cost them. The hospital's program cost $16,000, roughly twice as much as the Holman alternative, and the bank is paying only $4,800. If the executive and his wife had adopted the Holman plan, the bank would have paid most of the bill.    Despite such disagreements, the consultants insist that their treatment programs are generally more effective, as well as cheaper, than the extended hospital stays that physicians tend to prescribe. Ron N. Holman, the clinical psychologist who is president of Holman Group, maintains that 90% of mental-health hospitalizations are unnecessary. Because most problems are behavioral or social -- not medical -- they can be better treated by social workers or psychologists while the patient lives at home or in a specialized care facility, he says. &quot;Hospitals are the last place some people get well in.&quot;    ---   Ms. Rundle covers health care from The Wall Street Journal's Los Angeles Bureau. </TEXT></DOC>