<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871229-0086 </DOCNO><HL> Business World:The Efficiency Argument for Banking Reform---By George Melloan</HL><DD> 12/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><TEXT>   Dennis Weatherstone, president of J.P. Morgan andamp; Co., hopes Congress in 1988 will allow banks back into the securities markets they were barred from nearly 55 years ago. But he would prefer that the change be influenced mainly by positive, rather than negative, arguments.    &quot;I don't think the repeal of Glass-Steagall should be seen as a way of providing relief for the banks,&quot; he says. &quot;Rather, I think it should be seen as a way of making capital markets more efficient.&quot;    At first glance, it might appear that banks are in need of relief. Nearly 200 of the nation's 14,000 or so banks will have failed this year and money center banks will show sharply reduced earnings as a result of large set-asides to cover potential Third World loan write-downs. But the other side of that coin is that most money center banks now are prosperous enough to afford such moves, offset in part by tax benefits. They are beginning to clear away some of the debt-crisis debris. Failures mainly involve small banks and are no serious threat to the system itself.    But Glass-Steagall's drag on capital-market efficiency is indeed a central issue in the repeal debate. The public pays a price. Few people understand that better than Mr. Weatherstone.    Born in England, he started his banking career at age 15 as a junior clerk in the London offices of Guaranty Trust Co., predecessor to Morgan Guaranty Trust Co., which is J.P. Morgan's main enterprise. As he worked his way up, he helped advance the international investment banking operations Morgan conducts from London -- including activities Glass-Steagall bars commercial banks from in the U.S.    In the 1980s, the large corporate customers that banks such as Morgan Guaranty serve increasingly substituted issuance of commercial paper and other securities for bank borrowings. Banks had to turn to foreign exchange and other kinds of trading activities and advisory services as ways of making money. Mr. Weatherstone, who had moved to the New York headquarters in 1971, was a specialist in those activities and continued moving upward to the Morgan presidency.    He arrived in the U.S. as a relatively detached observer of American banking regulation, with its separation of investment and commercial banking, its multiple federal regulatory agencies and its separate state-level regulation. &quot;In England, we had only one regulator, the Bank of England, so there was some culture shock,&quot; he says.    J.P. Morgan itself had experienced that culture shock 40 years earlier. The Glass-Steagall Act was a post-1929 effort by Congress to reform Wall Street. Its requirement that banks withdraw from the securities markets meant that J.P. Morgan had to allow some of its partners to split away and form a separate investment banking concern, Morgan Stanley andamp; Co. If Glass-Steagall is repealed, Morgan Guaranty and Morgan Stanley will become full competitors for the first time.    As it happens, they already compete abroad and, partly because of the erosion that has occurred in Glass-Steagall, in a good many U.S. markets. Commercial banks can deal in federal government securities and in municipalities' general obligation bonds, for example. They are directly involved in the securities markets through their trust departments. J.P. Morgan is the nation's largest trust company, with nearly $50 billion in securities under management.    And as with investment banks, commercial banks increasingly make money supplying advisory services to corporations, particularly where mergers and acquisitions are involved. In a paper for a Cato Institute conference last February, lawyer Robert E. Litan, a senior fellow at the Brookings Institution, wrote that the legal profession has created &quot;virtually a cottage industry in the discovery and exploitation of loopholes in the {Glass-Steagall} act that render its intended restrictions less and less relevant to the marketplace.&quot;    The most important barrier commercial banks still face is the one that prevents them from underwriting corporate securities issues. Mr. Weatherstone complains that this leaves a big gap in the services he can provide to a client corporation. &quot;I may have to advise them that their best choice of financing is a securities issue, but then I have to tell them that they will have to go somewhere else to do that.&quot;    Morgan has been among the leaders in designing new capital-market &quot;products&quot; designed to spread risk for investors and broaden access by borrowers to international capital markets. For example, interest-rate swaps allow investors in separate countries to swap the interest income stream from securities while retaining the principle in their own currencies. Most of these new instruments are designed to &quot;unbundle&quot; risk, that is, spread both credit risk and foreign-exchange risk.    This complicated form of risk-hedging, of course, is not for amateurs, and as the breakdown of &quot;portfolio insurance&quot; with the stock-market crash this fall demonstrated, even the best-laid risk-avoidance plans can go awry. But the increased &quot;securitization&quot; of debt and globalization of securities markets, coupled with currency exchange and securities-market volatility, makes such expertise the most important service bankers can provide their big corporate customers today. It should be no surprise that Mr. Weatherstone wants full freedom to not only advise Morgan's bluechip clients but also to underwrite their securities in the U.S.    What does any of this have to do with capital-market efficiency? Efficiency in capital markets is pretty much like efficiency anywhere else. Cheaper rates for raising money have the same public benefits of, say, cheaper costs for electricity. A pension-fund manager can pass on the savings to pensioners, for example. As in other markets, competition is the best stimulant for efficiency.    Mr. Litan writes that &quot;the anti-competitive effects of Glass-Steagall are clearly demonstrated by the fact that concentration levels are considerably lower in underwriting markets in which banks are permitted to participate than in the markets from which banks are excluded.&quot; He cites studies showing that underwriting costs in the municipal revenue bond business (where banks are currently excluded) exceed costs for the marketing of municipal general obligation bonds (where they are not) by seven to 13 basis points.    &quot;In 1979, that translated into $150 million to $300 million in added costs to issuers of those securities,&quot; he asserts.    Investment banks might argue that comparing revenue and general obligation issues is like comparing apples and oranges. But if you assume that underwriting requires scarce skills and that a whole set of institutions with financial skills is prevented from competing, Mr. Litan's argument makes sense.    Mr. Weatherstone probably will never find his banking life in the majestic edifice at the corner of Broad and Wall as uncomplicated by regulation as in the days when the Bank of England was, for him, the font of all regulatory wisdom. But, in arguing for greater capital market efficiency, he is making a convincing case for a further removal of regulatory constraints on American banking. And his home country's regulatory comparative advantage is something Americans worried about future &quot;competitiveness&quot; should consider. </TEXT></DOC>