<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870225-0087 </DOCNO><HL> Out of Control:As Reagan's ProblemsGrow, Many Now SayDamage Is Irreparable---Even With an Exit by Regan,Iran Affair and the LackOf an Agenda Will Fester---A Remarkably Resilient Past---By David ShribmanStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/25/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A consensus is growing that the Reagan presidency has become paralyzed beyond recovery.    Ronald Reagan, the once-bold leader, plainly lacks command. The clouds of the Iran-Contra affair probably will darken before week's end, with the release of a damaging assessment of the Reagan national-security apparatus. Many politicians, business leaders and academic analysts have been stunned by the president's recent behavior, especially his changing testimony about his Iran-arms decisions. Some investigators believe that White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan prompted the president to revise his earlier recollections.    Mr. Regan, a leading target of criticism inside and outside the administration, is widely expected to depart soon. But the Reagan presidency is nevertheless gravely stricken. It lacks both momentum and a policy agenda for the administration's final two years. The result is growing skepticism that Mr. Reagan, who just turned 76, is capable of regaining control before his term expires 23 months from now.    &quot;There has been no time in this presidency when there has been as striking a sense of a president and his team not controlling the agenda and politics,&quot; says Fred Greenstein, a Princeton political scientist and a biographer of President Eisenhower. &quot;He's behind his own goal line and seems to be stuck there.&quot;    The gloomy assessment of the Reagan presidency extends into the ranks of the conservative movement and is especially worrisome to the Republican Party as the 1988 elections approach.    &quot;The Reagan presidency gives every appearance of being over,&quot; says Richard Viguerie, a conservative leader. &quot;We appreciate his humor and his funny stories, but there is no indication anything is happening.&quot; Michele Davis, the executive director of the Republican Governors Association, adds in a reference to the Reagan White House: &quot;The place is inert. Everything's stalled, and obviously it goes right up to the top.&quot;    Not everyone agrees that Mr. Reagan can't rebound, however. His backers note that the president has been underrated throughout his political career and has fashioned remarkable comebacks in the past.    &quot;The Reagan presidency is beleaguered and embattled, full of diversions and distractions,&quot; says Republican Rep. Henry Hyde of Illinois. &quot;But he is remarkably resilient.&quot;    It may be more difficult to rebound this time. Top business leaders, citing dealings with the administration, refuse to speak publicly about the president's troubles. Privately, however, many say they believe the Reagan presidency has unraveled beyond repair. One Wall Street executive compares the current Reagan administration with that of President Wilson when he was stricken ill; he hid from public view and relinquished many of his duties to his wife. A. Gary Shilling, a New York economic consultant, says his clients &quot;worry about protectionist legislation and that a weakened administration won't be able to head it off.&quot;    Consequently, these business leaders and others see a vacuum in the White House and the prospect that the administration's problems will only worsen, especially considering the president's lameduck status. With the loss of the Senate in last fall's midterm congressional elections, the united Democratic Congress has the initiative.    Even the president's critics acknowledge, however, that the replacement of Donald Regan with a respected political operative such as former Transportation Secretary Drew Lewis, former Nevada Sen. Paul Laxalt or former White House congressional lobbyist Kenneth Duberstein could help spur the administration to a modest second wind or at least help it limit the damage.    Despite his problems, Mr. Reagan also remains a popular president; the latest Wall Street Journal/NBC News poll puts his overall approval at 49% and holding steady. And, of course, Mr. Reagan retains the powers of his office. &quot;The guy still has his veto, and he still can move troops,&quot; says Richard Neustadt, a Harvard expert on the presidency.    But the prevailing sense of political anomie is reinforced by the consensus that the administration, having achieved its goals of tax cuts, tax overhaul and a military buildup, lacks any direction for its final two years in power.    &quot;You can't say this ship is crashing against the rocks,&quot; says David Smick, a Republican political consultant, &quot;because they've already reached the ports they wanted to hit and aren't very interested in going anywhere else.&quot;    Some analysts believe that Mr. Reagan's best chances of reviving his presidency lie in the realm of foreign policy, in particular the politics of arms. Conservatives are pressing him to accelerate deployment of the Strategic Defense Initiative, his &quot;Star Wars&quot; plan for an anti-nuclear shield, and make it the centerpiece of a policy offensive. Moderates are urging him to press for an arms-control agreement with the Soviet Union, especially now that Western diplomats have concluded that General Secretary Mikhail Gorbachev also needs a policy success.    Both strategies have problems, however. Doubts continue about whether the Reagan White House, racked by low morale and an exodus of personnel, possesses the creative skills to quell internal battles on arms-control matters. Moreover, the strenuous opposition by pro-defense lawmakers such as Democratic Sen. Sam Nunn of Georgia to moving too rapidly on Star Wars makes giant leaps in financing or deployment unlikely.    A measure of Mr. Reagan's peril is that the best the president's supporters can say is that there is still hope for his administration.    Few political analysts took the president at his word when he sought to rouse the faithful last week at a Washington meeting of the Conservative Political Action Committee. &quot;I learned a lesson in my former profession,&quot; he said. &quot;We're saving the best stuff for the last act.&quot;    Some students of the presidency anticipate an uneasy sense of resignation pervading the White House in Mr. Reagan's final years in office. &quot;Not much is going to happen in the rest of the Reagan presidency, but that doesn't mean there's going to be serenity,&quot; says James David Barber, a Duke University political scientist. &quot;The quietude could well be tragic. This is a chaotic world, and we are going to be on the sidelines.&quot;    In foreign matters, at least, former Defense Secretary James Schlesinger wrote in Foreign Affairs, &quot;American policy over the next two years will likely turn out to be a holding pattern.&quot; Zbigniew Brzezinski, who was President Carter's national security adviser, says that Mr. Reagan has only about four weeks to &quot;install a new team in one quick swoop&quot; or face &quot;very deleterious consequences for American national interest.&quot;    Many Republicans are urging Mr. Reagan to take the trail that President Eisenhower blazed in the final two years of his presidency and to use the presidential veto as a political weapon, a more attractive option since the Democrats took control of Congress. &quot;The White House has got to stop fooling around, and the president has got to use the veto pen to get the nation's attention,&quot; says GOP Rep. Don Young of Alaska. &quot;It's the only way he can salvage things.&quot;    It may be too late even for that. Lawrence Chimerine, the chairman of Chase Econometrics, says that &quot;an increasing number&quot; of his clients &quot;express the view that the administration's clout is dramatically reduced.&quot; A senior administration official says he believes the president's State of the Union message was his last chance to regain the initiative for the rest of his term and argues that Mr. Reagan failed to seize it.    &quot;He's been irreparably damaged,&quot; James MacGregor Burns, a Williams College political scientist, says of the president. &quot;He'll never regain the leadership and momentum he once had.&quot;    Republican Rep. Denny Smith of Oregon says that he doesn't believe that Mr. Reagan could prevail today if he faced the challenge of winning GOP support for the House tax-overhaul bill that was approved in December 1985 only after the president interceded personally.    &quot;This isn't a case of one decision gone sour,&quot; says Republican Rep. Dick Cheney of Wyoming, who was the chief of staff in the Ford White House, &quot;but a case of a lot of problems in the White House.&quot;    Mr. Reagan's supporters and critics alike say that the White House seems prone to stumbles in the wake of the Iran-Contra scandal. New communications director John Koehler, who replaced fiery Patrick Buchanan, got off to a bad start over the weekend, and angered other White House officials, when he chose to explain his brief boyhood membership in a Nazi youth group in Germany by holding a press conference just as the president was delivering his weekly Saturday radio address.    The administration will take another body blow tomorrow with the release of the Tower Commission report on the secret arms sale to Iran. The report is expected to criticize the way the National Security Council and senior White House officials developed the policy and then failed to control it once it was under way.    But perhaps the most damaging element of the crisis grows out of the president's changed testimony before the commission on a key point regarding the arms sale. In a reference to reports that he can't remember whether he approved the Iran arms shipments in advance, Mr. Reagan yesterday said, &quot;I think it's possible to forget.&quot;    The disclosure that Mr. Reagan changed his statement and his withdrawal from the public (underscored by the lack of a news conference since Nov. 19 and new White House restrictions on reporters' inquiries) have transformed him into what Christopher Matthews, the top aide to former House Speaker Thomas O'Neill, calls a &quot;peek-a-boo president.&quot; These factors have raised new doubts about Mr. Reagan's governing style and mastery of details.    &quot;The president's credibility is seriously damaged,&quot; says John Steinbrunner, the director of foreign-policy studies at the Brookings Institution. &quot;Is he in charge? Does he know what's happening? Is he being straightforward about his purposes? And if he's in charge, what's he doing?&quot;    The result is a smudge on the president's record that threatens to detract from the accomplishments of his first six years and endangers his niche in the nation's history as the man who restored trust in the presidency.    &quot;He was moving quickly down a road where his place in history was assured,&quot; says Michael McManus, a vice president of Pfizer Inc. and a former assistant to the president. &quot;Now all those accomplishments may be overshadowed by the negatives.&quot;    ---   Jane Mayer contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>