<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870422-0003 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 04/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   A CAR BOMB EXPLODED in Sri Lanka's capital, killing 105 people.    Officials in Colombo said the bomb was detonated at the city's main bus terminal during rush hour. Many of the victims were burned to death or were killed by smoke inhalation. About 200 people were injured, many critically. Responsibility wasn't claimed. The bombing was the third attack since Friday in Sri Lanka, where Tamil separatist guerrillas have waged a four-year war against the Sinhalese majority.    Troops cordoned off the area near the terminal and the government imposed a curfew. But police said Sinhalese gangs attacked Tamils in the streets.    ---   THE HIGH COURT SAID capital punishment can apply to murder accomplices.    By a 5-4 vote, the justices ruled that people who play a major part in a crime that results in murder may be sentenced to death if they displayed a &quot;reckless indifference&quot; to life. The court said the death penalty is constitutional in such cases, even if the condemned person never intended to kill anyone and wasn't the actual killer. The court, however, stopped short of deciding the fate of two brothers sentenced to die in Arizona.    The Supreme Court also gave courts nationwide new guidelines to determine when an accomplice's confession may be used against a co-defendant.    ---   ARGENTINE TROOPS STAGED a six-hour mutiny in the northern city of Salta.    Authorities in Buenos Aires reported that about 250 soldiers were involved in the revolt, which was peacefully ended. It was the third such action in a week. The uprising, apparently resulting from opposition to the army's leadership, came as the government announced that 19 military officers had quit or been dismissed since revolts at two army camps last week. Alfonsin denied the shakeup was part of a pact with the rebels.    Unrest also was reported at an infantry brigade in Tucuman. The governor of the province, however, said the situation was &quot;absolutely normal.&quot;    ---   Reagan said Moscow is giving &quot;every appearance of wanting to move ahead&quot; on an agreement eliminating nuclear arms from Europe, but congressional leaders urged the president to proceed cautiously. In Geneva, Soviet negotiators arrived for Thursday's resumption of talks, and said they had instructions to seek a treaty this year.    Gorbachev offered to begin negotiations on short-range missiles in Asia simultaneously with their removal from Europe, United Press International reported. The proposal by the Soviet leader was an apparent concession to U.S. demands for a global approach to nuclear arms control.    ---   The Senate Iran-Contra panel voted to grant limited immunity to former National Security Adviser Poindexter to compel him to testify about the arms sales to Tehran and diversion of funds to Nicaraguan rebels. The House's select panel is expected to take similar action today.    ---   Accused Nazi Karl Linnas arrived in the Soviet republic of Estonia, where he was condemned to death in absentia 25 years ago for supervising mass executions at a World War II concentration camp. The news agency Tass said Linnas, who was deported from the U.S., could appeal for mercy, but it indicated that clemency was unlikely.    ---   NASA said it can't meet the Feb. 18, 1988, date it had set for the first launch of a space shuttle since last year's explosion of Challenger. The director of the space agency's shuttle program said the test firing of the shuttle Discovery's three main engines would delay liftoff &quot;a number of weeks.&quot; A new launch date wasn't announced.    ---   Israel's defense minister warned Palestinian extremists that Israel would retaliate for recent rocket and guerrilla attacks that he said were ordered by PLO leader Yasser Arafat and other militants meeting in Algiers. Since Sunday, when three Palestinian infiltrators were killed, nine rockets fired from Lebanon have landed in Israel.    The U.S. formally protested to the Algerian government for allowing accused terrorist Abu Abbas to attend a meeting of PLO factions in Algiers. Abbas is wanted in the U.S. and Italy for the 1985 hijacking of the cruise ship Achille Lauro.    ---   A U.S. appeals court affirmed much of the Agent Orange settlement fund, a major step in the effort to distribute about $220 million to alleged victims of the herbicide used in the Vietnam War.    ---   A hand grenade killed an unarmed black cadet at a South African police academy in Soweto. At least 64 other police trainees were injured in the blast, which was considered one of the worst attacks ever on South African security forces. An underground black group claimed responsibility.    ---   Federal agents seized control of the headquarters of political extremist Lyndon LaRouche in an attempt to collect part of more than $21 million in fines facing LaRouche-related groups. The agents, acting under an involuntary bankruptcy order, occupied LaRouche organization offices at three locations around Leesburg, Va.    ---   U.S. immigration officials may require illegal aliens to be tested for AIDS when they apply for legalization under the new immigration law's amnesty provision. The director of the regional legalization processing center in Dallas said the issue is being discussed with federal health officials.    ---   Poland and the Soviet Union signed a declaration of cooperation reinforcing Warsaw's support for Kremlin leader Gorbachev's drive for political and economic change. The pact, signed by Polish leader Jaruzelski and Gorbachev, covers ideological, scientific and cultural ties. </TEXT></DOC>