<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870604-0098 </DOCNO><HL> Your Money Matters:Pied Piper: How Adviser CharmedRetirees Into Investment Disaster---By Martha BranniganStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><DATELINE> NAPLES, Fla.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Charles Phillip Elliott seemed to be the ideal investment adviser and broker.    He was an established family man with a stellar reputation and a lavish life style to attest to his success. During 14 years in and around this affluent retirement community, he attracted most of his business through the glowing referrals of happy customers. His investments earned up to 15%, tax-free. Interest checks always came on time, even early.    Small wonder some 1,300 investors, most of them elderly, poured more than $61 million into his deals.    But on March 31, Mr. Elliott and his companies -- Elliott Enterprises, an unincorporated business, Elliott Securities Inc., and Elliott Mortgage Co. -- were placed in receivership by a federal judge. That came after the Securities and Exchange Commission had filed suit in U.S. district court in Miami, charging Mr. Elliott, the three companies, and two other employees of the companies with fraud.    Without admitting or denying the SEC's charges, Mr. Elliott consented to a permanent injunction barring him from violating federal securities laws. He says he never intended to defraud anyone and asserts, &quot;If this investigation had not ensued, I honestly think no investor would ever have lost a dime.&quot;    In a report filed in the district court, the court-appointed receiver, Charles O. Farrar, says that the Elliott entities probably never were profitable and stayed afloat through a continual flow of new customer cash. While losses are still being tallied, Charles Harper, associate regional administrator of the Miami branch office of the SEC, estimates that at least half of the $61 million in investors' funds may be lost.    In many ways, Mr. Elliott's story is a familiar one. Because of his disarming charm and apparent success, investors didn't make basic checks. A few calls to regulators might have alerted investors that contrary to Mr. Elliott's claims, most of his operations weren't regulated and audited, his investments weren't covered by insurance and they weren't tax-free.    His case also reaffirms the investment adage: If it sounds too good to be true, it probably is.    Consider 81-year-old Naples retiree, Howard Heathman. He was looking to bolster his fixed income during an era of low interest rates, when he got chummy with Mr. Elliott. He even recommended Mr. Elliott for membership in the yacht club, where Mr. Heathman was commodore. He says the high interest rates on the investments should have sounded an alarm. Now, he says, he blames himself as much as Mr. Elliott for not being more leery.    Part of the lure of Elliott Enterprises was that it offered a variety of investments, personalized to customers' needs. Among the most common investments were what Mr. Elliott called &quot;repurchase agreements&quot; -- customers received monthly interest payments in exchange for handing over their cash, which was to be collateralized by municipal bonds or Treasury securities held in a third-party depository.    The trouble is, the SEC alleges in its suit, many transactions weren't collateralized at all, or if they were, involved securities that were also pledged as collateral for personal loans to Mr. Elliott. The SEC alleges that Mr. Elliott also falsely claimed that investments were insured by the Securities Investor Protection Corp.    Mr. Elliott also touted many of his investments as being tax-free, though they weren't, according to the SEC suit. Mr. Elliott's lawyer, David C. Pollack, says that his client based his representation on professional opinion.    Mr. Elliott, however, concedes he made little distinction between his private and business pocketbooks, sometimes using company funds for personal expenses: lawn maintenance, yacht expenses, alimony and the like. But, he adds: &quot;So what? I owned all the companies.&quot;    Mr. Elliott's life style was luxuriant, even by upscale local standards. But far from drawing suspicion, his extravagance won him respect. A Rolls Royce convertible headed his fleet of cars -- three Mercedes, two Cadillacs, a Corvette and a classic Ford Thunderbird convertible.    He kept a pair of yachts. His beach house on the Gulf of Mexico has waterfalls and a fountain, two pools, a spa and a wet bar. He also owns a nearby bayfront house with a two-story spiral staircase and tennis courts and maintains homes in Jamaica and North Carolina.    Last year, he completed a garish five-story, New Orleans-style headquarters in downtown Naples. Mr. Elliot's penthouse office overlooks Naples Bay. Behind his enormous rosewood desk is a solid rosewood bookshelf with the requisite hidden door that opens to an apartment suite.    &quot;I designed it so that when you walked in you could smell the money,&quot; says Mr. Elliott, who wears a diamond-studded, gold Rolex watch. &quot;That's why the rosewood paneling.&quot;    Meanwhile, Mr. Elliott's business prominence was complemented by his support of the arts, and he is an inveterate churchgoer. (His priest -- whose life savings and children's college funds are tied up in the Elliott imbroglio -- says when Mr. Elliott chaired the pipe organ fund at St. John's Episcopal Church, it was oversubscribed.)    Sometimes Mr. Elliott embellished his image through what others say was sheer flight of fancy. In a newsletter to investors, Mr. Elliott said that he had entertained Melvin R. Laird, former secretary of defense, at his home and &quot;at his request have offered the Elliott Financial Counseling and Asset Management Services to his Naples friends and clients.&quot;    Mr. Laird, who is senior counselor for national and international affairs at Readers Digest Association Inc., recalls having cocktails and hors d'oeuvres at Mr. Elliott's home, but says he never asked him to offer services to anyone.    According to an affidavit filed in federal court by the SEC, one worried investor who telephoned the company after its troubles began, was told by an Elliott Enterprises officer that Mr. Elliott had been summoned to Washington by President Reagan for financial advice during the Iran crisis. The officer added that things at the firm would be back to normal in a few weeks, according to the SEC.    The enterprises unraveled only after John Gersonde, a St. Joseph, Mich., businessman, questioned his mother's claims that she was earning 10% tax-free from her Elliott investments. He contacted the SEC last fall when the company couldn't satisfy his doubts. (Though his mother is now glad to have gotten her money out, he says, &quot;she was furious with me for ruining her tax-free investment. Livid.&quot;)    The SEC began its investigation late last year, culminating in the March 31 actions. Mr. Elliott is now cooperating with the court-appointed receiver. Most of his cars and both boats have been confiscated for sale by the receiver. His Naples beachfront house is also for sale.    In the meantime, the retirees who had planned so carefully are worried. On top of financial worries, they are furious that they were so easily deceived.    &quot;It happens to be everything I could accumulate after raising five kids, which wasn't easy,&quot; says James Tous, a former auto-parts manager now living in nearby Fort Myers. &quot;I'm looking to go back to work. I'd rather not, but I have to.&quot;    The receiver is still trying to identify and value the Elliott assets, which include art, antiques, jewelry, and precious gems, as well as real estate and interests in various business ventures.    Sorting out the tangled web of customer claims will take time. To many seniors whose income has evaporated, just how much time is the primary question. &quot;One guy told us 'I'm 84 years old. How long is this going to take?'&quot; says the SEC's Mr. Harper. &quot;He said 'I don't even buy green bananas anymore.'&quot; </TEXT></DOC>