<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870703-0186 </DOCNO><HL> Saving the Earth:U.S. Asks World BankTo Make SafeguardingEnvironment a Priority---Institution Adopts GuidelinesFor Third World Projects;But What About Haiti?---Monitoring Trees Via Satellite---By Eduardo LachicaStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/03/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM AFRIC FREST FORGNBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)ENVIRONMENT (ENV)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><TEXT>   Treasury Secretary James Baker once went to Botswana to hunt elephants, but, he says, he didn't have the heart to shoot any pachyderms. A lifelong hunter and angler, he was also a closet conservationist.    Recently, Mr. Baker has been able to take his environmental concerns public. Operating on instructions from Congress, he is pressing the World Bank to build environmental safeguards into its Third World development projects. &quot;The environment is on the agenda,&quot; he says. &quot;This is a matter we feel strongly about.&quot;    Now, partly because of pressure from the U.S., its largest contributor, the World Bank has set firm guidelines on how bank projects should avoid or minimize damage to tropical forests, watersheds and wildlands.    The bank has also expanded its environmental programs. It is turning its 12-person environmental staff into a full-scale department with as many as 100 professionals, most of whom will be posted in regional offices so that they can work hand in hand with lending officers. Bank President Barber Conable recently announced an &quot;urgent&quot; assessment of environmental threats in the 30 most vulnerable developing nations, including Brazil, Indonesia and Mali, and began programs to counter the spread of deserts, deforestation and pollution in the Mediterranean Sea.    The U.S. is pressing the African Development Bank, the Asian Development Bank and the Inter-American Development Bank to take similar steps. Together with the 151-nation World Bank, these institutions lend about $22 billion a year to developing countries.    The U.S. has also raised environmental concerns about a number of projects that are under World Bank consideration. Washington worries, for example, that Pakistan's $5 billion Kalabagh hydroelectric dam on the Indus River risks creating crop-killing salt deposits downstream and that a large hydroelectric project planned by India on the Narmada River will flood 150,000 acres of teak-covered valleys. A Delhi University team that surveyed the project called it &quot;sheer madness -- or at best a dangerous gamble.&quot;    U.S. conservation groups persuaded Congress to impose environmental conditions on the World Bank and other multilateral development banks. &quot;It's not just birds and bunnies and having nice parks,&quot; explains Barbara Bramble, the international program director of the National Wildlife Federation. &quot;We're talking about basic resources and how to use them wisely. That's something Middle America can understand.&quot;    Robert Kasten, a Wisconsin Republican on the Senate Appropriations Committee, argues that &quot;it's simply unacceptable that {development banks} should finance bad projects with U.S. taxpayer dollars.&quot;    And Claiborne Pell, the chairman of the Senate Foreign Relations Committee, insists that the environment is a &quot;foreign-policy issue&quot; and one that &quot;doesn't stop at the frontiers of any one nation -- even one as vast as our own.&quot; Forest destruction raises global temperatures, which in turn could melt the polar ice caps and flood coastal cities, the Rhode Island Democrat notes.    In financing the banks for the current fiscal year, Congress instructed the Treasury to promote the &quot;rapid addition&quot; of trained environmentalists to bank staffs, to vote against loans for projects that would hurt the environment and to demand that no less that 20% of development-bank loans be directed toward environmentally beneficial projects such as reforestation, small-scale farming and mini-hydroelectric dams.    Finally, the law requires the U.S. Agency for International Development to establish an &quot;early warning system&quot; to flag projects that might harm the environment. Its latest report lists more than $10 billion in bank-financed projects that are facing delays, mainly for environmental reasons.    The list includes major hydroelectric projects in India, Pakistan and China. &quot;Those mega-projects will have to undergo a greater degree of scrutiny for their environmental impact,&quot; Secretary Baker says.    Treasury officials insist that the U.S. isn't anti-growth. &quot;We're simply saying that it makes more sense economically to design projects properly and avoid environmental destruction that would cost a lot more to fix later,&quot; says James Conrow, the deputy assistant secretary for developing nations. &quot;We don't have to make a stark choice between development and the environment.&quot;    But the U.S. stance troubles some Third World developers. &quot;They have yet to show us any practical alternatives -- how, for instance, Indonesia can make up for the loss of foreign exchange if it agrees not to cut timber,&quot; says Al Binger, the president of the Biomass Users Network, based in Costa Rica. &quot;Let's not forget that it's the need to repay debt that's forcing countries to deplete their own natural resources.&quot;    The Jamaican-born Mr. Binger believes that until donor countries look at underdevelopment in its totality, many debt-ridden developing countries will listen politely to Secretary Baker but continue their environmentally harmful practices.    The World Bank is having some effect. It has firm guidelines against financing projects that would overtax the borrowers' natural resources -- fisheries projects that would overfish waters, for instance, or cattle projects that would overgraze the land. The bank's new environmental focus is to some extent in conflict with its more traditional goals, like fighting poverty and increasing food production. But Mr. Conable insists that ecology and economics can be &quot;mutually reenforcing disciplines.&quot;    Despite its efforts, the World Bank's environmental loans last year amounted to $800 million, or 5% of total lending, well below the 20% the U.S. is advocating. Mr. Conable concedes that the bank has to &quot;do more to ensure that environmental considerations play a central role in development strategies.&quot;    The development-bank community still has no answers for an environmental disaster like Haiti. The Caribbean nation, once rich in mahogany forests, is in danger of being reduced to a barren rock by desperately poor people who cut down trees for fuel. &quot;You can't talk about environmental protection to a country that's on the margin of survival,&quot; says Gunter Koenig, who runs some of the World Bank's Caribbean programs.    Haiti's problems have made development agencies more sensitive to preventing or repairing deforestation and erosion in Nepal and other countries. The bank is beginning a broad effort to curb the destruction of tropical forests, as much as 11 million acres of which are lost every year to human settlement. It has already had a lot of experience in replanting denuded lands with fast-growing species and training farmers to manage tree nurseries. Mr. Conable says that the bank has made $1 billion in forestry-project loans over the past decade and that &quot;we are ready to do more.&quot;    The World Bank is also working to repair environmental damage from earlier projects. Bank aides acknowledge that as much as $2.3 billion will have to be spent on a canal to divert the periodic flooding of the Indus River below Tarbela, a Pakistani hydroelectric project built in the early 1970s. The dam is causing waterlogging and salination in grain fields downstream.    What is happening in Brazil illustrates the struggle to balance development with environmental protection. At one point, World Bank officials recall, Brazil was developing so fast that it transported timber on airplanes to build its new capital. Government officials also once seriously considered turning the Amazon into a Mediterranean-sized lake to create internal shipping routes where impenetrable jungles still stood.    This exuberance has been cooled by a mountain of debt and the bitter aftermath of too-hasty development. A five-year-old Brazilian effort to settle the Amazon basin has led to destruction of vast tracts of tropical rain forests in the state of Rondonia. It was unwittingly abetted by the World Bank, which helped pay for a road, BR 364, that penetrated the jungle and brought in hundreds of thousands of settlers. That did more to unleash the wrath of U.S. environmentalists on the development banks than any of the banks' other works.    The bank now concedes that it misjudged Brazil's ability to control the migration. &quot;A tidal wave of humanity poured in, lured by TV reports that Rondonia is a green paradise where you can get rich quick,&quot; recalls John McKenna Jr., a World Bank resource planner. The bank reports that Rondonia, a state the size of West Germany, lost 15% of its forest cover to bulldozers and land speculators in less than five years.    Sen. Kasten asked the crew of a space-shuttle flight to photograph the devastation and showed the pictures at congressional hearings to help build support for putting environmental conditions on U.S. contributions to development banks. &quot;I'm not for going back to candles; we need electricity and development,&quot; Sen. Kasten says. &quot;But I'm against thoughtless, short-term development that can't be sustained over the long term.&quot;    Disturbed by the environmental damage, the World Bank suspended payments to the project until Brazil changed its policies. Now the bank is working to ensure that its mistakes aren't repeated. It is buying remote-sensing satellite services to detect any further changes in Rondonia's tree canopy. It is also paying for a force of 85 forest rangers to keep settlers away from Indian lands and biological reserves.    And the bank is offering Brazil incentives to protect its remaining wilderness. Under one possible deal, if Brazil kicked in the same amount, the bank would provide a $100 million loan for protecting the wildlife -- rich Pantanal area close to the Bolivian border and the mountain ranges on the South Atlantic coast.    The bank is also urging Brazil to change its tax system so that landowners can get a tax break for keeping their trees standing. Currently, the tax laws penalize owners for underusing the land.    In the meantime, Brazil's own environmental movement has come to life. The National Environmental Council, made up of both public and private entities, is lobbying for a law that would identify all of the Amazon's ecosystems, declare half of each a protected area and open only a quarter of each to commercial use.    Brazilian officials warn, though, that tensions between the underdeveloped northern states and the more modern south continue to obstruct a national consensus on the environment. &quot;The environment has to share resources with other priorities,&quot; says Brazilian diplomat Sergio do Amaral. &quot;We have to worry, too, about infant mortality and malnutrition, about all those children abandoned on the streets.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>