<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870514-0019 </DOCNO><HL> Latin Nations, Fearing Mass Deportations, SeekTo Lessen Impact of New U.S. Immigration Law---By Dianna Solis and Constanza MontanaStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAMJUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   From San Jose, Costa Rica, to Mexico City, Latin American nations are mounting challenges to lessen the impact of the sweeping new U.S. immigration law.    Officials there fear the law will lead to massive deportations that will worsen already severe unemployment and wipe out a significant source of foreign revenue: the money illegal immigrants send back to families in their homelands. (Those monies are estimated to represent the third largest source of foreign revenue for Mexico, the nation that is expected to be hurt most by the new law.)    About 70% of the estimated six million illegal immigrants in the U.S. are from Latin America; nearly one-fifth of the population of El Salvador is estimated to reside in the U.S., mostly illegally. As a result, for the foreign governments -- especially in Mexico, Guatemala, El Salvador and Honduras -- the adoption of the law was tantamount to a foreign-policy declaration by the U.S.    &quot;Mexico recognizes the sovereign right of every state to legislate,&quot; said Mexico's Consul General Hermilo Lopez-Bassols in a recent radio address in Houston. But when that right affects the interests of other nations, he says, &quot;the issue becomes transnationalized and, therefore, demands consultations and negotiations.&quot;    The U.S. Immigration and Naturalization Service insists that fears of massive deportations are unfounded. &quot;There will be no mass deportations. We just don't have the resources,&quot; says Mark Everson, INS executive associate commissioner.    But even Latin American nations with few illegal immigrants in the U.S. have a stake in the new law: They fear that the number of Salvadoran and Nicaraguan refugees already in their countries will swell when illegals in the U.S. discover employers will no longer hire them and begin to move back south.    &quot;The negative effect of this new law is going to be felt in Costa Rica,&quot; a haven for Nicaraguan refugees, says Guido Fernandez, that country's ambassador to the U.S. &quot;Where are these people going to go?&quot;    Central American nations have been feverishly strategizing in the past two weeks for a way to confront that question -- and a way to gain support in Washington for temporary-refugee status for some illegals. Guatemala, for example, has been trying to organize a Guatemala City meeting, with limited success, of five Central American nations to address the immigration law. Guatemalan President Vinicio Cerezo Arevalo discussed the law in a meeting yesterday with President Reagan. A Justice Department official, however, said the prospects for any special consideration for Guatemalans looked very dim. Likewise, a similiar request by President Jose Napoleon Duarte of El Salvador appears to have fallen through.    &quot;The feeling is that exemptions would undercut the immigration bill,&quot; said the U.S. official. &quot;If we exempt El Salvador and Guatemala, what about Mexico?&quot;    In Los Angeles, Mexican-American legislators and the White House's Hispanic affairs liaison are meeting today and tomorrow with their Mexican counterparts, including the Mexican consul general.    In Houston, the consulates of El Salvador, Colombia, Honduras, Guatemala and Mexico have joined with local attorneys and social-service agencies, using the federal court in one precedent-setting case and other forums, to &quot;safeguard the rights and privileges&quot; of illegal immigrants.    Last week the first major phase of the new law began. Under the legislation -- known as the Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986 -- illegal immigrants who can prove they've lived in the U.S. since Jan. 1, 1982, with few absences, are entitled to submit applications for temporary residency status. But the majority of Central American war and economic refugees aren't expected to qualify, since many fled their homelands after 1981. And while the INS estimates that 1.9 million to 3.9 million illegal residents will apply for amnesty, many aren't expected to because key family members won't qualify. Already, five bills have been introduced in Congress to help keep immigrant families united, or to delay deportations of Salvadorans or Nicaraguans.    The second major phase of the new law may pack an even larger punch for Latin America. Beginning June 1, the INS phases in warnings, to be followed by penalties, for employers who knowingly hire illegal immigrants after the law was signed by President Reagan last Nov. 6. The U.S. government hopes the employer sanctions will cut the flow of illegal immigrants by drying up job opportunities. Mexico fears that its unemployment and &quot;underemployment rate,&quot; already estimated at 40%, could swell as a result of the new law.    But challenging the new law and lobbying for amendments and other exemptions calls for delicate diplomacy on a number of complex fronts. Nonintervention has always been a fundamental principle of foreign policy for many Latin American nations, whose histories have been marked by invasions from the U.S., Spain and France.    The new immigration law, says Guatemalan Ambassador Oscar Padilla, &quot;is strictly an internal matter of the United States.&quot; But all of Central America &quot;is affected by this law&quot; and cannot sit by idly.    The Latin American governments have jumped into the issue so reluctantly, in fact, that their efforts may now be too little too late. Further, the sudden barrage of Latin American governments on the anti-deportation bandwagon may jeopardize the chances for Salvadorans and Nicaraguans to win &quot;extended voluntary departure&quot; status or EVD -- immigration jargon for a status that officially delays deportations.    &quot;What distinguishes Salvador and Nicaragua is that they are countries at war,&quot; says Rick Swartz, a Washington, D.C., attorney who leads a pro-immigrant coalition. &quot;Now one of the problems with EVD is all these other countries running around saying, 'Me, too.'&quot;    Already, Salvadoran President Duarte has written Mr. Reagan to urge EVD status for Salvadorans residing in the U.S. Such EVD status has been extended to Poles, Ethiopians and Afghanis. Mr. Duarte noted that the Salvadoran refugees in the U.S. send home $350 million to $600 million annually, money he argues his country sorely needs.    A bill by Sen. Dennis DeConcini (D., Ariz.) would block deportations of Salvadorans for two years because of that country's &quot;generalized climate of violence and destruction.&quot; Another bill by Rep. Joseph Moakley (D., Mass.) would also extend such status to Nicaraguans, an exile group likely to win over some conservative sympathizers.    Experience shows that U.S. foreign-policy objectives can influence the discretionary powers of U.S. immigration officials. The Miami INS office, for instance, stopped deportations of Nicaraguans a year ago. &quot;I personally find it abhorrent to send them back to the Sandinistas,&quot; the district director, Perry Rivkind, said.    Perhaps the most complex effort to push for favorable treatment of its nationals has been undertaken by Mexico, where the policy of nonintervention borders on an obsession. After immigrant women sought help from their consulates, Mr. Lopez-Bassols of Mexico, and other consuls helped bring a successful lawsuit in federal court on their behalf that sent a strong warning nationwide to bosses trying to rid work forces of illegals who might qualify for legalization.    The task force's next assignment? Publishing a &quot;black list&quot; of unscrupulous immigration consultants and attorneys who are leading immigrants down the &quot;wrong path&quot; with &quot;unreliable information.&quot;    In another shift, Mexican politicos have reached across the border to draw invited groups of regional Mexican-American leaders into the immigration issue. Such efforts have taken place in the past but a continous bond has never been fused.    Recent meetings in Mexico City with Mexican-Americans have included discussions with President Miguel de la Madrid and two cabinet ministers. Mexico, evermindful of the need to avoid appearing interventionist, calls the meetings &quot;cultural exchanges.&quot; But some Mexican-American leaders say the immigration issue is sowing the seeds for advancement of a more politicized agenda.    Isaias Torres, a Houston immigration attorney who met 10 years ago with then-President Luis Echeverria of Mexico, says he's more optimistic of fruitful future meetings that will strengthen the U.S. stature of Chicanos with U.S. policy-makers. &quot;The more we are ignored here, the more we are forced to turn outside,&quot; he says. </TEXT></DOC>