<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881028-0105 </DOCNO><HL> With Leveraged Buy-Outs in Spotlight, Here Are Answers to Common Questions </HL><AUTHOR> George Anders (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TAXES LABOR </CO><IN> TNM BON BNK FIN INS FND </IN><TEXT>   The bidding war for RJR Nabisco Inc. has put leveraged buy-outs in the spotlight. A decade ago, LBOs might have merited just a footnote in finance texts, but now they seem to be sweeping through corporate America. Already, companies ranging from Tiffany andamp; Co. to Levi Strauss andamp; Co. have been taken private in LBOs. And with two buy-out groups seeking to acquire RJR Nabisco for as much as $20 billion, the potential reach of the LBO wave seems immense.    So how do these transactions work? And are they good or bad for business? Here are the answers to some commonly asked questions about LBOs.    What's so special about leveraged buy-outs?    One word: debt. Traditional acquisitions are paid for mostly with cash or stock. In LBOs, often 90% or more of the purchase price is borrowed money. That means the new owners of the company get to control the business in return for putting up just 10% or less of the price.    To get out from under that debt mountain, they have two main choices: raise money by selling parts of the business, or improve operating profits by cutting costs.    Who makes these deals happen?    Usually it's an alliance between a buy-out specialist such as Kohlberg Kravis Roberts andamp; Co. and top management of a company. Together they become owners of the company and take on responsibility for paying down the debt. In RJR Nabisco's case, the company's chairman began looking at LBO prospects; in other cases a buy-out firm may be the first to broach the idea.    How big is the LBO business?    Vast and growing fast. LBOs were rare before the late 1970s, but last year 259 buyouts totaling $35.6 billion were completed, according to Mergers andamp; Acquisitions magazine. Today, the buy-out business probably commands at least $250 billion in spending power, says Steven Einhorn, a partner at Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co.    Generating that immense sum is $25 billion or more that's been committed to LBO partnerships such as KKR, Shearson Lehman Hutton Inc.'s buy-out fund and others. That's only the equity, or ownership money. The partnerships' buying power is easily 10 times greater because of all the money they can borrow.    Where does all that money come from?    Three big sources. Equity in the buy-out funds is provided mostly by pension funds, which love the big profits that LBOs have provided so far. Yet they leave the actual choice of investments and strategy to the fund operators. Typical is James George, investment chief of the Oregon Public Employees' Retirement System, who has invested $600 million in KKR's buy-out fund -- but lets KKR call the shots.    As for the debt financing, much of it comes from banks. LBO loans usually run 1 1/2 percentage points above the prime rate, making them more appealing to banks than regular business lending.    Insurance companies join in by providing &quot;mezzanine&quot; financing -- which ranks between the equity and bank debt in both credit-worthiness and potential returns. This can involve buying low-rated &quot;junk&quot; bonds that yield as much as 15%.    What kinds of companies are prime LBO candidates?    Generally, the duller the better. Financiers like mature industries that don't have big research budgets or capital-spending needs. Popular industries have included food, textiles and retailing -- businesses that also are prized for their strong cash flow and resistance to recession. Otherwise, deal makers say, taking on a big debt load is too risky.    How do LBOs affect executives -- and the rank and file?    For top managers, LBOs can be lucrative. Senior officers usually become part owners of the company through the LBO. If it prospers, their stakes could appreciate many times over.    Buy-outs also change the corporate culture, says Carl Ferenbach, a partner in the buy-out firm of Berkshire Partners. Management staffs are thinned out, so &quot;lines of communication get much shorter,&quot; he says. Decisions are made faster. Managers say they feel enlivened by a do-or-die attitude. But things aren't so exciting for low-level employees, who often end up seeing cost-cutting that can include layoffs.    Do LBOs make companies stronger or weaker?    If stock market value is the main gauge, LBOs have been a roaring success. Many buy-out companies go public again once they've paid down some of their debt -- and they often command much higher stock prices than before the buy-out. Shearson Lehman Hutton invested $100,000 in Tiffany in 1984 and cashed out with $2.2 million in March 1988.    But by other yardsticks, buy-outs don't always do so well. Research and development budgets can suffer, leaving a company poorly positioned for the future. Cost-cutting can become such an obsession that a company misses chances for expansion.    What's more, most buy-out companies have operated in a benign environment of economic growth and moderate interest rates. The final judgment isn't likely to be in until these companies show how they fare in a recession.    If LBOs succeed, who wins?    Buy-out fund managers and their equity investors do fabulously. Fifteen years ago, Messrs. Kravis and Roberts were just salaried employees at Bear, Stearns and Co.; now they're on Forbes magazine's list of the 400 richest people in the U.S. Lenders do well, though not spectacularly. As for companies' employees and customers, sometimes they say an LBO brings better management, but that isn't universally true.    If LBOs fail, who loses?    All the investors take a pounding. The bankruptcy filing of Revco D.S. Inc. this summer showed that big LBOs really can go sour. Revco's equity investors, led by Salomon Brothers Inc., have little to show for their investment; debtholders will recoup something but still show losses.    The damage of a failed LBO can be especially jarring for employees and company towns. After all, most LBO investors are so big and diversified they can afford an occasional loss. Other interested parties aren't so lucky.    What economic forces have made all these LBOs possible?    Start with the tax code. The tax-deductibility of interest gives an edge to companies that load up with debt. Add in a stock market that hasn't valued some companies as highly as deal makers think they're worth. And don't forget the importance of a growing economy with moderate interest rates. That's meant that operating earnings from these companies have covered their debt burdens.    What could cause LBOs to fail?    All the above conditions could be reversed someday. Congress periodically talks about ending some tax breaks for takeover-related debt. High interest rates could mean disastrous increases in debt-service charges for buy-out companies. And a recession would shrink the operating earnings needed to service that debt.    But the most immediate concern of buy-out professionals is that too much LBO money is chasing too few deals -- driving up prices and causing some questionable buy-outs to be done. &quot;There's been a dramatic increase in the number of players&quot; managing LBO funds, says Scott Sperling, a portfolio manager of Harvard University's $4 billion endowment. &quot;That portends an increase in the number of problems.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>