<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870224-0070 </DOCNO><HL> Alaska's Mall KingBattles His BankersAnd Builds No More---Pete Zamarello, Ship-JumperWho Struck It Rich, ToilsIn Bankruptcy Court Now---By Ken WellsStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BANKRUPTCIES (BCY)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)CONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON) </IN><DATELINE> ANCHORAGE, Alaska  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Pete Zamarello was known as Alaska's largest real-estate developer and richest man. So when he told lawyers a few months ago that he was flat broke, it sounded a little suspicious.    Further questioning, for a deposition in U.S. Bankruptcy Court here, brought a concession. Mr. Zamarello admitted having &quot;$8, maybe $10.&quot; He asked the lawyers, with a perfectly straight face: &quot;You want it?&quot;    About 15 banks and an army of lawyers were hoping for a little more -- say, $150 million. That didn't seem too extreme, considering that the banks, which tripped over one another lending Mr. Zamarello money before his Chapter 11 filing last summer, had been estimating his net worth at as high as $220 million.    Where had his fortune gone? For one thing, Mr. Zamarello explained, he had given a large portion of the assets of his sprawling shopping-center kingdom to his estranged wife in exchange for other property -- in Beirut, Lebanon.    &quot;Don't go look for it,&quot; he told the lawyers. &quot;It's not there anymore; they blew it up.&quot;    Mr. Zamarello is a one-time illegal alien who came to Alaska in 1958 with little more than the clothes on his back and a carpenter's hammer. Within 15 years he had become the developer-king of a retail-space empire, buying land at many of Anchorage's prime intersections and throwing up look-alike shopping malls anchored by pizza parlors or truck stops.    But two years ago, when practically every economist in the state was predicting a bust in its oil-driven economy, Mr. Zamarello continued to build, build, build, borrowing from banks at a rate he calculates at $75 million a year. In all, he built about four million square feet of retail space, more than half the state's total. Finally last summer, as Alaska sank into a near depression, Mr. Zamarello's operation, plagued by soaring vacancy rates and about $150 million of debt to some 250 creditors, fell into the bankruptcy courts.    Mr. Zamarello has tackled the task of rescuing his empire with the same brashness he applied to building it. In one deposition, he likened the bankers who lent to him so freely to liars, cheats and thieves, adding, &quot;I'd rather be a pimp with a purple hat . . . than be associated with banks.&quot;    He also hired his own crew of lawyers and blocked a move to put his holdings in the hands of a trustee. But his attempt to swap about $50 million in assets for property in a war zone didn't quite go through; a bankruptcy-court judge ruled that the property had actually been transferred to a corporation Mr. Zamarello controlled. (Mr. Zamarello says he made the transfers for tax reasons on the advice of a lawyer and an auditor, whom he won't name; he isn't under any criminal investigation.)    Having helped provide what now is a great glut of Alaska retail space, Mr. Zamarello has lost his ardor for construction. &quot;I will not build nothing in Alaska, even my tomb,&quot; he said in one deposition. Instead of a builder of shopping centers, he adds over a low-budget lunch of buttered grits, &quot;I'm going to become a manager.&quot;    It won't be his first career switch. Mr. Zamarello, born on the Greek isle of Cephalonia, was working as a seaman when he abandoned a freighter in Albany, N.Y., in 1955. Dodging immigration authorities, he then earned his living as a carpenter, before making his way to Alaska and turning developer.    Life in Cephalonia had been spare but not boring. Mr. Zamarello says he was forced as a child to join the Fascist youth movement gripping Greece in the '30s and that &quot;by the time I was 10 I was goosestepping.&quot; Later, with his country occupied by the Nazis, he was rounded up with some other Greek youths when the resistance killed a Nazi colonel. After watching the execution of his comrades one by one, Mr. Zamarello says, he saved his life by marching up to a Gestapo officer and offering a lusty Zieg heil!    These days, Mr. Zamarello's politics are mainstream but, he concedes, still expedient: Lavish Republican contributions have earned him an autographed picture of President Reagan, but he says he really leans to socialism.    Along the way, the developer became a citizen by marrying an American. He also acquired a new name, dropping the original, Panagiotis Tzamarelatos. (Saying his distant ancestors were Italians, Mr. Zamarello lately has been attributing his troubles partly to banker &quot;bias against Latins,&quot; while offering unsolicited denials of Mafia involvement.)    By the 1970s, Mr. Zamarello was astutely buying undervalued Anchorage land. Using his property as collateral and acting as his own contractor, he borrowed hundreds of millions to erect dozens of strip malls, each a collection of shops in one elongated street-front building. Architectural pretension has never been among the criticisms leveled against him; most of his buildings are uninspired econo-boxes.    Alaska banks were receptive to Mr. Zamarello, with his workaholic habits, his self-effacing wit and his contagious optimism. When they began to sniff a state recession two years ago, he turned to institutions in the Pacific Northwest, where sluggish local business made him a welcome customer. Until that point, no bank appears to have bothered checking whether Mr. Zamarello's one-page, unaudited financial statement was on target.    It wasn't. When BankAmerica's Seattle First National asked for an audited statement, it found a net worth of about $95 million, far from the $167 million shown in the unaudited statement and further still from what many banks had informally estimated. But Seafirst also lent to Mr. Zamarello's operation and now is among the creditors. Of the general willingness to shower loans on Mr. Zamarello, one bank president says, &quot;It was greed, pure and simple. Pete was where the action was, and everybody wanted some of the action.&quot;    While everything was working, Mr. Zamarello spent lavishly. His assets, as listed in the bankruptcy case, include a once-modest home that grew into a vast, purple-trimmed, 18,700-square-foot manse. There is $11 million in furniture, jewelry and memorabilia, including an $80,000 gold-and-diamond watch (Saudi King Fahd is said to have the only one like it) and a letter penned by Heinrich Himmler.    But as Alaska oil drilling fell off and store vacancy rates climbed, Mr. Zamarello's cash flow worsened. Then he hurt himself further with a plan for an 18-story Anchorage tower bearing the name of a bank in which he had a stake. The site was across the street from National Bank of Alaska, one of the few banks that had refused to lend to him. Friends say Mr. Zamarello was especially pleased that his penthouse office would spoil the mountain view of the lenders who thought his business unworthy.    Mr. Zamarello won't comment on that story, but the developer, known for a keen if sometimes coarse sense of humor, admits he occasionally goads foes. Some say letters written to Mr. Zamarello have come back with a rather specific obscene command stamped across the page.    Contending he had a commitment from the California unit of Barclays Bank International for financing, Mr. Zamarello started building the tower. But Barclays said no commitment existed. Soon, a contractor sued Mr. Zamarello and won a $4.3 million judgment, spurring the bankruptcy filing in August. Mr. Zamarello has since sued Barclays, alleging breach of contract; a Barclays lawyer calls the action &quot;frivolous.&quot;    As the Chapter 11 case proceeds, Mr. Zamarello has ceased transferring assets and describing himself as broke. He has whittled his bank debt to about $100 million by forfeiting a number of properties. And last month he filed a complex reorganization plan that he figures would leave him with about 30% of his former retail-space holdings while eventually paying back most of his debt.    The banks won't say yet whether the plan is acceptable. But some creditors, like Terry Gorsuch, a contractor to whom Mr. Zamarello owes $150,000, think that unless the bankers relish playing landlord for a gaggle of half-empty shopping centers, they may be stuck with the plan. &quot;Nobody knows Pete's business like Pete. I'd be very nervous about handing it over to anybody else,&quot; Mr. Gorsuch says.    Whatever else his legacy, Mr. Zamarello is likely to be remembered for enlivening normally dull bankruptcy proceedings. His latest quip is that when the furor over his finances finally subsides, he plans to apologize for his pimps-and-bankers comparison.    &quot;To the pimps,&quot; he says. </TEXT></DOC>