<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880919-0128 </DOCNO><HL> Put Members of Congress on a Short Leash </HL><AUTHOR> Thomas F. Hartnett </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> CNG </G><TEXT>   My six years in Congress taught me there is only one thing that might help bring about a balanced budget. That is a limitation on the number of consecutive terms a House or Senate member may serve. The 1988 Republican Party platform endorses the idea.    For years, we've been led to believe the best thing we could do for our district and/or our state is return legislators to Washington year after year so they would gain the seniority to bring home the goods. The fact is, in the House particularly, this is no longer so much the case. The Democrat caucus there elects committee chairmen and House officials, not necessarily on the basis of seniority. I have seen bright, newly elected members achieve more for their districts, their states and our nation than those who've been part of the congressional woodwork for years.    The desire to retain office remains strong, however, and the people are the loser. Consider my experience:   I was elected in November 1980, one of 54 Republicans in the largest freshmen class to go to Congress in a number of years. I had never met a brighter, more dedicated, enthusiastic and determined group of men and women than that class. We seemed united in our desire to bring about fiscal responsibility, conservative government, and common sense -- to make changes in the direction of this country. And we did, for about six months.    Then our thoughts turned to the re-election that faced all of us, some in primaries as little as 12 months later. Who among us would want to go home having voted for cuts in veterans benefits, Medicare, student loans, Aid to Families With Dependent Children, farm subsidies, national defense, or Social Security? No one. Who wants to be cut up by an opponent the next time around, when going along on all the various spending measures can ensure a long tenure in office?    Fiscal responsibility thus goes out the window. The system dictates to all of us how we have to vote. Oh, sure, a cosmetic if well-intentioned act such as Gramm-Rudman-Hollings might periodically be tried, but it won't really be effective as long as re-election is paramount.    The idea of limiting the number of terms is certainly not a new one. The founding fathers themselves realized 200 years ago that there might be some merit in restricting service. As far back as 1777 the Continental Congress, under the Articles of Confederation, limited delegates to three years' service in any six-year period. And a decade later, the Constitutional Convention debated the question, as did the First Congress, without setting a cap.    Not much has been done since then. In 1950, President Truman proposed a 12-year limit on service in each chamber of Congress, but his proposal got nowhere. (The next year, the 22nd Amendment to the Constitution, limiting the president to two terms, was ratified.) Later, President Eisenhower also favored some limit on terms.    A ruling class has emerged. We no longer have government of, by and for the people, but rather by professional legislators who, using all the perks of office, are re-elected time and again to the House and to the Senate. In 1986, the re-election percentage for House members exceeded 98%. It is not just coincidental that higher re-election percentages have accompanied higher federal deficits.    Perhaps I was the only member who ever opposed a UDAG grant for his own district and was successful in having the grant stalled. People in my district went to Sen. Strom Thurmond, who because of his tenure was able to override my objection; the grant was obtained. Sen. Thurmond, a fellow Republican, is known as a strong &quot;fiscal conservative.&quot; But his attitude, like that of other colleagues, was &quot;if I don't get it for my people, somebody else will.&quot;    Well, we can no longer afford to let our representatives &quot;get it for their people.&quot; Although we may be residents of small, rural areas, we are all affected by the economic condition of our nation. What happens in Washington affects what happens on Wall Street, and what happens on Wall Street affects what happens in Chesterfield County, S.C.    We have to place a lid on federal spending, and we can help our representatives from being scared to do it. It is time that we told them that after a limited number of terms, we will give you a gold watch, a brass band, put you on a bus, send you home and let you live under the laws you passed while you were in Congress.    ---   Mr. Hartnett gave up his congressional seat in 1986 to run for lieutenant governor of South Carolina. He lost and returned to the real-estate appraisal profession. </TEXT></DOC>