<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881012-0135 </DOCNO><HL> Planning Ahead: Expecting a Tax Rise Next Year, Lobbyists Try to Protect Clients --- They Seek Out Coalitions, Ignore Campaign Pledges; VAT Appears Unpopular --- A Windfall for Big Law Firms </HL><AUTHOR> Monica Langley and Alan Murray (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TAXES </CO><IN> MKT FIN INS PET TOB BVG REL CON FIN BNK ARO STK </IN><G> CNG </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The &quot;T-word&quot; is the talk of Washington lobbyists, even though the presidential candidates are trying hard not to talk about taxes.    Vice President George Bush pledges not to raise them, and Massachusetts Gov. Michael Dukakis says he will turn to a tax increase only as a last resort. But Washington tax lobbyists don't believe any of that campaign rhetoric.    &quot;Everybody thinks there is going to be a tax bill,&quot; says Nicholas Calio, a lobbyist for the National Association of Wholesalers-Distributors. &quot;The only disagreement is over the extent and breadth of the bill.&quot;    So lobbyists are scurrying about, trying to round up business and form coalitions to fight what they say may be the biggest tax rise in years. &quot;There will be a tax increase next year, perhaps for as much as $30 billion to $40 billion,&quot; says John Merrigan, a top tax lawyer and lobbyist here. &quot;We've already been contacted by a number of businesses who are concerned about next year's tax bill.&quot;    Such warnings are partly a matter of self-interest: By fueling concern about a tax increase, lobbyists are promoting their own business. Tax lobbying is one of this city's most lucrative enterprises; one Washington law firm, Verner, Liipfert, Bernhard, McPherson andamp; Hand, is negotiating with corporate clients for retainers that will top $500,000 a year. &quot;It's not unusual for a client to pay our firm a retainer of more than a half million dollars to work on a tax provision,&quot; says Berl Bernhard, the firm's chairman.    But the lobbyists' expectations are shared by many lawmakers. Despite the campaign rhetoric, congressional tax writers view the odds of a tax bill next year as high. &quot;A tax increase must definitely be considered,&quot; says House Ways and Means Chairman Dan Rostenkowski, an Illinois Democrat. &quot;I just don't see how we can reduce the deficit by just cutting spending.&quot; New York Democratic Sen. Daniel Moynihan, a member of the Senate Finance Committee, agrees. &quot;Anybody who thinks we won't think about a tax increase is wrong,&quot; he says.    The life-insurance industry is so worried about the prospects of a huge tax increase that it has hired Roger Fisher, who wrote a best-selling book on negotiations, &quot;Getting to Yes,&quot; to help work out an industry position. For months, top insurance executives have been isolating themselves at posh retreats and, under Mr. Fisher's direction, trying to reconcile longstanding differences between investor-owned and mutual companies. &quot;We will be better off if we're unified than if we're split,&quot; says William Harman, who represents the investor-owned insurers.    The general public also is skeptical of the candidates' no-tax statements. A new survey by Money magazine, for instance, found that 51% of those surveyed expect federal income taxes to be increased next year; only 17% expect them to decline or stay the same.    Just whose taxes are likely to be raised, however, remains unclear. Some companies hit hard by the 1986 tax-revision law fear that Congress will try to squeeze more money out of corporations. Others believe that lawmakers will turn instead to excise taxes on gasoline, tobacco and alcohol. Still others expect broad new consumption taxes, increases in estate taxes, or even cutbacks in popular personal tax breaks such as the home-mortgage deduction.    In fact, Congress is already on the verge of raising taxes. Tax bills in both the House and Senate would raise taxes from an acceleration in corporate estimated tax payments, a restriction on the sale of tax breaks by Alaskan native corporations and curbs on life insurance policies that can serve as tax shelters. The House tax bill also would raise additional taxes for, among others, military contractors and companies owning stock in other companies.    For now, lobbyists are focusing much of their attention on the National Economic Commission -- a panel established by Congress to make deficit-reduction recommendations to the new president. Commission Co-Chairman Robert Strauss acknowledged last month that the group is considering tax increases, inviting an onslaught from tax-fighting lobbyists.    Opponents of a gasoline tax, for example, have already launched a frontal assault on the fledgling commission. The American Automobile Association and the Highway Users Federation have flooded its offices with 1,000 letters opposing the idea. That's 80% of all the mail the commission has received so far.    And tax lobbyist Denise Bode -- whose clients include Equitable Insurance, Phillips Petroleum, the National Cattleman's Association and the Public Securities Association -- is submitting studies to the commission detailing adverse consequences for her clients if their taxes are raised.    With billions of dollars at stake, interest groups and their lobbyists are preparing to support or oppose a wide array of potential tax changes.    Value-Added Tax   Lobbyist Charls Walker, a champion of tax breaks for big corporations, recently sat down at Maison Blanche, a plush Washington restaurant, for lunch with Robert Greenstein, a proponent of programs for the poor. Mr. Walker, a Republican who was the second-ranking official in the Nixon Treasury Department, proposed that the two men should unite behind a common goal: the value-added tax.    A value-added tax, also known as a VAT, is similar to a national sales tax and could raise huge amounts of revenue. The Congressional Budget Office estimates that a 5% VAT could raise up to $100 billion a year, depending on how it is structured. For Mr. Walker, that money would help cut the budget deficit and, more important, reduce the pressure for higher corporate income taxes. For Mr. Greenstein, Mr. Walker argued, it would finance programs for the poor.    The strange union was never consummated. Mr. Greenstein believes that before considering a VAT, the government ought to try hard to eliminate more income-tax breaks. But the lunch illustrated Mr. Walker's wide-ranging efforts to promote his tax proposal. As Harvard economist Lawrence Summers jokes: &quot;Charlie has given away the proceeds of a value-added tax five times over.&quot;    Mr. Walker isn't the only one pushing the idea. The National Economic Commission has received letters from numerous luminaries who support it, including former Comptroller General Elmer Staats, USX Corp. Chairman David Roderick and even former President Jimmy Carter. Anticipating that the issue will arise next year, the congressional Joint Tax Committee and the General Accounting Office have both quietly begun VAT studies.    But despite all this activity, the chances that a value-added tax will be adopted next year remain very slim. Many people believe that such a tax would hurt middle-income taxpayers more than the wealthy. Moreover, Gov. Dukakis has made it clear that he opposes a broad-based consumption tax, such as a VAT, arguing that the tax system ought to be based on ability to pay. Says GOP Rep. Bill Gradison of Ohio: &quot;I don't think it has much popular support. But at least now it's a three-letter word that can be used in mixed company.&quot;    Excise Taxes   A group of companies worried about an increase in excise taxes -- the Coalition against Regressive Taxation -- has been meeting monthly to plot its lobbying battle. The group, which includes cigarette makers, producers of alcoholic beverages, and truckers, is planning a study to document what happens to low-income families when excise taxes go up.    Of the excise taxes, those on energy are most likely to be raised, many observers believe. &quot;A consensus is building around a gasoline tax,&quot; says John Chapoton, a lobbyist and former assistant secretary for tax policy in the Treasury Department. &quot;It seems to be the least evil.&quot;    That worries Kenneth Simonson, the tax-policy director of the American Trucking Associations. That's why his group formed an unusual alliance with the Automobile Association of America. &quot;We're usually not allies. The AAA is constantly trying to get trucks banned from certain roads and highways,&quot; he says. &quot;But this time, we're together.&quot;    Tobacco interests believe that a proposal in this year's &quot;technical corrections&quot; tax bill may be laying the groundwork for an increase in their taxes next year. The bill would require studies of the healthcare costs attributable to smoking and the impact of the cigarette excise tax on smoking by teen-agers and adults.    Although Gov. Dukakis hasn't said which taxes he would raise as a last resort, his efforts to balance the Massachusetts budget this year suggest that he might turn to &quot;sin&quot; taxes on alcohol and tobacco.    Corporate Taxes   Corporate taxes were increased sharply in 1986, but that doesn't prove that they would be exempt from any 1989 legislation. &quot;From a political point of view,&quot; says Mr. Calio of the wholesalers' group, &quot;it's always easier to tax corporations than to tax people.&quot;    Cleveland lawyer Hugh Calkins has been organizing a group to fight a possible reduction in the so-called dividend-received deduction -- a move that, in effect, would raise taxes on companies that own other companies. Congress is considering a proposal to trim the deduction this year, but that measure isn't likely to pass. Mr. Calkins is worried about next year. He has sent out letters to attorneys with personal holding companies as clients, asking them to meet with him after the election to plan strategy for 1989.    &quot;For the moment, the attacks appear to be beaten back,&quot; Mr. Calkins wrote. &quot;We expect they will resume in 1989.&quot;    A coalition is also being formed to fight any effort to limit advertising deductions, although its organizers apparently want to keep a low profile. &quot;I will not disclose the name of the group or the members,&quot; says Elhanan Stone, a New York attorney working with the group. &quot;I'll only say that it does have to do with advertising.&quot;    Capital-Gains Tax   Although most lobbyists are working to ward off tax increases, one powerful coalition has assembled to push a tax cut: the capital-gains lobby.    Taxes were cut in 1978 and again in 1981 on gains earned from the sale of stock and other assets. But that movement was partially reversed in 1986, when Congress and the Reagan administration agreed to eliminate the tax preference for capital gains as part of their tax-overhaul effort.    This year, however, the capital-gains lobby has been reinvigorated by Vice President Bush's proposal to cut the top tax rate on capital gains to 15% from the top marginal rate of 33% currently. Supporters of the proposal began their lobbying effort early this year by holding a rally sponsored by the Heritage Foundation. Business supporters include the National Venture Capital Association, the American Electronics Association, the Chamber of Commerce, and the American Council for Capital Formation, which also is fighting for the VAT.    The proposal has strong support among GOP tax writers in the House, and some Democrats are sympathetic as well. But Ways and Means Chairman Rostenkowski and other Democratic leaders oppose it, partly because studies by the Joint Tax Committee show the benefits overwhelmingly tilted toward the very wealthy. And Gov. Dukakis has attacked Vice President Bush for favoring the idea.    A major battle for the capital-gains lobbyists is to convince Treasury and congressional tax estimators that the change, by increasing asset sales, would actually raise tax revenue. The Treasury Department currently is split between the professional tax estimators, whose internal estimates have shown the change would lose revenue, and the Office of Economic Policy, which argues that it would raise revenue. Deputy Treasury Secretary Peter McPherson recently opened a study to resolve the dispute, but the outcome remains unclear.    &quot;As long as it loses money, I don't see how it gets anywhere,&quot; says former Assistant Treasury Secretary Chapoton. </TEXT></DOC>