<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870102-0167 </DOCNO><HL> By Carlos Alberto Montaner</HL><DD> 01/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST LATAM </IN><TEXT>   The first of the year has become a time to reflect on U.S.-Cuba relations ever since Fidel Castro took control of the island on Jan. 1, 1959. Two American presidents, Eisenhower and Kennedy -- and to a certain extent a third, Lyndon Johnson -- agreed that U.S. security would be much better defended by putting Mr. Castro out of power and the Soviet Union out of the vicinity of the U.S.    This explains why the harassment of the Havana regime began a few months after the start of the Castro regime. In 1960, Washington imposed an economic embargo on Cuba. In April 1961, it launched the illfated Bay of Pigs invasion. Between that date and 1965, the Central Intelligence Agency took part in several plots to assassinate Mr. Castro and organized hundreds of exiles to infiltrate the island on sabotage and intelligence missions.    Yet, starting in 1966 -- when the Vietnam War monopolized U.S. attention and all the energies of the Johnson administration -- the goal of liquidating &quot;Castroism&quot; disappeared from Washington's priorities, just at the moment when the Cuban revolution was becoming most dangerous to U.S. interests. It was as if, after the initial failures, U.S. administrations were left without an answer of how to deal with an enemy whose leitmotif is to try to destroy or damage U.S. society at any cost.    And that was a sorry mistake, because in his 28 years of governing, Mr. Castro has shown himself to be the most persistent enemy of the U.S. in its two centuries of existence. In nearly three decades the &quot;Maximum Leader&quot; has put into practice many kinds of direct offenses against his neighbor: the training, coordination and support of Puerto Rican terrorists who work on U.S. territory; the trafficking of drugs bound for American society; confiscating, without compensation, American property; an endless propaganda campaign in all the international forums; and the cruel act of sending several thousand insane men and criminals camouflaged amid the wave of emigrants from Mariel in 1980.    But Fidel Castro has not saved his indirect attacks against allies of the U.S., either. With the essential aim of &quot;combating Yankee imperialism,&quot; Mr. Castro has sent Cuban guerrillas to Panama, Bolivia, the Dominican Republic and Venezuela. He has armed and trained guerrillas and terrorists against almost all the countries of Latin America, achieving a spectacular triumph in Nicaragua and a notorious capacity for resistance in El Salvador. At the same time, he has sent his armies to Angola and Ethiopia while he maintains large detachments in 20 other Third World countries. To this Third World he does not stop preaching that there is only one natural ally of the poor nations -- the Soviet Union -- and only one natural enemy as well -- the U.S.    And, of course, since Mr. Castro's victory, U.S. vulnerability and the risks of confrontation with the Soviets have increased. The October 1962 Cuban Missile Crisis is behind us. However, for more than a decade the Bay of Cienfuegos, to the south of Cuba, has been used as a refueling port for the Russian submarine fleet. To the north of Havana, less than 100 miles from Key West, Fla., Moscow has built the largest electronic listening post outside its own territory. Some 10,000 Russian technicians and military men live permanently in Cuba, servicing their secret installation and the second largest army in the Americas, armed forces more powerful than those of all the other countries of the Caribbean Basin combined, including Mexico, Colombia and Venezuela (140 million inhabitants to Cuba's 10 million).    There is no doubt, then, that Presidents Eisenhower and Kennedy were right. U.S. interests and security would have been better protected without the presence of a militantly anti-American Communist regime 90 miles away. This was true in 1959, and it is even more true in 1987 on the eve of a possible Central American war, though few in the White House or State Department have the courage or the honesty to admit it.    Unfortunately, it's very late to try ousting Mr. Castro from power through the use of force. And as we've just seen with the Iran-contra dealings, covert methods of assisting in the elimination of individuals or governments has lost any value that it may once have had. However, if the U.S. government so insists, it is not impossible to neutralize the old Cuban dictator. In other words, to turn him into a domestic tyrant, internationally inoffensive, as is the case with Hungary's Janos Kadar, Romania's Nicolae Ceausescu and Poland's beleaguered Wojciech Jaruzelski.    And the way to achieve this goal is to put pressure on the Soviet Union. The U.S. should demand from Moscow, as part of the disarmament negotiations or economic agreements between the two superpowers, the total submission of Mr. Castro to the spirit of the 1962 pact that put an end to the Missile Crisis: insistence on absolute Cuban noninterference in the affairs of other countries. This means no guerrillas, no terrorism, no drug trafficking, no anti-U.S. agitation in the Third World, and the gradual return of Cuban troops from Africa and Nicaragua.    When a dog bites a person on the ankle, the complaint is not lodged with the dog, for this is useless. One looks for the master and negotiates with him. The Soviet Union is the total master of Cuba. Mr. Castro is not Moammar Gadhafi, who counts on his own financing for his lunacies. Mr. Castro has to do exactly what the Soviets indicate and will tolerate, since the island could not survive 30 days without Soviet petroleum and billions of dollars in direct aid annually.    And what interest might the Soviets have in seeing Mr. Castro stop biting Uncle Sam's ankle? Probably none, but it all depends on the price that Moscow has to pay to encourage or permit him to practice the role of a world protagonist. If the price is high, and Moscow has to gamble some of the main objectives of its foreign policy, then it would no doubt be ready to yield; the U.S. would not be asking the Kremlin to eliminate Mr. Castro, but simply to keep a tight hold on him -- apply the muzzle and turn him into an internationally harmless creature, more or less like the rest of the Soviet satellites. This is, moreover, what one expects of a Mikhail Gorbachev who puts forth &quot;peace&quot; initiatives and suggests a pullback from Afghanistan may be in the offing.    For the U.S., on the other hand, the pacifying of Mr. Castro's Cuba is quite important. If it had been achieved in time, a number of calamities would have been avoided -- among them, the civil wars in Nicaragua and El Salvador. Nevertheless, there is still time to try. It is an inexpensive way of testing Mr. Gorbachev's true intentions. According to my sources, this possibility keeps Fidel Castro awake at night. It should be explored.    ---   Mr. Montaner is a Cuban-born writer living in Madrid. He is president of Firmas Press, a Spanish-language editorial syndication service. </TEXT></DOC>