<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880414-0077 </DOCNO><HL> Reagan Era's Budget Standoff: Need Higher Taxes Follow? --- Gramm-Rudman Suits Liberals Fine </HL><AUTHOR> George Miller </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT </CO><IN> ECO </IN><G> EXE CNG DEF </G><TEXT>   Reaganomics wasn't supposed to work out like this.    Ronald Reagan's political goal was to abandon New Deal-Great Society programs, cut domestic spending and end the era of government activism.    That goal was pursued by forcing deficits to unprecedented heights through unrestrained military spending and excessive tax cuts. As a result, a political imperative to &quot;cut spending&quot; was created and ideologically targeted at domestic programs.    In one respect, the strategy worked: Public and congressional concern about the deficit fueled spending cuts, often without regard to the merits of the affected programs. Notwithstanding the president's pledge to protect the social safety net, we slashed more than $200 billion from low-income programs. When those cuts failed to stanch the deficit deluge, congressional conservatives (and their administration allies) wrote the Gramm-Rudman-Hollings deficit-reduction law.    Since enactment of Gramm-Rudman, deficits are lower. But the spending cuts mandated by the new law have not been achieved by further shredding the social policies so despised by the Reaganites.    Indeed, by imposing spending constraints and forcing Congress to choose budgetary priorities, Gramm-Rudman has inadvertently created a new -- if limited -- national consensus for compassion and investment in children, the elderly, the homeless and the poor.    Far from ordering indiscriminate cutbacks or across-the-board sequestration in response to Gramm-Rudman, Congress has apportioned cuts with selectivity. Many domestic programs not only have been spared cuts, but actually have been protected, and their funding expanded, as a result of the prioritization mandated by Gramm-Rudman.    This prioritization is incorporated into the text of the deficit-reduction law. House Democrats insisted that a dozen key programs be exempted from the across-the-board cuts imposed under a sequestration order, programs that provide health, nutrition and education assistance for the poorest people in the richest land on Earth.    Many of these programs -- like Head Start, and the Women, Infants and Children's supplemental feeding program -- were spared from the sequestration ax; others, like foster care and Medicaid, would be subjected to far smaller cuts than such unprotected programs as public works, space, and energy. And Gramm-Rudman, at the insistence of House Democrats, ensured that the Pentagon contribute its share to budget cuts by mandating equivalent reductions from the budget's military and non-defense segments.    This protection of the poor did not rely solely on the sequestration exemptions. In recent budgets, low-income programs have won special safeguards. The House Budget Committee has created a list of some 20 programs targeted to low-income Americans that, budget cutbacks notwithstanding, regularly have been granted cost-of-living escalators to ensure the same level of services in each budget cycle. Many have even been granted increases.    The budget resolution just approved by an overwhelmingly bipartisan vote in the House orders $25 billion in spending cuts. But high-priority/low-income programs -- health, social services, aid to poor children, the homeless and dislocated workers -- receive a cumulative increase of $3.5 billion.    Education receives an 8% increase. The allocation for AIDS research, prevention and education increases 50%. Health-care coverage for the poor under Medicaid is expanded to reduce the inevitability of spousal impoverishment, to encourage transition to work for welfare recipients, and to reduce infant mortality.    These increases do not indicate indiscriminate spending by Congress. They demonstrate selectivity, and the necessity of choosing among conflicting priorities in an era of fiscal restraint. Many other programs that could not meet the urgency test, including military spending, were frozen or even cut.    Given a choice between bombers and babies, Congress is choosing to pay greater attention to young Americans.    Why is all this happening under a deficit-cutting strategy that was intended to serve conservative goals?    One reason is that conservatives and liberals alike are responding to the accumulation of human tragedies in America during the deficit-spending binge of the Reagan years, a binge in which millions of young Americans, working people, and families fell through the shredded safety net into poverty.    As a result of research at universities, hospitals, think tanks and within the administration, we have documented that the long-term societal costs of increased poverty, chronic unemployment, developmental disabilities and malnutrition during pregnancy and childhood far outweigh momentary budget savings. Those same studies show conclusively that it is far cheaper to invest in preventive programs that promote sound development, good health and safe pregnancies than to pay for failure for years in the future.    Political reality -- and perhaps a touch of human compassion -- is rearranging the spending priorities away from the biases of the early Reagan years. The conservative agenda couldn't survive the reality imposed by the political necessity of making hard economic decisions.    The deficit-reduction scheme intended to undermine the domestic agenda has instead enshrined it; the Pentagon's free-flowing spigot has been turned off not by the rhetoric of liberals, but by the legislation of conservatives.    ---   Rep. Miller (D., Calif.) is on the Budget Committee and chairs the Select Committee on Children, Youth and Families.    (See related story: &quot;'Sequester' Isn't a Dirty Word&quot; -- WSJ April 14, 1988)</TEXT></DOC>