<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880720-0128 </DOCNO><HL> Speaking of Business: Let Third World Debtors, Banks Fight It Out </HL><AUTHOR> Lindley H. Clark Jr. </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><IN> BNK MON </IN><TEXT>   Next month marks an anniversary of sorts. Exactly six years ago, Third World debt became a world problem. Before August 1982, Third World debt had been a solution, not a problem.    In the late 1970s, members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries were pumping so much money into the world's financial system that the system seemed in danger of collapse. Then, incredibly, the banks recycled the money to Third World countries, all of which, with a little encouragement, seemed to think they had great ideas for using the funds productively.    Then came August 1982. Mexico, of all countries, announced it could not service its $80 billion international debt without a new loan of $3 billion. Never mind about the principal; Mexico couldn't even pay the interest without a fresh $3 billion.    Mexico was the country with so much oil that, when the nation first announced it, skeptical Americans wondered what the Mexicans were smoking. Mexican national income statistics aren't even as reliable as the U.S. numbers, but the available figures did seem to indicate the Mexican economy had been growing rapidly since the late 1970s. To the extent that banks were worrying about such things, Mexico certainly was regarded as a minimal credit risk.    Scarcely had the Mexican shock been absorbed when Brazil, Argentina and several other countries announced that they couldn't meet their scheduled payments either. All of a sudden there was a full-blown crisis.    Anna Schwartz of the National Bureau of Economic Research recalled this history in her presidential address at the recent meeting of the Western Economic Association in Los Angeles. What especially disturbs her are the efforts by governments and international agencies to &quot;solve&quot; the debt problem. These efforts by and large have only made matters worse.    Unquestionably, 1979-82 was a rugged time. New OPEC oil-price increases helped to re-ignite world inflation. The Federal Reserve responded with a monetary crunch that sent interest rates soaring -- including the variable rates on Third World debt. The upshot was a deep recession.    This was rough on all debtors, domestic as well as international. But no one proposed solutions for domestic debtors as grand as those officially offered for Third World debtors. The first part of the official proposal was to reduce the interest burden of the developing countries. Second, promote world economic recovery. Third, new loans should be made to the debtor nations by the banks, the International Monetary Fund, the World Bank and export credit agencies.    The implication of this was that the debtor countries were victims of circumstances beyond their control. It gradually became clear that the official problem-solvers were more interested in the solvency of the U.S. banks than they were in the economic health of the Third World countries.    It's often forgotten that banks in Britain, West Germany, Switzerland and Japan also had loaned money to the Third World. In none of these countries, Mrs. Schwartz comments, has there been talk of a financial crisis stemming from Third World debt.    When the crisis exploded in 1982, the U.S. government reaction was that the problem of the debtor countries was liquidity, not solvency. The finances of the debtors, as Herbert Hoover might have put it, were fundamentally sound. Just pour in a few more billions and everything would work smoothly. Unfortunately, as Mrs. Schwartz says, this assessment was based on fiction, not fact. East Asian nations, faced by the same world recession and high interest rates, had continued to service their debts faithfully.    The banks simply had loaned too much money to countries that had only the vaguest ideas about how the loans would be repaid. The U.S. government in effect encouraged the banks to be generous. U.S. regulators helped the banks to skate around guidelines that would have indicated the banks were lending more than they should to a single borrower.    The banks initially may have thought that the government would bail them out of any trouble, but government bailouts weren't any part of the official solution. So, Mrs. Schwartz says, the banks at first went along with the notion that a few additional billions would tide the debtors over into a new prosperity.    Eventually, the banks became more realistic and began increasing loan-loss reserves, adding to capital and arranging swaps and other transactions to get the loans off their books. Regulators up to now have allowed the banks to carry the loans at book value, but that fiction is becoming less and less useful to the banks. The markets see through the fiction, and the reality is reflected in prices of the banks' stock and in the secondary market for the Third World debt.    All of the rescue plans have called on the debtor countries to pursue sensible economic policies, but it is far easier to say that than it is to get it done. The lending banks presumably thought the debtor countries were going to use the money sensibly in the first place.    &quot;It is questionable,&quot; Mrs. Schwartz says, &quot;whether external capital flows to the troubled debtor economies both before and since 1982 have contributed to the welfare of their citizens. These countries have suffered from overvalued exchange rates -- produced in part by the capital inflows -- high inflation rates, and low real interest rates. These defects cannot be corrected overnight.&quot;    The political obstacles to reform are formidable. Austerity is an uncomfortable word, especially for politicians. But thorough reform is essential if the debtor countries are to have an economic future. A large part of the Third World debt -- in Venezuela it was 90% -- went to finance capital flight. Until the countries can persuade their own citizens to invest at home, new capital from abroad isn't likely to rush in or, ultimately, to be very useful.    The debtor countries not only must accept reform but make it credible. The international agencies have not been able to enforce conditionality provisions involved in new lending in part because it was advice from &quot;outsiders.&quot; The debtors must somehow come to recognize that they need reform for their own good, not because an outsider says so.    When there are bad loans there are losses, and there will be major losses on Third World debt. It's high time for governments and international agencies to get out of the way and let the lenders and debtors argue it out by themselves.    Credible progress toward reform would be helpful in such talks. Banks have been especially reluctant to make concessions up to now because they have had no way to assess the value of what they would have left. Any real solution is a long way off, but it would be comforting if everyone were heading in the right direction.    And maybe the official crisis-solvers could find more useful work to do. </TEXT></DOC>