<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870506-0153 </DOCNO><HL> Speaking of Business:Alaskans Learn Economics the Hard Way---By Lindley H. Clark Jr.</HL><DD> 05/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXESECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)PETROLEUM (PET) </IN><DATELINE> ANCHORAGE  </DATELINE><TEXT>   One day last week a French tourist walked purposefully toward Cook Inlet Bay, obviously intent on a swim. If you stand back far enough, the bay may vaguely remind you of the Riviera, but contact with its near-freezing waters would quickly kill that idea.    Fortunately, a courteous policeman was on hand to explain to the tourist that on that particular day, or any other day for that matter, Cook Inlet Bay was not the place for a swim.    Economists and politicians can't find a similarly easy explanation for what happened to Alaska's economy, which was going along so swimmingly. North Slope oil was pouring out, producing tax revenues so enormous that legislators in 1980 eliminated the state's income tax.    But that wasn't enough to handle the swelling stream of oil revenue. So the state decided to pay an annual dividend to each Alaskan. Social benefits were increased to the extent that they lured some near-retirement Americans from the lower 48 to try their luck up north. In one bit of farsightedness, the legislature set up a &quot;permanent&quot; fund, now $7.8 billion, just in case anything should go wrong in paradise.    Something did go wrong. In 1985, oil prices collapsed. Drilling activity slowed, and with it most of Alaska's economy. Anchorage last week raised the city's property tax rate 30%, which surely sounds like a lot. Local citizens, however, on the average won't pay higher taxes because the total value of about 84,000 properties has fallen more than one-fifth, and the higher tax rate barely offsets the tax-base drop.    Employment has fallen sharply, both in government and in the private economy. Last year the number of jobs fell 8,500, or 3.7%. A state analyst predicts a decrease of 13,800 more jobs by year-end 1988. The work force is shrinking, as many Alaskans return to the lower 48. More who might leave are stopped by the prospect of losses in selling homes bought at much higher prices three years or so ago.    The University of Alaska here runs a sizable program in economic education, aimed in large part at high-school teachers but also attracting people from the business community. My assignment last week was to talk to the class about the economic problems confronting the entire U.S. economy. It was an attentive audience, well aware that Alaskans, like other Americans, should be concerned about such matters as big federal budget and trade deficits. But before the class and afterward it was apparent that the pressing concern was Alaska's own economic problem.    An obvious worry for many people is their own jobs. Last week the borough assembly on the Kenai Peninsula, near here, cut next year's school budget $7.4 million. Two months ago a school official had said that a $6.5 million cut would mean elimination of more than 60 teaching positions, four central-office administrators, a half-time public-relations officer, eight half-time secretaries and 14 custodians.    Things obviously would get better if oil prices rose. In Alaska, as in Texas and Oklahoma, one hears favorable talk about a federal oil import tax. That would mean higher prices for domestic and imported oil, which would encourage domestic companies to produce more from existing reserves and to step up the hunt for new reserves. Naturally, Alaskans are pleased about the Interior Department's plans for more offshore drilling, and favor the idea of drilling in the wildlife refuge adjacent to the current North Slope field. Of course, higher oil prices would mean higher costs for consumers and business, but when one's livelihood depends on oil output, other things take second place.    So what should Alaska do?    Until now, there has been no talk of dipping into the permanent fund itself, although the declining bond market this year has trimmed the value of the fund's investments. One official tried hard to look at the bright side by noting that bonds the fund buys from here on will provide higher interest income.    With such a huge portfolio, the income is of great consequence. That's what funds those dividends for Alaskans, which were expected to run about $800 a person this year. Some legislators would like to use more of the income for other state purposes, shrinking dividends about 25%.    There is serious talk of bringing back the income tax. This has raised arguments from people who think it would be foolish to bring back the tax to help, in effect, finance continuation of the dividend. That's an argument where economic education can be helpful. The income tax, when there was one, was proportional to income, just like the federal tax. The dividend, by contrast, is across the board.    What we get into here is a redistribution of income. One teacher commented, &quot;Going back to the income tax may be the best idea, but I don't want to pay the tax to finance that dividend.&quot; No one is sure just how the average Alaskan feels on the issue. To get some idea, a local newspaper has asked for opinions from its readers.    State officials are counting on oil prices to remain at $15 to $18 through 1988. Neither they nor anyone can predict with certainty what will happen to the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries in the next year and a half. Not surprisingly, Alaskans would like to see OPEC at least keep its act together through that period. Officials are hopeful for a turnaround here by 1989-90, counting on a rise in oil prices and a consequent increase in exploration and development.    There is some talk here that Alaska should diversify its economy. But a state official says that diversification is at best a long-term hope; oil and gas will continue to be the economic base. There was hope that a new gas pipeline might help, but the decline in energy prices, along with a fight over where to put the pipeline, didn't help that alternative.    Alaska's current recession may be compounded by a general anxiety, a state analyst thinks. &quot;There seems to be some evidence that people are hanging onto their money and preparing for the worst,&quot; the analyst says. &quot;If people knew who was going to lose their jobs, the people who were going to keep their jobs would go back to living normally.&quot;    Until the past two years, people here were told they could have high wages, special dividends and big social benefits -- all without any income tax. They've found out differently. A teacher asked me if there was one economic lesson she could take back to her classes. I suggested, &quot;There ain't no such thing as a free lunch.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>