<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880401-0053 </DOCNO><HL> Growing Pains: In Indonesia's Paddies, The Rice Revolution Loses Some Ground --- Harvests Are Again Trailing An Increasing Population; A Turning Point for Asia? --- Friday Rat Hunts Help a Bit </HL><AUTHOR> Wendy L. Wall (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><IN> MON CMD </IN><DATELINE> SUKRAWETAN, Indonesia  </DATELINE><TEXT>   On Java's palm-studded coastal plain, farmers are measuring agricultural progress in dead rats.    Every Friday afternoon, they gather in their emerald paddies, armed with straw and bamboo sticks. Setting the straw on fire, they stuff it down rat holes, smoking out hundreds of rodents. As the vermin flee, the farmers charge in pursuit, bashing the rats that live off their precious grain.    As Sukrawetan's rat hunt indicates, Indonesia's long campaign to feed itself has assumed a new urgency. For more than a decade, this crowded island nation has mounted a warlike offensive against hunger and dependence on imported rice. Its rapid transformation from the world's largest rice importer to a small net exporter in 1985 made it a darling of the green revolution. And its resulting rural renaissance increased nutrition, income and education levels.    But now, Indonesia's rice miracle is hitting a wall. In the rice paddies of Java and Bali, yields are topping out, while new land elsewhere is harder to cultivate. The situation cries out for new technology, but Jakarta -- strapped for funds -- is resorting largely to shoestring solutions like coordinated rat-bashing. The upshot: The nation's last two rice harvests haven't kept pace with population growth, ending a decade of progress and auguring problems for the 1990s and beyond.    Across Asia, the green revolution is running out of steam. Countries like China and India are beginning to exhaust the technology that propelled their rice and wheat harvests for two decades, economists and agronomists warn. The global grain glut has undercut the price of the very crops into which they have poured their efforts. And farm investments are tight at a time when future advances may be more costly than ever.    Certainly, late monsoons across Asia worsened the problems this year. For many countries, keeping production abreast of population increases should be easier than closing huge grain import gaps. And biotechnology could eventually restock agronomists' shelves. Still, some experts fear that in the war on hunger, the tide is beginning to turn.    &quot;Given the technological capacity we now have, I don't see how we're going to keep up with demand,&quot; says Robert Herdt, the director for agricultural sciences at the Rockefeller Foundation. If current trends continue, warns Edward Schuh, a farm economist who recently left the World Bank, pockets of famine could reappear in China and India within the next decade.    Faltering Third World production could increase U.S. grain exports; prices were lifted by huge Chinese purchases in the past year. But even grain exporters eventually could be hurt if the slowdown depressed those nations' predominantly rural economies.    No one is predicting imminent famine in Indonesia, but the slowdown is forcing the country to the brink of painful decisions. The rice revolution has been a key source of wealth and national pride in this sun-baked archipelago, the world's fifth most populous nation. Rice -- or nasi, as it is called here -- supplies more than half the country's protein and calories, and is so important that national income figures are converted into rice equivalents.    Now, the country must decide whether to import rice, and Indonesians, who learned the hard way just how fickle world markets can be, don't take the subject lightly. They must also find a way to maintain economic growth in crowded rural areas when the traditional engine of that growth -- rice farming -- is stalling. &quot;It was easy to close the {rice} import gap,&quot; says Walter Falcon, a Stanford University agricultural economist who has worked with the Indonesians for 20 years. &quot;Now, they've got a real dilemma.&quot;    Such questions are tinged with deep emotion. In central Java, Supat Siswohardjono, a wizened irrigation official, motions to his belly as he recalls the famine-bloated stomachs he saw everywhere in the 1960s. In 1972-73, after a severe drought devastated Asia's rice crop, all of Indonesia's new-found oil wealth couldn't buy enough rice on world markets. Poor urban dwellers lived off fried dough. On the arid islands of Lombok and Sumba, peasants starved.    &quot;If the rice isn't there, the society becomes resah, unstable,&quot; says Wardoyo, Indonesia's agricultural minister, who, like many of his nation, has only one name. &quot;For developing countries like Indonesia, where stability is very important, the basic requirement of the people is food.&quot;    The 1972 famine made rice self-sufficiency a national priority. Indonesia built fertilizer factories, supported rice prices, and expanded sprawling irrigation projects built by Dutch colonialists. It passed out subsidized packages of high-yielding seeds, credit, fertilizer and pesticides -- and dispatched legions of government workers to show farmers how to use them. Even Indonesia's atomic-energy agency got into the act, releasing two mutant rice strains named Atomita 1 and Atomita 2.    The result: Between 1976 and 1985, the rice harvest grew at nearly triple the rate of population growth. Nutrition, income and education levels all climbed. So did another closely watched indicator of economic well-being: the number of Indonesian Moslems making pilgrimages to Mecca.    Today, in central Java, glistening rice paddies stretch beyond tile-roofed houses, and teen-agers play badminton in an aluminum barn only recently filled with rice. Men on bicycle-rickshaws strain under the weight of huge fertilizer bags, while women spread freshly harvested grain on concrete slabs to dry in the sun.    In the village of Sukaharjo, Padmo Suwiryo points proudly to the new wall clock and red-plush settee he recently purchased for his small, dingy home. For decades, the barefoot, mud-spattered farmer grew just one ton of rice a year. But in 1984, thanks to irrigation ditches, high-yielding seeds, pesticides and nitrogen fertilizer, his harvest reached 4.5 tons. Mr. Suwiryo now sends the youngest of his six children, 13-year-old Sarwoto, to middle school. It is a family first: The farmer can finally afford the $25 registration fee.    But such stories may become increasingly rare. On Java and Bali, Indonesia's main rice-growing islands and home to two-thirds of its population, production is rapidly reaching the point of diminishing returns. Some 94% of Java is already planted to high-yielding rice varieties, according to the World Bank, and roughly 87% of the rice land is now irrigated. Indonesian farmers already use three times as much fertilizer as their Thai neighbors.    &quot;This technology is becoming saturated. We need a new breakthrough,&quot; says a top Indonesian scientist who asks not to be named. Robert McConnell, a former U.S. agricultural attache here, agrees: &quot;There aren't many tricks left.&quot;    Some existing technology has started to backfire. Mr. Suwiryo lost one whole rice crop in 1986 because of a virulent outbreak of the brown plant hopper. Pesticide overuse killed the insect's natural predators, and the infestation destroyed crops across Java. That prompted a major pesticide ban from President Suharto.    In 1986, for the first time in a decade, Indonesia's rice production lagged behind the rate of population growth. And last year, the harvest inched up just 0.7%, roughly one-third as fast as the population, according to Jakarta. U.S. statistics paint an even bleaker picture. Although government stockpiles so far have largely cushioned the country against imports, those reserves are dwindling fast.    To compound matters, the dollars that fueled Indonesia's rice revolution are drying up. Collapsing oil prices have drained the national treasury, gutting budgets for farm research and irrigation projects. Pressured by U.S. farmers, the U.S. Agency for International Development has cut its aid to the country by some 40% over the past two years. Indonesia's cash crunch also has made it harder for the country to cushion domestic rice producers from the effects of plummeting world prices.    In the rice bowls of Java, such pressures are being felt. Asep Abdie, a local official in the north-coast town of Indramayu, greets a visitor in a parlor filled with stuffed tigers, velvet curtains and gilded mirrors. Mr. Abdie is charged with raising rice production in his district, but a huge wall map underscores his problem: Green and blue splotches show that nearly all of the region's rice land is already planted to improved varieties, with 95% irrigated at least part of the year. A plan for year-round irrigation in all areas is stalled for lack of funds, he says. Recently, the district's rice harvest has slipped, as low prices prompted farmers to abandon the crop.    Mr. Abdie tries to sound upbeat. Ignoring the lizards that climb the walls, he outlines the government's plan to raise harvests by coordinating farmers' planting and pest control; that is what the weekly Sukrawetan rat hunts are all about. This new approach is cheap, but Mr. Abdie concedes that such &quot;social engineering&quot; will also be tricky. He has more hope for another government plan: getting farmers to plant rice seedlings closer together.    At the nearby Sukimandi Research Institute, the wind whistles down empty corridors. Budget cuts have turned the nerve center of Indonesia's irrigated rice research into a mausoleum. Forests of empty test tubes and pipettes fill deserted laboratories, abandoned because scientists can't afford to purchase needed chemicals. Test plots lie fallow. Weeds overrun bungalows built to house foreign researchers.    Here, Bambang Suprihatno is working on one technology that researchers say could rekindle the revolution: hybrid rice. A hybrid that thrives in the tropics could increase rice yields 20% or more above other improved strains. But Mr. Suprihatno isn't expecting quick success. Funds for assistants and test plots are in short supply. Rats climb his wire fences and ravage the fields by night. &quot;We are asked {by the government} when we will have rice hybrids, but we are not backed up with money,&quot; the researcher says.    Without a breakthrough, Indonesia's continued self-sufficiency hinges on expanding rice production on outer islands, many agricultural experts here say. The country has had some success on Sumatra and Sulawesi, but costs are high. On Java and Bali, rice flourishes in rich volcanic dirt; the outer-island soils are thin, clay, and acidic. In many areas, roads must be built before water and seeds can follow.    There are cultural barriers as well. Although rice farming is prized on Java and Bali, that isn't true on the outer islands. A big U.S.-backed water project in South Sulawesi faltered because local farmers couldn't operate the unit, says a U.S. irrigation specialist working here. In addition, many balked at giving up seasonal jobs on palm and timber plantations in Malaysia.    Indonesian officials concede that major investments are needed, but it is hard to see where the money will come from. And even if the country's rice production could keep pace with growing demand, some slowdown seems inevitable. Jakarta can't export rice into a glutted market; and, in contrast to developed countries, it can't afford to store budget-swamping surpluses of grain.    Most Western advisers urge Jakarta to maintain rural growth by turning its attention to other crops. But many aren't optimistic about changing the country's course. &quot;For 20 years, Indonesia's sole goal was to grow more rice,&quot; says Steven R. Tabor, a U.S. consultant to the Agriculture Ministry. Indonesians fear that if they turn away from their staple crop, &quot;they will create rural impoverishment and rural-to-urban migration on an unprecedented scale.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>