<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880805-0110 </DOCNO><HL> Old Money: An Influx of Retirees Pumps New Vitality Into Distressed Towns --- Healthy, Active and Wealthy, Oldsters Spend Nest Eggs, Creating Jobs and Tension --- Voting Down Tax Increases </HL><AUTHOR> Bill Richards (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LABOR TAXES </CO><IN> REL CON </IN><TEXT>      {Second of two articles)   KEOWEE KEY, S.C. -- In the past, rural areas with the economic blahs would reflexively try to collar a new industry. But the hustling and scheming to attract new business aren't yielding good results anymore. So a growing number of distressed regions like this one are looking for salvation from a different kind of industry.    Forget about landing that widget factory; this industry is better. It gives a tremendous boost to local retail, services and construction businesses. It adds greatly to the tax base and requires little or no extra spending on police or schools. It chokes local banks with fresh money, and it doesn't belch noxious fumes into the air or turn the landscape into a moonscape.    The industry: old people. Or, more specifically, retirees with loose change and a hankering to look for the good life in rural America.    Here in Keowee Key, a retirement community expanding across a stretch of this raw, piney-woods corner of South Carolina, every moving van unloading a new upscale migrant gives a lift to the once-laggard economy of Oconee County, hammered by decline in its textile industry. The tax rolls swell a bit. The average income goes up a bit. A new job is generated.    &quot;It's like somebody came around with a watering can and things just started popping up,&quot; marvels local restaurateur Brit Adams.    His storefront establishment, Le Champignon, is one of several restaurants that have blossomed in Seneca, S.C., the nearest town to Keowee Key. Since 1981, when retirees first started coming here in numbers, the town has been transformed into one of the state's fastest-growing commercial areas. Says Seneca City Councilman Devoe Blackston: &quot;We ought to be looking at retirement communities as a whole new form of light industry.&quot;    Elsewhere, a growing influx of retirees into rural areas is creating similar bright spots in the economic gloom that covers much of the countryside. A 1986 study by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City found that rural counties of what might be called the Prune Juice Belt -- those whose economies are based on retirees -- have outpaced all others in per-capita income growth.    Until recently, however, most rural authorities didn't appreciate what retirees could do for them, and those attracting them did so mainly through luck and not concerted effort. Old people meant poor people, they thought, and so they kept on lusting after conventional industries.    Many still do. &quot;It's hard to overcome the smokestack-chasing mindset,&quot; says Mark Drabenstott, an economist at the Kansas City Fed. Retirees, he adds, are still &quot;an overlooked part of the economy.&quot;    But that is changing, and fast. Thanks in large part to vastly improved pension arrangements, retirees and those nearing retirement have more to spend than any other segment of the population. Younger, healthier and more active than their counterparts of a generation ago, they are willing to spend -- and spend big. Understanding this, more towns, counties and even whole states are beginning to woo them.    Michigan's Upper Peninsula and Minnesota's Iron Range, both of them depressed mining areas, are promoting their potential for outdoor recreation in trying to win retirees. When Silver Bay, Minn., lost its major industry, Reserve Mining Co., residents pooled their resources for far-flung newspaper ads (some appeared in Florida papers) offering their homes to retirees. Several dozen have already moved in.    In hard-pressed Bennettsville, S.C., officials reluctantly decided they couldn't afford the tax abatements and other incentives needed to land a new electronics plant, the town's first employment choice. Now they are cozying up to developers, hoping to get a retirement community built. The pitch: the area's rolling terrain is &quot;ideal for golf.&quot;    The state government of South Carolina is after retirees, too. In 1986, it bought more than 3,000 acres of land adjoining Clarks Hill Lake, near a sparsely settled stretch of the Savannah River. The state plans to put in roads and other amenities, then sell the property to a developer to build a retirement town of 12,000 people.    In doing so, the state is trying to use retirees as a vehicle to achieve a public-policy aim: pumping more jobs and money into its poorest region. Morrison Parrott, head of the Clarks Hill-Russell Authority, the state agency overseeing the development, predicts it will create 3,400 new jobs. &quot;It's going to be our economic salvation,&quot; Mr. Parrott says.    Massachusetts is using the same strategy. It has been assembling 1,040 acres for a similar but smaller development near Mount Greylock in the northern Berkshire Mountains, an area that has lagged behind the rest of the state economically. It is estimated that the project's 2,000 residents, who will pay up to $250,000 to live among a golf course, tennis courts and ski trails, will generate about 700 permanent jobs.    For its part, Exxon Corp. is hoping that retirees will help it recover some of its investment in one of the biggest resources busts of recent years. In 1982, Exxon gave up on its giant Colony oil-shale project on Colorado's beautiful but isolated Western Slope -- deflating the hopes of everyone in the region and leaving Exxon stuck with Battlement Mesa, a 3,200-acre, partly developed townsite it had set up to house workers and their families. What to do with it?    After analyzing its options, Exxon decided that retirees offered, as one official puts it, &quot;the best return we could get.&quot; The company has changed its model-home plans from big split-levels to smaller, single-story ranch homes, beefed up insulation (warmth was a primary retiree concern), and added a golf course and indoor swimming pool. About 1,500 people have moved in to date.    Though the Prune Juice Belt overlaps much of the Sun Belt it is not limited to it, as shown by places like Battlement Mesa. Self-contained retirement communities are springing up everywhere. In other cases, large numbers of retirees are moving into existing rural towns, seeking safer streets, cheaper and more ample housing, cleaner air, less crowding, a sense of community. And wherever they settle, in town or in a retirement enclave, they generally bring disposable income that can and does make a big difference.    When Howard Heggem retired as president of a Chicago abrasives company, he paid cash for a 2,200-square-foot home in Hot Springs Village, a retirement community in central Arkansas. Mr. Heggem and his wife transferred their six-figure nest egg to a local bank. They hired a local contractor to build their home. When they decided to trade in their Cadillac, they bought a Buick from a local dealer.    Many people like him live in Hot Springs Village. A survey shows its residents annually spend about $10,000 each in the area. Mr. Heggem says that while county officials ignored the fledgling development at first, &quot;we began hearing from them when they realized we were putting $20 million a year into the local economy.&quot;    Developers say that large retirement communities generally produce one service job for every eight residents. Hot Springs Village, with 4,400 of them, does better than that. It is credited with spawning 75 new area businesses and creating more than 1,400 new jobs for rural Garland and Saline Counties.    But if retirees bring money and create jobs, they also can change the entire nature of a rural area, inspiring friction that didn't exist before. The interests and priorities of retirees often don't coincide with those of old-time residents, who may also resent the comparative affluence of the strangers in their midst.    No one denies, for example, that the upper-income retirement community of Heritage Village has transformed the economy of its host town, Southbury, Conn. Southbury used to be a one-horse town, a place where a doctor visited only twice a week. Now the Yellow Pages list a whole sheaf of doctors. There are two big shopping plazas now. And the roads are snarled with rush-hour traffic and lined with retail businesses and office buildings.    But Heritage Village, which has 4,400 residents, is viewed with something akin to awe by the local educational establishment. The residents of the village mobilized a solid bloc of voters who rejected four school tax increases in a row before relenting. Such opposition to taxes for services they don't use is common among retirees in many places, and other residents find them formidable opponents. &quot;These are people who ran corporations,&quot; says John Fitzsimons, superintendent of Southbury's schools. &quot;They're smart cookies and boy, are they well organized.&quot;    Some grumbling and resentment have also been directed at the well-to-do residents of Keowee Key, here in South Carolina, who are as different from the people around them as night from day. Their average household income is above $90,000, more than quadruple that of the rest of the county, and many of the houses they live in cost well over $200,000, several times the average county price for homes.    The people of Keowee Key are mostly northerners who incline toward Methodism, Lutheranism, Catholicism and Republicanism -- in an area where the Baptist church has long held sway and elected Republicans are as rare as 12-inch snowfalls.    So it isn't surprising, perhaps, to find a dumpster on the road to the development spray-painted with the message &quot;No more damn Yankees.&quot; Or to learn that some politicians are nettled at the efforts of Key residents to get anti-littering and leash-law measures passed. &quot;This is hunting country,&quot; says Jerry Dyar, a member of the Oconee County council. &quot;Leash laws are kind of taboo around here.&quot;    But money makes friends, too. Keowee Key has already generated several hundred construction and other jobs, and its developer expects that when it is finished it will produce 550 permanent ones. That would make it the fourth-largest private employer in the county. Also, the kind of jobs it is creating, while paying almost as much as factory work in this fiercely nonunion area, aren't likely to disappear in the next recession or shift in industrial policy, as local textile and sawmill jobs have.    None of this is lost on local residents. Says James DuPrey, the county superintendent of education: &quot;Those folks aren't a cost item. They're a revenue item.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>