<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870629-0127 </DOCNO><HL> New Stock Listings</HL><DD> 06/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> HDI CLM FGL TJX AMW CPE CFG NFC PFP PMC ADDR BOFR BDNIBDNIW BDNIU CHCO ENEUV FFES HWCD HRMR ITGN MCOM MYCO NYCOPPGEN RFBK SPMD TCGN WTOYSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Oxford First Corp. begins trading today on the New York Stock Exchange under the symbol OFC. The Philadelphia-based financial services company previously traded on the American Stock Exchange.    Harley-Davidson Inc., will begin trading Wednesday on the Big Board under the symbol HDI. The Milwaukee-based maker of motorcycles and recreational vehicles previously traded on the American Stock Exchange. Three new issues began trading on the Big Board last week.    Clemente Global Growth Fund Inc., a New York-based closed-end management investment company, began trading under the symbol CLM.    FMC Gold Co., Reno, Nev., began trading under the symbol FGL. The gold and silver mining and processing concern was spun off from Chicago-based FMC Corp.    TJX Cos., Natick, Mass., began trading under the symbol TJX. The off-price specialty retailer is a spin-off of Framingham, Mass.-based Zayre Corp. Zayre retains an 83.7% stake in the company. TJX includes the T.J. Maxx and Hit or Miss stores and Chadwicks of Boston mail-order catalog.    On the American Stock Exchange, Uno Restaurant Corp., begins trading today under the symbol UNO. The West Roxbury, Mass., restaurant chain previously traded over the counter. Ten new issues began trading last week on the American Stock Exchange.    Americus Trust for GTE Shares, New York, began trading units and prime and score portions on a when-issued basis under the symbols LDUWI, LDPWI and LDSWI. The prime portion receives dividends, and the score portion receives certain capital appreciation. The trust, sponsored by Americus Shareowner Service Corp., is issuing the units in exchange for shares of GTE Corp.    Americus Trust for Sears Shares, New York, began trading units, prime and score portions on a when-issued basis under the symbols RSUWI, RSWPI and RSSWI. The trust, also sponsored by Americus Shareowner Service Corp., is issuing the units in exchange for shares of Sears, Roebuck andamp; Co.    Amwest Insurance Group Inc., Woodland Hills, Calif., began trading under the symbol AMW. The insurance holding company previously traded over the counter.    Centennial Group Inc., an Orange, Calif.-based real estate company, began trading on a when-issued basis under the symbol CEQWI.    Colorado Prime Corp., Farmingdale, N.Y., began trading under the symbol CPE. The company sells gourmet foods and food-related appliances and accessories through direct marketing.    Copelco Financial Services Group Inc., began trading under the symbol CFG. The Pennsauken, N.J.-based company, which previously traded over the counter, provides leasing services to finance health care, commercial and industrial equipment.    Nelson Holdings International Ltd., began trading under the symbol NHI. The Vancouver, Canada-based video concern also trades on the Toronto and Vancouver stock exchanges.    North Carolina Federal Savings andamp; Loan Association, Charlotte, N.C., began trading under the symbol NFC.    Prime Financial Partners L.P., a Scottsdale, Ariz.-based real estate investment banking concern, began trading Class A units under the symbol PFP and preferred units under the symbol PFPPR.    Pro-Med Capital Inc., a North Miami Beach, Fla.-based closed-end management investment company, began trading under the symbol PMC.    Seventeen new listings began trading over the counter recently.    Addington Resources Inc., an Ashland, Ky.-based coal mining company, began trading under the symbol ADDR.    Bank of the Redlands, Redlands, Calif., began trading under the symbol BOFR.    Builders Design Inc., began trading common shares, warrants and units under the symbols BDNI, BDNIW and BDNIU. The Dania, Fla.-based company makes window treatment products.    City Holding Co., a Charleston, W. Va.-based bank holding company, began trading under the symbol CHCO.    Energy Conversion Devices Inc., based in Troy, Mich., began trading units under the symbol ENEUV. The company develops technology for electronic-images processing products and flat-panel displays.    First Federal Savings andamp; Loan Association of East Hartford, Conn., began trading under the symbol FFES.    HWC Distribution Corp., a Houston-based distributor of specialty wire and cable, began trading under the symbol HWCD.    Hunter-Melnor Inc., a Memphis, Tenn.-based consumer products company, began trading under the symbol HRMR.    Integon Corp., a Winston-Salem, N.C.-based insurance holding company, began trading under the symbol ITGN.    Midwest Communications Corp., Edgewood, Ky., began trading under the symbol MCOM. The company supplies video, audio and transmission equipment to the television industry.    Mycogen Corp., a San Diego-based biotechnology company, began trading under the symbol MYCO. The company develops biological pesticides.    Nycor Inc., Peapack, N.J., began trading preferred stock under the symbol NYCOP. The company makes rotary compressors and heat-transfer products for the automotive aftermarket.    Plant Genetics Inc., based in Davis, Calif., began trading under the symbol PGEN. The agricultural biotechnology company develops improved plant varieties and plant products for the agricultural and food industries.    Raleigh Federal Savings Bank, based in Raleigh, N.C., began trading under the symbol RFBK.    Spectramed Inc., based in Newport Beach, Calif., began trading under the symbol SPMD. The company makes equipment to monitor critical-care patients.    Tecogen Inc., a maker of packaged cogeneration systems based in Waltham, Mass., began trading under the symbol TCGN.    Wisconsin Toy Co., a discount toy wholesaler and retailer based in Milwaukee, began trading under the symbol WTOY. </TEXT></DOC>