<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880802-0122 </DOCNO><HL> Business World: Countertrade Suits Metallgesellschaft Fine </HL><AUTHOR> George Melloan </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><IN> MON </IN><DATELINE> Economists  </DATELINE><TEXT>   especially free-market economists of the Austrian school -- have for years been skeptical of countertrade, a form of barter much favored by cash-short Third World and socialist states. The critics argue that countertrade is inefficient and, more to the point, a means by which state enterprises can flood free markets with low-priced, state-subsidized products.    But there is at least one Austrian-born economist willing to defend countertrade. He is Heinz Schimmelbusch, 44-year-old deputy chairman of Metallgesellschaft A.G., a West German multinational that produces nonferrous metals and runs a global trading organization. &quot;MG,&quot; as Mr. Schimmelbusch calls his company, also is the parent of Lurgi, S.A., a major industrial construction contractor.    With a world-wide distribution network and a factory-building subsidiary, MG is in an excellent position to conduct countertrade. It can sell new factories and at the same time contract to market the exports of those factories. So it has been developing that business in socialist countries with what it sees as mutual benefits. With metals smelting and other basic industries increasingly running afoul of environmental restrictions and high costs in North America, Western Europe and Japan, socialist nations may have happened upon a lucrative source of foreign exchange, which their otherwise backward economies have so much difficulty earning.    Mr. Schimmelbusch is something of a Wunderkind of West German industry. He was born in Vienna but earned his Ph.D in economics at Tuebingen University in West Germany. After a brief hitch of teaching, he spent some time in New York honing financial skills at Morgan Stanley, Goldman Sachs and other firms and then joined MG in 1973. Last month, MG announced that he will become the company's chairman and chief executive officer when its current chairman, Dietrich Natus, retires next May. By German standards or almost any others, his has been a meteoric rise, no doubt owed mainly to the role he has played, through world-wide expansion of raw-materials operations, in restoring MG to health. It had suffered its first postwar loss in 1982 when deflation had depressed world prices of basic materials.    Mr. Schimmelbusch isn't betting the company's future on countertrade. He expects that the developed world will continue to be the best source of growth and earnings. Lurgi, for example, is cashing in on the demands in the developed world for a clean environment by developing new technologies for recycling industrial materials, such as the zinc residue contained in the dust from electrical arc steel furnaces. But countertrade is one of the most interesting lines of business, partly because of the earnings prospects it holds for the heavily indebted East-bloc nations and partly because of the controversy that surrounds it.    East-bloc countries, indeed, very often consider little else in a plant-construction project other than how much foreign exchange it will cost and how much foreign exchange it will earn. Sometimes that equation works out very well with the aid of countertrade. MG built a very large methanol plant in East Germany's huge Leuna chemical complex, which supplies about half of East Germany's chemicals. The East Germans needed methanol for their chemical industry and also had a cheap feedstock, natural gas piped in at concessionary prices by the Russians. They also needed foreign exchange.    So Lurgi built them a plant. Mr. Schimmelbusch explains how the deal is working: &quot;It now produces 800,000 tons of methanol, of which 408,000 tons are going for export per year. We are buying 100%. The plant cost 400 million deutsche marks and the 408,000 tons of methanol, at 250 marks per ton, earn more than 100 million marks in foreign exchange a year. You invest 400 million marks and then deduct 250 million for capacity you needed anyway to supply national demand, and you have 150 million left. So you earn 100 million a year on a 150 million investment.&quot;    Obviously that's not a bad deal for the East Germans. How did it work out for MG? Well, the East German government paid cash for the plant. But MG suddenly had a very large supply of methanol to market. &quot;That's about two to three trains a day into the whole logistics network of Western Europe, into a market that doesn't need 408,000 tons of methanol. So outdated plants had to be closed, which took us three years to do. But now that is a fait accompli. That gave us a big boost in the methanol trade, in which we weren't a factor, but learned to be a factor over three years.&quot;    So it has. In April, MG made a deal with Tenneco Inc. under which Tenneco will recommission a methanol plant at Pasadena, Texas, that was shut down in 1983 due to low demand. MG financed the reopening and will market most of the plant's production, which it figures will give it a strong position in the U.S. market as demand for methanol derivatives in gasoline rises.    Lurgi will make a big effort to sell a new gasoline additive process that it says further improves gasoline efficiency. &quot;That will lead us to access to U.S. refineries and our oil trading subsidiary can provide other services to them.&quot;    But back to East Europe. Mr. Schimmelbusch thinks that the basic materials business, in depression in the early 1980s, now faces a bright future well into the 1990s. That's partly because of rising demand but also because so much capacity in the industrial world has been abandoned for environmental and economic reasons. It has become very difficult to find places to build new capacity.    &quot;There has been a dramatic reduction in capacity in the United States, for instance, in copper refineries, copper smelters, the secondary lead industry, the zinc industry -- almost an exodus. In Japan, the aluminum smelting industry vanished, from 1.6 million tons to zero. Please go to New Jersey or Texas or wherever and apply for permission to build a new metals smelter. Or go to Austria where there's a wonderful gold property and you say you will build a gold leaching operation in the next two years. Or go to a West German community and say: 'Guys, you have unemployment of 20%. I have the solution, a lead smelter.' It sounds like a joke. You don't even go there.&quot;    So socialist countries, seeing a scarcity of production locations in the West, are saying, &quot;We have locations so why not use them?&quot; It makes sense for them, it makes sense for MG and it is a natural outgrowth of environmental restrictions Western nations have placed on themselves. But that won't make Western economists and policy makers any happier about the growing inroads of countertrade in world markets. Indeed, U.S. negotiators participating in the so-called &quot;Uruguay&quot; round of multilateral trade talks in May asked for a new set of ground rules under the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) to cover state enterprises. The U.S. complained specifically that countertrade can cause &quot;serious trade distortions&quot; inconsistent with &quot;nondiscrimination and other GATT principles.&quot;    Mr. Schimmelbusch, for his part, thinks that countertrade is nothing more subversive than signing two deals at the same time. But -- especially considering the political elements involved -- this debate isn't over yet. </TEXT></DOC>