<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861202-0105 </DOCNO><HL> Credibility Gap:Some Concerns FudgeTheir Safety RecordsTo Cut Insurance Costs---Consolidation Coal Co. FailedTo Report All Its Injuries,Won Awards for Safety---How Did Bruce Ballard Die?---By Bryan Burrough and Seth H. LuboveStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/02/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> DD LABORFINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)MINING, METALS (NON-PRECIOUS) (MIN)LABOR DEPARTMENT (LBR) </IN><DATELINE> GRUNDY, Va.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Buchanan County medical examiner Thomas McDonald recalls vividly the visit last fall of four Consolidation Coal Co. officials to his office. The men, who had arrived in this Appalachian hamlet in a black limousine, grilled him on his diagnosis of a miner's death as work-related electrocution rather than -- as the company insisted -- a heart attack from natural causes.    &quot;It was obvious they would have liked the cause to have been something other than an electrocution,&quot; says Dr. McDonald, who says the nation's second-largest coal producer went to extraordinary lengths to distance itself from the death last year of the miner, 25-year-old Bruce Ballard.    Dr. McDonald is one of two doctors who examined Mr. Ballard's body; the other doctor also believes that Mr. Ballard was electrocuted. Nevertheless, Consolidation, a Du Pont Co. unit, ultimately convinced a federal agency that Mr. Ballard died of causes unrelated to coal mining.    But the miner's death, at an underground coal mine judged the nation's second safest in 1985, suggests that federal safety records can be deceptive. And the actions of Consol, as the company is known in the coal fields, show the lengths to which some companies go to avoid responsibility for industrial accidents, and even deaths.    Consol, which a Washington watchdog group last April judged to have the coal industry's best safety record, has long worked at keeping accidents to a minimum with intensive training programs for workers and awards for managers with clean safety slates. In fact, two Consol mines -- Osage No. 3 in West Virginia and the Buchanan No. 1 mine in Virginia, where Mr. Ballard worked -- were judged the nation's two safest underground coal mines last July and won the federal government's Sentinels of Safety awards for operating an entire year without an injury involving lost workdays.    But were they accident-free? Several miners at the Osage mine now say they were injured and missed workdays last year. They say they agreed to help cover up their accidents -- which ranged from torn shoulder tendons to bruised ribs -- by recording missed workdays as vacations or by recuperating at work. Both ploys allow a company to argue that an injured worker never actually missed work.    Consol officials deny any wrongdoing and insist they have correctly followed federal guidelines. But the company's actions recently have drawn criticism from the federal Mine Safety and Health Administration (MSHA), which has cited the company for failing to report 25 accidents at seven West Virginia and Pennsylvania mines this year, and from the United Mine Workers union, which accuses Consol of trying to cover up accidents. &quot;There's a concern that Consol may be manipulating its accident records on a large scale,&quot; says Joseph Main, the United Mine Workers' top safety official.    The use of cover-up tactics appears to be on the rise in many industries. Violations of federal record-keeping statutes have spurted 71% since 1980. In November, the federal Occupational Safety and Health Administration (OSHA) fined Chrysler Corp. $910,000 -- one of the agency's largest such fines ever -- for failing to report 182 job-related injuries at its Belvedere, Ill., assembly plant. Though 3,900 people work at the plant, Chrysler was reporting only about three or four injuries a month.    No one knows how many industrial accidents go unreported. And incidents of under-reporting may be much more numerous than officials suspect. A 1974 federal study of accidents at 140 companies found that 42% weren't reported to the government, and a 1980 OSHA-commissioned study of work-related deaths in North Carolina discovered that 38% went untallied.    The implications of this misreporting are far-reaching. Labor Secretary William E. Brock says: &quot;Too many things depend on it -- individual companies' ability to recognize and correct hazards, OSHA's ability to concentrate its resources in areas where the most dangers exist and, ultimately, the safety of the workers themselves.&quot;    Both MSHA and OSHA are stepping up scrutiny of accident-reporting records. In the wake of its largest fine ever involving unreported accidents -- a $1.4 million levy last April against a Union Carbide Corp. plant in West Virginia for 128 unreported accidents, among other violations -- OSHA has alerted its field offices to watch for similar violations and has beefed up record-related training for new agents.    &quot;The Carbide case really opened our eyes,&quot; says Leo Carey, OSHA's deputy director of field operations.    Incentives abound to fudge corporate accident records. Among these: skyrocketing insurance bills and the high cost of workers' compensation claims. Salary incentives for managers who maintain good safety records may spur the activity. Furthermore, penalties for failing to report violations can be so low that they don't deter potential rule-breakers. North American Coal Co., since renamed Nacco Industries Inc., was fined a mere $60 by the mine-safety agency for 479 unreported accidents, &quot;about the price of a good pair of work boots,&quot; says the UMW's Mr. Main.    For non-mining companies, the strongest incentive to keep quiet about accidents may be OSHA's 1982 guidelines: Facilities whose accident records indicate a rate lower than the national average are rarely inspected. (Until early this year, OSHA didn't inspect any of these &quot;safe&quot; firms; however, OSHA officials say the agency now inspects one out of 10 of the firms that report low accident rates.) A chemical worker's much-publicized death from cyanide poisoning at a Chicago-area plant owned by Film Recovery Systems Inc. occurred after an OSHA inspector, using the 1982 guidelines, chose to forgo a full safety inspection after checking the company's accident records. Defending its policy, OSHA says it is the best way it can focus its inspections on the worst violators.    Nevertheless, a look at Consol's two nationally acclaimed mines indicates how misleading safety records can be.    Shortly before midnight on Aug. 13, 1985, Edward Cheslick was repairing a large cable in the underground mine when it snapped. The cable propelled him, he recalls, &quot;like a slingshot&quot; against the steel arms of a coal-loading machine, bruising several of his ribs. After a few days, he says, his side was so painful he couldn't drive or lie down, so he stayed home.    For mine officials, the mishap threatened to mar a goal they had been seeking all year -- an unblemished safety record. Mr. Cheslick says that after he called in sick, Consol officials phoned him six times, begging him to return to work. When he insisted on taking a compensated leave, two mine officials drove 50 miles over back roads to plead their case in person.    &quot;We're here to wheel and deal,&quot; the 38-year-old miner recalls one official as saying. When the men promised that Mr. Cheslick could record lost days as fully paid &quot;personal&quot; days, the miner relented.    Ronald L. Wooten, Consol's vice president of safety at its Pittsburgh headquarters, says Mr. Cheslick's injury wasn't reported to MSHA because the miner elected to take personal days. But he says he can't confirm or deny that local Consol officials persuaded Mr. Cheslick to take the days off, and mine officials say through a spokesman they don't remember what the miner was told.    &quot;They didn't want a lost-time accident, and they were willing to go to any extent not to get one,&quot; says David Gearde, another miner at Osage. &quot;Come hell or high water, they were going to get that {Sentinels of Safety} award.&quot;    Mr. Gearde should know. He bears a 9-inch pink scar across his right shoulder from surgery he underwent -- also in August 1985 -- after tearing shoulder tendons while lifting a rail at Osage. Mr. Gearde says Consol officials persuaded him to record as a vacation the week he recuperated at home. &quot;They said, 'You don't want to be the first one hurt at the mine {this year}, do you?'&quot; he recalls.    Mr. Gearde says he initially went along, telling his &quot;vacation&quot; tale to an MSHA inspector. He says he later told the truth because he feels the mine's safety award is undeserved. A Consol spokesman says that mine officials &quot;informed {Mr. Gearde} of his options,&quot; which included having surgery on vacation time, and that a federal inspector approved the arrangement.    Consol's benevolence extended further than free vacations, however. Two months earlier, on June 18, Charles Minor broke a bone in his foot while fleeing an out-of-control hydraulic oil line. The miner says Osage officials handed him a walking stick and persuaded him to hobble around the mine for three weeks while others performed his normal duties as a mechanic.    &quot;They told me if I came back to work they would take care of me,&quot; says Mr. Minor, who did so against a doctor's recommendation. &quot;Now the doctor says the foot may bother me the rest of my life.&quot; Mine officials say through a spokesman that no special treatment was given Mr. Minor.    Bruce Ballard, a former high-school football star, was laboring in a coal mine's most dangerous job: pounding supports into the mine's roof using a 550-volt electric bolting machine.    Shortly before 7:40 a.m. on Sept. 20, 1985, a co-worker saw Mr. Ballard remove his right work glove to scribble down the number of roof bolts he had installed during the eight-hour midnight shift. Less than two minutes later, according to an internal company report, another co-worker stumbled onto Mr. Ballard's lifeless body sprawled beside the roof-bolting machine.    Consol moved quickly. Within hours of Mr. Ballard's death -- before he was declared legally dead -- mine officials were insisting that the strapping young miner had died of natural causes. Questions about the death and Consol's behavior began swirling just as fast: Why was the roof-bolting machine used by Mr. Ballard moved and reused before authorities could conduct a formal investigation? Why was Mr. Ballard's body delivered to medical authorities with bare feet?    Dr. McDonald, the medical examiner, was the first physician to examine Mr. Ballard's body. He believes that Mr. Ballard's boots could have shown evidence of electric shock. Burn marks on the young miner's right arm first led Dr. McDonald to suspect electrocution. &quot;This man was covered with coal dust and his clothing was wet,&quot; says Dr. McDonald today. &quot;He could be like a walking electrode.&quot;    William Massello III, a Virginia state assistant chief medical examiner and the only doctor to perform an autopsy on Mr. Ballard, also declared the death an electrocution. His autopsy noted abrasions &quot;consistent with electrical burns&quot; on Mr. Ballard's right elbow and hand.    &quot;Based on the evidence, what else can you call this?&quot; Dr. Massello asks. &quot;Put it this way: There is a chance that someone may come up and confess that they threw him in a hole, killed him and painted it to look like an electrocution. Until then, no other medical conclusion can be drawn.&quot;    But Consol, in visits to both doctors and elsewhere, strenuously argued against the electrocution verdict. An internal company investigation &quot;could not produce any evidence indicating that the death was mine-related,&quot; a Consol report said. Eventually the company convinced MSHA's three-man &quot;fatality-review committee.&quot; That panel, noting that a &quot;second autopsy&quot; by the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology, based in Washington, D.C., &quot;could not substantiate&quot; the electrocution finding, ruled that Mr. Ballard's death wasn't mine-related.    However, Col. Donald G. Wright, the doctor who performed the examination for the institute, says that the institute didn't conduct a second autopsy. &quot;It was a review of all the documents and slides&quot; from the original state autopsy, he says. &quot;That's all we did.&quot;    Consol refuses to elaborate on the Ballard case and says in a statement: &quot;While we sympathize with the family of Bruce Ballard over their loss, we strongly believe the death was thoroughly investigated.&quot;    Even when officials at the coal company acknowledged an injury at Buchanan, the critical question of lost workdays was sometimes in doubt. Both federal and Consol officials, for example, recorded Jerry D. Cochran's Aug. 16, 1985, injury as a &quot;non lost-worktime&quot; incident, even though the miner missed a full week of work. In contrast, records filed with the Virginia Department of Labor and Industry say Mr. Cochran's accident resulted in two lost workdays.    Hardened ambulance attendants blanched when they treated Mr. Cochran, whose arm had been caught in a conveyor belt and was spurting streams of blood from a sliced artery. The miner spent a four-day weekend in hospital beds and consulting with doctors. The question of whether he could return to work the following Wednesday was made moot when Consol slapped him with a three-day disciplinary suspension without pay for violating safety rules.    Consol's Mr. Wooten says that Mr. Cochran was able to work on Wednesday and that his two days consulting with doctors don't count as lost workdays. Mr. Cochran, who now sports two deep scars across his right forearm and bicep, used the suspension to recuperate. And Consol preserved its record of no lost-time accidents.    Consol officials play down the significance of the Osage and Buchanan incidents. &quot;The employees of Osage and Buchanan mines have earned the respect of the entire coal industry,&quot; said Consol Chairman Bobby R. Brown in a company statement marking the Sentinels of Safety awards. </TEXT></DOC>