<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871001-0066 </DOCNO><HL> Foreign Investors Deserve Same Treatment as Americans---By Michael F. Butler</HL><DD> 10/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGN LABORMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   The small print of the House version of the trade bill contains a provision that, if enacted, would be a major deterrent to foreign investment in the U.S. Sponsored by John Bryant (D., Texas), the provision calls for a massive and unprecedented system of public disclosure on foreign investment in the U.S. It would undercut years of U.S. government efforts to eliminate investment restrictions in other countries and would violate U.S. treaty obligations.    Under the provision, a foreign investor with an equity interest -- either direct or indirect -- in a U.S. business (including real-estate investments), would be required to file detailed information on itself and the U.S. enterprise with the U.S. Commerce Department -- information that would be available to the public. Current law requires foreign investors to file reports that contain much of the same information specified in the Bryant provision, but the reports are not available to the public and are considered highly confidential.    The most egregious disclosure requirements would be imposed on a foreign investor holding 25% or more of the equity of a U.S. business enterprise with assets or sales of $20 million or more. The investor would be required to file an audited financial statement on the U.S. enterprise, including sales, assets, operating income, depreciation by industrial segment, and changes in financial condition. The compensation of the executive officers of the U.S. enterprise, related business transactions of the enterprise's directors, and any significant civil litigation involving the enterprise for the prior year would also have to be disclosed.    The disclosure obligations would apply whether the investor purchased the U.S. enterprise or developed it from scratch. And they would apply to any entity that meets the $20 million test: a wholly owned subsidiary, a branch bank, and even an otherwise private joint venture or partnership.    When a foreign investor has less than a 25% interest in U.S. enterprise, the disclosure requirements would be less onerous. However, a foreign investor with as little as a 5% interest in a U.S. enterprise that has assets of $5 million or sales of $10 million would be required to disclose the name, location and industry of the enterprise, the size of the interest when acquired and the price paid.    All reports would have to be updated annually. There would be a $10,000-a-week penalty for late filing and criminal penalties for failure to file.    There is no good reason to require such detailed public disclosure for U.S. businesses with foreign investors when similar enterprises with no foreign ownership do not have to make such disclosures. (Enterprises with foreign investors that have publicly traded securities in the U.S. are, of course, already subject to SEC and state securities-law requirements.) The Bryant provision would put foreign investors and their U.S. partners at a considerable disadvantage with competitors, customers and suppliers. No other industrialized country imposes similar disclosure provisions on foreign investors.    Foreign investors would consider enactment of the Bryant provision a clear statement that the U.S. wants to discourage foreign investment -- something that certainly would be disastrous for the economy. Almost three million jobs in the U.S. are in entities in which foreign investors own at least 10%. In 1986, foreigners spent $31.5 billion to establish or acquire businesses in the U.S. (almost 90% of which was in manufacturing, mineral development, wholesale and retail trade and services); these investments alone involved 320,000 jobs.    The Bryant provision would violate U.S. treaty obligations with most industrialized countries. These treaties typically provide that foreign investors in the U.S. shall receive the same rights as Americans except for measures necessary for national security. The Bryant provision would also violate Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development agreements to which the U.S. is a party.    The U.S. has long opposed investment restraints imposed by other countries and is actively seeking bilateral investment treaties with a number of Third World countries to remove investment barriers there. A few years ago it strongly objected to Canadian disclosure restrictions that were much less onerous than the Bryant provision. In the current Uruguay Round of trade negotiations, the U.S. is leading a major effort to remove host-country restraints on foreign investment. Enactment of the Bryant provision would be used by foreign countries to counter these efforts and would invite counter-legislation abroad.    Proponents maintain that the Bryant provision will prevent foreign dictators or terrorist organizations from making hidden investments here, but that argument is far-fetched. Assuming such unscrupulous investors would file at all, law-enforcement agencies can get this information from existing reports; it is hard to see how public disclosure would help. The argument is about as sensible as saying we could find out what the Mafia does with its illegal proceeds by requiring every U.S. business to publicly disclose all aspects of its operations.    Labor unions support the Bryant provision because the public-disclosure requirement would give them information that would be valuable in unionizing foreign-owned installations or in bargaining at those installations. They also consider that enactment of the Bryant provision would be a useful precedent in seeking future legislation to require domestic companies to furnish detailed financial information to them.    The Bryant provision has received scant public attention. It was slipped into the House bill at the last minute and without hearings. The Senate defeated an effort to add a proposal similar to the Bryant provision to its trade bill, so it is possible the provision will not make it into the final bill. But given the scope and complexity of the trade bill (the House and Senate versions, which differ substantially, are each about 1,000 pages), the Bryant provision has a clear chance of remaining in the final bill -- if only because it hasn't attracted sufficient attention. If it is enacted into law it would significantly reduce investment and jobs in the U.S. and would encourage restraints on U.S. investment abroad.    ---   Mr. Butler, an attorney in Washington, D.C., is chairman of the American Bar Association's international section's committee on foreign investment in the U.S. </TEXT></DOC>