<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890810-0059 </DOCNO><DD> = 890810 </DD><AN> 890810-0059. </AN><HL> Midland Malaise:@  Out-of-State Bankers@  Tight With a Dollar@  Rile Old-Style Texans@  ---@  Branches Lack Autonomy,@  Insist on Little Formalities@  Failed Banks Neglected@  ---@  No More Handshake Deals@  ----@  By Michael Allen@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/10/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> NCB </CO><IN> BANKS (BNK) </IN><DATELINE> MIDLAND, Texas  </DATELINE><TEXT>   If First City Bancorp of Texas had had the last word, Roy Kimsey's back yard wouldn't be full of sexually aroused ostriches.    The big bank holding company, acquired in 1988 by a group led by former Chicago banker A. Robert Abboud, recently refused a loan request from Mr. Kimsey, an independent oil man and longtime customer who wanted to get into the increasingly lucrative ostrich business. He needed $10,000 to buy a male to mate with the two females he keeps behind the house.    Spurned, he went instead to the locally owned United Bank, which stepped forward with the cash to buy a 400-pound bird named Bert.    &quot;It just scares (First City) to death when I mention ostriches,&quot; says Mr. Kimsey of the episode. &quot;They said they'd be embarrassed to take it to their loan committee.&quot; First City won't comment for publication about that.    Timid -- if not prudish -- lending is but one result of the new banking climate in Texas. As out-of-staters, ranging from New York's Chemical Banking Corp. to Banc One Corp. of Columbus, Ohio, finish picking up the pieces of the state's battered banks, Texans are struggling to make some adjustments. The newcomers have introduced scores of newfangled retail banking &quot;products&quot; and waged a fierce marketing war. But it doesn't all boil down to easy credit. Banks these days are taking pains to avoid anything like the disastrous real-estate and energy loans that brought down their predecessors. Freewheeling lending practices have gone the way of the Texas longhorn. So has the quaint old notion that a bank should try to carry its customers through hard times.    Perhaps most galling of all to proud sons of the Lone Star State is the impression they have that bean-counting interlopers have seized control of their economic destiny. In an era of branch banking and centralized decision-making, business borrowers complain that local banks owned by big holding companies have lost their autonomy and their commitment to local development.    Many customers have lost something too: Their loyalty to the local bank.    Here in Midland, the epicenter of the state's devastated oil industry, the banking upheaval is taken very personally. Attempts to introduce banking procedures common enough elsewhere -- like credit checks and loan application forms -- have customers in a fury that isn't likely to subside soon. &quot;There's going to have to be some funerals around here to change that thinking,&quot; sighs a local officer with NCNB Texas National Bank, a unit of NCNB Corp. of Charlotte, N.C.    NCNB has had a particularly rough reception from Texans who have mocked it, variously, as &quot;No Credit for No Body&quot;; &quot;Nobody Cares, Nobody Bothers&quot;; and &quot;Name Change National Bank.&quot; A big peeve in Midland is that local officials of the bank can't seem to make decisions without approval from headquarters.    &quot;I think it's absolutely terrible that several banks in Midland are owned by outside interests,&quot; says oil man John Cox. He and several other prominent citizens declined an NCNB offer to join a &quot;senior advisory board,&quot; contending that the local people weren't really going to have any control over decisions.    Times really have changed.    When the First National Bank of Midland was independent, locals eagerly served on its board, which was a true board of directors. And why not? First National spent nearly a century backing every civic improvement project imaginable, from the town square to the Boy Scouts to a hospital in town. It lent money, made donations and encouraged others to do likewise. It grubstaked many of the city's businesses and carried indebted ranchers through droughts, sometimes over the objections of federal bank examiners punctilious about lending standards.    But it was here that the Texas banking crisis began, with the 1983 collapse of First National. Owned by millionaire oil men, the bank fell victim to the get-rich-quick hysteria of the late-1970s oil boom, eventually making loans to just about anybody who asked for one. At least it seemed that way. First National made it easier for a loan officer to grant a loan than to deny it: Rejections, unlike approvals, required a superior's signature.    &quot;People had so much money, they were punching holes they knew had no chance of hitting oil,&quot; says Harry Spannaus, the executive vice president of the Permian Basin Petroleum Association. One local wheeler-dealer even bragged of getting a $50,000 loan -- which he then used to bet on the Super Bowl. When oil prices plummeted, First National was doomed.    Over the next five years, as bad loans took their toll across the state, the bank was taken over by RepublicBank Corp., which then merged with InterFirst Corp. to form First RepublicBank Corp., by far the state's largest bank holding company. And when it collapsed, in 1988, its banks were auctioned off to NCNB in the largest federally assisted bank bailout ever. (First Republic isn't related to First Republic Bancorp. Inc. of San Francisco.)    Now NCNB is trying to win back the town -- at times rather clumsily. The bank's commercials invited Texans to Chairman Francis &quot;Buddy&quot; Kemp's Dallas office for coffee. In Midland, the bank retained 87year-old John Butler, a former chairman of First National, as a consultant and gave him a big corner office where he could visit with patrons.    But while it serves free coffee and soft drinks with one hand, NCNB is busy throttling some longtime customers with the other. The bank has tossed nearly $7 billion of doubtful loans into its special-asset division, where all losses are covered by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corp. As manager of the division, which is aptly called &quot;SAD,&quot; NCNB comes under regulatory pressure to get the loans off the books, either by forcing borrowers to refinance them elsewhere or by foreclosing and selling the collateral.    The arrangement -- regarded by Wall Street as a major plus for NCNB -- gives the bank little incentive to work out delicate loan restructurings in tough times, or to give borrowers the benefit of the doubt. Indeed, NCNB has been known to put some performing loans into the SAD if the value of the collateral has been eroded (which has happened in Texas real estate) or if the bank decides that the borrower's cash flow stands to decline.    Thus, a former Midland mayor awoke recently to find that NCNB had tossed all five of his business loans onto the scrap heap for liquidation -- even though he wasn't behind in any payments and only one of his oil operations was experiencing cash-flow problems. The politician was able to refinance his loans, mostly through competing banks that didn't think he was quite the risk NCNB adjudged him to be. But he frets that many others won't be as fortunate, and he worries that NCNB's aversion to risk is hobbling the town's economic recovery efforts.    Nor does the new regime at the bank seem to put much stock in old loyalties. In 1982, when Thomas C. Brown was one of the town's highest-flying oil men, he led a campaign to save the struggling First National. At the request of the bank's president, he and a small group of wealthy investors bought First National's headquarters building at an inflated price, allowing the bank to book a profit for the year. But now that the boom times are gone -- along with his three Falcon 10 jets -- Mr. Brown is quarreling with NCNB over how to repay more than $20 million in old personal loans. &quot;They were great people,&quot; the 62-year-old Mr. Brown says of the old First National management. &quot;But that's history.&quot;    An NCNB spokeswoman in Midland declines to comment on this or other loans, saying the bank &quot;doesn't discuss specific customer relationships.&quot;    In the view of some people in Midland, NCNB is hardly the only bad guy to swagger into town. All of the bailed-out banks suffer from the reputation, earned or not, that all they do is collect deposits and send them out of state, while ignoring local businesses starved for credit. According to statistics compiled by Sheshunoff andamp; Co., a research outfit in Austin, Chemical's Texas Commerce Bancshares unit last year had lent out just 24% of its gross deposits; First City lent 57%; the Texas American Bancshares unit here, which was recently taken over by Deposit Guaranty Bank in Dallas, had a mere 26% of its deposits out in loans. By contrast, locally owned United has put 71% of its deposits to work in the community as loans, while locally owned Midland American Bank lent 61%. NCNB doesn't release branch financial figures.    The numbers -- which are gleefully circulated by the independents -- have local business people steaming. &quot;The only way you can get a loan is by putting up an arm or a leg or maybe both, near as I can figure,&quot; says Donna King, whose company makes oil-well blowout preventers in nearby Odessa.    Holding-company bankers tend to blame their low loan-to-deposit ratios on the battered local economy, which has savaged balance sheets. &quot;Anybody who has a viable and doable loan request will certainly get their loan request granted,&quot; says Matthew Murphy, the president of NCNB-Midland, who denies that branch managers have lost any lending authority. &quot;Unfortunately, there are lots of people coming in with loan requests who aren't qualified.&quot;    Students of banking say it is more complicated than that. For one thing, the newcomers generally have imposed much stricter credit policies than their predecessors had. With statewide networks, the holding companies understandably divert resources from towns like Midland to places with more economic potential. And local managers don't have the authority to embroider on the rules -- that bankers once enjoyed.    When a large petroleum products distributor learned he needed five levels of approval for a simple revolving credit line, for example, he closed his account with NCNB. The last straw, he says, was NCNB's insistence that his customers -- who are scattered across West Texass -- end their payments to a Dallas address for the sake of efficiency. He protested, but to no avail. Having to send checks to Dallas, he says, doesn't make people feel they are dealing with a local company. &quot;Our competitors would have had a field day,&quot; he says.    The big banks' rocky start in Midland has created opportunities for aggressive independents like United Bank -- which got Mr. Kimsey's ostrich business, the miffed distributor's account and some of the former mayor's business. Started in 1983 by local businessmen, United has an asset base that has swelled from virtually nothing to nearly $200 million. Belying the notion that good borrowers can't be found hereabouts, United has been quite profitable, keeping its nonperforming loan ratio to a healthy 0.78% of total loans last year while racking up earnings of $2.3 million.    United's directors have used their local contacts to woo customers from the competition. Cadell Liedtke, a 34-year-old oil man and board member, says he vouched for a friend who needed a quick $80,000 to close an oil deal because a competing bank was moving too slowly. &quot;He paid that loan off in 90 days, and we still have his business,&quot; Mr. Liedtke says.    But despite the initial successes of community-run banks like United, many independents fear they will eventually be squeezed out by the big boys. With deep pockets -- and the ability to keep down overhead by consolidating back-office functions -- the big bank holding companies can offer depositors rates independents may not be able to match for very long.    Nor can they match the holding companies' marketing might. The out-of-staters have poured millions into advertisements touting smorgasbords of new retail banking products. So Texas consumers -- who used to take a back seat to commercial clients -- are flocking to the new accounts, even as businessmen howl about the banks' tightfisted lending.    In less than a year, Texas Commerce signed up more than 54,000 Texas households in its OnePlus program, a consumer account promoted by parent Chemical that links savings, checking and certificates of deposit and bundles everything into one monthly statement.    As a retail lender in the days when real bankers wouldn't deign to touch a car loan when they could be doing multimillion-dollar oil deals, Jolene Trolinder, a vice president at the Midland branch, felt out of it. But now, NCNB flies her to Dallas for occasional morale building. She has won a bonus for meeting her lending goals -- a portable TV set -- and she is angling for the grand prize, a Caribbean cruise.    Still, for many Midlanders, this new, uncharted territory is confusing at best. Gone forever are the days when Midland oil barons plunked their millions into local banks at passbook rates and thought they were doing the right thing. Now, the smart money moves around a lot.    &quot;There's no loyalty any more,&quot; says a Texas banker of the old school who is now an NCNB officer. &quot;If (customers) can get a half a percent more at some Sandamp;L on a $100,000 CD, they'll go there. If it's an Iranian bank north of town they'll go there. They don't give a damn who owns it.&quot;    Gone forever, too, are the days when Midland borrowers could get funds on the strength of a handshake. Now, like everybody else, they have to bother with loan applications and credit investigations. A local real-estate broker recalls the client who flew into a rage when a bank asked him to fill out an application for a mortgage loan. The client, who had more money in a CD at the bank than he was requesting for the loan &quot;was ready to cancel the whole deal,&quot; the broker says.    For bank employees, the new age in Texas banking hit like a neutron bomb. The old First National building remains, but under NCNB, 210 people work in the facility that once was home to nearly 1,000. Most left soon after First National failed. And the 24th-floor board room, which commands the best view in town, is now a restaurant.    At 2:30 one afternoon, H.L. Brinson, with a neatly clipped white mustache and cowboy hat, shuffles in, passing empty teller cages and circling the nearly deserted customer lounge. Dejected, the 78-year-old rancher and oil man turns to leave: &quot;I'm looking for someone who's been here for 40 years like me,&quot; he explains. &quot;But I can't find anybody.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>