<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870819-0019 </DOCNO><HL> Growing Arsenal:Japan's Arms BuildersOpenly Vie for OrdersAfter Long Hesitancy---Pentagon Likes Ally's HelpIn Defense of the Area,But Others See Problems---Civilian Spinoffs Aid Military---By Eduardo Lachica and Masayoshi KanabayashiStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JAPAN NIPNYAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><DATELINE> TOKYO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In the pacifist atmosphere about 15 years ago, NEC Corp. passed up a chance to head the Japan Ordnance Association. &quot;NEC didn't think we were the right image for a company making telephones and household appliances,&quot; recalls retired Maj. Gen. Sakichiro Ono, the association's chief executive director.    No longer does NEC have such qualms. Last year, it allowed its highly regarded president, Tadahiro Sekimoto, to be elected the association's chairman and to speak for the more than 100 Japanese weapons-makers.    Like NEC, the rest of Japan's defense industry has come out of the closet and is openly lobbying for orders. &quot;In the last five years, those companies have acquired a brand-new interest in getting into the business -- even those with reservations about its profitability,&quot; observes Lawrence Snowden, a retired U.S. Marine Corps general who, until 1984, headed the American Chamber of Commerce in Japan.    The industry has been emboldened by more than four years of Prime Minister Yasuhiro Nakasone's pro-defense policies and by a growing defense budget, which rose 5% in the fiscal year begun last April 1 to 3.517 trillion yen ($23.5 billion). By 1990, the Pentagon predicts, Japan's defense outlays could be the fourth-largest in the world, surpassing those of Britain and France.    This trend has provoked mixed U.S. reactions. The Pentagon is pleased to see Japan assuming a greater security burden. So are U.S. defense vendors, who anticipate more sales to Japan.    However, a highly damaging breach of export-control rules by a Toshiba Corp. subsidiary, plus a number of similar cases, has angered the U.S. government, raised concern about future incidents and compelled the Japanese government to tighten its vigilance. In addition, congressional critics worry that through purchases of American equipment, Japan is absorbing enough technology to challenge the U.S. someday in the global aerospace market.    &quot;We are giving our competitors the capability to penetrate our markets even further,&quot; Rep. John Dingell, a Michigan Democrat who heads the House Energy and Commerce Committee, charged in a letter to President Reagan.    And, in fact, a group of Japanese companies led by Mitsubishi Heavy Industries Ltd. -- all licensees of major Pentagon contractors -- is lobbying to build a new Japanese fighter-bomber, with U.S. companies getting only a minor role. The Japanese companies also are designing their own radar system and cockpit computer for the plane, the Fighter Support Experimental (FSX).    Japan's defense buildup is raising political questions, too. It has spurred China, ever wary about its industrially powerful neighbor, to remind Japan of its wartime abuses. But other Asian nations haven't reacted as strongly because Japan's defense spending is increasingly going into high-tech &quot;black boxes&quot; rather than highly visible -- and overtly threatening -- equipment such as warships.    So far, admittedly, the Japanese defense industry is still a low-profit sideline of manufacturers whose business is mostly civilian. And because the personnel costs of Japan's 272,000-man all-volunteer force absorb more than 45% of the defense budget, only some 25% of it is left for weapons procurement.    But Japanese companies now see the Japan Defense Agency as a source of business that is steadily growing and relatively unplagued by currency swings or protectionism. For Mitsubishi Heavy Industries, Japan's largest defense vendor, those orders are vital to future growth. The years when MHI fed a strong demand for nuclear reactors and sold desalination plants all over the Persian Gulf have ended. An MHI spokesman says the company wants to offset that loss by expanding defense-related business to nearly 20% of sales from 14% this year.    In the mid-1970s, MHI played down its relationship with the Japan Defense Agency after a bomb killed some bystanders at its downtown-Tokyo offices. But like NEC, the company has shed its inhibitions. Reporters can tour MHI's Nagoya works, where F-15 jets and Patriot missiles are practically hand-made. Unabashedly, Japanese engineers say they can make F-15s better than does their U.S. licensor, McDonnell Douglas Corp.    In the past two years, MHI has pumped 135 billion yen, 40% of its capital spending, into its Nagoya plants and transferred a thousand workers there from its idled shipyards. &quot;Mitsubishi's basic strategy is to make aerospace a major pillar while the power-systems division supports the company,&quot; says Nario Sanada, an analyst at Nikko Research Institute.    The Japan Defense Agency allows vendors to earn less than 5%, but that is a godsend for Kawasaki Heavy Industries Ltd. The company's other manufacturing lines, such as shipbuilding, are awash in deficits. Defense orders, including those for Pratt andamp; Whitney engines for F-15s, now account for 20% of Kawasaki's sales, and Chairman Kenko Hasegawa has intimated that its defense business could double to about 300 billion yen in four or five years.    Another troubled shipbuilder, Ishikawajima-Harima Heavy Industries Co., is in the same boat. A spokesman says naval orders have risen to 25% of its shipbuilding from 10% a few years ago.    Japan's strength lies in so-called dual-use technologies, which originally were developed for civilian uses but now have military applications. &quot;Before, military technology spun off into civilian uses. But now the flow has reversed: It's civilian technology that's feeding the modern military arsenal,&quot; says Hidehiro Konno, the director of the Ministry of International Trade and Industry's aircraft and ordinance division.    Japan, for instance, produces more than half the world's carbon-fiber composites. Toray Industries Inc.'s output is used mainly for recreational products such as tennis rackets and golf clubs, but some of this tough, light material also is sold by Toray's U.S. distributor, Amoco Corp., for use in jet-fighter airframes.    Other examples of Japan's technological resources abound. NEC's expertise in telecommunications has earned it a partnership with Hughes Aircraft Co. in a $2 billion contract to improve data transmission between radar sites and air-defense centers. As the world's largest producer of semiconductors, NEC has another leg in the defense business, which uses huge quantities of microchips. And the electrooptics in Toshiba's home-video cameras is essentially the same technology used in missile-guidance systems. Toshiba supplies Hawk missile parts, cockpit instrumentation for F-15s and inertial navigation systems for P-3C submarine-hunting planes.    Mitsubishi Electric Corp. hopes to raise its defense sales to 200 billion yen by 1990 from 130 billion last year. It gets that business from co-production arrangements with more than 20 foreign companies, including Westinghouse Electric Corp., Raytheon Co. and the Hughes Aircraft subsidiary of General Motors Corp.    The Japanese defense industry now is better organized for lobbying than it was during the dovish 1970s. The Japan Ordnance Association, housed in an aging building with a recalcitrant elevator, still maintains a mousy, low-budget image, but it is backed by two other powerful groups, the Japan Shipbuilders Association and the Japan Society of Aerospace Companies.    And the even more influential Federation of Economic Organizations (Keidanren) now leads the charge. &quot;We often invite JDA officials to our meetings and freely exchange views,&quot; says Yoshio Anzai, deputy director of the Keidanren's defense-production committee.    The JDA itself used to be a low-prestige agency unable to attract top scientific talent. But recently, as many as 30 university graduates have applied for every opening at its Technical Development and Research Institute, which designs and integrates weapons for all the armed forces. &quot;Those young men can earn more in private industry, but they are motivated by patriotism and the challenge of the job,&quot; asserts Ryozo Tsutsui, the JDA's director general for research and development.    Some Pentagon officials expect Japan to continue to rely heavily on U.S. weaponry. Rear Adm. E.B. Baker Jr., the acting deputy assistant secretary of defense for East Asia and the Pacific, even sees Japan buying entire Aegis cruisers from the U.S. rather than co-producing them.    But other Pentagon assessments suggest that Japan is quickly catching up with the U.S. even in sensitive technologies. John MacCallum Jr., a Pentagon scientist who has led some technology-shopping missions to Japan, declared Japanese image-seeking devices &quot;state-of-the-art quality&quot; and adaptable for U.S. military applications. In an official report, he rated as &quot;slightly ahead of the U.S.&quot; Japan's research on cathode-ray tubes and liquid-crystal displays used in jet fighters' fire-control and navigation systems.    The JDA's Mr. Tsutsui contends that a shoulder-fired anti-aircraft missile that it is developing with Toshiba technology is superior to the U.S. Army's Stinger. &quot;We aren't saying that we have more capability,&quot; he says. &quot;Our missile is simply a generation newer than the Stinger.&quot; Mitsubishi Heavy Industries likewise says its topsecret anti-ship missile, the SSM-1, has a better &quot;hit ratio&quot; than U.S. Harpoon.    In one of the Japanese industry's most ambitious projects, the FSX team wants to build a phased-array radar system small enough to fit into the fighter plane. Four-engine Boeing Awacs carry such radar, which can detect potential targets more quickly and accurately than standard dish-antenna models can. But the U.S. can't build such a system for small jets.    However, the Japanese think that they can do it. They have mounted an experimental unit on an F-4EJ fighter. &quot;As far as I know, Japan is the only country which is conducting flight tests of a complete prototype of such a radar,&quot; says Takeshi Abe, a Mitsubishi Electric executive. &quot;That means that the U.S. is three to four years behind Japan. Europe has nothing comparable at all.&quot;    These claims have an obvious flaw: None of Japan's self-developed weapons have been tried in combat. And some Japanese critics question their effectiveness. &quot;Those companies just want jobs. They don't care whether those weapons are capable enough,&quot; says Osamu Kaihara, a former JDA officer who was dismissed years ago in a power struggle among politicians and who has long criticized the JDA and the Japanese defense industry for -- like the Pentagon -- going too high-tech.    But the U.S. is turning to Japanese technology. The Navy has borrowed Japanese modular techniques to rehabilitate an aging aircraft carrier, the USS Kitty Hawk. Another Pentagon mission is looking at Japan's use of industrial robots for small-lot production jobs. Says Yoshio Sasaki, MHI's just-retired vice president for aerospace: &quot;We can't develop big systems like the F-15 or the Patriot. But we can do smaller projects and do them on schedule and within budget.&quot;    For example, the XT-4 subsonic jet trainer recently developed by Kawasaki and Mitsubishi is a workmanlike product with no major technological breakthroughs, but Mr. Tsutui notes that it has outshone its U.S. equivalent, Fairchild Industries Inc.'s T-46. The Air Force was so disappointed with the American plane that it canceled an order for it. </TEXT></DOC>