<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861222-0074 </DOCNO><HL> The Outlook:What Is Culture's RoleIn Economic Policy?---By Charles N. Stabler</HL><DD> 12/22/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO) </IN><DATELINE> BOSTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   How does the world work? Are humans driven fundamentally and rationally by a desire for material well-being? Or are there noneconomic needs that must be met through status, identity and membership in a group, even at an economic cost?    The competing views of human behavior implied by such cosmic questions converged here recently and the result was as much collision as consensus. Anyone who wants to get into the argument should feel free to do so, as it wasn't resolved here. But the discussion brought into new focus an old issue between economists and other social scientists -- the role of noneconomics in economic analysis.    The occasion was a mixed-discipline conference at the year-old Institute for the Study of Economic Culture at Boston University, co-sponsored by the Center for Policy Studies of Clemson University.    The people at the institute, headed by Peter Berger, a sociologist, believe that what is called &quot;the economy&quot; can't be understood in antiseptic isolation from the rest of social life, such as religious beliefs, family structures and ethnic or national heritage. In a word, culture.    Many economists are hostile to this view. Some see culture as merely a manifestation of economic forces, past or present, and thus of secondary interest. Others regard culture as irrelevant in analyzing public policy and predicting its consequences.    &quot;Sure, there are cultural differences among groups, but economics works the same for all,&quot; commented one economist at the session.    Some of this debate involves saying much the same thing in the differing jargons of economics, political science, sociology and anthropology. And some of it may represent competition for turf and clout among adherents of different faculty faiths.    But there is more to it. The issue involves important practical questions, and the debate may help to answer them.    For example, strategies of economic development that have succeeded in South Korea, Taiwan, Hong Kong and Singapore haven't worked as well in much of Latin America or Africa. Is this because of cultural differences or economic policy? It has been suggested that East Asia's success stems from a Confucian heritage that values work, discipline and education. If so, then Brazil can't become a dragon just by importing Taiwanese economic policies.    Also, economists generally agree that free movement of the factors of production enhances economic welfare. If this is true, why do so many nations, including the U.S., deliberately hurt themselves by limiting the flow of labor, a key factor of production, through restrictive immigration policies?    Questions of status and class, a subject for sociologists, can also have economic consequences. For example, Gustave F. Papanek, an economist at Boston University, noted that economic efficiency depends on a close correspondence between contribution to output and economic reward. Where the culture dictates that plant managers, government officials and other economic decision makers are appointed on the basis of their connections rather than abilities, general economic well-being is reduced.    Several speakers at the session called attention to a cultural phenomenon now taking place in many countries that may have important effects on their economic future. That is the rapid growth of evangelical Protestantism in some unlikely places.    In the San Joaquin Valley, Mexican immigrants with a strong Catholic heritage are joining fundamentalist churches in large numbers, according to Alan Rufus Waters, of California State University at Fresno. In South Korea, if present trends continue, Protestants will form a majority early in the next century. In Guatemala, an estimated 20% of the population now is Protestant, mostly of the evangelical variety, and similar gains are being made elsewhere in Central America and the Caribbean.    &quot; . . . the old Protestant ethic, which isn't very significant today in its countries of origin, is alive and well in Seoul, in Soweto and in Santiago de Chile,&quot; noted Prof. Berger. It is operating there, he added, much as it did in Europe and North America in an earlier period, &quot;by inculcating moral values and attitudes that are conducive to success in a nascent capitalist economy.&quot;    The Boston conferees included economists of the public-choice school who saw little merit in concentration on culture. They believe any cultural factors worth explaining can be explained through the competition of special interests, i.e. economics.    For example, they took issue with a political scientist who explained restrictive immigration policies as reflecting, through the state, the desire of groups to protect their cultural identity against outsiders. Not so; it is economic self-interest, said the economists.    The benefits of immigration are so broadly diffused that an open-borders policy lacks political punch. But the costs, in terms of increased competition for jobs, are concentrated, mostly among recent immigrants. It is in the economic interest of the ones already on board to raise the gangplank even though this blocks would-be immigrants of the same cultural heritage. The sharp focus of this smaller group gives them the political edge.    And, as the economists happily noted, the new U.S. immigration law legitimizes those already here and sets higher hurdles for those still at the gate.    In this case at least, the economists were right about how it works. </TEXT></DOC>