<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890816-0096 </DOCNO><DD> = 890816 </DD><AN> 890816-0096. </AN><HL> Asia:@  Sri Lanka's Despair Explodes Into Violence@  ----@  By Tom Marks </HL><DD> 08/16/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> COLOMBO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Power grows from the barrel of a gun, opined Mao Tse-tung. And in the absence of politics, he might have added, there is no recourse save the gun. That, tragically, is the state of affairs here in Sri Lanka, a once-idyllic island state of 16 million now entering its seventh year of widespread internal strife.    Signs of deterioration are everywhere. Normal life is at a standstill, and the economy is faltering. Troops line the streets of Colombo, the capital; counterguerrilla operations daily take in hundreds of suspects in rural areas. Despite its promises of renewal, the newly elected government of President Ranasinghe Premadasa has been unable to break loose from the rigidity and corruption that paralyzed the previous administration.    Two years after they entered the country in a Cyprus-style solution to allegedly safeguard Sri Lanka's three million Tamils, Indian troops continue to occupy the north and east. They have suffered more than 1,000 deaths fighting Marxist guerrillas demanding establishment of an independent state, or &quot;Eelam,&quot; yet have been unable to end the conflict. Instead, they are viewed as a hostile occupation force by many of the people they came to protect. Further, their presence has inflamed the nationalist passions of the Sinhalese majority in the south, where the once moribund Marxist JVP (&quot;People's Liberation Front&quot;) has gained a new lease on life by portraying itself as an anti-foreign standard bearer. JVP insurgency has brought to the island as a whole the suffering once generally restricted to the Tamil areas. Deaths related to the insurgency now number between 700 and 1,000 per month. Behind this process are a number of factors. Most significantly, though, is the absence of politics. This leaves nowhere else for popular discontent to go save the streets or the ranks of the insurgents.    This seems a contradiction in a nation that since its independence in 1948 has maintained a functioning parliamentary democracy (it is now headed by a French-style president rather than the prime minister). But if politics is defined as shaping the human environment -- setting forth the rules of the game in response to the desires of those who make up that environment -- Sri Lanka's system has been a failure. Behind the facade of democracy, successive governments have severely restricted representation of the popular will.    Recent electoral mechanics have seen a nearly 50-50 split in the popular vote reflected in lopsided parliamentary majorities for either of Sri Lanka's major parties, the United National Party (UNP), in power since 1977, or the Sri Lanka Freedom Party (SLFP), which ruled with an enormous parliamentary margin during 1970-77 despite losing the popular vote.    The result is a political system manned by individuals owing their allegiance not to their constituencies but to their parties. Electoral corruption, intimidation and manipulation of voting rules prevented popular discontent from fielding alternate representatives. Rather than see its four-fifths majority endangered in 1982 -- a crucial level because it allowed the amending of the constitution -- the UNP simply held a referendum to extend the life of the parliament another term. Though it won the vote, the narrow margin of victory reflected the true polarization of the electorate, increasingly resentful of official corruption and deteriorating services.    The worsening lives of the people escaped notice in many quarters, foreign and domestic. Progress in economic macro-indicators served to conceal serious problems in the micro-world of Sri Lanka's majority, problems of health, nutrition, livelihood, and access to opportunities for advancement.    Discriminatory legislation and regular episodes of anti-Tamil rioting culminating in the nationwide explosion of July 1983 were passed off by the world as communal conflict. Actually, they reflected attempts by the Sinhalese majority to claim from the successful Tamils their slice of what increasingly was viewed as a zero-sum distribution of rights, resources and privileges. Faced with a system unwilling to provide for their livelihood or even to protect them, the conservative Tamil population turned to the only viable option championing their interests -- existing Marxist guerrilla movements.    The Sinhalese community also has been driven to self-defense. Contrary to a view fashionable in many circles of the Colombo elite, the JVP has not caused the present insurgency. Neither can it even be said to be leading it: It is racing to keep up with it. What the JVP has demonstrated is a tactical sophistication that has allowed it to ride each wave of discontent as it has surfaced.    In this sense, the JVP has learned a great deal from its earlier lack of success in 1971, when a popular explosion placed the survival of the government in question but was crushed when it moved too far ahead of its popular base. Previously sympathetic to the Tamil cause, the JVP flipflopped and adopted a hard-line pro-Sinhalese stand when it became clear that it was to its advantage. This served it in good stead when the Indians entered the picture, because it allowed the party to wrap itself in the mantle of nationalism. Indeed, JVP documents say virtually nothing of its ideological stance, instead concentrating on the betrayal of the country by its rulers. It is but a logical next step to advance a simple connection: The same people who sold you out are responsible for the poor conditions of life in which you find yourselves. Yet this linkage is so far reserved for instructions to JVP cadres.    Meanwhile, the insurgency gains strength. Whole areas of the countryside have effectively become &quot;no-go&quot; areas, and urban unrest has grown dramatically. Anonymous &quot;struggle committees&quot; now function in virtually all businesses and close them down at will by simply posting notices instructing work to cease lest reprisals be taken. By killing prominent people who do not comply with their demands, the insurgents have gained authority far beyond their numbers. The industrial sector functions at what appears to be just 20% capacity.    Such economic paralysis, in turn, feeds the JVP cause. Already, many businesses report they are unable to meet their loan and tax obligations, concentrating only on at least paying their workers. As this, too, becomes impossible, the ranks of the unemployed will provide fertile ground for JVP recruiters. Significantly, when Colombo's curfew was lifted temporarily late last month, the overriding complaint was an inability to find bread. The government would do well to look at history: It was the bread riots of the urban &quot;small people&quot; in Paris that led to the French Revolution.    Sri Lanka has not yet reached that point, but it could. It will if the reformist sentiments of the new administration are not matched by the political will to implement significant changes. If this is not done, the gun rather than the vote will express the political demands of Sri Lanka's disillusioned masses.    ---   Mr. Marks, a former U.S. military intelligence officer who specialized in revolutionary warfare, has traveled extensively in Sri Lanka since 1983. </TEXT></DOC>