<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880823-0081 </DOCNO><HL> Island Impasse: After Long Conflict, Cyprus Now Searches For an Elusive Peace --- Greek and Turkish Cypriots Remain Deeply Divided As Talks Start Tomorrow --- Even the Money Is Different </HL><AUTHOR> Kathryn Christensen (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><DATELINE> NICOSIA, Cyprus  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Every six months for 24 years, the United Nations has reviewed conditions on Cyprus, finding them so explosive that it extends orders for its 2,000 peace-keeping soldiers here. This is the year all that is supposed to begin to change.    More than ever before, elements are in place to settle one of the world's most intractable disputes: that between Greek Cypriots who control the southern portion of this Mediterranean island and Turkish Cypriots who control the north. The Greek Cypriots earlier this year elected a new president, a pragmatic businessman eager to negotiate and free of ties to the hardliners who vilify Turkish Cypriots. Tomorrow in Geneva, leaders of both sides will talk for the first time in two years.    The stage may seem set for progress. If other adversaries -- the Soviet Union and Afghanistan, Vietnam and Cambodia, Iran and Iraq -- can check their guns, surely the Cypriots can. Most promising of all, relations have thawed between Greece and Turkey, the North Atlantic Treaty Organization &quot;allies&quot; whose antagonism is rooted in Cyprus.    But the optimism is overstated. Aphrodite's island of love and beauty remains a contemporary quicksand of fear and misunderstanding.    &quot;I've been here 6 1/2 years, and I try not to be a cynic,&quot; says James Holger, until this month the U.N. Secretary General's acting special representative here. &quot;But in 6 1/2 years, we have accomplished very little.&quot;    &quot;The situation,&quot; says Nicos Agathocleous, an official in the Greek Cypriot foreign ministry, &quot;is unreal. If I can use the American word, it is crazy.&quot;    He is right. Despite a veneer of tranquillity, divisions on this resort island run deeper than those splitting East and West Germany and North and South Korea. And are similarly costly. Without Cyprus as a sticking point, the hostility between Greece and Turkey that has partially paralyzed NATO's air and sea defense in the region would ease. It also could open a valuable site for secure electronic intelligence stations just 125 miles off the coast of Lebanon.    Barbed wire is strung concertina-style across the island, separating the south, the formally recognized Republic of Cyprus backed by Greece, from the north, the breakaway Turkish Republic of Northern Cyprus. Sandbags, booby-trapped buildings and mine fields marked by faded red skull-and-crossbone signs reinforce a 110-mile &quot;green line&quot; patrolled by Turkish troops on the north and Greek Cypriot guardsmen on the south. U.N. troops provide a buffer between the two. Already this year, there have been 17 shooting incidents along the line -- &quot;a considerable increase&quot; over the past, says Lt. Col. H.F. Elliott, commander of the U.N. Canadian forces.    Nicosia's old Ledra Palace, pocked by gunfire, is the only crossing point. But this is no Berlin Wall, where movement is regulated but frequent. Cypriots can't cross, period. For an outsider wanting to spend a few days in the south and a few in the north -- 50 miles away at most -- the trip becomes an all-day journey made by flying a 1,400-mile loop back through Athens and Istanbul via three airlines.    The languages are different, the religions are different, even the money is different. There is no mail or telephone service between the two sides, which share little but the strong scent of jasmine in the baking sun. In the prosperous south, telephones work and stunning beach resorts draw droves of European tourists. Average annual income is about $6,000 -- high for this part of the world. Alongside every green, yellow and white Greek Cypriot flag is a blue and white Greek flag.    In the mountainous forests of the north, the red and white Turkish Cypriot flags are twinned with the red and white flag of Turkey. Banners declare gratitude to &quot;motherland Turkey,&quot; and the coastal resorts, dominated by Germans and Turks, wear a faded luster. Everywhere are signs of the south's grip on resources. Water and power are temperamental commodities in the north. Telephone service is intermittent and mail is slow; both are routed through Turkey. Income is just $2,000 a year.    If those real differences aren't enough to overcome, consider another that is more threatening. The total segregation of the two communities puts each at the mercy of inflammatory rhetoric and revisionist history. Hardline politicians on both sides resurrect memories of atrocities, neither forgiving nor forgetting. &quot;The people who massacred our children are still alive, and we know who they are,&quot; says Kenan Atakol, Turkish Cypriot minister of foreign affairs. &quot;Can you imagine we would let them come back?&quot;    Against this backdrop, George Vassiliou, Cyprus's new president, will meet tomorrow in Geneva with Rauf Denktas, president of the Turkish Cypriot side. After the meeting, which was proposed by the U.N. Secretary General, the two are expected to announce resumption of talks aimed at reaching agreement -- within one year -- on a solution to the bitter division of Cyprus.    Mr. Vassiliou, who promptly agreed to the Geneva meeting, is circumspect about the talks. He professes optimism, saying he believes agreement can be reached &quot;within two or three months&quot; for a new federal republic. Privately, he is determined not to allow Mr. Denktas to antagonize him. If the talks fail, aides say, Mr. Vassiliou intends to make sure that the blame rests with the Turkish Cypriots and that the world knows it.    That won't be easy. Mr. Denktas, longtime leader of the Turkish Cypriots, is &quot;a formidable political animal with a bottomless bag of tricks,&quot; says the U.N.'s Mr. Holger. And Mr. Denktas, who took weeks before agreeing to tomorrow's meeting, doesn't speak like a man anxious to do some serious bargaining. &quot;Our interests are not parallel but at a crossroads,&quot; he insists. &quot;No settlement is better than a settlement that forces us into bloodshed.&quot;    At one time or another, Cyprus has been ruled by nearly every Eastern Mediterranean country as well as Britain. Its latest trouble began soon after independence in 1960. The new republic, with Britain, Greece and Turkey as its guardians, carried constitutional guarantees for the Turkish Cypriot minority and was headed by Archbishop Makarios. Within four years, disorder erupted and the U.N. sent a peacekeeping force.    Then in 1974, a crisis broke out when Greek army officers led a coup, seizing the government and naming a new president who advocated union with Greece. Five days later, Turkey invaded and within a month held the northeast one-third of the island. Roughly 30,000 Turkish troops are garrisoned in the north, constituting what Greek Cypriots call an illegal occupation force. Turkish Cypriots see the troops as their only protection from slaughter.    A forced relocation of the population sent 180,000 Greek Cypriots to the south and 37,000 Turkish Cypriots to the north. Partition was total. Overnight, mosques were topped by crosses in the Christian south and churches by minarets in the Moslem north. Bustling areas became ghost towns. In Famagusta, on the northern edge of the green line, half-built hotels stand near rusting construction cranes where Greek Cypriots abandoned them. Turkish Cypriots don't have the money to complete the construction.    But as the political stalemate continues, the social landscape changes. A new generation is growing up, feeling more Greek or Turkish than Cypriot. Many Turkish Cypriots, beaten by the south's economic blockade, have left. Encouraged by Mr. Denktas, settlers numbering between 30,000 and 60,000, depending on who is counting, have moved to Cyprus from rural Turkey. Cypriots on both sides of the island consider the newcomers inferior, backward and a threat to future union of north and south.    &quot;We haven't got much time,&quot; says Ozker Ozgur, leader of the biggest Turkish Cypriot opposition party. The settlers, he says, are &quot;a completely different brand of people quite against a united Cyprus. They want an independent state in the north which will gradually unite with Turkey.&quot;    Meanwhile, the biggest obstacle to reconciliation may be the very thing keeping Cyprus out of headlines: Despite increased flare-ups, the island is relatively free of violence.    &quot;It's the inherent problem of peacekeeping,&quot; says Maj. Gen. Gunther Greindl, the Austrian who commands all U.N. forces here. &quot;Stability creates the impression of security, and the urgency of a solution is less.&quot; In Cyprus, he adds, there is &quot;no agreement whatsoever between the two sides.&quot;    The big sticking points are over the presence of Turkish troops and settlers, the free movement of all Cypriots over the entire island and the role of Turkish Cypriots in the government.    Greek Cypriots generally want the Turkish army out before a new republic is declared. They say the settlers should go, too, and they want some property restored to Greek Cypriots who had to move to the south. In return, they offer Turkish Cypriots only a minority role in government, excluding the presidency. They insist on a federal republic and, with their relative prosperity and U.N.-enforced security, they have little incentive to bend. In their villages, Greek Cypriots smile and say they are ready to settle anytime. Asked what they are willing to give, they look stunned at the very question.    Turkish Cypriots, recalling the failure of their minority rights in the 1960 constitution, fear a repeat of 1974's effort to unite with Greece. &quot;For them, it is Greece, Greece, Greece,&quot; says Mr. Denktas. &quot;For us, it is Turkey, Turkey, Turkey, because we know that without Turkey we won't exist in Cyprus; they will overthrow us.&quot;    He prefers a confederation in which Turkish Cypriots have a distinct territory and Turkey remains a protector. &quot;Only this guarantee saved the skin of Turkish Cypriots,&quot; he says. Villagers in the north concur; they can't imagine feeling safe without the Turkish soldiers.    Mr. Denktas, in short, seeks something very similar to the status quo, without the U.N. presence. Greek Cypriots want something akin to the 1960 situation, when they held the real power. As for union with Greece, Mr. Vassiliou says &quot;we are the masters of our house. Greece doesn't interfere.&quot;    But even if Turkish Cypriots believe Mr. Vassiliou, they doubt his authority, noting that he has no political party of his own and was elected largely on the support of Greek Cypriot communists. &quot;Mr. Vassiliou,&quot; says Mr. Atakol, the Turkish Cypriot foreign minister, &quot;is a gentleman sitting on thin air.&quot;    Indeed, Mr. Vassiliou's official support at home is thinning as he heads into tomorrow's meeting. &quot;We believe this new dialogue is going to fail,&quot; says Petros Voskarides, spokesman for the former Greek Cypriot president, Spyros Kyprianou. He accuses Mr. Vassiliou of &quot;oversimplifying&quot; because of &quot;inexperience or overconfidence.&quot;    Vassos Lyssarides, head of the Greek Cypriot socialist party, is similarly dismissive and takes a hard line on the talks. &quot;My God, they should be relieved we would even agree to sit with somebody illegally proclaiming himself president,&quot; he says of Mr. Denktas and the Turkish Cypriots.    A Western diplomat is pessimistic. &quot;There's an absolute failure of the two communities to look beyond their own interests to a shared national future,&quot; he says. &quot;The difference between Cyprus and Lebanon or Northern Ireland is that neither side is suffering horribly. So where are the incentives&quot; for compromise?    (Revised WSJ Aug. 26, 1988)</TEXT></DOC>