<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871229-0066 </DOCNO><HL> Chile at a Crossroads---Democracy vs. Prosperity---By Laurence G. O'Donnell</HL><DD> 12/29/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM </IN><DATELINE> SANTIAGO  </DATELINE><TEXT>   On this afternoon, the Pinochet regime allows its opposition to use the huge downtown O'Higgins park -- named for Chile's revolutionary leader and first president -- for a rare anti-government demonstration. Everyone in Santiago seems to be walking toward the enormous center field as a warm sun fades into Santiago's smoggy horizon.    A frequently seen poster depicts a masked man releasing his slingshot from behind a low barrier with the painted slogan, parar la tirania ahora. The poster's call &quot;to stop the tyranny now&quot; captures a main theme of the opposition. Communist banners fly side by side with many other red, yellow and green flags representing all shades of Chilean opposition and dissent. Popular music and protest speeches crackle endlessly through a blaring public address system while hawkers sell copies of El Siglo, the Communist magazine banned throughout the country.    Political rallies in Latin America are notoriously volatile and dangerous. How much more risky in a country infamous for its recent human-rights abuses, ruled by military decree for 14 years and now one of the last holdouts against the pervasive and inevitable sweep through the region back to civilian governments?    So why are such critical posters, banners and magazines freely available in a dictatorship? Where are the armed guards? Uniformed police are in fact scarce; there is no show of force, although troops with automatic weapons sit in buses a few blocks away . . . just in case. Yet there is no conflict, nor are there reports of any important incidents the morning after.    Crowd estimates vary widely, but no one quarrels with the 100,000 estimate -- large but hardly massive. Why the relatively light turnout? Pinochet supporters believe the low numbers prove that the opposition is divided, disorganized and able to drum up only limited support against the 72-year-old president, even though the regime permits the demonstration in one of Santiago's largest parks. They see in the low turnout a clear signal that Chileans, in a plebiscite sometime over the next 13 months, will support the regime, putting off civilian rule for at least eight more years. Under President Pinochet, they argue, inflation and unemployment are relatively low and downtown streets are safe day and night, all solid reasons why voters may opt for the status quo.    Critics of the regime say the rally really is a classic demonstration of what's wrong with Chile: It shows that the Pinochet regime now exercises such complete control that it can allow demonstrations and not fear embarrassment. Many people stay away out of fear they'd be identified and might lose their jobs; many who attend seek to avoid notice. Human-rights monitors allege that the political process has been paralyzed by attacks against local opposition-party activists by unknown assailants, but nevertheless hesitate to say as much on the record. Such violence is effective and intimidating, they say.    The country is at a crossroads and the people are ambivalent about what choice to make: Under Gen. Pinochet, tight controls limit free speech, political activity, access to television, and numerous other democratic freedoms; violators often end up in jail without quick access to counsel and are judged by military tribunals instead of civilian courts. Yet under Gen. Pinochet, a greater measure of economic stability and gain has come to Chile than to most of its Latin neighbors, including many of the countries that recently ousted military regimes. The opposition so far lacks a charismatic, populist leader such as Peru's Alan Garcia and, in the view of one foreign diplomat, &quot;is having trouble putting together a coherent program.&quot;    Meanwhile, Gen. Pinochet, unshaken by an assassination attempt a year ago, campaigns vigorously and openly as if the plebiscite were only days away. He warns Chile and the world of the dangers of a return to Marxism, which he argues wrecked Chile's economy. Advocating higher wages and more housing for the poor, he counts on effects of the relatively favorable economy to win over voters who long ago soured on him. Close observers find the general unswayed by warnings that a plebiscite perceived as unfairly won by the regime could lead to violence later. Pleas of the opposition for access to television mainly go unheeded.    So far, it seems that the political outlook is hinged on how much the general economic gains have become personal. Signs of prosperity are widespread. Visitors from other Latin countries marvel at the look of Santiago, its shops fuller with goods and consumers than many other major Latin American cities. In eastern Santiago, new, expensive homes dot the foothills of the snowcapped Andes, symbolizing the fresh wealth of Chile's growing business elite.    Middle-class intellectuals still rue the lack of movie choices in Santiago and the high price and relative shortage of new books. But they often exchange their complaints over late suppers in crowded Santiago restaurants and then make their way to new cars parked on dimly lit streetssomething the middle class would fear doing in most other large cities anywhere in the hemisphere.    How far down prosperity trickles below the middle class is hard to assess. A visit to the Catholic parishes of La Victoria and Santa Adriana, two of Santiago's largest slums, tells more about how poor people cope with their hard-scrabble existence than whether money from the top flows all the way down to the bottom.    The problems are typical of Latin slums: overcrowded housing, high unemployment, lack of food, inadequate health care, unsupervised youth, drug abuse, crime and suicide. But in this district of southern Santiago, La Victoria, Santa Adriana and five other parishes have banded together to forge a vast self-help network for the 300,000 parishioners. Under the supervision of a Spanish priest, they buy their food in a huge cooperative, run soup kitchens from homes and provide their own medical services; they run labor workshops to teach women how to sew attractive cloth mats that they happily sell for $8 each, even though one requires a week's work, part time. Their lives seem little helped by the economy, the government or private philanthropy in Chile.    The Catholic Church is important in Chile; the pope's visit last April stressed &quot;reconciliation&quot; in a pastoral message that seemed aimed as much at the regime as at Marxist terrorists. Some believe the church's influence could be as powerful to Chile's future as the questions of how the economic gains have been divided.    But for the moment, the future seems to turn mainly on the hard choice between democracy and prosperity. When the time to choose comes, many Chileans may see the contest as between the devil you know and the devil unknown. The risk that a return to civilian rule may jeopardize the economic improvements may be too great to many voters. Some may -- as recent polls suggest -- simply opt not to choose and will shun the plebiscite altogether. Meanwhile, Chile is spawning a generation of new citizens for whom democratic responsibilities are a foreign experience. The maturing of this generation will make a return to democracy a harder choice later than now.    ---   Mr. O'Donnell is an associate editor of the Journal.    (See related story: &quot;A Hot Economy Once Again&quot; -- WSJ Dec. 29, 1987) </TEXT></DOC>