<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880506-0080 </DOCNO><HL> Fire at Los Angeles High-Rise Places Focus on Sprinkler-System Retrofitting </HL><AUTHOR> Earl C. Gottschalk Jr. and Daniel Akst (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> I </CO><IN> CON REL </IN><TEXT>   A devastating high-rise fire in Los Angeles that began Wednesday night points up a major problem for American companies in urban centers: Thousands of high-rise commercial buildings don't have fire sprinklers or modern elevators that will save people in a fire.    The fire at First Interstate Bancorp's 62-story headquarters tower -- the tallest building in Los Angeles -- was also a case of tragic timing. Management had been installing a sprinkler system throughout the building and had completed 90% of the job when the fire broke out, fire officials said. A building maintenance engineer died after being trapped in an elevator on a fire floor and 40 other people were injured as flames swept from the 12th to 16th floors in a scene reminiscent of the movie &quot;Towering Inferno.&quot;    According to fire officials' preliminary estimates, damages could possibly exceed $400 million. There was smoke and water damage to every floor including the building's subbasement, firefighters said.    Los Angeles Fire Chief Donald Manning says the damage would have been relatively minor had the sprinker system been completed and working. Mr. Manning says three-quarters of Los Angeles's 800 high-rise buildings still lack sprinkler systems.    There aren't any comprehensive figures on how many high-rise office buildings in the U.S. lack sprinklers, says David Riseden, president of the American Fire Sprinkler Association, a trade group.    But he says, &quot;The majority of them lack sprinklers. If the office building was built more than 10 years ago, the chances are it isn't sprinklered.&quot;    Backers of retrofitting laws have met with opposition from building owners, who have complained about the cost and about the relatively good safety record of highrise offices generally. Only a handful of jurisdictions require retrofitting, Mr. Riseden notes. Massachusetts, for example, adopted such a law only last year.    &quot;Of all the technologies ever invented, sprinklers have proven themselves the most effective, reliable way of putting fires out,&quot; says David Lucht, director of the Center for Fire Safety Studies at the Worcester Polytechnic Institute in Massachusetts.    Mr. Lucht says that despite the multimillion dollar cost, a number of older buildings have been retrofitted with sprinklers. Marriott Corp., for example, is installing sprinklers in its older hotels. Fire safety regulations for hotels across the country were strengthened following the disastrous November 1980 blaze at the MGM Grand Hotel in Las Vegas that claimed 84 lives.    The building permit for the First Interstate high-rise was issued in 1972, when sprinkler systems weren't required in any Los Angeles structures. The city code was changed in 1974, so that any buildings for which permits were issued since must have sprinkler systems if they're more than 75 feet tall. The building is 50% owned by First Interstate and 50% owned by Equitable Life Assurance Society of the U.S.    Under California building codes, the First Interstate building and other high-rises weren't required to install sprinkler systems as long as they met certain other upgrading standards by 1979. Among the upgraded standards were safety improvements in corridors, stairwells and elevator systems.    The cost of installing sprinkler systems is high. One Los Angeles fire official estimated that full systems cost from $1 to $3 a square foot. Each of First Interstate's floors are about 16,000 square feet.    Another landmark high-rise complex in downtown Los Angeles, the twin Bank of America and Arco towers, also were built without sprinkler systems, according to the Los Angeles city building department. But sprinklers are currently being installed in the towers. Officials of Tokyo-based Shuwa Investment Corp., which bought the complex for about $600 million in 1986, said it will take two to three years to complete the work.    Whatever the potential dangers from high-rise fires, the number of fires in U.S. office buildings have been relatively few, according to the National Fire Protection Association. No one was killed in a high-rise office fire last year, the association says. The most lethal high-rise fires in the U.S. have been in hotels and apartment buildings.    Preliminary investigations of the First Interstate fire also suggested that the building's automated elevator security systems may have malfunctioned. When a fire breaks out, modern elevators are supposed to automatically return to the ground floor and open their doors, fire officials say. The maintenance engineer died in an elevator on the 12th floor.    The blaze was confined to the bank's operations on four floors. Gutted were floors that housed foreign exchange trading, corporate loan administration, personal trusts, economics, advertising and public affairs.    First Interstate executives said a business resumption plan, developed in case of earthquakes, mitigated the effect on bank operations. Yesterday key managers moved a few blocks from the building to a crowded emergency headquarters. Backup systems in St. Louis successfully stored crucial trading data. Traders moved to home computers and other trading rooms that offered space. A spokesman said the bank hopes to resume full trading again by today or Monday, using other systems.    It will be some time before the 3,500 tenants are allowed to return to the building. Daniel Occelli, a group manager at the bank, who works on the 37th floor said yesterday he was in no particular hurry. Mr. Occelli was fortunate. On Tuesday, he was working late on the 15th floor until 11 p.m. The fire broke out the next night at 10:38 p.m., Pacific time.    ---   Pauline Yoshihashi and David B. Hilder contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>