<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870427-0140 </DOCNO><HL> Manager's Journal:Could an Ethics Course Have Kept Ivan From Going Bad?---By David Vogel</HL><DD> 04/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR) </IN><TEXT>   Unethical or illegal behavior on the part of businessmen is hardly new. What has changed, however, is our explanation for business crime. During the second half of the 19th century, the machinations of the robber barons -- whose manipulation of stock prices makes the current insider-trading scandals seem like parking-meter violations -- were commonly attributed to their lack of moral character.    For example, Jay Gould, whose financial speculations made him the most vilified businessman in American history, was described by one writer as &quot;a pitiless human carnivore . . . . an incarnate fiend of a Machiavelli,&quot; while Henry Adams wrote: &quot;It is scarcely necessary to say that {Gould} had not a conception of a moral principle.&quot;    In the 20th century, corporate misdeeds have been commonly ascribed to the lack of adequate government controls over business. As a result, new scandals often lead to the establishment of a new statute, regulation or regulatory commission.    These explanations of character deficiencies and inadequate regulation persist. Thus, we have recently been presented with in-depth accounts of the personal histories of Messrs. Ivan Boesky, David Levine and Martin Siegel, seeking to understand the flaws in their characters that led to their behavior. And to shore up government regulations, it is likely that Congress will amend the Securities and Exchange Act so as to make the use of insider information about impending mergers more difficult. But now a third explanation for business has been added: the lack of adequate instruction in ethics by the nation's business schools.    Business ethics has now become a growth industry, its fortunes rising as the ethics of business appear to be declining. There are currently more than 30 books on the subject, two scholarly journals and a half-dozen academic research centers. A Society for Business Ethics has been established and several academic conferences on ethics are held each year. Recently, John Shad, ex-chairman of the Securities and Exchange Commission, pledged to raise $30 million to establish a program to teach Harvard Business School students that &quot;ethics pays.&quot;    Before we set about reforming the nation's businesses through its business schools, we might want to reflect more carefully on the relationship between these two institutions. Does anyone believe that if Mr. Levine or Mr. Siegel had been exposed to a few lectures, or even a course, on business ethics they would have been better able to resist the temptation to benefit financially from insider information?    In fact, since the early 1980s there has been a significant expansion of ethics education at the nation's business schools, including some of the schools whose alumni are facing prison sentences. The impact of these pedagogical initiatives on the ethics of the current generation of executives speaks for itself. If anyone has evidence that being taught ethics in school affects people's subsequent professional behavior, I wish he would share it with us.    Business schools need all the criticism -- and self-criticism -- they can get. But much of the current interest in ethics education appears to be heading in a direction that is silly and irrelevant. Before any more resources are committed to improving ethics education at business schools, we should determine exactly what our objectives are and figure out how we will know when we have achieved them.    One important limitation of much of the curriculum material in business ethics is that it invariably addresses &quot;yesterday's&quot; issues. It is thus extremely unlikely that those who currently work in investment banking would have been exposed to any of the ethical problems associated with risk arbitrage when they were students, for the simple reason that hostile takeovers were much less common 10 years ago. Instead, they might well have studied the ethical problems raised by overseas payments, an issue whose importance has diminished considerably since the mid-1970s.    Over the next few years, insider trading will doubtless become the focus of many lectures, articles and cases. But it is highly unlikely that this problem will be as salient a decade from now. Perhaps at that point we will be worried about the ethics of marketing new &quot;life forms.&quot;    Does this mean business schools should not bother to teach ethics? Not at all. While schools cannot make people ethical, they can strengthen the commitment of those who have a well-developed sense of personal morality to begin with. They can help sensitize them to the kinds of ethical quandaries that will confront them in the business world and give them the analytical tools to enable them to think more clearly about the kinds of responsibilities and obligations individuals owe to one another in a market economy.    Most important, schools can teach the nation's future business leaders how to manage their companies, divisions or units in such a way as to minimize the likelihood that those who work for them will violate either company policies or the law.    Most people tend to respond to the incentives created by their environment. In the final analysis, it is up to the managers of each company to establish and enforce the standards and norms under which their employees seek to advance both their interests and those of the firm. For this reason, instruction in ethics is likely to be most effective when it is done by companies and when it is accompanied by the introduction of management systems that reenforce the kinds of behavior the firm's management professes to believe in.    Finally, we need to keep the entire issue in some perspective. The scandals on Wall Street are a national disgrace, but they are hardly unprecedented. They are also likely to be forgotten in a few years. How many people, for example, still recall E.F. Hutton's check-deposit scheme or the Bank of Boston's failure to report large cash deposits made by reputed leaders of organized crime? Yet these took place only two years ago. A generation from now, business schools will be judged less by the number of their graduates who have served time than by how many of them are working for companies still owned and managed by Americans.    ---   Mr. Vogel is professor of business and public policy at the University of Berkeley's School of Business Administration. </TEXT></DOC>