<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870708-0103 </DOCNO><HL> Utility Aids Customers' Welfare Needs---Social Workers Go FarBeyond Collecting Bills---By Bill PaulStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> NGEUTILITIES (UTI)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN) </IN><DATELINE> LEWIS, N.Y.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Alzada Pulsifer pours out her problems at the kitchen table of her threadbare Adirondack Mountains trailer home to the understanding woman.    &quot;You name it, I've had it,&quot; the 65-year-old grandmother says sadly, ticking off cancer, heart attacks and cataracts. Now emphysema ties her to an oxygen machine several hours daily. Of her gaunt husband, Chet, she says: &quot;I almost lost him the other day. They had to shock his heart back to beating.&quot; Then there's the dog, who's sick, and the past-due electric bill and. . . .    Ah, the electric bill.    The sympathetic stranger at the table, Paula Ross, is really a bill collector from New York State Electric andamp; Gas Corp.'s nearby Plattsburgh office. But Mrs. Ross isn't here to badger the Pulsifers. Rather, she wants to tell them about public-assistance programs for which they may qualify. While she emphasizes programs that pay a poor person's utility bill, the 40-year-old Mrs. Ross also imparts information about medical, educational and other plans. She will even fill out the forms and go to the agencies.    A trained social worker, Mrs. Ross is part of an unusual corporate-responsibility program that contains as much pragmatism as altruism. While other companies may contribute to worthy causes or divest themselves of their South African subsidiaries, New York State Eandamp;G helps people navigate the byzantine social-welfare system. In the process, it keeps thousands of potential deadbeats off its bad-debt rolls. For example, Mrs. Ross and the other 12 New York State Eandamp;G consumer representatives, all former social workers, helped about 200 families to obtain roughly $90,000 in April, or about $450 a family. That included about 160 families who received about $45,000 to pay utility bills.    William Tabbert, New York State Eandamp;G's consumer-affairs supervisor, has written papers on how utilities, banks, insurance companies, retailers and other consumer-oriented concerns could benefit by hiring social workers. Indeed, Mrs. Ross helps not only the indigent and elderly, but also middle-class and even affluent customers who have lost their jobs and fallen behind on mortgage and credit-card payments, as well as their utility bills.    The Edison Electric Institute, the industry trade group, emphasizes that many utilities do have special programs for poorer customers. But only a couple of other power companies so far have adopted New York State Eandamp;G's social-worker approach, even though its write-off rate for uncollected bills runs roughly 20% below the national electric-utility average.    For although New York State Eandamp;G's 10-year-old program has been a public relations and financial success, it remains controversial. In 1983, New York State Eandamp;G sued Chemung County's social services department, charging it failed to disburse $340,500 owed the utility by people qualified for public assistance. New York State Eandamp;G won, and bad feelings remain, with some social agencies disparaging the company's motives for, as they see it, ursurping their role. &quot;In the long run, NYSEG is only interested in serving themselves,&quot; says Raymond E. Fortier, Chemung County social services commissioner. Mrs. Ross says even some fellow employees think she is conducting a &quot;giveaway.&quot;    A ride around her scenic but financially depressed territory brings New York State Eandamp;G's program into focus.    Barreling down a twisting mountain road in her Honda sedan, late for her next appointment, she pops a chocolate into her mouth and reflects on the frustrations of her 12 years with the Clinton County, N.Y., Department of Social Services. With wry laughter, she points out the ramshackle house where her first child-abuse victim lived. &quot;Some difference I made,&quot; she says. &quot;I stayed up all night with that girl but she stayed with&quot; her father, the abuser.    Still, Mrs. Ross recalls those years as perfect training. As a divorced mother of two trying to make ends meet on $16,000 a year, &quot;I knew what poverty was all about,&quot; she says. When she joined New York State Eandamp;G four years ago, she not only doubled her salary but found the man who would be her second husband, a New York State Eandamp;G employee whom she married last year.    Mrs. Ross gets referrals from other employees of the utility -- especially meter readers, whom she has trained to look for signs of family distress. Social agencies and a few local politicians also call her. Before a home visit, she calls up the customer's payment record on her computer and checks with different agencies to see what assistance the family might already be receiving.    Sometimes she strikes out. An elderly Essex County man with cancer reported on his application for assistance that he spent $40 a month on bird seed for the 30 bird houses in his back yard. That, Essex County ruled, was a disqualifying nonessential expenditure, saying the money should have gone instead to the utility. &quot;But watching those birds was the way he relaxed,&quot; Mrs. Ross says. &quot;For a cancer patient, I'd call relaxation an essential.&quot;    Still, she has hit plenty of home runs, including one for an Essex County family whose mother had cancer of the trachea. Their application for emergency energy assistance was at first denied because they were making monthly payments to a local retailer for a washer and dryer. The county maintained that the money should instead go to the utility. That decision was reversed, however, when Mrs. Ross pointed out to the agency that the appliances were needed to carry out a doctor's order to wash bedclothes daily.    Such episodes boost Mrs. Ross's reputation in the eyes of customers such as Bob and Julie Boudreau of Beekmantown, N.Y., who have so far received $2,300 in assistance. &quot;If we go in (to a social-service agency), we're peons,&quot; Mr. Boudreau says angrily. &quot;But Paula's NYSEG. She's got power.&quot;    Indeed, Mrs. Ross's power extends over her employer, which has decreed that it won't turn a person's lights off if she says &quot;no.&quot; That powerful incentive for her clients to trust Mrs. Ross is important. For not until a customer is within seven days of a shutoff do state laws allow her to shift into high gear. At that point, a person can apply for emergency aid from the state's Home Energy Assistance Program.    Under the program's &quot;Emergency HEAP,&quot; the government will pay a person's prior four months of utility bills, and pay for repairs of energy-related equipment. Thus, Mrs. Ross often finds herself working with local heating-oil companies -- New York State Eandamp;G's competitors.    By the time a customer qualifies for Emergency HEAP, Mrs. Ross probably has already secured a $200 grant, available once a year, from the regular HEAP program, plus as much as $200 more from &quot;Project Share,&quot; an assistance program administered by the Red Cross and funded by the utility.    She may also have spurred the state to pay for vocational training for a child with a learning disability, or induced the American Cancer Society to underwrite a customer's trips to the hospital for radiation treatments, or talked a hospital into applying some of its federal funds against the bill of an indigent customer who lacks medical insurance.    Seldom will she take &quot;no&quot; for an answer. When Diana Mitchell, another utility customer with a past-due account, refuses over the phone to let Mrs. Ross come to her house, the lady from New York State Eandamp;G fast-talks her into a meeting in a nearby parking lot. &quot;I'm here to see if we can't find you money from somewhere,&quot; she tells Mrs. Mitchell, who fidgets nervously in the back seat of Mrs. Ross's car.    Medical payments for Mr. Mitchell's cancer have left the family behind on their electric bill. Mrs. Ross promises Mrs. Mitchell at least a Project Share grant and a call to the Cancer Society. And she asks Mrs. Mitchell to fill out an income statement to see what else she may qualify for. &quot;Now you call me -- collect,&quot; Mrs. Ross tells her.    Mrs. Ross's patience, which matches her persistence, also saves the utility embarrassment. In 82-year-old Francis LaDieu's one-room apartment in Keeseville, N.Y., Mrs. Ross gently probes to learn the events that led to the utility's order to cut off his service after he missed his first monthly payment in several years.    At first, Mr. LaDieu insists he paid the utility bill. But conversation reveals that he is confusing New York State Eandamp;G with the telephone company. It further emerges that Mr. LaDieu was in the hospital when the utility mailed out the bill in question, which he apparently never received. On learning that Mr. LaDieu has never applied for HEAP, Mrs. Ross picks up the phone and arranges an appointment for him the next day at the Plattsburgh benefits office for the elderly. &quot;Now I'll be back to drive you into town,&quot; she says as she waves goodbye. </TEXT></DOC>