<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890801-0023 </DOCNO><DD> = 890801 </DD><AN> 890801-0023. </AN><HL> Politics andamp; Policy:@  Bush's First Foreign Policy Crisis Brews@  As He Confers on Mideast Terrorist Threat@  ---@  Response to Group's Claim@  That It Killed Hostage@  Is Affected by Israeli Role@  ----@  By Walter S. Mossberg and Gerald F. Seib@  Staff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/01/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> MDEST </CO><GV> EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </GV><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Iranian-inspired terror, which helped end Jimmy Carter's presidency and blemished Ronald Reagan's, has now created George Bush's first foreign policy crisis.    Terrorists in Lebanon claimed to have murdered one of the nine U.S. hostages they hold, Marine Lt. Col. William R. Higgins, and threatened to kill another today. In response, Mr. Bush rushed back to the White House, cutting short a Western speaking tour, to convene an evening meeting of advisers.    But retaliating for the apparent murder and deterring further killings are tasks fraught with diplomatic and military complications. And the current crisis is vastly compounded by two factors: the apparent threat to kill more Americans by the day and Mr. Bush's need to establish toughness in his first encounter as president with terrorists.    The president displayed anger over the claim Col. Higgins had been hanged in retaliation for Israel's kidnapping of a Shiite Moslem cleric and pro-Iran leader in Lebanon, a claim the terrorists buttressed by releasing a videotape of a hanging victim vaguely resembling the colonel. Mr. Bush expressed a desire to do something in response.    &quot;This was a young American colonel serving in an international force, and it is incumbent on all of us to try to rectify this situation if at all possible,&quot; Mr. Bush said.    Anger also swept over Capitol Hill, where the Senate passed a resolution, 99-0, that urged Mr. Bush to determine &quot;whether it would be possible to isolate and bring to justice or retaliate against those responsible&quot; and to demand that Israel consult the U.S. before taking similar actions in the future. But last evening, White House aides were cautioning against any assumption that a military retaliation might be forthcoming, emphasizing the practical difficulties of such a response. White House spokesman Marlin Fitzwater said, &quot;We don't often know where hostages are being held or who's holding them or who the perpetrators are. There are a lot of difficult issues here that make one proceed cautiously.&quot;    After the president met with his national security advisers, Mr. Fitzwater issued a statement saying, &quot;This was primarily an informational meeting at which all aspects of the case involving Col. Higgins and the other hostages were discussed.&quot; Congressional leaders who met with Mr. Bush later also indicated the president hadn't decided on a plan of action.    &quot;The options are very few for retaliation,&quot; said one administration official. &quot;One of the best things we could do now is to be patient and wait for an opportunity to retaliate.&quot; Another administration official emphasized that nothing has been ruled out, but added, &quot;It's still early in the process.&quot; He said diplomatic and economic pressures against both Iran and Syria were being weighed.    A failure to respond, or a response that seems timid, could have a price, too, by suggesting that the new administration is weak. In addition, administration officials may be deliberately playing down the possibility of military action to avoid making any eventual military move harder by signaling one in advance.    The group that claimed to have killed 44-year-old Col. Higgins, &quot;Organization for the Oppressed on Earth,&quot; is believed by U.S. intelligence agencies to be a faction of Hezbollah, the pro-Iranian Shiite Moslem terrorist group in Lebanon. Another Hezbollah faction, &quot;Revolutionary Justice Organization,&quot; issued the threat to kill a second U.S. hostage, Joseph Cicippio, 58, an official of the American University in Beirut. Mr. Cicippio was seized in 1986.    The Associated Press reported that its Cyprus office received a call, allegedly from the &quot;Oppressed on Earth&quot; group, claiming that Anglican Church official Terry Waite, a Briton, also would be killed today unless Israel frees the Shiite leader, Sheik Abdel Karim Obeid. Sheik Obeid is believed to have been personally involved in some of the hostage takings, especially that of Col. Higgins. An Israeli official said he was being &quot;interrogated.&quot;    The first task for U.S. officials will be to determine whether Col. Higgins actually was killed yesterday, as his captors claimed. Some Middle East analysts have suspected he was killed months ago, and there's at least a chance the victim shown in the tape released in Lebanon wasn't Col. Higgins, or that the tape was made some time ago.    If the U.S. concludes Col. Higgins actually was killed by the terrorists, the pressure on President Bush to retaliate will be strong. Already, lawmakers in Congress are clamoring for swift, strong retaliation. &quot;We must strike back,&quot; said Rep. Helen Bentley (R., Md.).    Failure to respond could invite more incidents and leave unchallenged the threats to kill other hostages unless Sheik Obeid is released by Israel. But it will be especially difficult for Mr. Bush to decide whether, or how, to strike back.    For starters, any military move could put at risk the lives of eight other American hostages, and hostages from Britain, Ireland, Italy and elsewhere.    The situation is further complicated by the fact that it is not the U.S. but Israel, through its imprisonment of Sheik Obeid, that holds a key to the crisis. Yet the U.S. isn't in a position to press Israel to release the Moslem cleric because doing so after the claimed assassination of Col. Higgins would appear to be caving in to the terrorists' latest violence.    And choosing a target for retaliation -- the terrorists themselves, their bases in Lebanon or their Iranian sponsors -- would be difficult. &quot;The president is going to have to decide if he's going to retaliate against Iran directly, or if he's going to retaliate against Hezbollah bases in Lebanon,&quot; says one government counterterrorism official.    Over the weekend, the White House implied it would hold Iran responsible for the hostages' safety; it said the U.S. would be depending on those who &quot;have influence with the hostage-holders&quot; to see that they weren't harmed. Yet this would be a particularly awkward time to strike at Iran because the country has just picked a new president, Hashemi Rafsanjani, who, it's hoped, might temper Iran's extremism now that Ayatollah Khomeini is dead.    Robert Gates, the president's deputy national security adviser, told reporters that &quot;There has been considerable dispute over the last several years just how close the connection is between Iran and the Hezbollah and the degree of control Iran has. . . . There's clear evidence of influence. The question is the degree of control.&quot;    That leaves the option of a military strike at terrorists or their bases, which are mainly in Lebanon's Bekaa Valley, an area under Syrian control. U.S. intelligence agencies have identified as potential targets there buildings known to have been used by Hezbollah forces and their mentors, the Iranian Revolutionary Guards. But they aren't certain which factions use which buildings or when they are present.    U.S. intelligence about the terrorists is considered poor. It has proven difficult to infiltrate small terrorist cells, which often are held together by family relationships. And during the 1980s, Lebanese terrorists killed two of the Central Intelligence Agency's top Middle East operatives, Robert Ames and William Buckley.    The dearth of intelligence is one reason the U.S. has never staged a military strike in Lebanon in retaliation for any of the terrorist assaults against Americans, including the 1983 slaughter of 241 Marines near Beirut. In 1983, the U.S. Navy tried to bomb Syrian antiaircraft batteries in Lebanon, which had fired at a reconnaissance jet, but lost two planes in the effort.    The U.S. has a wide variety of forces ready in the Mediterranean should President Bush and his advisers choose a military option.    The aircraft carrier Coral Sea, accompanied by a battle group, is scheduled to resume patrolling tomorrow after completing a port call in Alexandria, Egypt. A three-ship Marine amphibious task force including the helicopter carrier Nassau is sailing in the Mediterranean; it holds 2,400 Marines. The cruise-missile equipped battleship Iowa and accompanying warships are anchored in Marseilles, France. Altogether, according to a Pentagon spokesman, the U.S. has about 24 warships in the Mediterranean.    President Bush could also call on the new Special Operations Command, Tampa, Fla., if he decides to mount a commando operation. The unit is designed to coordinate the growing special forces capabilities of all three services.    The crisis could strain U.S.-Israeli relations. U.S. officials insist Israel didn't consult them before it decided last week to kidnap Sheik Obeid in a commando raid. The Israeli move apparently was an effort to trade the sheik for Israeli prisoners and Western hostages held in Lebanon. Israeli Defense Minister Yitzhak Rabin made such a swap offer yesterday morning, just as the terrorists supposedly were killing Col. Higgins.    But U.S. condemnation of the Israeli kidnapping was faint, with President Bush saying merely: &quot;I don't think kidnapping and violence helps the cause of peace.&quot; White House Chief of Staff John Sununu told reporters the Bush administration hasn't discussed the kidnapping with the Israelis and has protested only the proposed swap. The U.S. opposes making deals with terrorists.    Still, the apparent Higgins murder holds the potential for a significant U.S. backlash against Israel. Yesterday, Senate Minority Leader Robert Dole (R., Kan.), said &quot;I would hope the Israelis would take another look at their actions, which they must have known in advance would endanger American lives.&quot;    Rep. Lee Hamilton (D., Ind.), chairman of the House Middle East subcommittee, said, &quot;We would like to see Israel bring us in. If we are going to be in on the crash landing, we would like to be in on the takeoff as well.&quot;    U.S. diplomacy in the crisis also is complicated by a recent warming of relations between Iran and the Soviet Union. Soviet Foreign Minister Eduard Shevardnadze, who has just held a meeting with Secretary of State James Baker, is visting Tehran this week. Mr. Bush may hesitate striking directly at Iran for fear that would drive Tehran even closer to the Soviets. </TEXT></DOC>