<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880427-0090 </DOCNO><HL> Dumping Meese: Close Reagan Advisers Mount Drive to Force Attorney General Out --- Bush Favors His Departure; So Does Weinberger, Who Rejects Job Himself --- Nancy Is Said to Back Goal </HL><AUTHOR> Ellen Hume and Andy Pasztor (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST </CO><IN> PET ARO BCY </IN><G> JUS EXE </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   An influential group of Ronald Reagan's closest advisers and friends has concluded that Edwin Meese must go and is pressing a strategy to force him to leave.    Despite President Reagan's repeated orders to stop any actions against the attorney general, the dump-Meese push is proceeding. The effort has just &quot;gone underground,&quot; says a White House official.    Reagan insiders including former Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger and longtime campaign consultant Stuart Spencer are convinced that ethical questions surrounding Mr. Meese are threatening Republican political fortunes and tearing apart the Justice Department. White House Chief of Staff Howard Baker is aware of the moves. Nancy Reagan, sometimes the final arbiter in such matters, also &quot;knows that Meese has to go,&quot; says a person familiar with the First Lady's views.    The White House at first declined to comment, but a spokesman for White House chief Baker called back to say that &quot;he denies any knowledge of any such effort.&quot; Others involved in the dump-Meese drive, though, say that Mr. Baker knows what is going on and has made no move to stop it.    The catalyst for prying out Mr. Meese, those involved in the scheme hope, will be the scheduled mid-May report by independent counsel James McKay, which will fall short of indicting the attorney general but is expected to severely criticize his ethical conduct. The strategy of White House officials is for some of Mr. Reagan's old California friends, such as former national security adviser William Clark and former Attorney General William French Smith, to go to the president and Mr. Meese after the McKay report is released. It is known that Mr. Clark has expressed his view that Mr. Meese has become a serious liability; some close acquaintances of Mr. Smith say he feels the same, but his views are less certain.    Former defense chief Weinberger got involved after last month's resignation of two top Justice Department officials. Mr. Weinberger telephoned White House Chief of Staff Baker to say that Mr. Meese must go, and this message was passed on to the president. White House officials have even sounded out Mr. Weinberger about replacing Mr. Meese. He rejected the overture but remains convinced that Mr. Meese must leave.    The goal is to present the president with a completed quick-exit package, as advisers did to force out former White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan. Under this scenario, Mr. Meese would quit and would quickly be replaced by someone with recognized stature and abilities. So far, a replacement hasn't been found.    The resignations of Justice Department officials Arnold Burns and William Weld were a part of the anti-Meese strategy, and the two men continue to be involved. According to a person close to the situation, &quot;the consensus was that it was going to take more than one stroke because Meese is dug in so deep.&quot;    Vice President George Bush, who fears damage to his presidential campaign, also supports the ouster of Mr. Meese, according to word put out by his campaign aides. But White House insiders say that there isn't any indication that Mr. Bush has suggested to the president that Mr. Meese must go.    The strategy faces potential snags. Nancy Reagan is said to worry that a direct assault on Mr. Meese at this time will cause the president to dig in his heels to keep his old friend. Participants in the plan say that although the McKay report may hasten events, forcing out Mr. Meese could take weeks or months. But even some Meese associates doubt that he will stay much longer. &quot;I think Meese will be gone by the first of June,&quot; says a former aide sympathetic to the attorney general.    There is a major difference between Mr. Meese's situation and previous efforts to oust Reagan aides, such as Mr. Regan. The president has a longtime political loyalty to, and personal affection for, the attorney general. Nevertheless, Mr. Reagan's history is that once his most trusted advisers reach a consensus, he usually relents and goes along.    For now, Mr. Meese vows to stay, blaming his troubles on partisan critics. To allow himself to be &quot;hounded out of office by false accusations&quot; and &quot;incessant media barrages,&quot; he asserted in a recent television interview, would play into the hands of Mr. Reagan's political foes. The attorney general is expected to dismiss the McKay report's criticism as misguided and unfair. He has said that short of an actual criminal charge against him, he doesn't see any reason to step down.    The latest maneuvering to oust Mr. Meese began more than a month ago as months of criticism against the embattled attorney general reached a peak. About that time, the Justice Department's Messrs. Burns and Weld met quietly with Reagan Chief of Staff Baker and White House counsel Arthur B. Culvahouse Jr. to signal that they were primed to quit because of the pervasive problems they saw at the agency. Within days, the two men resigned in what they and White House officials saw as the first step toward forcing out Mr. Meese.    When the two Justice Department officials' abrupt departures rocked official Washington, Reagan intimates quickly stepped in to try to protect the president from the political fallout.    Immediately, former Defense Secretary Weinberger began consultations with the White House, arguing that Mr. Meese was damaging the president, according to White House aides and a source close to Mr. Weinberger. Other Reagan friends telephoned the White House with the same message. But despite &quot;hundreds of phone calls, nothing was busted loose,&quot; says a participant. The campaign moved to the next phase: news leaks about White House worries, aimed at undermining Mr. Meese's credibility within the administration.    Angered by the reports, the president ordered that his aides stop their anti-Meese activities. But Mr. Meese's own missteps and much-publicized difficulties in filling the Justice Department vacancies heightened the administration's embarrassment.    Chief of Staff Baker played his next card: a meeting at the White House last Wednesday with President Reagan and the two departed Justice Department aides, who bluntly laid out the agency's problems and their views of Mr. Meese's lapses. Vice President Bush asked to be involved and led the questioning at the session, according to people familiar with the meeting.    But if that meeting weakened Mr. Reagan's resolve to stand by his longtime friend, it was quickly revived by Mr. Meese's spirited defense of his own actions at a meeting with the president immediately afterwards. Much of the discussion focused on independent counsel McKay's investigation of Mr. Meese's association with Robert Wallach, who is under indictment on federal conspiracy and racketeering charges stemming from an alleged scheme to influence Mr. Meese and other administration officials on behalf of Wedtech Corp.    Once again, Mr. Meese strongly defended Mr. Wallach, who is his former personal attorney and confidant. People familiar with last week's White House meetings say that the beleaguered attorney general convinced Mr. Reagan that the president was the real target of the attacks. (Prosecutor McKay is also investigating, among other things, Mr. Meese's dealings with Mr. Wallach and other backers of a proposed Mideast oil pipeline. Mr. Wallach, who denies any wrongdoing, has refused to cooperate with the continuing criminal investigation of the attorney general.)    Also last week, Mr. Spencer, a longtime friend of the Reagan family who managed Mr. Reagan's gubernatorial campaigns, visited President and Mrs. Reagan in the White House family quarters. He warned that the Meese issue is one of the political problems that Vice President Bush now faces.    The next stage hasn't been made final yet, but White House strategists hope that members of Mr. Reagan's California kitchen cabinet will follow through on their own private concerns and take a more active role. Under the scenario envisioned by these White House officials, this old guard -- including former Attorney General Smith, former national security adviser Clark, California businessman Holmes Tuttle and others -- who have known both the president and Mr. Meese for decades, would deliver the coup de grace after the McKay report is released.    &quot;There's anguish&quot; among these old friends, who believe that Mr. Meese should resign, according to one of the group. But there isn't a firm decision yet on how to proceed.    Concern is growing within the administration that the public spectacle of Mr. Meese's stubborn resistance is undermining Justice Department policies and support even among conservative congressional Republicans. A top administration expert on Central America compares Mr. Meese's case to that of Panama strongman Manuel Antonio Noriega: &quot;As Ed Meese proves, it's tough to push a guy out when he doesn't want to leave.&quot;    At least 10 senior officials have left the Justice Department in recent weeks, and even such trusted conservative aides as Charles Cooper, the department's legal counsel, and Terry Eastland, Mr. Meese's spokesman, are considering bailing out. Efforts to fill judicial vacancies have been delayed, major policy decisions are in limbo and morale has plummeted. Recently, department officials started an investigation to try to find out who had scrawled anti-Meese graffiti in the hallway next to Mr. Meese's offices.    Mr. Meese, whose relations with Congress have been rocky from the start, has also alienated conservative Republicans and administration supporters like Sen. Strom Thurmond. The South Carolina lawmaker has privately urged the attorney general to consider stepping down, according to Senate aides, and he is furious about Mr. Meese's repeated failure to solicit his advice before announcing Justice Department replacements.    Even some lawmakers willing to overlook Mr. Meese's legal problems believe that he should step aside because of poor performance. Oklahoma Rep. Mickey Edwards, a leader among the House GOP who accuses Mr. Meese of &quot;incompetence,&quot; says flatly: &quot;If I were the president, I would not have Ed Meese in my cabinet.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>