<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880901-0077 </DOCNO><HL> Out of Orbit: Why a Space Station That Costs $25 Billion May Never Leave Earth --- NASA Wants It for Research, But Many Scientists Call It A Black Hole for Funds --- Just a Steppingstone to Mars? </HL><AUTHOR> Bob Davis and Laurie McGinley (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT FREST CANDA JAPAN EUROP </CO><IN> ARO </IN><G> EXE CNG </G><DATELINE> HUNTSVILLE, Ala.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Tourists here file wide-eyed past a model of the 250-ton space station the U.S. wants to build in space in 1995. The visitors see the compact rooms where astronauts will work, sleep and perhaps train for a journey to Mars.    But Huntsville may be as close to orbit as the space station ever gets. The spacecraft's cost of at least $25 billion has made it a fat target for budget cutters, who nearly killed the program this summer. A host of scientists are wondering whether, at that price, the station is really worth building. They insist the craft, called Freedom, will simply siphon funds from unmanned space research -- just as the space shuttle has. Its proponents, meanwhile, often have undercut their own efforts by hyping the station's benefits while hiding its ballooning costs, a pattern again eerily reminiscent of the shuttle program.    &quot;We worry about being nailed to the cross of the space station,&quot; says Eugene Levy, director of the University of Arizona's planetary sciences department. &quot;Programs for basic {space} research are already being squeezed dry&quot; by decreased financing.    The space shuttle was conceived as a ferry to the station, and the two remain entwined. Both are highly complex and fragile spacecraft, stretched to their engineering limits. A failure involving fatalities in either, coming on the heels of the Challenger disaster, could doom the U.S. manned-spaceflight program.    The National Aeronautics and Space Administration champions the space station as an &quot;international research lab&quot; that will orbit the Earth every 92 minutes, map the planet and study the heavens. Astronauts floating in weightlessness also could grow rare materials and proteins on board that otherwise would be crushed on Earth by gravity. For example, space-station research into the chemical makeup of proteins could lead to better cancer-fighting drugs, says Charles Bugg, a University of Alabama molecular biologist.    But NASA has an even bigger reason for building the space station, a reason it rarely talks about: Mars.    The agency is filled with acolytes of the late rocket scientist Wernher von Braun, who dreamed of a Mars landing. To these people, the station is an essential step toward Mars, a place where astronauts can learn both to build spacecraft in space and to live for up to six months in cramped, weightless conditions. The astronauts, for example, would test a new method of conserving water: a shower stall that sucks shower water from the skin for recycling.    &quot;You can't explore the universe and beyond if you don't learn to live in space,&quot; says J.R. Thompson, director of Mr. von Braun's old fiefdom here, the Marshall Space Flight Center.    But the cost of a manned mission to Mars would be so immense -- perhaps $300 billion -- that NASA has never formally acknowledged Mars as its goal. George Keyworth, a former White House science adviser, says NASA routinely &quot;lies&quot; by claiming it is satisfied with cheaper programs. NASA denies that it has lied. Officials there say they are simply being realistic in proposing smaller projects.    So far, NASA has squeezed nearly $2 billion out of Congress to design the space station. But the spacecraft faces an uncertain future. The next president must decide by May 15 whether to block further spending on the project. That will probably be the first of many life-or-death deadlines. &quot;NASA has to drag each president along to the next step,&quot; in space exploration, grouses James Beggs, the former NASA chief who sold President Reagan on the space station over fierce opposition within the administration.    Both George Bush and Michael Dukakis say they would push ahead with the space station. Early in his campaign, Mr. Dukakis signaled that he would kill the program, but he reversed course after intensive lobbying by Sen. Howell Heflin, an Alabama Democrat who worries about losing jobs at the Marshall Center in Huntsville. Mr. Dukakis's running mate, Lloyd Bentsen, also is a booster of the project. A few years back, Sen. Bentsen led the Texas delegation in a furious push to win more space-station jobs for the Johnson Space Center in Houston.    Neither presidential candidate, however, has faced up to the problem of paying for the project at a time of enormous budget deficits. This summer, thanks to a clever legislative maneuver by Sen. Bennett Johnston, a Louisiana Democrat, Congress approved $900 million for the year starting Oct. 1. The numbers promise to go up from there: NASA says it needs $2.1 billion the following year and $2.9 billion the year after that to start building the station. &quot;You'll need serious new money,&quot; says Sen. Johnston.    Leading space scientists doubt there will be big payoffs from much space-station research. Producing materials in space is still in its infancy, warns Paul Todd, who headed a study of the field by the National Research Council, an arm of the National Academy of Sciences. Astronomers say the space station will shake too much to help them make precise observations. The space station's &quot;orbit is wrong, the size is wrong, the location is wrong,&quot; adds Don Anderson, a California Institute of Technology geophysicist who wants to study Earth from space.    Lennard Fisk, head of NASA's space science division, says he favors the space station as a way to enhance national prestige and promote manned spaceflight. But after facing a barrage of hostile questions from space scientists at a National Academy of Scientists meeting, he admits: &quot;I couldn't justify the space station on the basis of science. I wouldn't try.&quot;    But other NASA officials do, leading to the same credibility problems that have dogged the space-shuttle program. In the shuttle, NASA saw a robust spacecraft that would routinely carry satellites into orbit. Instead, the agency delivered a balky, fragile craft that exploded in January 1986 and that, redesigned, only now is getting ready to fly again. In the space station, NASA sees a research lab, but the National Academy of Sciences says the U.S. won't need such a pricey space lab for 20 years, if then.    NASA hurried to declare the shuttle &quot;operational&quot; so it could convince the president that it was ready to start work on the space station, contends American University space historian Howard McCurdy. In fact, NASA plans to make the station depend on the shuttle for its very existence.    For the first time, the agency wants to assemble a spacecraft in space instead of building it on the ground and lofting it into orbit. NASA plans 20 shuttle missions over three years in which astronauts will drop off big pieces of Freedom and bolt them together during 10-day periods of intensive space construction. According to a National Research Council report, should the space station unexpectedly lose power during assembly, NASA would have only a month or two to cobble together a shuttle mission to somehow save the station from falling back into the earth's atmosphere and burning up.    NASA says it plans to place the space station in an especially high orbit, which would reduce risks should a power failure occur. But Alex Roland, a former NASA historian who now teaches at Duke University, says that won't be protection enough. Ultimately, he says, &quot;NASA is depending on one fragile system&quot; -- the shuttle -- &quot;to save another fragile system. It's chilling.&quot;    The shuttle and station are bound together in Washington too. Both are frequent targets of congressional budget cutters and are maddeningly difficult for NASA to manage.    NASA says budget cutbacks forced it to redesign the space shuttle 50 times before it launched the first craft in 1981. Already those same financial pressures have forced NASA to rework the space station three times in four years and push back the date astronauts will step on board by a year, to late 1995. During the same time, NASA has replaced the space station chief four times. &quot;It's a burnout,&quot; says Andrew Stofan, who headed the project for two years. &quot;I was constantly trying to save the program.&quot;    NASA once had broad backing in Washington and among the general public to spend vast sums to explore the solar system. But support for NASA faded quickly after the moon landing, as the Pentagon and social-welfare programs vied for funds formerly allotted to space exploration. In a bittersweet irony, Rep. Joseph Kennedy, whose uncle, John F. Kennedy, inspired the U.S. to explore the moon, argued passionately this year against the space station. &quot;No one who stood for that grand and noble dream {of space exploration} ever thought it would be financed at the expense of the very poorest and most vulnerable people here on Earth,&quot; said the Massachusetts Democrat. He wants to use space-station money to build low-income housing.    To save the space station, NASA is counting on its friends in aerospace companies and Western space agencies -- and on competition from the Soviet Union. The two-man Soviet Mir space station doesn't represent any advances in space technology over the U.S. Skylab, a space station that fell to earth in 1979, NASA officials acknowledge. But the agency says the eight-man Freedom would let it leapfrog Mir and regain an edge in space. &quot;The prospect of the U.S. becoming a second-rate or third-rate space power isn't a pretty sight,&quot; warns NASA administrator James Fletcher.    NASA is recruiting Western allies in this space race, both for financial and political reasons. International projects are much harder for Congress to cancel than purely American ones. In the case of the space station, NASA persuaded Japan, Canada and European nations to contribute about $8 billion of equipment for the project.    Now NASA will shower space station money on a half-dozen of its biggest space centers and a host of aerospace heavyweights. Already about 5,000 NASA employees and contractors work on designing the space station. By 1993, if Congress goes along, that number will swell to 40,000. NASA and its contractors will then be better able to lobby lawmakers whose constituents or contributors benefit from the spending -- the classic bureaucratic strategy for saving controversial big-budget projects.    NASA's efforts to save the station, however, still face tough odds, largely because the agency can't figure out how to curry public favor. &quot;NASA calls the space station 'the next logical step,' but they never say the next logical step to what,&quot; says John Pike, a space expert at the Federation of American Scientists. &quot;They have to commit to a Mars mission or forget about building the space station. The current rationales won't generate enough excitement to move the next president.&quot;    For nearly 20 years, NASA has played it safe, trying to get the White House budget office to approve new space projects without admitting to any grand plan for planetary exploration. In the early 1970s, President Nixon turned down as too costly NASA proposals to build a space station and travel to Mars. He approved only the shuttle. Ever since, NASA has tried to resurrect the other parts of the plan by selling them as slimmed-down projects.    Once approved, though, costs explode. In 1984, NASA won approval of an $8 billion space station. NASA nearly doubled its cost estimates the following year, and now figures it will spend $18 billion to develop the space station. But the National Research Council says $25 billion to $30 billion is a more realistic estimate, if you include launch costs and other expenses.    The space station seems destined for yearly budget battles and constant rejiggering of its design, says Mr. Roland, the former NASA historian. &quot;It will dribble on and on, just like the shuttle,&quot; he says. &quot;If it gets stretched out, someone should take out a gun and kill it.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>