<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880819-0004 </DOCNO><HL> Quayle Family Contacts Helped Him Avoid Draft --- Former Newspaper Official Aided Indiana Senator In Getting Post in Guard </HL><AUTHOR> David Rogers and Jeffrey H. Birnbaum (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> BIO </IN><G> EXE CNG </G><DATELINE> NEW ORLEANS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   GOP vice presidential nominee Sen. Dan Quayle used the contacts of his wealthy Indiana family to help secure a place in the state's National Guard and thus avoided the draft during the Vietnam War.    A retired executive of the family newspaper company said yesterday that he telephoned an associate to assist Mr. Quayle in 1969, and that the young college graduate had questioned him about the likelihood of being called to active duty as a guardsman.    Retired Maj. Gen. Wendell Phillippi, who was then managing editor of the Indianapolis News and worked for Mr. Quayle's grandfather, Eugene C. Pulliam, told his former newspaper that he contacted National Guard acquaintances and recommended Mr. Quayle &quot;highly&quot; for a position.    Mr. Quayle subsequently secured a position at a headquarters clerical unit in the Indianapolis area, which allowed him to attend law school and satisfy his military obligation without being subject to the draft. &quot;It was not a crawl-through-the-bushes unit,&quot; said a former guardsman who was a contemporary of Mr. Quayle's.    Gen. Phillippi, who had earlier commanded the Indiana Guard, said he was personally approached by Mr. Quayle and subsequently intervened on his behalf. In a page from the partisan politics of Indiana, Democratic and Republican adjutant generals in the Guard yesterday gave conflicting accounts of the number of vacancies in state units at the time, but the commandant of the unit where Mr. Quayle served told NBC News last night that there was a waiting list for those assignments.    &quot;We had a waiting list of at least 35 to 40 at the time,&quot; said Wyatt Cole.    Some National Guard units, including an honored Army Ranger infantry company in Indiana, saw combat in Vietnam, but by the time Mr. Quayle joined in 1969 the Guard was widely regarded as a safe haven for young men who wanted to avoid an unpopular war.    What mobilization there was of the Guard occurred earlier, and represented a small share of U.S. forces. Pentagon records show that 20 units comprising 12,234 Guardsmen were mobilized in May 1968, and of this number, about 7,000 were subsequently sent to Vietnam. In addition, 10,551 air guardsmen were mobilized during the war, and about 20% later served in Southeast Asia in support of tactical fighting squadrons.    Among the more than 58,000 men killed during the entire war, Pentagon records indicate that only two-tenths of one percent were from the Guard. By comparison, draftees accounted for an estimated 30% of those killed, and enlistees 59%.    In his acceptance speech last night, Mr. Quayle set off thunderous cheers from delegates when he declared: &quot;As a young man, I served six years in the National Guard, like millions of Americans who have served in the National Guard and serve in the National Guard today, and I'm proud of that.&quot; The Indiana senator is expected to answer questions from journalists soon -- possibly today -- about the controversy.    Separately, questions were increasingly being raised about Mr. Quayle's mediocre academic career. To the extent that they remember him, some of his own professors say he was a notably inferior student.    Despite public assertions of support, the Bush high command spent most of Wednesday night reviewing options. Privately, some Bush aides already were questioning Sen. Quayle's veracity and engaging in internal finger pointing. Some Bush aides indicated that the vice presidential choice didn't level with them during the consideration process, but others suggested that he wasn't asked the right questions.    Sources close to campaign chairman James A. Baker were putting out the word that Mr. Baker had nothing to do with selecting Sen. Quayle, and even opposed the choice. On television, last night Mr. Baker insisted that the Bush-Quayle ticket was a good one, but subtly put some distance between himself and Sen. Quayle by noting that &quot;none of the rumors have been substantiated so far.&quot;    Publicly, some Republicans were trying to put the best face on the situation, but many acknowledged that the controversy was drawing attention away from what they hoped would be a celebration of George Bush's acceptance speech last night. &quot;The fact that he (Mr. Phillippi) made a call for him still doesn't mean he was taken ahead of someone more qualified,&quot; said Sen. John McCain (R., Ariz), a decorated former prisoner of war in Vietnam. &quot;But to be honest with you, this issue is distracting from the goal we had for this evening. It is hardly helping us.&quot;    &quot;The first lesson is not to pick someone untested, who hasn't been through the process,&quot; said Ed Rollins, President Raegan's 1984 campaign manager and a backer of New York Rep. Jack Kemp for the second spot on the Bush ticket.    The senator's wife, Marilyn, defended her husband as not being a &quot;draft dodger.&quot; And other Republicans, clearly uncomfortable with the situation, fell back on a defense citing the accomplishments of the Guard and the fact that Mr. Quayle didn't flee the country.    &quot;The thing that's important is he didn't go to Canada,&quot; said the vice president's eldest son, George Bush Jr. &quot;Remember, in 1968, Canada was an option. He didn't go. Let's keep it in generational perspective.&quot;    As a conservative and flag-waving advocate of the military, Mr. Quayle is being held to a higher test than a liberal dove might be. Vice President Bush warmly praised his 41-year-old running mate yesterday, but the controversy seems certain to weaken the senator's ability to be the forceful spokesman on defense issues that the campaign hoped he would be.    Though President Nixon had announced his intention to withdraw U.S. troops, 1969 saw some of the highest American casualties of the war, and the Army relied heavily on draftees to fill the infantry ranks. Student deferments no longer existed beyond college, and draft-age men like Mr. Quayle competed with one another as they shopped around among state Guard units looking for a spot to satisfy their military obligation without having to go overseas.    Col. Ronald Beretta of the Indiana Guard said July 1969 figures show that state units were operating at 98.4% of their authorized level near the time of Mr. Quayle's May enlistment. He said it was possible that a waiting list existed at the headquarters unit where Mr. Quayle was assigned. Though the senator trained initially as a welder, Col. Beretta said military records cited show he was a clerk typist in the public information section after January 1970 and later received &quot;cross-training&quot; as a military journalist.    Although Mr. Quayle expresses admiration about those who fought in Vietnam, he hasn't indicated any personal dilemma over choosing a course that kept him out of the war. At a veterans post in his home town of Huntington, Ind., yesterday, some of his contemporaries expressed support. &quot;If he pulled strings to stay out, fine,&quot; said Charles Kuschel, 39, who went to Sunday school with Mr. Quayle and later lost an eye when he was wounded in 1968 as a combat engineer in Vietnam. &quot;He really had nothing to gain by being there.&quot;    But Eugene Howell, 72, a past commander of the post, was more hesitant. &quot;If Quayle joined the Guard just to get out of Vietnam, I don't think much of that,&quot; he said. &quot;A lot of people had to go. I think there's mixed feelings about all of this.&quot;    The issue also calls into question the effectiveness of the review Mr. Bush's staff conducted of potential running mates: President Reagan's 1984 campaign manager, Ed Rollins, complained that the &quot;right questions&quot; hadn't been asked. Within the campaign, there were recriminations over whether Mr. Quayle had been sufficiently forthcoming in providing information about himself.    In addition to the attention focused on Sen. Quayle's service record, people familiar with his educational record spoke of him in less-than-flattering terms.    At DePauw University, a small, acclaimed liberal arts college in Greencastle, Ind., that is largely attended by the sons and daughters of the Midwest's upper-middle class establishment, Mr. Quayle was a mediocre student from 1965 to 1969. Michael Lawrence, now an art gallery owner in Santa Fe., N.M., said he taught Mr. Quayle courses in constitutional law and American government, and said as best he can recall he gave him a D in one and a low C in the other. &quot;He was as vapid a student as I can ever recall,&quot; he said.    And Robert Sedlack, a professor of English at DePauw and a Democratic member of the city council, recalled, &quot;Dan Quayle was a crashingly mediocre student. C-minus would probably categorize him.&quot;    William Morrow, a professor at William and Mary College who was a professor at DePauw during Mr. Quayle's time there, said, &quot;I remember him being a student on campus . . . but his performance in the class does not stick out in my mind.&quot; He adds, &quot;The only thing I can say is he was not a distinguished student.&quot; Some schoolmates said that Mr. Quayle spent more time on the golf course than in the classroom.    In the spring of 1982, Depauw students gathered hundreds of signatures on an open letter to the university president seeking to prevent the young senator from getting an honorary degree and delivering the commencement address. The reasons cited in the letter were his &quot;undistinguished&quot; academic career and his &quot;lackluster&quot; performance in Congress.    In addition, critics at the time cited rumors that Mr. Quayle had been involved in a cheating incident. &quot;There was an allegation that he had plagiarized in a political science course,&quot; said Mr. Sedlack, the English professor. But none of Mr. Quayle's professors or friends contacted by The Wall Street Journal recalled anything that substantiated the charge.    &quot;I know of no case involving plagiarism with Dan Quayle,&quot; said Frank Darling, the chairman of the political science department from 1967 to 1979. Prof. Morrow, in whose class Mr. Quayle was rumored to have cheated, said he hasn't any recollection of such an incident.    In his years at DePauw, Mr. Quayle was considered likable. He was a member of the golf team for four years. He belonged to the Delta Kappa Epsilon fraternity, the same one both his father and grandfather belonged to at DePauw. &quot;It was an 'Animal House' with a little more class,&quot; said Quayle fraternity brother Michael Conway.&quot;It was definitely a party house.&quot; Mr. Quayle rose to the office of vice president of the fraternity house, according to a spokeswoman for the college.    More than a year after he left DePauw, Mr. Quayle entered Indiana University School of Law at Indianapolis. While he attended law school's part-time evening program, he held a series of jobs in state government, according to Kent Frandsen, the law school's associate dean. He graduated in 1974.    ---   James B. Stewart, Bill Richards and Brooks Jackson contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>