<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880218-0106 </DOCNO><HL> Reagan and the Courts: U.S. Appeals Court Judge Draws Fire for Stance On Civil Rights, Praise for Intellect and Manner </HL><AUTHOR> Stephen Wermiel (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> JUS </G><TEXT>      {Second of a Series}   CHARLOTTESVILLE, Va. -- When J. Harvie Wilkinson III was nominated by President Reagan in 1983 to be a federal appeals court judge, civil-rights groups criticized his lack of courtroom experience.    Now some civil-rights lawyers would prefer that he had a little less experience in court. &quot;He's developing a pattern of being hostile to civil rights,&quot; says Henry Marsh, a lawyer in Richmond, Va., home of the U.S. Court of Appeals for the Fourth Circuit on which Judge Wilkinson sits.    But if civil-rights lawyers are alarmed, Judge Wilkinson's sharp intellect and easy manner earn praise from other judges and have made him a powerful influence on the court, which serves Maryland, Virginia, West Virginia, North Carolina and South Carolina. &quot;He's already highly influential on our court,&quot; says Judge James Dickson Phillips, former dean of the University of North Carolina Law School, who was appointed to the court by President Carter in 1978.    Judge Wilkinson is part of President Reagan's legacy of 334 appointments to the federal appeals and district courts, 45% of the total, in seven years. These judges are transforming the federal courts from forums for the active oversight of individual liberties to more restrained resolvers of disputes.    Like a number of Mr. Reagan's choices, especially among appeals court judges, Judge Wilkinson is young enough to log more than 25 years on the bench, if he chooses. At age 43, he has already put in 3 1/2 years. And, like some others, his conservative writings as a constitutional law professor gave the Reagan administration a good feel for his views, reducing the risk that he would surprise them once he took his life-tenured seat on the court.    Conservatives couldn't be happier with Judge Wilkinson. &quot;He doesn't try to remake the law. He is faithful in interpreting it,&quot; says Assistant Attorney General William Bradford Reynolds, chief of the Justice Department's civil-rights division, for whom Judge Wilkinson worked for a year before being appointed to the appeals court. &quot;He's as good as we anticipated he would be.&quot;    Many of Judge Wilkinson's decisions fit a pattern of Reagan appointees. Theirs is less an agenda of specific political goals, such as eliminating abortions or restoring school prayer, than an approach to the role of a judge. Hallmarks of this view are narrow interpretation of federal laws, skepticism toward claims of discrimination, tough handling of criminals, strict attention to procedural requirements for lawsuits and deference to the executive branch of government.    In an interview in his bookcase-lined office in a modern courthouse in the center of Charlottesville, near the University of Virginia where he taught law, Judge Wilkinson recently outlined his approach. &quot;There are very few cases where a judge doesn't owe some deference, either to state courts, to juries, to regulators, to administrative agencies, to Congress or to the Supreme Court,&quot; he said. &quot;That's not to say the role is one of abdication, but you approach the task with a sense of caution and circumspection.&quot;    His friends, and even many of his critics, express admiration for Judge Wilkinson's manner, which some suggest reflects his long, close association with retired Supreme Court Justice Lewis Powell, for whom he was the first law clerk in 1972. Says a Charlotte, N.C., civil-rights lawyer who asked not to be identified: &quot;I know he's against me. I know he's conservative. But his opinions aren't filled with a lot of far-right rhetoric. They are legitimate.&quot;    And the conclusions Judge Wilkinson reaches aren't uniformly conservative. A three-year stint as editorial-page editor of the Virginian-Pilot in Norfolk gave him a broad view of freedom of the press. In a 1986 dissent, he objected to a jury award of damages for the Rev. Jerry Falwell for &quot;emotional distress&quot; caused by a Hustler Magazine parody. Imposing liability for parodies of public figures will be &quot;a powerful inhibitor of humorous and satiric commentary,&quot; he said. The Supreme Court is reviewing the case.    In another 1986 dissent, with which the Supreme Court later agreed, Judge Wilkinson said that part of an 1866 civil-rights law, intended to combat racial bias, could also be used by whites to challenge ethnic discrimination, in this case by a Jewish temple in Silver Spring, Md., to sue persons who defaced the property.    Other rulings show him to be a conservative force. Last July, he wrote a 2-1 decision rejecting the city of Richmond's affirmative action plan requiring that 30% of city construction funds go to minority-owned businesses. Saying that Supreme Court precedent is ambiguous, Judge Wilkinson ruled that a city may implement affirmative action only if it has discriminated itself, not simply to correct societal bias. Judge James Sprouse, a Carter appointee, dissented.    Barry Goldstein, a lawyer with the NAACP Legal Defense and Educational Fund Inc. in Washington, says Judge Wilkinson's decision &quot;is simply not an accurate description of Supreme Court law.&quot; But Duke University Law School professor William Van Alstyne says, &quot;I don't think he has misread the Supreme Court. He is reluctant simply to acquiesce in trends from the Supreme Court without a clearer statement of them.&quot;    Criminal lawyers are alarmed at Judge Wilkinson's decision last month that split the full 11-member court, 7-4. He ruled that a 1984 federal law permits seizure of a defendant's assets that are tainted by drug or racketeering activity, even if the funds have been used to hire a lawyer. He said such application of the law doesn't violate the right to a lawyer.    Peter Lockwood, who will appeal to the Supreme Court for the Washington law firm of Caplin andamp; Drysdale, says &quot;Judge Wilkinson's opinion glosses over a lot of difficult and important points.&quot; But Murray Janus, a lawyer in Richmond, says that while he disagrees with it, the ruling &quot;takes a scholarly, intellectual approach.&quot;    Last November, Judge Wilkinson ruled that a judge's refusal to allow a defendant to see his lawyer during a court recess after which the defendant was to be cross-examined didn't render the trial unfair. In 1986, he ruled that a defendant's rights weren't violated when police hypnotized and privately questioned a witness. In 1985, he reversed a jury verdict in favor of two Baltimore jail guards who said they were denied promotions because of union activities and reversed a judge's verdict that Charlotte, N.C., had discriminated against a black police officer by suspending and demoting him.    James Fuller, a Raleigh, N.C., civil-rights lawyer, says Judge Wilkinson and others &quot;have redefined the term conservative to give government carte blanche to roll over individual rights. It would make Thomas Jefferson turn over in his grave.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>