<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870410-0012 </DOCNO><HL> Three of Wall Street's Top ArbitragersIndicted on Insider-Trading Charges---By James B. Stewart and Daniel HertzbergStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GESTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Three top arbitragers arrested in February were indicted on charges of insider trading.    Robert M. Freeman, 44 years old, a partner and head of arbitrage at Goldman, Sachs and Co.; Richard B. Wigton, 52, a vice president and until yesterday head of arbitrage and over-the-counter trading at Kidder, Peabody and Co.; and Timothy L. Tabor, 33, formerly of Kidder Peabody, each were charged with four felony counts by a federal grand jury. Kidder suspended Mr. Wigton without pay yesterday.    The three men were accused of conspiracy to violate securities laws, securities fraud, mail fraud and wire fraud in connection with illegal insider trading. If convicted of all counts, each faces total maximum penalities of 20 years in prison and fines of $250,000, or twice any illegal profit -- whichever is greater.    The men are scheduled to be arraigned next Thursday.    Kidder Peabody, which had earlier sought a postponement of the indictments to persuade the government not to indict the firm, wasn't indicted. According to people familiar with the case, after extensive negotiations, Kidder Peabody succeeded in persuading the government not to seek any indictment against it now, in part by pledging to cooperate in the government's prosecution of the three men.    The decision not to indict Kidder Peabody, 80% owned by General Electric Co., is contingent on the securities firm reaching a settlement with the Securities and Exchange Commission of as-yet unspecified civil charges related to the alleged insider-trading scheme, according to people familiar with the case. These people said Kidder Peabody representatives are scheduled to meet with SEC officials next week to discuss a settlement, and that the firm assured prosecutors that it will agree to disgorge any illegal insider-trading profit.    The government has alleged that Kidder Peabody reaped millions of dollars in insider-trading profit from a scheme involving the defendants and former Kidder Peabody investment banker Martin Siegel. Mr. Siegel pleaded guilty in February to two felonies for his role. Mr. Siegel, who once directed Kidder's arbitrage, has admitted to trading inside information with Mr. Freeman. Kidder Peabody's arbitrage profit has been estimated at $6.9 million in both 1984 and 1985.    U.S. Attorney Rudolph Giuliani said it would be &quot;inappropriate for me to make any comment&quot; on negotiations between prosecutors and Kidder Peabody.    A Kidder Peabody spokesman denied that either the firm or GE has made any deal with the government. The spokesman added that Kidder Peabody &quot;didn't agree to cooperate against Mr. Wigton.&quot; Asked about Mr. Tabor, the spokesman said only that Mr. Tabor isn't a Kidder Peabody employee.    Gary Naftalis, the firm's chief lawyer in this case, and Joseph Hambros, GE's deputy general counsel, handled the negotiations with the U.S. attorney's office, according to people familiar with the case.    Mr. Naftalis declined to comment. A spokeswoman for GE said that since there haven't been any meetings yet with the SEC, &quot;clearly, no deal has been made.&quot; Moreover, Kidder Peabody has stopped paying the legal expenses of Messrs. Wigton and Tabor, the people familiar with the case said. A spokesman for GE said it isn't company policy to pay legal fees for employees who are indicted.    Before yesterday's indictments, GE had been paying the expenses of both men, even though Mr. Tabor hadn't been a Kidder employee since early 1986. Since then, he headed arbitrage units at Chemical New York Corp. and Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. Such units deal in speculation on takeovers and related stocks.    The developments are the first indication of cracks in the united front that has been maintained by the three individuals, Goldman Sachs and Kidder Peabody. Lawyers noted that if Messrs. Wigton and Tabor are guilty of any wrongdoing, the pressures on them to reach a plea agreement with the government will be intense.    Paul J. Curran, Mr. Freeman's lawyer, said, &quot;We are looking forward to pleading not guilty, going to trial and dealing with the charges.&quot; Stanley S. Arkin, Mr. Wigton's lawyer, called the indictment of his client an &quot;injustice,&quot; and said Mr. Wigton &quot;will be found innocent.&quot; Andrew M. Lawler, the lawyer for Mr. Tabor, denied the charges and said &quot;we expect to go to trial and be fully exonerated.&quot;    A spokesman for Goldman Sachs noted that Mr. Freeman has been with Goldman Sachs since 1970. The spokesman added that &quot;we know him and trust him. Based on all we know now, we continue to believe he did not act illegally. We are as anxious as the prosecutors for the truth to prevail. We hope that all will reserve judgment until after trial.&quot; Goldman Sachs has been paying Mr. Freeman's legal expenses.    Yesterday's indictments added little that wasn't already known about the government's case against the three men. However, the government, confirming reports in this newspaper, charged for the first time that Mr. Freeman traded on inside information for Goldman Sachs's arbitrage account and for family and trust accounts he controlled.    The indictment charged that he earned &quot;substantial amounts of money&quot; for Goldman Sachs, himself and his family. When the three defendants were arrested and charged last February, the government alleged only that Mr. Freeman traded in his personal account.    If Mr. Freeman is convicted, lawyers said that Goldman Sachs could be forced to disgorge any illegal trading profits earned by the firm.    The indictments referred only to two previously disclosed instances of alleged insider trading involving securities of Unocal and Storer Communications Inc. Mr. Freeman allegedly leaked details of a stock buyback by Unocal to Mr. Siegel. Mr. Siegel allegedly passed on the information to Messrs. Wigton and Tabor, who are said to have traded in Unocal options for Kidder Peabody's account.    Mr. Siegel allegedly leaked confidential details of a takeover bid for Storer to Mr. Freeman. The indictment charged that Mr. Freeman traded in Storer stock, but it didn't say for whose account.    Unocal was a Goldman Sachs investment banking client, and Storer was a Kidder Peabody investment banking client.    In both instances, the indictments said the trading took place at different times from those cited by the government in its earlier complaints.    The complaint issued by the government in February charged that Kidder Peabody's arbitrage department traded Unocal options in or around April 1985; the indictment says that the trades occurred between May 15 and May 17, 1985. Similarly, the February complaint charged that Mr. Freeman traded Storer stock in April 1985, while the indictment alleged that this took place in December 1985.    The abbreviated indictments suggest that the government continues to shroud its insider-trading investigation in the maximum possible secrecy. As reported in this newspaper, the government has evidence suggesting that Mr. Freeman engaged in massive trading in stocks that later became targets of takeover bids. The government is also understood to have examined numerous stocks that were the subject of trading by Kidder Peabody's arbitrage department.    Moreover, the government has said that Mr. Siegel, who is cooperating in the ongoing investigation, isn't the only witness in its case against Mr. Freeman.    The case began in February with the dramatic arrest of the three men and the handcuffing of Mr. Wigton. It has come to be viewed as a crucial battle in which the fates of two prestigious Wall Street firms and the reputations of government prosecutors hang in the balance.    Though yesterday's indictments were widely expected, a number of employees at Goldman Sachs and Kidder Peabody were described by co-workers as dejected. One Goldman Sachs employee said co-workers &quot;genuinely believe&quot; that the government doesn't have a case, and thought it wouldn't press charges. </TEXT></DOC>