<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870605-0135 </DOCNO><HL> ---By Claudio G. Segre</HL><DD> 06/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   What was Italy's experience with the Holocaust? Did the Italians, who had a long history of toleration and virtually no tradition of anti-Semitism, behave any better toward their fellow Jewish citizens (and thousands of Jewish refugees who sought asylum in Italy) than other nationalities?    A study of the period by American historian Susan Zuccotti, &quot;The Italians and the Holocaust: Persecution, Rescue, Survival&quot; (Basic Books, 334 pages, $19.95) and Dan Vittorio Segre's recently translated &quot;Memoirs of a Fortunate Jew: An Italian Story&quot; (Adler andamp; Adler, 273 pages, $16.95) shed welcome light on a neglected corner of the war against the Jews.    In her remarkably evenhanded study, Ms. Zuccotti concludes, on the basis of archival research and dozens of interviews with survivors and rescuers, that in Italy &quot;worthy behavior outweighed the unworthy.&quot; Nevertheless, the Holocaust in Italy was, according to her, &quot;a twisted legacy -- a blend of courage and cowardice, nobility and degradation, self-sacrifice and opportunism.&quot;    The persecution of the Jews, she makes clear, was not something imposed on Mussolini or on Fascism by the Nazis. It was an official policy, sanctioned by the Italian government; Italian bureaucrats and police implemented it, especially the vicious laws passed under the puppet Salo Republic in December 1943.    High churchmen, including Pius XII, failed to speak out clearly against persecution of the Jews; but so, for different reasons, did the leaders of the Roman Jewish community, who might have warned community members and destroyed membership lists. On the other hand, rescuers turned up in the most unlikely places. The author recounts dozens of stories of lower clergy -- even chaplains in the most fanatic Fascist organizations -- who sheltered Jews.    Ms. Zuccotti also explores the options available to Jews who plotted to escape the Holocaust. Was it better to seek remote villages in the countryside? (No. Local residents immediately noticed strangers.) How difficult was it to flee across the Swiss border and how much did it cost? (A lot. Guides charged from 5,000 to 9,000 lire for each individual; the average daily wage of an industrial worker in 1944 was about 45 lire.)    Fifteen percent of the Jewish population perished in camps like Auschwitz. Italian Jews had one of the highest survival rates in Europe, the author points out, for a number of reasons.    There were only 47,000 Jews in Italy at the beginning of the war, or about 0.1% of a population of 45 million. They were highly assimilated. The period of their persecution was relatively short compared with Eastern Europe. And they benefited from the war weariness of their countrymen and from Italian resentment of the German occupation.    Ms. Zuccotti tells her story fairly and carefully, without false rhetoric or sentimentality, in the tradition of the best writing about the Holocaust. The book is studded with dozens of anecdotes and stories -- many of them heartbreaking, others full of ironies and black humor. Ms. Zuccotti's book will remain a standard history for years to come.    Still, readers hankering for more of the flavor of life than Ms. Zuccotti's general approach permits, can turn to Israeli diplomat and journalist Dan Vittorio Segre's memoir.    Mr. Segre (no relation to me) grew up in a highly assimilated patriotic family in the northern region of Piedmont. He was typical of the middle-class Jews Ms. Zuccotti discusses in her early chapters. He escaped the Holocaust in 1939, emigrating at the age of 16 to Palestine. There he worked on a kibbutz, then joined the British army's propaganda services division for the duration of the war.    In a brilliant and often breathtaking juggling act, Mr. Segre manages to tell his own story, provide a critical history of Italian Jewry under Fascism, offer vivid glimpses of Israel in the pre-independence period, and comment on the great moral problems of our time. He also entertains. The book is worth reading just for the humorous parts.    Mr. Segre is steeped in the learning of the Jewish sages who loved paradoxes and ironies. In this book things are never what they seem -- beginning with the title, &quot;Memoirs of a Fortunate Jew.&quot; Mr. Segre was indeed fortunate. He escaped the Holocaust in Europe and survived to build the modern state of Israel. But at what price?    Is he proud of the Jewish state he helped build and of the Jewish heritage he personally reclaimed at great sacrifice? Apparently so, but ultimately he is elusive. Most readers will wonder where he really stands as they wrestle with this prickly, disquieting, yet immensely rewarding and entertaining book.    ---   Mr. Segre teaches history at the University of Texas at Austin. </TEXT></DOC>