<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870129-0029 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> MDESTEXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Reagan administration is struggling to revive a tough anti-terrorism policy in the face of an escalating round of kidnappings in Lebanon and in the wake of revelations that the U.S. secretly sold arms to Iran in a vain attempt to win the release of American hostages.    So far, the administration's actions have been measured. The State Department, warning of &quot;imminent peril&quot; to U.S. citizens in Lebanon, invalidated American passports for traveling or remaining in Lebanon. And the Defense Department has moved the aircraft carrier Nimitz eastward in the Mediterranean Sea to a position south of the islands of Cyprus and Crete, Pentagon sources said.    But senior administration officials told reporters yesterday that they are considering military action against terrorist targets in Lebanon if any American currently held hostage is killed. The officials were careful to say that President Reagan and his top advisers haven't decided whether to retaliate against the Shiite Moslem fundamentalists who are believed to be holding the hostages, and that such a decision probably won't be made unless one of the hostages is killed.    &quot;No hard and fast decision has been made, but our patience is at an end,&quot; a senior official said. &quot;We've tried every method of dealing with these people, including international action, and nothing has worked.&quot;    Such public saber rattling could be an effort to begin preparations for possible military action in Lebanon, much as the administration threatened Col. Moammar Gadhafi for five years before finally bombing Libya in April. On the other hand, the talk of military action could be an attempt to intimidate the kidnappers and to convince the American people, European allies and Arab moderates that, despite its secret Iran policy, Washington still means to get tough with terrorists.    In a background briefing for reporters, a senior administration official called the movements of American ships &quot;a precautionary measure.&quot;    &quot;The current posture of our forces is not a threat to anyone,&quot; the official said. &quot;It's a preparatory -- it's a contingency-measure.&quot;    But senior officials said the administration's top counterterrorism experts have met several times this week to discuss possible military action against Iranian-backed terrorists in Lebanon if any American currently held hostage is killed. The administration's Interagency Group on Terrorism, headed by the State Department's top counterterrorism official, L. Paul Bremer, also met Tuesday and again yesterday to consider the administration's options, officials said.    Sources said there is a growing consensus within the administration that the U.S. has little alternative but to strike back quickly if one of the hostages is killed. White House officials, the sources said, desperately want to prove that President Reagan still is taking a tough stand against terrorism, and his advisers are convinced that military force is the only language the kidnappers understand.    &quot;The terrorists' heads are about 18 feet in diameter now,&quot; argues one official. &quot;They've got the United States, France, and Italy humbled and the West Germans are vacillating. I think they've lost touch with reality; they don't think there are any bounds to their power.&quot;    Three American teachers and an Indian professor who is a U.S. resident alien were kidnapped Saturday in Beirut. Two West Germans were kidnapped Jan. 19 and Jan. 21. About two dozen foreigners are believed to be held hostage in Lebanon.    Despite the administration's desire to strike a blow against terrorists after its Iran arms debacle and the new wave of kidnappings in Lebanon, officials concede that an attack remains militarily and politically risky. It could lead to the deaths of more American or foreign hostages, or could kill innocent civilians with whom the terrorists mingle, one official said.    Intelligence sources said a possible target for American planes or missiles is the Sheikh Abdullah barracks in Lebanon's Bekaa Valley, which is used by Iranian revolutionary guards and by members of the Shiite terrorist group Hezbollah.    U.S. and European intelligence officials believe Hezbollah is responsible for the kidnappings of hostages Terry Anderson and Thomas Sutherland, the 1985 hijacking of a Trans World Airlines jet, and for the most recent kidnappings in Beirut.    However, bombing targets in the Bekaa Valley could provoke a confrontation between the U.S. and Syria, another official said. One terrorist target in the valley is literally across the street from the headquarters of Syrian air force intelligence in the town of Baalbek, U.S. officials noted, and most of eastern Lebanon is protected by Syrian antiaircraft missiles.    Another possible target, the sources said, is a prison in Moslem West Beirut where U.S. intelligence officials believe some American hostages may have been held in the past. U.S. officials believe the hostages are no longer in the prison or in the Bekaa Valley, but are being held at different locations around the Lebanese capital.    The U.S. bombed targets in Libya in April after it intercepted Libyan diplomatic communications revealing that the Libyans had ordered the bombing of a West Berlin discotheque. But it hasn't retaliated for the 1985 torture and slaying of hostage William Buckley, the CIA station chief in Lebanon, or for the slaying of hostage Peter Kilburn, whom U.S. intelligence sources believe was killed after the U.S. attack by a Libyan intelligence officer stationed in Damascus.    In the past, Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger and the Joint Chiefs of Staff have questioned the wisdom of taking military action against terrorist targets. They have argued that intelligence on terrorists' whereabouts is incomplete and sometimes flawed, and that attacking Arab targets could damage relations with moderate Arab states.    The latest rash of kidnappings in Lebanon began after the Jan. 13 arrest in West Germany of Mohammed Ali Hamadi, who is suspected of participating in the TWA hijacking in June 1985 in which a U.S. serviceman was slain. Yesterday, as it invalidated U.S. passports for travel to the war-torn country, the State Department said that &quot;events of the past few days have demonstrated that private citizens have neither sufficient information to evaluate the threat against them, nor the means to protect themselves&quot; in Lebanon.    The department granted U.S. citizens already in Lebanon a 30-day exemption to allow them time to depart without violating U.S. law. A similar exemption was granted for families of hostages. The department said violators of the restrictions would be subject to prosecution.    In congressional testimony Tuesday, Secretary of State George Shultz estimated that there are about 1,500 U.S. citizens in Lebanon, mostly Lebanese with dual citizenship. While the State Department action would limit their use of U.S. passports, they still could travel on their Lebanese passports. </TEXT></DOC>