<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871228-0028 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   ISRAEL SAID its military would again use deadly force to quell Arab unrest.    Israeli Defense Minister Rabin and Foreign Minister Peres said that if renewed violence flares in the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, Israeli troops reserve the right to use live ammunition when the situation justifies it. Israel's tactics in handling recent Palestinian unrest drew international criticism last week. At least 21 Arabs were killed in the violent disturbances, and about 1,000 Palestinians were arrested.    Palestinian prisoners appeared before Israeli military courts, and their lawyers said the Arabs were beaten in the prison and denied fair trials.    ---   REAGAN JOINED Western leaders in condemning the occupation of Afghanistan.    Marking the eighth anniversary of the Soviet invasion of the country, the president called upon the Kremlin to &quot;promptly and irrevocably&quot; withdraw its troops from Afghanistan. Other government leaders also faulted the Soviet military intervention. In Pakistan, as many as 100,000 Afghan refugees participated in anti-Soviet demonstrations, and leaders of the anti-Marxist rebels called for direct peace talks with Moscow.    The Kabul government said its forces had broken a prolonged rebel siege of the eastern garrison town of Khost following a three-week offensive.    ---   KING FAHD ACCUSED Iran of pursuing regional &quot;territorial ambitions.&quot;    As the six-nation Gulf Cooperation Council met in Riyadh to plot military strategy and diplomatic action to deter Iranian attacks on their coastlines and oil tanker routes, the Saudi Arabian monarch said Tehran's hostility was intended &quot;to expand and control and export ideas strange to our Islamic society.&quot; He urged Iran to join Arabs in attempting to &quot;liberate&quot; Jerusalem from Israeli occupation.    The Saudi foreign minister said the Persian Gulf leaders expressed support for U.N. measures to implement a cease-fire resolution in the gulf war.    ---   A Catalonian separatist group claimed responsibility for a grenade attack on a USO club in Barcelona, Spain. A U.S. sailor died of wounds suffered in the Saturday assault, and at least nine other people, including four other sailors, were injured. The attack was the second against a U.S. facility in about three months in the port city.    ---   Tamil rebels killed a Sri Lankan police officer in Batticaloa, sparking a gun battle in a crowded market. At least 25 people were killed, 18 of them civilians, residents of the port city said. In India, the death toll rose to at least 63 from suicides and riots that broke out in a Tamil community after its top leader died last week.    ---   The Reagan administration suspended duty-free status for some exports from Chile because of the Santiago government's treatment of union organizers and workers. Chile's suspension from the U.S. program of trade preferences affects products representing about $60 million of Chile's $800 million of annual exports.    ---   Malaysia issued two-year detention orders to the leader and six other members of the country's chief opposition party, sources said. The officials, members of the Malaysian parliament, were arrested under the Internal Security Act in a crackdown that began Oct. 27, during which 106 Malaysians were arrested.    ---   Dissident youths in South Korea clashed with riot police in downtown Seoul to protest what they called fraudulent presidential elections. About 2,500 youths denounced the government, burned effigies symbolizing the U.S. and President-elect Roh and demanded that the results of the Dec. 16 balloting be declared &quot;null and void.&quot;    ---   Police in South Africa said at least eight blacks were killed, 43 arrested and 22 homes set ablaze in factional unrest in the Durban-Pietermartizburg area. Bishop Tutu blamed the weekend fighting on government refusal to grant rights to blacks. Meanwhile, Pretoria reported an &quot;outbreak of harmony&quot; at newly integrated beaches in Durban.    ---   Pakistani authorities said shops were closed in Islamabad to protest three car bombs that killed a man and injured at least 40 others. The Saturday evening blasts were the latest in a series that have killed more than 200 people in Pakistan this year, but were the first in central Islamabad.    ---   Pravda criticized a growing number of private Soviet organizations and clubs advocating liberalization, warning that Moscow isn't moving toward Western-style democracy. The official Communist Party newspaper urged the groups to curb what it called anti-state activities and conform to the country's &quot;communist ideals.&quot;    ---   A winter storm hit the western Plains, dropping more than a foot of snow and prompting the closure of Denver's airport and interstate highways. Thousands of travelers were stranded by the storm, which was expected to produce only flurries.    ---   Philippine military officials said government and communist rebel forces renewed fighting after a Christmas truce. At least five guerrillas were killed and five soldiers wounded in two separate encounters. </TEXT></DOC>