<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871223-0172 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor:Pity the Poor Animals</HL><DD> 12/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Stanford University President Donald Kennedy, in a broadside against the Palo Alto Humane Society and the animal rights movement in general (editorial page, Oct. 29), calls us &quot;anti-science . . . believers in astrology and the efficacy of pyramids in promoting health&quot; and portrays us as the Mme. Lafarge of cystic fibrosis sufferers and AIDS patients.    Such words reveal either egregious bad faith or a lack of understanding so profound as to be particularly disturbing in a man who heads one of the country's largest research institutions -- institutions that will have to come to intelligent terms with the growing number of people who question the ethics of animal use in research.    What triggered Mr. Kennedy's ire was that we were instrumental in obliging Stanford to develop environmental impact reports (EIRs) on two new buildings to be used in recombinant DNA research. In this we had the support of California's Environmental Quality Act and the Board of Supervisors in Santa Clara County. There was a shared realization that in this age of Love Canal, Bhopal and Chernobyl, all the wondrous new technologies of the last half century have carried as their price the potential of disaster and that the public is owed what possible safeguards can be provided.    To Stanford these EIRs spell an intolerable delay in the fiercely competitive worlds of recombinant DNA research, which, more than any other biomedical field, holds the promise of rich financial rewards, among them lucrative patents. In his pique, Mr. Kennedy called upon other research institutions to form a regional agency intended to bypass local government bodies sensitive to their constituents' concerns -- an arrogant and transparent ploy to circumvent the normal democratic channels that has met with a most tepid reception from its potential participants.    If Stanford is infuriated by the EIRs it now has to present, it was hoist by its own petard. We might never have learned of their omission had we not first discovered that, in contrast to the university's soothing public relations on its tender concern for its animals, it had been, in reality, aggressively lobbying against implementation of the Dole-Brown bill, passed into law in 1985, to amend the federal Animal Welfare Act, which &quot;protects&quot; the estimated 70 million lab animals used per year in the U.S.    There is no sentient group on earth more victimized and more bereft of legal protection than animals. Since research institutions are specifically exempt from state anti-cruelty statutes, the AWA -- underfunded, essentially unenforced, and not even applicable to some 90% of research animals (chiefly rats and mice) -- is all they have.    Stanford, rich and mighty -- it sits on over $10 billion in assets and is presently conducting a $1.1 billion fund-raising campaign -- opposed such small improvements as better care and housing for dogs and primates, more humane methods of euthanasia and even as seemingly anodyne a requirement as thorough literature searches to obviate needlessly duplicative research projects. And it has, alone among San Francisco Bay Area research organizations, categorically excluded any avenue of accountability, such as meaningful participation in its oversight committee, to the public that pays liberally for its research.    Despite some heavy rhetoric on the inviolate sanctity of medical research, it is just possible that money is the first name of the game. The National Institutes of Health alone are giving Stanford $107.3 million this fiscal year. Add to that the 73% that Stanford collects for indirect cost recovery and you have $185.63 million just for 1987 (a sum that has more than doubled, incidentally, in the five years since Stanford lost its accreditation for failure to comply with NIH guidelines on animal care).    That 73% constitutes an essential chunk of the university's annual operating budget. In quest of it Stanford engages in a huge amount of tax-supported research devoid of applicability to human health problems but left unmentioned by Mr. Kennedy -- such as the $3.5 million NIH grant Stanford presently enjoys for a study simulating human day care conditions in monkeys (while human day care goes begging); another study, separately funded, that measures by heart puncture the degree of terror experienced by monkeys exposed to the overhead presence of a live boa constrictor; and so on down the line, comprising innumerable projects repeated ad nauseam or disguised as &quot;basic science,&quot; the understanding of whose futility may be less readily accessible to the lay public.    This is exactly the kind of research targeted for extinction by animal rights activists. The possibility of its eventual demise -- a potential tax saving, incidentally, of billions nationally -- strikes terror into the heart of the biomedical establishment whose comfortable existence has come to depend on the government's open-handed support of just such research.    The animal rights movement, like all movements with a powerful moral base, is here to stay. It can only grow as public awareness grows of the massive exploitation of a constituency that cannot act or speak for itself and whose chief qualification for its role is all too often its very defenselessness. Hostile outbursts like Mr. Kennedy's against people who struggle, in William James' words, &quot;to protect the rights of the helpless,&quot; will not arrest the thrust for a more honest, fiscally responsible, genuinely scientific and ethical system of research.    Helen Hooper McCloskey   President   Lise Giraud   Member, Board of Directors   Palo Alto Humane Society   Palo Alto, Calif.</TEXT></DOC>