<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881006-0170 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint: U.S. No Longer Has the World on a String </HL><AUTHOR> Hodding Carter III </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FORGN FREST JAPAN EUROP </CO><IN> BNK MON </IN><TEXT>   While the presidential candidates studiously avoid giving a hint that either one has a vision of the future larger than a two-line slogan, the stores are already full of books predicting what life will be like in a &quot;post-Reagan&quot; world. Implicit in most of these volumes, and too much of the current political dialogue, is the assumption that the U.S. is the defining nation in the international arena.    What should be obvious, but isn't, is that the world is full of nations and people who don't buy the notion. What will be extremely obvious to the next president is that objective reality doesn't support the notion either.    The headlines out of Moscow over the weekend are indicative. As Mikhail Gorbachev consolidates his power, the better to meet the daunting obstacles in his path at home, he expands his standing on the world stage. The Soviet Union is spinning out initiatives and offering unexpected proposals to adversaries and friends alike at a staggering rate.    Last year's startling departures in arms negotiations by the Soviets are matched by new ones at the United Nations and with individual nations. Half of the Soviet troops have been withdrawn from Afghanistan while Soviet diplomats propose a United Nations army. Summit discussions with China have been initiated. The slow journey back to full relations with Israel is well under way. Vietnam is being prodded to pull back from Kampuchea.    In each instance -- and there are many others that could be detailed -- the new Russian sophistication requires a sophisticated American response. The old formulas will not necessarily apply. If we are not very adroit, we could suddenly find ourselves in a role reversal of monumental proportions, sounding like the Russians of old by repeatedly saying nyet to ideas that are compelling if not irresistible to some of our best friends.    In another arena, the U.S. has managed recently to look unpleasantly hypocritical and distinctly ill-tempered in dealing with an interesting Japanese idea for alleviating Third World debt. What was important about the Japanese plan, sprung last week, was less its details than its very existence, however.    Put simply, Japan has been a reluctant addition to the rank of world leaders. As its economic success mounted, it tried with equal success to enjoy the benefits and assume few of the responsibilities of its new standing. Conversely, successive American administrations devoted considerable energy to trying to persuade each new Japanese leader to do more, particularly in the field of foreign assistance.    Now, almost overnight, Japan is responding with mounting visibility, but is also serving notice that it intends to offer guidance as well as yen. Since no one has a monopoly on wisdom, it is inevitable that a more assertive Japan (which holds billions of dollars of a profligate America's debts) will not jump every time the U.S. says frog.    Petulant anger is not the reaction most likely to win converts to our point of view, but public perturbation about the unwanted Japanese independence has marked too many American pronouncements of late.    In Europe, the long evolution toward a true common market is expected to come full term in four years. That united European economic entity will be larger than our own and also little inclined to give way simply because we demand it. While Europe and the U.S. share common values and heritage, they alone will not be enough to overcome the strains of divergent economic interests.    Invoking the slogans of the Atlantic Alliance will not suffice, either, because few Europeans believe that the formulas of the 1940s will suffice as the 21st century approaches.    Instead, an America that can no longer both propose and dispose will have to rely more on its ideas and diplomacy than its economic and military muscle. Whether in redesigning the European relationship, dealing successfully with the economic challenge posed by Japan or constructively responding to the new kind of competition offered by Gorbachev's Soviet Union, the next president will find little guidance in accounts of the past eight years -- or the past 18 for that matter.    Which is not necessarily a cause for alarm. All the world's major players are having to feel their way in the rapidly changing economic and political environment we all inhabit. If it's a new situation for the U.S., it's new for everyone else as well. Creative thinking and intelligent leadership are required in ways unmatched since the 1940s, which ought to be an exciting, rather than frightening, prospect.    Nostalgia for the simpler days of American hegemony, real or imagined, will simply impede the work ahead, as will all attempts to reimpose it. Hard as it may be to swallow, there are going to be few unilateral answers to the multiple challenges ahead. </TEXT></DOC>