<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870930-0077 </DOCNO><HL> Kathleen Warwick Resigns SEC PostIn New York After Months of Turmoil---By Thomas E. Ricks and Bryan BurroughStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> WNEWSSECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><TEXT>   The Securities and Exchange Commission moved to end months of turmoil in its important New York office by accepting the resignation of Kathleen Warwick, the head of that office.    The change isn't expected to alter the policies of the office significantly, but will likely improve its efficiency.    Ms. Warwick couldn't be reached for comment, and reports on the nature of her exit differed. Some sources familiar with SEC's recent review of her performance said they understand she was asked to resign by David Ruder, the agency's new chairman. Others said that Ms. Warwick and Mr. Ruder agreed after some discussion that she should leave the agency.    The rift in the New York office -- the SEC's most important post outside Washington -- presented Mr. Ruder with his first big in-house problem. Less than a week after Mr. Ruder was sworn in as chairman in early August, this newspaper reported that growing dissension between the New York office's enforcement personnel and Ms. Warwick had led to demoralization among important SEC attorneys and investigators handling insider-trading cases.    Even before the rift became public, some attorneys in the SEC's enforcement division in Washington had raised questions about Ms. Warwick's management of insider-trading cases and other matters.    James Clarkson, currently the SEC's director of regional office operations, yesterday was named acting head of the New York office, while William McLucas, an associate director of enforcement who has been active in the agency's recent crackdown on insider trading, was named acting head of the office's enforcement operations. The latter position had been vacant since early August, when Anne Flannery resigned from the post after a series of disagreements with Ms. Warwick, according to SEC staff members.    Both Mr. McLucas and Gary Lynch, chief of the SEC's enforcement division, said the changes wouldn't alter the scope or direction of the agency's pending actions against insider trading. &quot;I'm not going to go up there and shake things up,&quot; said Mr. McLucas. &quot;They've got great people and good cases.&quot;    But an elated New York staff member said the new situation would at the very least improve the office's morale and efficiency. &quot;You will see immediate improvement in terms of productivity,&quot; he said. &quot;Things will speed up a little.&quot;    Ms. Warwick's short tenure was marked by controversy from the start. When she was appointed last November by then-Chairman John Shad, sources said, she was jumped over a list of five finalists chosen by a special SEC search committee. Mr. Shad, now U.S. ambassador to the Netherlands, couldn't be reached for comment.    At least once this year, agency sources said, Ms. Warwick's management decisions prompted a meeting between her and Mr. Shad.    Turmoil with the New York office has led to delays in several other insider-trading investigations handled by the office, staff members have said. These staffers blamed the delays on an inability to communicate with Ms. Warwick and a perception that the administrator wasn't interested in pursuing further insider cases. As a result, several senior officials in the office were known to be seeking jobs elsewhere.    The final straw may have been Ms. Warwick's tabling of a major insider-trading investigation related to the so-called Yuppie Five case, which involved a group of young lawyers and investment bankers. Shortly thereafter, the SEC named a team of three senior agency officials to review the New York office's operations. Not long after that, the probe was reopened.    Agency sources said the SEC review team recently delivered an oral report to Mr. Ruder. None of the three members of the team would comment on that report, or on any other aspect of the Warwick matter. Mr. Ruder couldn't be reached for comment.    It isn't clear who will eventually be named to preside over the New York offfice, which has about 200 staff members, including 40 attorneys in the enforcement division.    Among those who might be considered are the five candidates passed over last fall. Sources said the five are: Ms. Flannery, the enforcement officer who resigned last month; David Denton, associate U.S. attorney in Manhattan; Michael Blane, senior counsel for Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. in London; and two senior administrators still in the SEC's New York office, Charles Padgett and Edwin Nordlinger.    Of the five, three couldn't be reached for comment and Mr. Nordlinger and Mr. Denton declined to comment.    ---   Bruce Ingersoll contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>