<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870601-0008 </DOCNO><HL> Fed's Volcker Is Likely to Be ReappointedIf He Wants, White House Aide Indicates---By Ellen Hume and Gerald SeibStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EXECUTIVE (EXE)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A senior White House official indicated that Paul Volcker is likely to be asked to stay on -- if he wants to -- as chairman of the Federal Reserve Board after his term expires in August.    When asked about predictions that Mr. Volcker will be reappointed, the official said: &quot;I wouldn't try to lead you off that.&quot; He emphasized, however, that &quot;one of the major factors involved is what Volcker wants to do. The chairman has not yet talked to the president and expressed it.&quot;    The remarks by the high-ranking official, who insisted on anonymity, are a strong signal that the White House is interested in reappointing Mr. Volcker. There has been speculation that although Mr. Volcker's inclination is to retire from the Fed, he would agree to stay on if Mr. Reagan appeals to him to do so. Mr. Volcker declines to discuss his plans.    Mr. Reagan has had more than one conversation with advisers about the reappointment decision, even though his aides have declined to say so publicly. In his most recent public comments on the Fed, Mr. Reagan suggested an important factor is whether Mr. Volcker wants to keep the job.    &quot;We haven't even met or discussed that as yet,&quot; the president told a group of foreign journalists last week. &quot;I know that I'm going to be faced with that decision down the road, or perhaps he has a decision he wants to make himself. I don't know. But we just haven't made a decision.&quot;    Those comments stirred concern in financial markets, where some interpreted them as meaning Mr. Volcker might not stay on. The senior official's subsequent comments, made during an interview on the coming Venice economic summit, may have been designed to allay that concern.    The decision will be made by a small inner-circle group consisting probably of only the president, Treasury Secretary James Baker, Chief of Staff Howard Baker and Mr. Volcker. Officials declined to speculate when the decision would be made but didn't anticipate any announcement before the economic summit in Venice, Italy, next week.    Other officials have warned this high-level group that time is running out if they want to pick someone other than Mr. Volcker because of cumbersome security and background checks that would be required for the successor. These officials think the fact that the president hasn't picked someone else by now signals the likelihood that Mr. Volcker will be reappointed.    Administration insiders have speculated that the White House might prefer to get rid of Mr. Volcker on the theory that he is too independent and wouldn't hesitate to raise interest rates during the 1988 election campaign. Some Reagan loyalists contend that the president ought to name his own man; Mr. Volcker originally was appointed by President Carter.    But with all the financial turmoil in recent weeks, Reagan advisers have become increasingly convinced that it is desirable to retain Mr. Volcker for his unparalleled credibility on Wall Street and in foreign financial capitals. There has been some talk that because other industrialized countries would welcome another Volcker term, the U.S. might announce the reappointment during the Venice summit.    The White House official's carefully worded comments on the reappointment suggest that the Fed chief has expressed some reluctance to stay on. Earlier this year, Mr. Volcker was quoted in the Washingtonian magazine as saying that staying on for a third term &quot;ain't my life's ambition&quot; because of the financial and personal strains of his $89,500-a-year job.    Mr. Volcker's wife lives in New York, and she is said to strongly favor his retirement from the Fed. But it seems clear that Mr. Volcker hasn't ruled out accepting another four-year term. If he had, he probably would have informed the White House by now so that the administration could find a successor.    Friends and associates of the Fed chief have speculated in recent weeks that he would agree to stay on only if President Reagan asked him directly, with an appeal to Mr. Volcker's sense of public service and approval of his performance.    Such a request from the president would endow the Fed chief with a new political mandate. Mr. Volcker has been at odds with the Reagan administration over some monetary and regulatory issues, and his sway over the board has been diminished in recent years. In February 1986, for example, four Reagan appointees on the seven-member board outvoted the chairman and two others to cut interest rates. The Fed chief almost resigned after the initial vote, but later the same day a compromise was struck.    Since that episode, Mr. Volcker and the Reagan appointees have developed a high degree of unity on monetary issues, but the chairman continues to find himself at odds with the administration over banking regulation. He long has advocated placing sharp restrictions on limited-service banks, also called nonbank banks, while the administration opposes the curbs. Mr. Volcker also is reluctant to go as far as the administration in granting banks new authority to underwrite securities; three of the Reagan appointees on the Fed outvoted Mr. Volcker earlier this year on one such regulatory matter.    The chances of Mr. Volcker's reappointment have swung from almost negligible to very high. When Donald Regan, who disliked Mr. Volcker, was chief of staff at the White House, administration officials said the president wouldn't ask Mr. Volcker to stay unless a financial-market crisis forced him to do so. The Fed chief is held in high esteem on Wall Street.    But Mr. Regan resigned in the wake of the Iran-Contra scandal and was succeeded by former Sen. Baker, an acknowledged admirer of Mr. Volcker. Speculation began growing that the White House would urge Mr. Volcker to stay on, and the odds of reappointment appeared to improve dramatically when the dollar plunged, interest rates rose and global-debt problems worsened.    If Mr. Volcker decides against staying, other frequently mentioned candidates for the post are the economist Alan Greenspan; E. Gerald Corrigan, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of New York; Fed Vice Chairman Manuel Johnson; Secretary of State George Shultz and his deputy, John Whitehead; Treasury Secretary Baker; and Treasury Undersecretary George Gould. </TEXT></DOC>