<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880222-0078 </DOCNO><HL> Beware the Tyranny of the Senate </HL><AUTHOR> Robert F. Turner </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST EUROP </CO><IN> NUK ARO </IN><G> EXE CNG </G><TEXT>   The effort by Sens. Sam Nunn and Robert Byrd to hold the INF Treaty &quot;hostage&quot; until the president agrees to surrender his constitutional powers to interpret the nation's international treaty obligations brings to mind Thomas Jefferson's observation that the nation must be wary of the &quot;tyranny of the Legislatures.&quot;    This is but the latest round in a continuing assault on the Constitution that dates back nearly two decades. When the Supreme Court in 1983 struck down by implication the &quot;legislative veto&quot; provisions in several hundred laws -- including the controversial 1973 War Powers Resolution -- because they infringed upon the independent constitutional power vested by the people in the president, Congress essentially thumbed its nose at the high court. A recent survey by a Library of Congress scholar identified more than 100 &quot;legislative vetoes&quot; that have been enacted into law since the mechanism was held to be unconstitutional.    Now Senate Democratic leaders -- particularly Sens. Nunn and Byrd -- have reportedly informed Secretary of State George Shultz in an angry letter that they will hold up Senate consideration of the INF Treaty if the president refuses to concede ultimate authority to the Senate to &quot;interpret&quot; treaties. In essence, they are telling the president that his effort to reduce nuclear armaments and enhance the prospects for world peace will be held hostage if he refuses to acquiesce to further encroachments upon his constitutional powers.    The senators misunderstand the constitutional separation of powers regarding the making, interpretation and implementation of treaties, and they misunderstand the process of determining international treaty obligations. As a matter of settled constitutional law, the Senate neither &quot;makes&quot; nor &quot;ratifies&quot; treaties. The Senate possesses what Jefferson, in the first Senate Rules Manual, characterized as a &quot;negative&quot; (i.e., veto) over a treaty negotiated by the president or his agent. More recently, such respected constitutional scholars as Edwin Corwin have also described this Senate power as a &quot;veto.&quot;    In 1790, Jefferson wrote: &quot;The transaction of business with foreign nations is executive altogether. It belongs then to the head of that department, except as to such portions of it as are specially submitted to the Senate. Exceptions are to be construed strictly.&quot; In his first Pacificus letter in June 1793, Alexander Hamilton described the president as &quot;the interpreter of the National Treaties in those cases in which the Judiciary is not competent, that is in the cases between Government and Government.&quot;    When two weeks later, French Minister &quot;Citizen Genet&quot; threatened to appeal President Washington's interpretation of a treaty to Congress, Jefferson responded that &quot;there were very few cases indeed arising out of treaties, which {Congress} could take notice of; that the President is to see that treaties are observed.&quot; Genet inquired: &quot;If he decides against the treaty, to whom is a nation to appeal?&quot; In his subsequent account of the exchange, Jefferson wrote: &quot;I told him the Constitution had made the President the last appeal.&quot;    As early as 1801, in U.S. v. Schooner Peggy, the Supreme Court said: &quot;The execution of a treaty between nations is to be demanded from, and, in general, superintended by, the executive of each nation. . . .&quot; More recently, the president's constitutional pre-eminence in this field has been recognized by the Second Restatement of Foreign Relations Law (1972), which states in Section 149: &quot;The President of the United States, or an appropriate official acting under his authority, has the authority to determine the interpretation of an international agreement to be asserted by the United States in the conduct of its foreign relations.&quot;    A treaty is a compact between (or among) nations. Its meaning is to be found by determining the genuine shared expectations of the parties. This is done by looking at the text of the treaty and any supplementary documents agreed to by both parties; and if this proves indecisive, by considering supplementary means of interpretation such as the preparatory works or negotiating history to the agreement.    The senators are certainly right when they argue that the president may not ratify a treaty other than the one to which the Senate gave its consent (including any formal Senate amendments, reservations and declarations). But that has to do with the text and not the interpretive nuances of the agreement and associated documents.    Sens. Nunn and Byrd are alleging that every statement made by administrative witnesses (some of whom may have had little direct involvement in the negotiations themselves) becomes binding upon the U.S., and it is the subjective understanding of the Senate that establishes the true &quot;meaning&quot; of the treaty -- even if subsequent developments establish that a particular statement inadvertently did not reflect the actual agreement made by the two parties. In reality, statements made in internal national ratification processes are properly given very little weight in the business of interpreting treaties.    Consider, for a moment, the logical consequences of the senators' viewpoint. By the doctrine of reciprocity, the terms of the treaty are expected to be applied equally to all parties to the treaty (unless the treaty clearly provides otherwise).    If the Senate claims that statements made either by senators or by administration witnesses during hearings are primary factors in determining the international meaning of the treaty, it must be prepared to accept as binding any interpretation put forward during consideration of the treaty by the Supreme Soviet. By Sen. Nunn's doctrine -- which does not require that the Senate's &quot;understanding&quot; or &quot;interpretation&quot; of a treaty be communicated to the other party -- the U.S. could be held to strained interpretations agreed upon in secret by another state's legislature long after the Senate itself had consented to the ratification of the treaty.    The constitutional role of the Senate is an important but limited one. The Senate has a veto over a treaty negotiated by the president or his agent. By longstanding practice the Senate may also propose changes to a treaty. However, as a matter of international law the Senate does not actually &quot;amend&quot; or modify the treaty itself -- rather, it technically refuses to consent to the treaty that has been submitted while notifying the president in advance that he has its consent to &quot;make&quot; a treaty that incorporates the terms set forth in the Senate's resolution.    In such an instance, the president may attempt to renegotiate the treaty to incorporate the Senate's conditions -- and, if accepted by the other party, the Senate's terms become a part of the treaty. However, the president has complete discretion after the Senate has given its consent -- conditioned or otherwise -- to decide whether to proceed with the ratification of the treaty.    For the Senate to exceed its proper constitutional role in the treaty process -- as proposed by Sens. Nunn and Byrd -- not only would be another unlawful act, but in practical terms could create a confusing and even dangerous situation. First, there is the problem of establishing precisely what &quot;meaning&quot; each senator understood concerning every provision of every treaty at the time the Senate gave its consent to ratification. (From my observation, most senators do not attend treaty hearings, read committee reports on treaties, or even personally examine the texts of most proposed treaties before they are called upon to vote.) Further, many difficult questions of interpretation occur because of developments unforeseen by both the negotiators and the Senate at the time it gave its consent.    Even if those problems could be resolved, the Nunn-Byrd proposal would be a bad idea. If the president were legally required to follow the Senate's &quot;understanding&quot; of the meaning of a treaty during subsequent disputes, three possible results could occur:   --If the Senate properly understood the meaning of the treaty and its interpretation coincided with the shared expectations of the parties in light of all of the evidence, the &quot;Nunn-Byrd&quot; rule would have no effect on the treaty's meaning.    --If the Senate erred -- either out of its own ignorance or as a result of a mistake by an executive branch witness -- and underestimated the extent of the true U.S. obligation, forcing the president to follow this &quot;interpretation&quot; would make the U.S. an international lawbreaker.    --If, on the other hand (as may be the present situation), the Senate inadvertently overestimated the actual obligations of the treaty, the Nunn-Byrd rule would result in the U.S. being bound to a more restrictive course of action than would apply to the other party to the treaty. In a matter as critically important as an arms-control treaty with Moscow, that is hardly a result to be welcomed. It is, furthermore, in conflict with the expressed views of the Senate that approved ratification of the ABM Treaty in 1972. That year the Senate approved a joint resolution (signed into law as P.L. 92-448) that included a provision known as the Jackson Amendment. It formally requested the president in future arms-control negotiations to seek a treaty that would not place greater force limits on the U.S. than on the Soviet Union.    Even were there no constitutional difficulties with the Nunn-Byrd approach, it would thus still be bad policy. Nor would the senators wish to see their &quot;theory&quot; followed to its reasonable conclusion. If the most authoritative interpretation of a treaty is that understood by the Senate at the time it decides not to exercise its &quot;veto,&quot; would it not follow that the controlling interpretation of domestic laws ought to be the understanding of the president as he decides not to exercise his &quot;veto&quot; over the proposed statute?    As important as the INF Treaty is in promoting international peace and stability, it is certainly less important than the Constitution. As the late Harvard Law Prof. Charles Warren observed: &quot;In maintaining his rights against a trespassing Congress, the president defends not himself, but popular government; he represents not himself, but the people.&quot;    ---   Mr. Turner is associate director of the Center for Law and National Security at the University of Virginia. He was a Senate staffer, 1974-79, and deputy assistant secretary of state for legislative affairs, 1984-85. </TEXT></DOC>