<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871021-0123 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Film:Thanks for the Memories---By Julie Salamon</HL><DD> 10/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   The Chuck Berry you see in &quot;Chuck Berry Hail! Hail! Rock 'n' Roll&quot; is a calculating tease and a control freak. He allows Taylor Hackford's crew to film his wife, but cuts her off before she has a chance to say much. He listens to the crew's polite questions about the time he spent in prison, but he doesn't answer them.    So this is not the inside story of the king of rock 'n' roll. For that you have to buy Mr. Berry's autobiography, an idea that surely didn't elude this shrewd operator. In fact, part of the fun of &quot;Hail! Hail!&quot; is watching Mr. Berry not answer questions, watching him construct the image that he wants homage paid to.    And this entertaining documentary is a homage, built around Mr. Berry's 60th birthday party last year in the restored glamour of St. Louis's Fox Theater. The movie is worth seeing for the concert alone, watching Mr. Berry's fierce, joyous energy and his star-studded backup band and guests including Linda Ronstadt, Keith Richards, Eric Clapton and Julian Lennon.    But this isn't a pure concert film. Mr. Hackford interviewed other old-time rockers about Mr. Berry. Bo Diddley, the Everly Brothers, Bruce Springsteen and Roy Orbison are among the talking heads who tell anecdotes that are reverential -- and amusing.    Mr. Springsteen recalls playing backup years ago for Mr. Berry, who likes his concerts to be one-night stands so he can travel light. Mr. Berry arrived on stage five minutes before the concert began, then left it to the band he'd barely met to figure out what songs he was playing. Such spontaneity could be taken as arrogance, but he was Chuck Berry, so who was going to argue?    Keith Richards, looking as though somebody walked on him, edgily explains what it's like to work with Mr. Berry. He's clearly frustrated by Mr. Berry's methods, by the way he had everyone rehearse the big concert for 10 days and then, on opening night, he decided to play in a different key entirely.    Above all, there is Mr. Berry, lean, handsome and crafty. He talks about himself and his music coolly. He's a businessman, he says, who figured out what would sell. That's all, he says. But he does allow a hint of bitterness to show about the way he and other black musicians weren't allowed to profit fully from their music.    And during the filmed rehearsals, he isn't the good-time fellow you see in concert at all. He's a perfectionist who isn't very interested in anyone else's idea of perfection.    But watching this lithe 60-year-old up there on stage, duck walking and shimmying his way through terrific songs that are a couple of generations old, it's clear there is much more to the man than what he shows.    ---   &quot;The Whales of August&quot; stars Lillian Gish, Bette Davis, Ann Sothern and Vincent Price, so it shouldn't surprise anyone to hear that this is a nostalgic picture.    It's a delicate little piece about two ancient sisters who still live together in the Maine beach house where they've summered for 60 years. The picture opens with a shot of them as they might have looked way back then, young women in white dresses, scampering to the beach to watch the whales pass by.    Now, their husbands are long dead and one of them, Libby (Ms. Davis), is blind, vain and ready to die. Her sister, Sarah (Ms. Gish), is a sweet and long-suffering romantic, who remembers her wedding anniversary with a red and a white rose and who wants to build a picture window so she can watch the sea. Mr. Price plays a smooth stranger who drops in with his own memories, and Ms. Sothern is Sarah's relentlessly cheerful best friend.    Director Lindsay Anderson has kept the scope of the movie small and intimate. He's limited somewhat by the narrow confines of the David Berry play on which it is based. Very little happens as he charts the emotional progress of the sisters over the course of one summer.    Still, &quot;The Whales of August&quot; has a strong emotional pull. How can it not, when it displays the still-vibrant talents of these wonderful old actors? It's impossible to look at them and not be reminded of all the emotions they've wrung out of us before, in dozens of movies.    ---   Paul Newman watched his wife, Joanne Woodward, and Karen Allen play Amanda and Laura, respectively, in two different stage productions of &quot;The Glass Menagerie.&quot; He was so moved by their performances in the Tennessee Williams classic that he put his spaghetti sauce on the back burner, garaged his race car and decided to film the play with these two actresses.    His isn't the first filmed &quot;Glass Menagerie,&quot; but it is the best. He's been faithful to the play and generous to his actors, who are all quite wonderful. Mr. Newman has had cinematographer Michael Ballhaus shoot the play as a play, all shot within the confines of Amanda's apartment. Yet the production is remarkably fluid; Williams's lush prose pours out of the actors' mouths quite naturally.    Ms. Allen, with her strong, pretty looks, is an unusual Laura, but quite effective. Ms. Woodward plays Amanda without shrillness, as the domineering, yearning creature that she is. John Malkovich, fast becoming the current master of repressed angst, does a fine Tom. And James Naughton's Gentleman Caller is suitably poignant.    As an extraordinary number of movies open in theaters this fall, I can think of none that gave me nearly as much pleasure as &quot;The Glass Menagerie.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>