<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870827-0032 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint:Economic Success Story Has Its Costs---By Hodding Carter III</HL><DD> 08/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   There was a spate of generally good economic news last week and another lovely performance by the stock market. It all had to make the clutch of Democrats seeking their party's presidential nomination vaguely suicidal, since a warm economy inevitably casts a chill on the prospects of the political outs.    While there were enough bad-news indicators, such as declining real family income and a still massive balance-of-payments problem, to feed the political propaganda mill and warn of tough days ahead, they were largely overshadowed by the positive economic indicators. Diminished inflation, slow but steady growth, a shrinking budget deficit and the combination of falling unemployment and booming employment are just plain welcome.    But a conversation I recently had with several veteran airline employees while they were dead-heading home reminded me that something unhealthy and in the long run destructive is also at work in the economy. From their vantage point, the new American economic success story is being built in too many companies on the backs of both their employees and the public. The bottom line so beloved of stock analysts looks very good, but a cost is being incurred that will have to be paid sooner or later.    Approach it from the public's perspective. We live in what is usually called a &quot;service economy.&quot; The phrase is an oxymoron, as air travel today proves. The meals are skimpier, the legroom is shorter (unless you pay more), and the attitude of some personnel -- particularly in those airlines whose parent companies have been on an acquisition binge -- is either indifferent or rude. Costs have been cut and the huge takeover debts are being paid on schedule, but at least part of that performance is being taken out of the collective hide of the traveling public.    But that's just part of a larger picture, best illustrated by the familiar, if invidious, comparison with Japan. Service workers are simply not inspired enough by the conditions of their employment to give decent service in this country. Some of us laugh at the training methods used by the Japanese companies to teach their employees that the customer is always right, but few don't envy the result. The customer is king in Japan, and that is reflected in everything from smiling, attentive help from clerks and fast-food waitresses to repairmen whose first objective is to make the busted gizmo work rather than to pad their time sheets.    None of that just happens. The companies for which the repairmen and clerks work have to demonstrate that they are serious about their commitment to that kind of excellence, as serious as they are about showing a healthy profit every quarter. And that means they have to be serious about their commitment to the people they employ and the products they manufacture.    One of the seemingly inevitable side effects of merger mania in this country has been that the top managements of many companies could not care less about the end products of their subsidiaries. A sizable number of the bottom-line boys who today control airlines, newspaper chains and television networks, for instance, would be just as happy if they were turning out widgets, so long as their performance won plaudits on Wall Street. Indeed, many of them were turning out the equivalent of widgets before taking on their new roles, which is why the public occasionally gets the impression that it is riding on widgets rather than airplanes or is reading predigested Pablum instead of news.    A company's verbal insistence on good service and well-built products is so much hollow exhortation, however, if the company is not equally dedicated to its employees' well-being. Some of America's most notable men of industry have an attitude that is usually summarized by a variation on the following theme: &quot;We don't owe you (the workers) anything more than today's job today.&quot;    As veteran pilots and flight attendants have discovered in several recent showdowns, loyal service and competent performance aren't enough when management decides that overnight surgery is required to prove its balance sheets are under control. As the airline veterans with whom I was talking have learned to their sorrow, a favorite tactic of the new management teams is to pit classes of workers against one another -- the younger, newer employees being paid and treated as one tier and the older employees being paid and treated as another. What this does for intra-personnel relations is self-evident. What it does for loyalty up is equally obvious.    Again, the Japanese comparison is useful. Loyalty down is used to command loyalty up. The idea that everyone is in the same boat, working toward the same objective, is basic. The result, as all but the most myopic have noticed by now, is not a fat, slothful, touchy-feely group of toothless competitors, but lean and mean teams pulling together.    This has been a rough composite of what those flight attendants and pilots had to say and what should be clear to anyone who looks beyond his workbench. There is more than one way to hollow out American enterprise, and neglecting the spirit of each organization is not the least of them. The so-called &quot;English disease&quot; can be as painful here as it long was in Britain.    ---   Mr. Carter is a political commentator who heads a television production firm. </TEXT></DOC>