<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861216-0167 </DOCNO><HL> Speaking of Business:Mergers and Acquisitions Are Alive and Well---By Lindley H. Clark Jr.</HL><DD> 12/16/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><DATELINE> TUCSON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Earlier this month the Karl Eller Center at the University of Arizona's College of Business and Public Administration held its annual dialogue between businessmen and academics. The organizers work far in advance, and they hardly could have realized how newsworthy this year's topic would be.    The subject was &quot;Corporate Reorganization Through Mergers, Acquisitions and Leveraged Buyouts&quot; -- chosen long before &quot;Ivan Boesky,&quot; &quot;Dennis Levine&quot; and &quot;Drexel Burnham Lambert&quot; became household names. In case you've been out of the country lately, Mr. Boesky arranged with Mr. Levine, who was working for Drexel Burnham, to get advance information on takeover deals Drexel was handling. Mr. Boesky apparently used this inside dope to make a good deal of money in the market for himself and Mr. Levine.    Mr. Levine pleaded guilty to four felony counts. Mr. Boesky agreed to a record $100 million penalty and a guilty plea to one felony count. Both men have been cooperating with the Securities and Exchange Commission.    Neither man was among the three-dozen dialogue participants, but their names surely kept cropping up. When the scandal broke earlier this year and began to spread, there was a feeling on Wall Street that it would at least slow the takeover trend. Businessmen and academics here, however, were agreed that the trend still has a long way to go.    Perhaps the most specific comment came from Frederick B. Rentschler, executive vice president of Beatrice Companies: &quot;After we refine our balance sheet, in the first quarter we'll be back in an area where we can make specific acquisitions.&quot; This would be a change of direction for Beatrice, acquired earlier this year in a leveraged buyout by Kohlberg Kravis Roberts andamp; Co., an investment firm. Since then the company has been selling off units to pay the debt accumulated in the transaction.    Leveraged buyouts, in which investors acquire companies mainly through borrowing, have grown increasingly popular. Beatrice shed several units through leveraged buyouts, and several participants here said such &quot;second stage&quot; LBOs are going to become common.    The surge in mergers, acquisitions and buyouts stems from several causes. A prime factor has been the rise in international competition, which has forced businesses into massive restructuring if they wish to be competitive.    Sometimes the need to restructure isn't seen by the current managers of the firm. Mr. Rentschler of Beatrice, for example, says &quot;the need to reorganize at Beatrice was absolutely critical. We came in with the idea that decentralization was essential.&quot;    When an outsider decides that he knows what's best for a corporation, that can lead to a friendly merger or acquisition -- or to an unfriendly raid. Since no one has a monopoly on wisdom, it's possible the outsider is wrong. Even if he isn't, the insider may think he is -- and then fight tooth and nail to hold off the invader.    Although there was general agreement here that the major motive for mergers is economic, there was a recognition that mergers were more than selfless efforts to make the economy function more efficiently. The people who arrange these deals obviously want to know what's in it for them. If you're going to shake up a business enterprise, you may be convinced that it will work a lot better that way, but you can't be sure.    &quot;If you want managers to gamble,&quot; Michael Jensen of the Harvard Business School said, &quot;you've got to give them a chance to become really rich.&quot; In the past few years, some managers certainly have become really rich. In the process, a lot of investment bankers and investors have gotten reasonably rich.    Mergers and acquisitions really got rolling in 1965, and the reason was heavily economic. In the first two decades after World War II, the U.S. was alone among major nations in possessing an intact industrial plant. It hardly mattered how efficiently it was run; companies could sell whatever they produced at whatever price they wanted to charge. By the mid-1960s, however, Europe and Japan, with lots of U.S. help, had become competitive.    The first surge of reorganization went on until the early 1970s, when industry in the U.S. and elsewhere was distracted by oil shocks and high inflation. A new surge got under way about 1980 and is continuing.    Some people in the market are keeping a nervous eye on the Securities and Exchange Commission, whose activities at times seem to go beyond catching criminals. Some of the agency's investigations are getting into the market's methods of doing business, most of which, at least up to now, have been legal.    There was a feeling here, however, that the SEC's aggressiveness was at least partly for show. Gregg A. Jarrell, chief economist of the agency, noted that the SEC has been told by the Office of Management and Budget that its appropriation will be considerably larger than ever before. The more effective the SEC appears to be, the less likely Congress will be to pass a number of new laws to handle the situation.    &quot;The political opportunity to do harm now is very high,&quot; Mr. Jarrell said. &quot;The opportunity to do good is very low.&quot;    The Reagan administration has been trying to limit the use of antitrust laws in barring mergers aimed at improving competitiveness. Last week it got some help from the Supreme Court. The case concerned the proposed acquisition of Land O'Lakes Inc.'s Spencer Beef division by Cargill Inc.'s Excel Corp. meatpacking unit. A competitor of Excel, Montfort of Colorado Inc., sued to block the merger, and a federal court halted the takeover in 1983.    The high court, however, held that a company must show that it faces a real anti-competitive threat &quot;of the type the antitrust laws were designed to prevent,&quot; rather than simply a deteriorating economic position from more vigorous competition.    There was a good deal of conversation here about what companies can do to protect themselves from being taken over by other corporations, and the target firms didn't get a whole lot of sympathy. There was a feeling that the best defense was really a good offense -- convincing stockholders that current management was doing the best possible job. No one had a kind word for poison pills, greenmail and other devices, which may protect existing management but damage stockholders. Several participants suggested that many corporations needed more effective outside directors to protect the interests of stockholders.    The consensus was that the stockholders' interest should be paramount. Stockholders in takeover targets usually do well. Shareholders in the acquiring companies normally do less well. Why? &quot;Some of these deals are overpriced,&quot; said Harold Hammer, former chief administrative officer of Gulf Oil. Acquiring stockholders often don't do well if there is competition among prospective buyers.    So there will be a lot of suits, but corporate takeovers -- for the next year or two at least -- will roll on and on. </TEXT></DOC>