<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880816-0075 </DOCNO><HL> Keeping Secrets: GE Presses Campaign To Halt Rivals' Misuse Of Turbine-Parts Data --- Four People and Three Firms Enter Guilty Pleas So Far; A Big Civil Case Is Settled --- Sting Operations Aid Inquiry </HL><AUTHOR> William M. Carley (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GE </CO><IN> ELE </IN><G> JUS </G><DATELINE> SCHENECTADY, N.Y.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The first hint that General Electric Co.'s former employees were trying to steal company trade secrets came in a phone call to a GE salesman in the turbine division here. The caller was Carman Sanders, who had left GE for a Houston company that repairs and sells turbine parts. Mr. Sanders was fishing for technical turbine data that GE considers confidential.    After conferring with superiors, the GE salesman called Mr. Sanders back. This time, a tape recorder was running.    GE salesman: &quot;I thought I'd talk to you again and get an idea of a -- what kind of stuff you were looking for.&quot;    Mr. Sanders: &quot;Give me a drawing {of turbine parts} every once in a while. . . . {In return}, I could take care of you, get you things, or you want money?&quot;    That episode, in 1981, touched off an investigation that has spanned nearly seven years. Complete with undercover agents, sting operations and raids to recover documents, the investigation has spread well beyond Mr. Sanders to several companies and individuals. It also has led to a series of criminal and civil lawsuits.    So far, four individuals and three companies have pleaded guilty to criminal charges. And on May 6, the most important of the civil cases, brought by GE against Turbine Services Ltd., climaxed in federal court in Albany, N.Y. In a tough settlement, GE will get $5.2 million in damages, the return of hundreds of technical drawings and a slew of restrictions on Turbine Services' future activities. Moreover, GE says the settlement is worth hundreds of millions of dollars in future sales in the world-wide turbine business -- sales that would otherwise have been lost to Turbine Services. That makes it one of the biggest trade-secret cases in the annals of U.S. business.    Despite having pleaded guilty to a related criminal charge in 1986, Turbine Services denies any wrongdoing. &quot;We never stole a drawing,&quot; says Charles Mothon, a top executive at Turbine Services. Rather, he contends, GE security for its technical drawings was &quot;very loose,&quot; allowing the drawings to slip into the public domain. Turbine Services pleaded guilty to the criminal charge and settled the civil case only to avoid high legal costs, Mr. Mothon says. He adds that once Turbine Services became a major GE competitor in turbine spare parts, GE tried &quot;to force us out of business.&quot;    GE's trade-secret imbroglio isn't over. Its lawyers are preparing to sue still another company, which they won't name.    At the heart of the dispute are big steam turbines that generate electricity and smaller gas turbines that utilities use to meet surges in demand for electric power and that industry uses for such jobs as pushing gas through pipelines. To produce power, expanding steam or gas spins the turbine blades at enormous speeds. Tiny differences in the metallurgy and design of the blades and other parts -- tolerances as small as one-third the thickness of a sheet of paper -- can spell the difference between efficient performance and mechanical breakdown.    GE has poured more than $200 million into designing better turbine parts. Its design drawings contain not only the shapes of blades and other parts but also the critical tolerances and metallurgical data. The drawings, a GE attorney says, &quot;represent the sum and substance of GE's massive investment in gas and steam turbine technology.&quot; As such, they are generally marked as GE proprietary data and kept secret.    A competitor obtaining GE drawings and using them to replicate its parts can tap into a huge potential market: the thousands of GE turbines around the world requiring a constant flow of replacement parts. And without research costs, that competitor can undercut GE's prices. Turbine spare parts can cost hundreds of thousands of dollars apiece; parts sales account for nearly a third of the $1.5 billion annual turbine business.    After Mr. Sanders phoned from Houston asking the GE official for drawings in 1981, GE said it called in the Federal Bureau of Investigation, and the FBI taped the second phone conversation. The agency pursued the case, but the U.S. attorney's office in Albany, N.Y., didn't prosecute and won't comment on the reason.    Worried about a raid on its technology, GE set up its own investigative team in 1983. Members eventually included Donald Ross, the chief attorney for GE's turbine unit; Michael Hershman, the president of Fairfax Group, a corporate-security consulting firm; and Salem Katsh and Suzanne Hawkins of the New York law firm of Weil, Gotshal andamp; Manges.    The investigators tried to keep their work secret and kept most of their records in Weil Gotshal offices in New York City. Mr. Ross's office in Schenectady was swept for bugs. &quot;We didn't know who in GE might be involved,&quot; he says.    In 1984, just as the investigation began, GE got a jolt. AEG, a German manufacturer of power plants and GE licensee, landed a big Soviet turbine order, but didn't follow its usual practice of buying the high-tech spare parts from GE. This time, AEG placed a $6 million parts order with Turbine Services.    GE sales executives were astonished and suspicious, especially when an AEG test found the Turbine Services parts surprisingly close to GE's own. &quot;We asked ourselves how Turbine Services could do that, and we concluded there was only one way -- they must be getting our drawings,&quot; Mr. Ross says.    So investigators focused on Turbine Services, which is based in Ballston Spa, a town close to GE's Schenectady plant. The company was set up in the early 1970s by Mr. Mothon after he resigned as GE's director of gas turbine international sales.    Turbine Services soon ran into trouble. Acting as middleman in the sale of a GE turbine plant to Puerto Rico, Mr. Mothon suggested that GE salesmen pay a $1 million bribe to a Puerto Rican official to win the order, and Mr. Mothon delivered the bribe, according to evidence presented in federal court in Newark, N.J. After top GE officials blew the whistle, GE and Mr. Mothon were indicted on fraud charges and eventually pleaded no contest. Mr. Mothon was fined $10,000.    Now, new doubts had surfaced about Turbine Services. Mr. Hershman, one of GE's investigators, hired an undercover agent, formed a dummy company in London called &quot;Lyricgrove&quot; and began to set up a sting operation to try to learn if -- and how -- Turbine Services got GE drawings.    The sting was to involve a fake parts order from Iran. Iran was chosen, Mr. Hershman says, because it has &quot;lots of GE gas turbines requiring spare parts, but poor communications so that if anyone got suspicious, they couldn't check the authenticity of the order.&quot;    Abdollah, a 34-year-old Iranian engineer working in the U.S., was to be the undercover agent. (GE declines to disclose his last name.) Abdollah was &quot;hired&quot; in GE's engineering marketing support group in Schenectady -- the suspected source of drawing leaks. By prearrangement, Abdollah suggested that more spares could be sold to Iran if GE worked through agents he knew; Abdollah's boss disagreed. Abdollah openly became a &quot;disgruntled&quot; employee. The trap was set.    Another GE engineer in the marketing group, Thomas Tearno, approached Abdollah. He suggested that Iranian orders could be steered to Turbine Services rather than GE. Mr. Tearno introduced Abdollah to Mr. Mothon and Vincent and Ronald Riggi, brothers who also had worked at GE before joining Turbine Services. (Vincent Riggi now is the president, Mr. Mothon the vice president and Ronald Riggi the secretary-treasurer of Turbine Services.)    Abdollah said he planned to quit GE, join a London firm -- Lyricgrove -- and act as agent for parts sales to Iran. Would Turbine Services supply parts that met GE specifications? Turbine Services said it would.    During lunch in Albany's Americana Hotel, Abdollah -- carrying a tape recorder in his suit pocket -- quizzed Vincent Riggi. How, he asked, could Turbine Services duplicate GE parts without copies of GE drawings? Mr. Riggi replied: &quot;We got too big of a company to take risks of copying drawings. That's, ah, that's for the penny ante guys.&quot;    The deal proceeded in 1984, with Turbine Services supplying Lyricgrove with almost $190,000 in parts supposedly destined for Iran. To get the business, Turbine Services paid Mr. Tearno a commission. GE turned its evidence over to New York State's organized-crime task force. In May 1985, New York officials armed with search warrants raided the Turbine Services offices in Ballston Spa, confiscating financial records -- and hundreds of GE drawings. Turbine Services was charged with paying an $8,000 bribe to Mr. Tearno -- his commission -- to induce him to divert parts business from GE to Turbine Services. In July 1986, Turbine Services pleaded guilty and was fined $29,000. Mr. Tearno pleaded guilty to taking a bribe. He was fined $1,000 and fired by GE.    GE investigators, meanwhile, were pursuing the Houston lead with another sting. A sales agent working secretly for GE called on Preco Turbine Services in Houston, whose sales manager, Carman Sanders, had set off alarm bells at GE with his phone call to Schenectady.    The sales agent told Preco that he was seeking a supplier for a Mexican order for GE gas turbine parts and that he would need to show the Mexicans GE drawings of the parts as proof that the supplier could do the job right. Shortly afterwards, Mr. Sanders met in a Houston hotel with the sales agent and his &quot;Mexican representative,&quot; actually an investigator for the local prosecutor. As part of the charade, the sales agent painstakingly translated the conversation into Spanish for his &quot;Mexican&quot; partner. While a hidden camera filmed the meeting, Mr. Sanders rolled out drawings marked &quot;Proprietary information of General Electric.&quot;    Texas authorities raided Preco offices in Houston, seizing hundreds of GE drawings. Preco pleaded guilty to trade-secret theft, and a state court fined it $80,000.    GE had found out who was leaking the drawings to Preco almost by chance. One day, when the GE undercover agent asked Preco for a drawing, he was told of a snag: The man who supplied GE drawings had been in an auto accident. GE investigators promptly checked with a GE turbine repair shop in Houston and found that a GE salesman there had indeed been in an accident. When confronted, the salesman confessed and was fired.    A tantalizing -- and important -- mystery remained. The search by New York authorities in Ballston Spa had revealed that Turbine Services had GE drawings. But how was Turbine Services getting them?    The answer came -- again serendipitously -- from a former GE draftsman, Chester Barnowski. GE persuaded Mr. Barnowski to supply information to GE and to cooperate in the civil suit it was then pressing against Turbine Services. For a fee -- $3,000 a month -- he agreed.    At that time, Mr. Barnowski was acting as a sales agent for metal shops that made parts for Turbine Services. According to his affidavit filed in the civil suit, Turbine Services induced the shops, which legitimately had GE drawings to make parts for GE, to use those drawings -- illegally, GE says -- to make parts for Turbine Services. The affidavit also says the Riggis took drawings when they quit GE in the 1970s. &quot;We brought out what we could,&quot; the affidavit quotes Vincent Riggi as saying.    Mr. Barnowski also admitted procuring GE drawings for Turbine Services himself, using half a dozen contacts inside GE. A principal source, according to the affidavit, was the chief of GE's gas turbine drafting department, who was about to be promoted. (When this came to light, one GE investigator says he ran over to a GE executive, saying, &quot;You can't promote this guy.&quot; The promotion was quietly blocked, and the draftsman ultimately fired.)    In a deposition in the court in Albany, the chief draftsman denied giving drawings to Mr. Barnowski.    As camouflage, the affidavit says, Turbine Services had its own draftsman copy GE drawings onto Turbine Services forms. While cross sections of GE parts were relocated on a page, critical data -- including tolerances -- were identical. And certain Turbine Services specification numbers were simply GE numbers in reverse.    Although federal Judge Con. Cholakis in Albany had ordered both sides to turn over all relevant documents in the civil case, Turbine Services had concealed key documents, according to the Barnowski affidavit. One was a notebook with an index linking the copied Turbine Services drawings to the GE originals. Other documents were certain purchase orders kept by a Turbine Services employee, Anthony Falvo.    Last December, Mr. Barnowski telephoned Mr. Falvo and recorded the call. When he asked Mr. Falvo about a copy of a purchase order, Mr. Falvo replied: &quot;Yeah, I do have a copy. I didn't want to give it to you in front of the lawyers. I'm not supposed to have all that stuff. . . . I got it all in one book now. . . . So, I figure if I got one book, I can throw one book away if they raided me.&quot;    Mr. Barnowski gave the tape to GE investigators and lawyers, who decided on a daring approach. Without notifying the opposing lawyers, they would ask Judge Cholakis for a secret court order authorizing a search of Turbine Services for the concealed documents. The legal move was so unusual that it was cleared by attorneys at GE's headquarters in Fairfield, Conn., and by its chairman, John F. Welch Jr.    Last Feb. 4, Judge Cholakis authorized the search. That afternoon, the GE team, accompanied by four federal marshals, drove the 15 miles from Albany to Ballston Spa through a blizzard. The GE investigators were nervous. &quot;We were betting a lot on this,&quot; says Mr. Katsh, the Weil Gotshal attorney.    Guided by a map Mr. Barnowski had drawn of the Turbine Services offices, GE's Mr. Ross and Mr. Hershman strode into the building directly to Mr. Falvo's desk and retrieved the purchase orders. (Mr. Falvo, who happened to be in the washroom, didn't have a chance to throw any documents out.) Mr. Katsh and Ms. Hawkins of Weil Gotshal went to another office and got the notebook linking GE and Turbine Services drawings. (&quot;When I saw that book, I knew the case was over,&quot; Mr. Katsh recalls.)    At this point, a marshal walked into Vincent Riggi's office and yelled, &quot;He's got a machine gun.&quot; The two Weil Gotshal lawyers ducked. But the gun, which was leaning against a wall, was only a replica; it was seized by the marshal.    GE asked Judge Cholakis for a default judgment against Turbine Services for allegedly failing to produce all relevant documents. Before a hearing on the issue was held, settlement discussions began.    In interviews, Turbine Services executives say their company obtained GE drawings legitimately as a sales agent for Hitachi Ltd. of Japan, a GE licensee. They add that they legally obtained drawings from many other sources, including turbine customers, parts vendors and others. &quot;The drawings were everywhere and weren't being kept confidential,&quot; says Dennis Mondolino, the attorney for Turbine Services. As for Mr. Barnowski, any GE drawings he got were for his own benefit, Mr. Mondolino says, and weren't purloined at Turbine Services' behest. Mr. Barnowski's other allegations are &quot;complete fabrications,&quot; the attorney adds.    As for Mr. Riggi, he denies ever taking any drawings from GE or making any remark that he did.    Turbine Services turned over thousands of documents to GE in the course of the civil suit, Mr. Mondolino says. Those seized by GE in the raid were either unimportant, had been provided earlier in another form or were inadvertently overlooked, he says. The restrictions imposed on Turbine Services under the court settlement, he adds, affect only a small portion, &quot;10% to 15%,&quot; of Turbine Services' business, and aren't any big victory for GE.    GE sees the evidence and the settlement differently. In a hearing before Judge Cholakis following the search of Turbine Services, Mr. Katsh, the GE lawyer, flourished two drawings. &quot;I represent to the court that the drawing itself and all the numbers on this drawing, which has the name Turbine Services on it, are identical to the GE drawing . . . word for word identical. . . . This is the kind of evidence we have linking a stolen GE drawing with TSL.&quot;    As for the settlement, GE also disagrees with Turbine Services. Besides getting $5.2 million and retrieving the drawings, GE considers the restrictions important. Turbine Services parts made from the drawings, valued by GE at about $6 million, must be locked up in a bonded warehouse for five years. And Turbine Services is prohibited from dealing in parts for several lines of gas turbines for five to 10 years. To ensure compliance, GE got the right to audit Turbine Services for 15 years.    For GE, however, a troubling question lingers: Why were so many current and former employees disloyal? In all, nearly two dozen people in Schenectady, New York and Houston have been implicated in the theft of its trade secrets.    Joyce Hergenhan, GE's vice president for public relations, says that in any organization, &quot;you always have a few rotten apples, and you can't legislate morality.&quot; (The turbine division has about 10,000 workers.) She adds that the half-dozen who were removing drawings from GE have been fired. She also says GE has tightened security and initiated a program to teach employees, vendors and customers that trade secrets must be respected. </TEXT></DOC>