<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880812-0099 </DOCNO><HL> Thinking Machine: An 'Electronic Clone' Of a Skilled Engineer Is Very Hard to Create --- A Utility Has Mixed Success With Computer Program Mimicking a Dams Expert --- Did He Withhold Secrets? </HL><AUTHOR> Frederick Rose (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> SCE </CO><IN> UTI EDP </IN><DATELINE> ROSEMEAD, Calif.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Here in the engineering warrens of Southern California Edison Co., Thomas Kelly has worked for two decades to master an obscure specialty: diagnosing and treating the ailments of a massive and cantankerous dam high in the Sierra Nevada.    The 55-year-old civil engineer can gauge the danger in a murky pool of water. He can find a blocked drain in the vast arterial web that permeates the structure. He can tell from a trickle if the earthen dam is bleeding -- or just breathing.    In the eyes of Edison, Mr. Kelly is a valuable employee -- too valuable to risk losing. So the big utility has spent the last two years and about $300,000 trying to create a computer program that can think like Mr. Kelly. In effect, Edison is trying to clone him electronically.    For decades, researchers have been trying to develop computer programs that can puzzle through problems the same way a human does. Now, artificial intelligence, as it is called, is moving out of the lab and into the workplace. Edison's Project Kelly, which has had mixed success, offers insights into the trials that confront those who try to invest a machine with human reasoning.    Mr. Kelly is an old-fashioned engineer; he admits finally abandoning his slide rule for a calculator only last year. Over the course of his career at Edison, the gruff, red-headed ex-Marine has tinkered with dozens of hydro-electric dams, but none more thoroughly than Vermilion. That's partly because of the problems that have plagued the 24-year-old dam. Vermilion, Mr. Kelly says, &quot;is the problem child.&quot;    A barren bulk of dirt and gravel 165 feet high and nearly a mile long, Vermilion spans Mono Creek, a tributary of the San Joaquin River, about 300 miles north of here. In the spring when the snows melt, the dam holds back as much as 40 billion gallons of water. The dam has been prone to water seeping through its foundation and has needed lots of attention over the years. Edison says Mr. Kelly's troubleshooting has helped keep the dam -- and those in the valley below -- safe.    Edison grew to depend on Mr. Kelly, but at the same time officials fretted about the company's vulnerability if he were to retire or quit. (Mr. Kelly also says his boss worries that Mr. Kelly &quot;might get hit by a bus.&quot;) So Edison decided to try to devise a so-called expert system that would ape the engineer's ingenious reasoning. By probing the engineer's thought processes, Edison hoped to come up with a program that would be as capable as Mr. Kelly in analyzing symptoms of trouble in the dam and suggesting necessary repairs.    Like humans, computers must be taught. Sophisticated expert systems can take years and cost millions of dollars to perfect. One hurdle: &quot;Many experts don't consciously understand how they do what they do,&quot; explains Paul Harmon, a consultant and editor of Expert System Strategies, a newsletter.    Edison set out to woo Mr. Kelly to cooperate in what it knew would be a time-consuming project. &quot;We appealed to his ego,&quot; recalls James Schoonmaker, who guided the project at the start. &quot;We explained that he was important and that we needed his knowledge.&quot;    Mr. Kelly agreed to be a guinea pig. &quot;I'd thought of writing a history of the dam, but this was a lot more fun,&quot; he recalls. Project Kelly turned out to be a lot more difficult.    The process of understanding what Mr. Kelly does and how he does it started in 1986 with the arrival of two &quot;knowledge engineers&quot; from Texas Instruments Inc. It was the first assignment for Terry Phillips, an intense 30-year-old engineer and computer whiz, and Kimberly Britt, a 30-year-old management systems expert.    The programmers were nervous when they first sat down with Mr. Kelly, who is almost twice their age. They had boned up on books about dam safety and construction, but that was just a start. Before them was a professional engineer, with decades of experience that they needed to dissect. As Ms. Britt recalls, &quot;It was the beginning of a mini-apprenticeship.&quot;    Their first meeting was a marathon, seven-hour session in a windowless room, where the programmers grilled Mr. Kelly. Tell us about Vermilion's earth and gravel interior, the pair asked. What about the drainage systems that riddle the dam? Every syllable was tape-recorded and transcribed for later study. &quot;When we left the meeting, everyone's eyes were bugging out,&quot; says Mr. Phillips.    In theory, fusing human reasoning onto electronic circuitry is simple. Human experts supply the rules that guide them in making judgments. Typically, the rules involve &quot;if-then&quot; scenarios: If these are the observations, then these are the likely conclusions. Technicians assemble the rules into a computer program. With elaborate networks of rules, computers can reason. In theory, given the same evidence, a well-programmed expert system should reach the same conclusion as the expert it was designed to mimic.    But in practice, parsing human judgment into logical chunks that a computer can digest is extremely difficult. Human reasoning is often instinctual and hard to explain. Then, too, experts often have a &quot;sixth sense&quot; with respect to problems that defies language and can't be programmed.    There have been successes. In the mid-1970s, computer specialists developed a system that could diagnose meningitis and bacterial infections in blood -- often more accurately than physicians. Today, dozens of expert systems are being used to help make loan decisions and juggle airline equipment, among other things.    At Edison, Mr. Phillips and Ms. Britt were struggling to understand how Mr. Kelly arrived at his diagnoses. Earth and gravel dams, like giant sponges, seep water through their foundations. But how did the engineer know that a small stream of water on one side of the dam meant a blocked drain at its base? How much did he rely on water-pressure readings deep within the foundation?    Mr. Kelly began to find the interrogations troubling. Sometimes, he wasn't sure they understood what he was saying. &quot;I'd come away frustrated, saying, 'We're not communicating,'&quot; Mr. Kelly recalls.    The programmers also had a problem. Mr. Kelly, taciturn by nature, wasn't revealing enough. Though seemingly willing, he would listen to questions and reply simply &quot;yes&quot; or &quot;no.&quot; Explanations -- when given -- tended to be brief. Was he perhaps unconsciously reluctant to part with his expertise? Mr. Kelly insists he was being cooperative. Still, Mr. Phillips and Ms. Britt were worried.    After a few days of discussion, Mr. Phillips and Ms. Britt assembled small experimental programs. But the first tests were a flop. &quot;The conclusions were all the same and all trivial,&quot; recalls Mr. Phillips. Almost every problem elicited the same response: pack the offending wet area with gravel and keep it under observation, the engineering equivalent of a physician's order to take two aspirin and rest in bed.    The failure was doubly discouraging because small programs are the building blocks for expert systems. If the smaller, experimental programs didn't work, then a bigger one based on the same rules was doomed as well.    Frustrated, the programmers began to widen their inquiry. They combed old files, reviewing yellowing reports of repairs at Vermilion, some dating back almost 30 years. At one point, they considered creating a mathematical model that would mimic the dam's performance. But the plain-thinking Mr. Kelly rejected the plan as needlessly esoteric. Hoping to get the engineer to open up, the two programmers joined him for meals (he is a gourmet cook) and gabbed with him about skin diving, his private passion.    One hot August day, the trio visited the dam, gazing down inspection hatches, tromping through damp spots, peering at gauges that measured rushing water. It was a visual breakthrough. &quot;After that, we understood better how the pieces of the dam fitted together,&quot; says Mr. Britt.    But months were passing, and the team was feeling lost. A slim set of about 20 rules still produced trivial advice. The programmers found it hard to grasp how Mr. Kelly used bits of evidence such as rodent holes to determine if there had been internal injury to Vermilion. &quot;Tom is very intuitive, and that is the toughest problem to deal with,&quot; says Mr. Phillips.    After a year, concerned about the time and money the project was demanding, Edison executives narrowed the project's ambitious scope. Originally, the utility had hoped to develop a program that could be used at dozens of earthen dams. Project Kelly, officials decided, would deal only with problems at Vermilion.    Gradually, the programmers realized that understanding Vermilion was in some ways simpler than they had first thought. Originally, they had envisioned an expert system that would involve hundreds of rules; the programmers realized a working system could succeed with far fewer. The focus shifted slightly, too. The team earlier had studied the problems that could be linked to water seeping from the front of the dam. A third engineer assigned to the project by Texas Instruments, Mark Waage, added another factor to the equation: data on the movement of water deep inside Vermilion. Eventually, he extracted new rules for the program based on instrument readings.    The results brightened. The number of rules in the system swelled to 80, which was still a slim total for such an elaborate project. But the computer's judgments grew more useful and more pointed. In fact, they were too pointed for Mr. Kelly. He objected to the warning messages that flashed on the screen, and he ordered the machine's conclusions written in softer terms. He feared the flashing messages and the strong wording would unduly alarm someone using the program.    Project Kelly is winding down now. Texas Instruments' team has moved on to other projects. After all the work, the Kelly System isn't in regular use. With Mr. Kelly handy, there isn't a lot of demand for his electronic counterpart. And Edison says the system still needs more work to be really useful.    Eventually, the company would like to broaden the program to permit it to analyze problems at other dams. But that will be costly. Edison figures it could take another $100,000 or more to change the program. Someday, Edison hopes, other utilities may find a use for a generic program on dam troubleshooting, if it could develop one based on the Kelly System.    Mr. Kelly seems pretty satisfied with the electronic oracle he helped create. And the program proved impressive in a recent demonstration. In front of an electronic display where the dam is etched in white lines on a black screen, Mr. Kelly sits down to communicate with his electronic clone.    He poses a hypothetical problem: water seepage from the dam.    &quot;Is there vegetation in the area?&quot; the computer asks.    &quot;No,&quot; Mr. Kelly answers.    &quot;Is the water murky?&quot;    &quot;Very.&quot;    There are more questions, and more answers. Then, Mr. Kelly pauses. Beside him, a rectangular column about three feet high -- the machine's brain -- begins to click and hum quietly. The problem Mr. Kelly has put to the machine is serious, suggesting internal damage to the dam. An expert would recognize this and lower the water behind the dam.    After an eerie pause, the computer's advice appears on the screen, set in the same, measured way Mr. Kelly would have put it: &quot;Consider dropping the reservoir immediately. Cover the area with a layered filter and wait for the reservoir to drop 15 feet, then carefully excavate and repair drain, if damaged.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>