<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870223-0152 </DOCNO><HL> Asia:'Displaced' Cambodians Strain Thailand's Camps---By Claudia Rosett</HL><DD> 02/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><DATELINE> SITE 2, Thailand  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Nak Chhoeun is a two-year-old Cambodian girl with dirty feet, a shy smile and a shrapnel wound -- now healing -- on the back of her head. She lives in what you could call a bad neighborhood. From where she stands in a dusty lane of this huge refugee camp known as Site 2, it's only about two miles to the Cambodian border. Just over that border are the Vietnamese troops who fired 17 rounds of artillery shells into the camp on Jan. 26, injuring Nak Chhoeun and eight others. Now, along with the monotonous rations and indefinite confinement, her family and neighbors can contemplate the shell craters near their bamboo huts.    Clearly the solution is to find a new home. Nak Chhoeun's 23-year-old mother, Lav Chhoy, says she has lived in refugee camps since she fled Cambodia in 1979 and would like to resettle in a third country. But for the roughly 375,000 Indochinese refugees still in the Thai camps, chances of moving on -- or even moving farther from the border -- are bad and getting worse. Most of those eligible for resettlement under current criteria have already gone. Fearful that the flimsy camps are becoming permanent problems, the Thai government is stepping up its efforts to get rid of the refugees one way or another.    The latest effort took the form of a three-paragraph letter from the Thai authorities, delivered on Feb. 6 to about 40 representatives of various relief agencies operating along the border. The letter said that after July 1, 1987, the Thai government would consider all refugees not actually being processed for resettlement as &quot;persons who no longer have a chance for third country resettlement.&quot;    The letter, signed by the deputy director of the Displaced Persons Operations Center, Virachai Naewboonnien, also said that for the second half of 1987, the Thai government would change its guidelines for the refugees who remain. For example, the letter implied that resettlement training programs would be forbidden: &quot;No teaching of the English, French or Thai language will be allowed.&quot;    In their attempts to enlist third-country help to absorb the massive refugee population, the Thais have been known to talk tough in public and go easier in private. Previous threats have brought promises of more help from abroad. But Western relief workers say that Thailand's tolerance is genuinely running out. One experienced worker says the letter is &quot;the first thing I've seen that specifies things are coming to an end.&quot; Although the refugee inflow is down from hundreds of thousands some years ago to a few hundred a month, the U.S. quota for immigrants from all of Indochina in fiscal 1987 is 32,000. Of these, at most 20,000 might come from the camps in Thailand. And of the Free World's host countries, the U.S. is one of the most open to these people. &quot;From Thailand's perspective,&quot; says this relief worker, &quot;they've got to go back where they came from.&quot;    Repatriation is a course that could mean death or punishment for many of these refugees. So far no policy has pushed the issue that far. But another ominous sign has been the Thai government's decision to close Khao I Dang, an apolitical camp for Cambodians run by the United Nations High Commissioner for Refugees. Although relief workers with access to the camp say that more than 20,000 people are still living in Khao I Dang, it has been officially shut down since the first of the year. Reporters are not allowed in. Inmates who cannot immediately find resettlement are to be moved to political camps under the control of Cambodian resistance groups.    Once refugees enter these political camps, their chances of going anywhere else -- except into Cambodia to fight the Vietnamese army -- dwindle close to zero. Site 2, where Nak Chhoeun got her shrapnel wound, is one such camp. Its 159,000 inmates are under the administration of the Khmer National People's Liberation Front, run by former Cambodian Premier Son Sann. Another political camp, farther north along the border is Site B, or Green Hill, where about 42,000 people are under the control of Prince Norodom Sihanouk, the former head of state. To the south is Site 8, where roughly 30,000 people are fenced in under the auspices of the same Khmer Rouge responsible for the deaths of close to two million Cambodians in the late 1970s. Still more civilian camps run by the resistance lie elsewhere along the Cambodian border. The number and locations change from time to time to escape Vietnamese attacks, but altogether, the Cambodians in these resistance camps number about 260,000.    In the jargon of the Free World's immigration departments, the inmates of these camps are not refugees but &quot;displaced persons,&quot; who are expected eventually to return home. Accordingly, existence in the camps becomes a long exercise in wasted lives. One of the civilian administrators of Site 2, Thou Thom, describes the daily routine as &quot;Wait until the supplies are coming and eat and sleep.&quot; The people are not allowed to take jobs for pay. They are not allowed to go anywhere. They are not even allowed to trade with outsiders.    The Thai prohibition against trading is aimed partly at keeping life in the camps so isolated and austere that it does not attract more refugees. It is also intended to prevent smuggling of goods from the camps into Cambodia and Vietnam. Nonetheless, a lot of trading, or &quot;smuggling,&quot; goes on, and it offers a hint of the energy that these refugees could be putting into building new lives elsewhere. Instead, they spend their time and effort trying to outwit the Thai authorities. Just south of Site 2, it was hard to miss the four young men rushing toward the camp fence, which is patrolled by Thai soldiers. They were pushing bicycles loaded down with smugglers' sacks of goods.    One camp inmate at Site 2 ticked off some of the booty confiscated by Thai authorities recently: On Jan. 8 Thai soldiers seized a batch of monosodium glutamate (used for food seasoning). On Jan. 11 they seized some bananas. Sugar cane, soap and cigarettes are also popular items.    Another prevalent activity at the camp is procreation. Small children, most of them born in the camps, come running by the dozens to greet an American visitor. At the entrance to the Khmer Rouge camp, Site 8, a little boy in green pants and a pair of army boots much too big for his feet is the first person encountered at the gates. One relief-organization official estimates the birth rate among refugees at about 5%, more than twice the Thai rate.    There are several reasons for this burgeoning population. Most of those who survived to reach the camps are of childbearing age; the old and young were the chief victims of the Khmer Rouge regime. Once the survivors reached even temporary asylum, they began rebuilding their lost families. Also, pregnant or nursing women and small children receive supplementary rations from the U.N. Border Relief Organization that trucks in rations for the refugees. Along with the standard-issue rice, mung beans, salt, oil and dried fish, they also get fruit and milk. Finally, as the relief official put it, &quot;There's not a whole lot else to do recreation-wise in the camps.&quot;    Most of these children did not face the land mines and bandits at the border to cross into Thailand. They are, in effect, native refugees. But more than anything else, their presence in the camps underscores the blindness of a world that will not offer them, or their parents, a future.    ---   Ms. Rosett is editorial-page editor of The Asian Wall Street Journal. </TEXT></DOC>