<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880519-0152 </DOCNO><HL> Going for Broker: What Can Jackson Offer Dukakis? </HL><AUTHOR> Joseph N. Boyce </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   The question has been asked so often that it has become a cliche: Just what does Jesse Jackson want from the Democrats and the man almost certain to be their nominee, Michael Dukakis? A more material question is: What can Jesse Jackson give to get what he wants?    Not a lot at this stage, it seems.    The current theory is that Mr. Jackson, who captured almost all of the black vote and did unexpectedly well among whites in the primaries, will go to Atlanta in July with at least 1,000 delegates and thus the leverage to &quot;broker&quot; with Mr. Dukakis and party leaders over selection of the vice presidential nominee and rules and platform issues.    But the fact is, there won't be much left for him to broker with. Mr. Dukakis is projected to win most of the 466 delegates at stake in primaries in California, New Jersey, Montana and New Mexico June 7, which, when combined with votes from &quot;superdelegates&quot; makes his nomination little more than a formality. It will not be lost on the uncommitted superdelegates that a vote for front-runner Mr. Dukakis could have greater future advantages than one for Mr. Jackson.    Mr. Jackson wants a say in the choice for running mate, but that decision will rest more on the pragmatics of geography and philosphical balance than on his endorsement.    A more politically savvy and mature candidate than he was in 1984, Mr. Jackson has publicly refused to discuss in any detail what demands he might make on the party or the Dukakis camp, except to argue that his support by superdelegates should reflect the proportion of the popular vote he receives in the primaries. So far, this contention has found little support among the 644 party and elected officials making up the superdelegate bloc.    Other black leaders warn, however, that a failure of Democrats to recognize Mr. Jackson's enhanced political stature in Atlanta in July could spell disaster in November and beyond. Said NAACP executive director Benjamin Hooks in a recent interview: &quot;If Jesse should be mistreated, maltreated, ignored, overlooked or treated contemptuously by the party in Atlanta . . . then the Democrats are in a terribly dangerous position.&quot;    The loss to the party of the black support that served Mr. Jackson so well in the primaries could indeed be devastating in what looks to be a close race between Mr. Dukakis and George Bush. While the black vote didn't provide much help to Jimmy Carter in 1980 or Walter Mondale in 1984, it was crucial to Mr. Carter's victory over Gerald Ford in 1976.    Mr. Jackson's influence on black voters contributed to the successful elections of several Democratic congressional candidates in 1984 and 1986 and could have an effect this year on Senate and House races in key states. Just how transferable, though, is that support to the Massachusetts governor? Ironically, Mr. Jackson's absence on the ballot -- almost a foregone conclusion -- could make it difficult for him to guarantee that his backers in the primaries will show much enthusiasm for a ticket headed by Mr. Dukakis.    Mr. Jackson's strength in the primaries has come mainly from two types of blacks -- party loyalists who, even if Mr. Jackson isn't on the ticket, will vote for a Democrat, and those with little or no history of political participation who are stirred by his personal magnetism and the opportunity to cast a vote for a black.    As a surrogate for Mr. Dukakis rather than as a candidate, Mr. Jackson could have a tough time getting the latter group back to the polls in November. Personal popularity is not transferable. Between 22% and 27% of Jackson supporters interviewed in exit polls in the Illinois, New York and Pennsylvania primaries said they probably would stay home if he is not the nominee in November.    Both Mr. Dukakis and Mr. Bush indicate they are not going to leave the mobilization of the black vote to Jesse Jackson. Mr. Dukakis's black supporters from Massachusetts are spreading the governor's message to black communities around the country and he is scheduling appearances in black neighborhoods.    Thaddeus Garrett Jr., a black and a senior adviser to the Bush campaign, says the Republican candidate has invited black leaders to meet with him in his home today. &quot;The vice president told us early on that he wanted a strong effort in the black community,&quot; says Mr. Garrett, who adds that in this close election Mr. Bush &quot;must go after the black vote just as he must go after every other group.&quot;    Mr. Hooks is correct that an impression that Mr. Jackson is given short shrift in Atlanta could turn off the black electorate. But given the candidate's sense of his role in history, it is unlikely he would take any steps to divide the party that could result in his being charged with its defeat in November. After all, Mr. Jackson may well have his eye on running again in 1992, and like Al Smith and Lyndon Johnson winning the presidential nomination after two previous failures, the only Democrats to do so in this century.    Whatever the future holds, Mr. Jackson's substantial and lasting contribution to the Democratic Party and to American politics as a whole will not be found in what he does in Atlanta, but in the fact that he has waged a dignified and well-organized campaign, addressed issues of concern to all Americans, energized new political participation and expanded the opportunity for blacks and other minorities to run for president and any other elective office in the land. That achievement can't be brokered.    ---   Mr. Boyce is a Journal senior editor. </TEXT></DOC>