<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870507-0016 </DOCNO><HL> South AfricaVote Sets StageFor Conflict---Ruling Party Retains Hold,But Results Show SplitAmong Whites Growing---By Roger ThurowStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 05/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> AFRIC </IN><DATELINE> JOHANNESBURG, South Africa  </DATELINE><TEXT>    Voters returned the NationalParty to power in yesterday's whites-only election but alsoset the stage for greater confrontation in white politics.   Preliminary results indicated that the National Party was sure to retain its strong 39-year hold on the government. The initial trend showed a swing to the right, with the National Party winning several seats from the liberal Progressive Federal Party. In addition, the pro-apartheid Conservative Party was doing well in working-class and rural constituencies.    While the National Party was likely to pick up several seats in parliament, its portion of the total vote was expected to fall from the 57% it gained in the previous general election in 1981. That is because of the growing polarization of the white electorate, with the Conservative Party growing on the right and several independent candidates taking support on the left.    With about two-thirds of the votes counted, the National Party had 53% of the ballots, the Conservative Party 24% and the Progressive Federal Party 17%.    Currently, the National Party holds 127 seats in parliament; the Progressive Federal Party, 27, and its moderate ally, the New Republican Party, 5; the far-right Conservative Party, 18; and the Herstigte Nasionale (Reformed National) Party, one seat.    President P.W. Botha called the election two years early, saying he needed a new mandate to continue gradual reforms of some aspects of apartheid and give blacks a limited role in national decisionmaking. But during the campaign, he and the National Party vowed to resist majority rule by blacks and promised to maintain segregated schools and neighborhoods.    A stronger right-wing opposition would try to put the brakes on reform and insist on strict segregation of society according to race. At the same time, the liberal opposition is expected to increase its demands on the government to scrap apartheid and to begin negotiating with blacks to bring them into national politics.    Some of the strongest and most closely followed challenges to the National Party came from independent candidates who left the party earlier in the year. Wynand Malan, formerly one of the rising stars in the ruling party, returned to parliament as an independent, defeating his National Party opponent by more than 2,600 votes. In Stellenbosch, the university town where many professors have turned their back on the government, the independent candidate Esther Lategan lost to her National Party opponent by 1,700 votes. In the previous election, the National Party won the seat there by more than 5,500 votes.    In the neighboring constituency, independent Denis Worrall lost to Minister of Constitutional Development Chris Heunis by fewer than 50 votes. Mr. Worrall resigned from his post as the South African ambassador to Britain early this year to stand against Mr. Heunis. In 1981, Mr. Heunis of the National Party, won the constituency with a majority of nearly 3,000 votes.    Mr. Heunis was considered a top prospect to succeed Mr. Botha as president whenever he leaves office. But political observers said the narrow victory wouldn't enhance his chances.    The election, coming in the 11th month of the state of emergency, took place under tight security. The polling stations were closely guarded by police, and security troops maintained a strong presence in the black townships. For weeks, the government had warned of a terrorist plot by the African National Congress, the outlawed anti-apartheid group, to disrupt the election. But there were no major outbursts of violence yesterday.    Nevertheless, the election triggered widespread unrest among the country's 24 million blacks, who have no say in the political process. To protest this disenfranchisement, more than one million black workers and students boycotted jobs and classes yesterday, following a smallerscale boycott on Tuesday. Downtown Johannesburg, ususally teeming with black workers, was almost deserted. Four universities, including predominantly white campuses in Johannesburg and Cape Town, closed for the day to prevent repeats of the violent clashes with police that flared during the past week.    According to the independent Labor Monitoring Group, the work and school boycott Tuesday and yesterday was the largest two-day boycott in the country's history.    The police reported more than 60 incidents of unrest around the country, including stone throwing, arson and clashes with police. The Bureau for Information reported that about 100 people were arrested for holding illegal gatherings. Army troops manned roadblocks at the entrances to the Johannesburg townships of Soweto and Alexandra.    Early in the day, the government distributed pamphlets in the black townships, asking residents to support the government's efforts to achieve peace. The message was addressed to &quot;fellow South Africans.&quot; Black leaders and anti-apartheid activists denounced the election as racist and irrelevant. </TEXT></DOC>