<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870526-0122 </DOCNO><HL> Labor Letter:A Special News Report on PeopleAnd Their Jobs in Offices,Fields and Factories---By Jeanne Saddler</HL><DD> 05/26/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR GOVMTCONSTRUCTION, MATERIALS (CON)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL)PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA)LABOR DEPARTMENT (LBR) </IN><TEXT>   AIDS EDUCATION: Programs are started at more companies.    At Time Inc., where 12 of 17 workers known to have acquired immune deficiency syndrome have died, the company distributes pamphlets and holds workshops about AIDS. Time also has added a hot line for employees to ask health-related questions.    San Francisco's Wells Fargo andamp; Co. uses seminars, films and brochures to tell its work force that AIDS isn't transmitted through casual contact. Barnett Banks Inc. of Jacksonville, Fla., will distribute pamphlets on the disease to its 17,000 employees this month. Knight-Ridder Inc. of Miami has had experts give periodic presentations on the disease over the last year. SSCandamp;B: Lintas Worldwide, a New York City advertising firm, considers an educational program for its employees.    &quot;Patients seem more open about AIDS, and employees are much more rational,&quot; says Phillip Kasofsky, Time's medical director.    &quot;COMMON SENSE&quot; wasn't a defense for the employer in this safety case.    The Occupational Safety and Health Review Commission recently upheld a Labor Department finding that A.C. Dellovade Inc., a Pennsylvania construction company, violated federal safety rules in a case in which an employee fell 1,200 feet to his death. The company argued that its foreman needn't have told the worker not to move the plank to which his lifeline was tied because &quot;that comes with common sense.&quot;    The commission noted, however, that Dellovade hadn't instructed its employees on how to secure their lifelines and didn't heed a federal inspector's earlier suggestion that the company install special safety lines inside the A-frame structure it was building. The company was fined $6,500 for disregarding safety rules.    DISLOCATED WORKERS benefit more from company and union programs.    A Government Accounting Office study of 80 federally sponsored job-training programs for dislocated workers found that programs run by employers or labor unions were three times more likely to have above-average placement success than those run by state agencies and other organizations. Company and union officials can help jobless clients more easily by using contacts with local employers, the report said.    Training efforts that focused on specific business closings or permanent layoffs were twice as successful as other retraining programs, principally, the study showed, because they began helping the workers before or just after they lost their jobs. Intensive, individualized job counseling also was a feature of the better programs.    The study found little difference between the success rates of programs that emphasized classroom training and those that stressed on-the-job training.    DISABILITY BENEFITS from Social Security granted to workers with chronic pain should be based on the employees' ability to function at work, not just clinical evidence of injury, says a National Academy of Sciences report. An expert panel found no clear link between physical damage and pain.    FEDERAL FIREFIGHTERS may be in line for up to $20 million in back pay. A federal appeals court in Washington, D.C., recently ruled that during vacation periods, the government can't deduct the overtime pay that's regularly part of the 2,500 workers' weekly salary. About 12,000 other firefighters may qualify for back pay under the decision in a dispute that began in 1978.    TAX OVERHAUL is leading to changes in companies' 401(k) savings plans, says Buck Consultants Inc. In a survey of 168 companies, Buck found that 22% will make major changes in administering their plans. Another finding: Nearly half of the plans don't meet the new tax law's fairness test.    LEANER DAYS: Mortgage-banker compensation could plunge sharply this year as the real-estate market starts to cool, says MCS Associates, a consulting firm. An MCS survey shows 1986 income for mortgage-banker chief executives climbed about 18% over 1985 to an average $312,000, including $167,000 in bonuses.    HOSPITALS OFFER more perks to attract rehabilitation specialists.    As jobs in sports medicine and private practice draw more therapists, hospitals scramble to compete. Mercer Medical Center in Trenton, N.J., and the Medical Center of Delaware in Wilmington offer scholarships to physical-therapy students if they'll work at the hospitals after graduation. Cleveland Metropolitan General Hospital last week gave its rehabilitation nurses a 7% pay increase and improved scheduling.    Chicago's Rehabilitation Institute reimburses the tuition of physical therapists seeking master's degrees. New England Rehabilitation Hospital, with 10% of its therapy jobs vacant, considers offering sign-on bonuses and moving expenses as well as higher salaries and flexible schedules.    Demand for specialists grows. &quot;Patients expect more remedial help than they did 20 years ago,&quot; says a Boston rehabilitation-hospital official.    THE CHECKOFF: Union members linked to the AFL-CIO's Building and Construction Trades Department plan to ask for contributions to D.A.D., Dollars Against Diabetes, by approaching motorists and shoppers around the country on June 20. . . . Members of Local 400 of the Food and Commercial Workers Union striking Scan furniture stores, a Washington D.C.-area cooperative, don black armbands to protest the &quot;death of the co-op spirit.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>