<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870731-0075 </DOCNO><HL> Municipals Morass:Tax-Free Bond ProbesBy Federal AgenciesStir Talk of Regulation---Matthews andamp; Wright InquiriesIllustrate the WeaknessesOf Industry's Safeguards---Big Issues From Tiny Towns---By Steve Swartz and John ConnorStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/31/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MW TAXES PNCFBOND MARKET NEWS (BON)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   A federal investigation of Matthews andamp; Wright Inc., a once-obscure New York municipal-bond house, is turning a spotlight on a longstanding problem: The tax-exempt market can be hazardous to some investors' financial health.    The Matthews andamp; Wright Group subsidiary had prospered by specializing in transactions that were too small or too risky for other securities firms and that were arranged on behalf of some unlikely places. These included a $399 million bond offering for the U.S. territory of Palau and a $9 million offering for Lenexa, Kan. &quot;I've never heard of a Lenexa, Kan., bond,&quot; says Barnet Sherman, a municipal-bond analyst at Smith Barney, Harris Upham andamp; Co. Lenexa &quot;isn't even in our atlas.&quot;    Now, Matthews andamp; Wright is at the center of one of the largest federal investigations of the municipal-bond business in history. Investigators from several agencies, including the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Securities and Exchange Commission, are looking into possible fraud, bribery and tax-law violations involving more than $1 billion of tax-exempt bonds underwritten by Matthews andamp; Wright in 1985 and 1986, people familiar with the investigation say.    The investigation raises questions about the nation's largely unregulated $730 billion municipal-bond market. Unlike the market for corporate bonds, municipal-bond offerings aren't scrutinized by either the SEC or any other federal agency before the issues are sold. And federal laws give virtually no clues to what must be disclosed to investors beforehand.    Moreover, the industry professionals who are supposed to provide safeguards for bond investors somehow dropped the ball in some recent Matthews andamp; Wright underwritings. The bond attorneys, investment bankers, municipal-finance officers and bank trustees failed to question certain practices now drawing federal scrutiny.    &quot;I think there is a need for more regulation,&quot; says Peter A. Cohen, the chairman of Shearson Lehman Brothers Holdings Inc., a big underwriter of municipals.    The investigation of Matthews andamp; Wright could ignite a regulatory fire in Congress. Rep. John Dingell, the Michigan Democrat who heads the powerful House Energy and Commerce Committee, has already publicly questioned the level of investor protection in the municipal-bond market. Senate Banking Committee Chairman William Proxmire, a Wisconsin Democrat, last week raised the possibility of having the SEC scrutinize municipal-bond offering documents, and David Ruder, President Reagan's choice to head the SEC, told Congress this week that he favors more regulation of municipals.    Gerald A. Feffer, a Washington-based lawyer representing Matthews andamp; Wright, declines comment on the continuing federal investigation. The firm has denied any wrongdoing and asserted that all its underwritings were properly handled and legitimately tax-exempt. This week it said a preliminary internal investigation hasn't found any evidence of bribery or other improprieties.    Meanwhile, the tax-law aspects of the investigation have expanded to include about 100 municipal-bond issues valued at some $12 billion and underwritten or sold by several securities firms in addition to Matthews andamp; Wright. The investigation &quot;promises to be the biggest case of its kind,&quot; Sen. Proxmire says.    Calls for more regulation of the municipals market may intensify later this year when Congress is expected to get the SEC's three-year study on the record $2.25 billion default by Washington Public Power Supply System in 1983. Although the SEC's conclusions haven't been made public, Rep. Dingell has said the WPPSS default raises serious questions about &quot;misrepresentations and omissions&quot; in WPPSS statements before its bond sales. Industry officials also expect strong criticism of some attorneys who worked on the offerings.    Any move toward tougher federal regulation of the municipal-bond market would rile states' rights proponents. And many municipals professionals argue that the market is already well policed by state regulators and municipal officials. Michael D. Hernandez, the head of the municipal securities division at First Boston Corp., contends, for example, that municipalities often disclose more information about their offerings than corporate issuers do because cities and towns aren't sure what they have to disclose.    And Robert D. Pope, the president-elect of the National Association of Bond Lawyers, says &quot;the first line of enforcement&quot; is the industry professionals who structure bond sales for local governments. But the investigation of Matthews andamp; Wright and other firms suggests that the self-regulatory mechanisms failed to catch bond-underwriting activities that should have had the professionals raising red flags.    A bond attorney's primary role is to ensure that a bond offering has been validly issued under state law and is tax-exempt under state and federal laws. The trustee's job, which varies with the issue, generally is to ensure that the bond proceeds are invested and eventually spent under the terms set out in bond documents. Both professionals normally are hired by the municipality, but the underwriter typically has a strong say over who is selected.    Thus, like accountants doing corporate audits, bond lawyers and trustees can be subject to pressure from underwriters to approve their activities. Industry professionals complain privately of &quot;shopping&quot; by some underwriters, particularly for favorable bond-law opinions.    The Matthews andamp; Wright investigation involves a controversial form of bond called an &quot;escrow&quot; or &quot;arbitrage&quot; bond. Municipalities and private developers, who arrange for municipal help in financing projects, liked the bonds because the proceeds could be invested profitably for up to three years while projects got off the ground. Funds borrowed at tax-free interest rates of, say, 6%, could be reinvested in Treasury securities at 8%. The municipality pocketed the profit.    Investors also liked the bonds because their money wasn't spent but simply reinvested, typically in Treasury securities, in bank certificates of deposit or with insurance companies. When the developer really wanted funds for his project, anything from an apartment complex to a prison, he usually repaid the arbitrage-bond holders and borrowed again at higher long-term rates through another bond sale or from a bank.    But because lawmakers suspected that municipal arbitraging left issuers little incentive to get their projects moving, Congress practically ended the practice. It did so in two steps, touching off a last-minute avalanche of arbitrage offerings in December 1985 and August 1986.    Now, investigators are probing whether Matthews andamp; Wright constructed sham bond sales in some cases to beat the deadlines and then sold the issues later to the public. For example, the U.S. attorney's office in Philadelphia has requested information on four Matthews andamp; Wright offerings done just before the deadlines, according to officials of Pittsburgh National Bank, the trustee for bondholders in the four issues. The issues are a $335 million financing for a trash-to-steam plant in Chester, Pa.; the $399 million industrial issue for Palau; a $65 million financing for a port authority in Nassau County, Fla.; and $29.3 million for sewers and other public improvements in Galt, Calif.    All four transactions followed a pattern similar to the Galt offering last August, according to Pittsburgh National. Some key participants in the Galt offering now say they aren't sure that there was a legitimate sale. And they don't remember asking any questions about the transaction at that time.    Matthews andamp; Wright said it sold all the city's bonds in a sale completed last Aug. 29. The firm was brought in when the original underwriter, A.R. Altura andamp; Co., of San Ramon, Calif., was worried that it couldn't place the bonds because of a glutted market. Alan Altura, the firm's president, says he doesn't know to whom Matthews andamp; Wright sold them.    Walter E. Gregg, the chief regulatory counsel at Pittsburgh National's parent, PNC Financial Corp., says in an interview that the bank, as trustee, got a check for the Galt bonds from Matthews andamp; Wright drawn on New American Federal Credit Union of Jersey City, N.J., which credit-union regulators say is controlled by Arthur Abba Goldberg, executive vice president of Matthews andamp; Wright. Mr. Gregg adds that no one at the bank questioned Matthews andamp; Wright's use of the tiny credit union.    Under terms devised by Matthews andamp; Wright, Pittsburgh National immediately endorsed the check over to Commercial Bank of the Americas, which was to invest the proceeds temporarily for Galt, Pittsburgh National says.    Pittsburgh National officials also say the same Commercial Bank was listed as the beneficial owner of the bonds, indicating that the bank bought the bonds itself or held them for private investors. Again, no one at Pittsburgh National questioned the arrangement, Mr. Gregg says. Neither did the bond counsel, Jones Hall Hill andamp; White, of San Francisco, according to Sharon White, a partner in the law firm.    Based on the Pacific island of Saipan, Commercial Bank of the Americas was established by, among others, Frederick Mann, who has worked for Matthews andamp; Wright and was convicted of fraud in Canada in 1984, federal investigators say. A class-action lawsuit alleging fraud and filed in federal court in Philadelphia by a disgruntled holder of another Matthews andamp; Wright bond issue alleges that Commercial Bank was simply a &quot;mail drop&quot; controlled &quot;directly or indirectly&quot; by Matthews' Mr. Goldberg and others. In an interview, an investigator for the comptroller of the currency calls the bank &quot;a shell&quot; with &quot;no evidence of any financial capability.&quot;    George Benoit, Matthews andamp; Wright's chairman, has said it is &quot;absolutely untrue&quot; that Mr. Goldberg controlled Commercial Bank. Mr. Benoit also has called Commercial Bank &quot;a valid corporation.&quot;    Mr. Goldberg's attorney, Stanley S. Arkin, says Mr. Goldberg &quot;denies any wrongdoing.&quot; Mr. Arkin declines further comment.    If Matthews andamp; Wright wrote a check that was immediately turned over to a bank that it controlled, did anybody really buy Galt's bonds on Aug. 29? &quot;It's a very good question,&quot; says Mr. Gregg of Pittsburgh National. Galt's finance director, Roy Mitchell, says he isn't sure who bought the bonds.    And Ms. White, who is the current president of the National Association of Bond Lawyers, says her firm didn't examine the legitimacy of the sale because Pittsburgh National said at the time that it had received the proceeds. The trustee knows, she says, that &quot;when they sign receipts, that means they've got the money.&quot; The law firm concentrated its efforts on ascertaining whether Galt had viable projects to finance with the bonds. &quot;I can see I ought to broaden my focus here,&quot; Ms. White comments.    Nevertheless, Ms. White asserts that her firm carried out its responsibilities as bond counsel. &quot;We had no reason to believe there weren't real proceeds,&quot; she says. And Mr. Gregg says two outside law firms have examined Pittsburgh National's conduct and concluded that &quot;the actions we took were in compliance with the instructions given&quot; by Galt, Matthews andamp; Wright and Commercial Bank. Mr. Gregg adds, &quot;In every case, the bondholders have been protected.&quot;    Should investigators find there really wasn't a sale before the congressional deadline, interest on the bonds could be declared taxable, and investors could be liable for back taxes. In addition, the municipality could have to refund any profits it made by investing the bond proceeds. Investors already have seen prices of some Matthews andamp; Wright bonds plunge as much as 10% because of fears that the bonds' tax-exempt status may be revoked.    The drop in the bond prices is particularly vexing to investors. Many Matthews andamp; Wright issues carry the highest possible ratings from the two leading credit agencies, Moody's Investors Service Inc., a Dun andamp; Bradstreet Corp. unit, and Standard andamp; Poor's Corp., a McGraw-Hill Inc. unit. All the underwritings were approved by outside attorneys. And some of the bonds were sold to institutional and individual investors by well-known securities firms such as Smith Barney, a unit of Primerica Corp., and Dean Witter Financial Services Group, a Sears, Roebuck andamp; Co. unit.    &quot;How were we supposed to tell our clients not to buy?&quot; one bond analyst asks. &quot;These were triple-A credits, and Matthews andamp; Wright had never had a problem before.&quot;    However, Moody's and Standard andamp; Poor's say the high credit ratings on the issues reflected the safe investments in which the proceeds were placed. Whether the bonds were tax-exempt was largely for the outside bond attorney to decide, says Bill De Sante, a Moody's vice president.    But in recent years, the number of law firms doing municipal-bond work has exploded so fast that monitoring the quality of a bond counsel's opinion is much more difficult, industry professionals concede. &quot;Everyone and their dog thinks they can be a bond counsel these days,&quot; a prominent bond lawyer says.    Bond analysts also question how closely municipalities and related issuers have monitored developers, particularly on privately owned projects. &quot;We approved the bonds,&quot; says Hop Bailey, the chairman of the Knox County, Tenn., Health, Education and Housing Facilities Board, which made two bond offerings through Matthews andamp; Wright. &quot;From that point on, I really don't keep up with them.&quot;    The question of who should &quot;keep up&quot; with the vast municipals market has long been a contentious issue. The last major regulatory push came in 1975 when Congress, reacting to a series of scandals, created the Municipal Securities Rulemaking Board, a self-regulatory organization that sets standards for municipals underwriters.    The board is barred by law from requesting information from local-government issuers or in any other way regulating them. &quot;The board has been asked to regulate with less than all the tools available to regulate the corporate world,&quot; says Christopher Taylor, the board's executive director.    Mr. Taylor notes that corporate-bond issuers must, by law, register offerings with the SEC and follow specific guidelines on what information is to be disclosed. Corporations must file quarterly and annual financial statements with the SEC and disclose any material events affecting their financial status.    Although the anti-fraud provisions of federal securities laws apply to municipals offerings, regulation of the market is largely left to state and local officials. &quot;Some states, like New Jersey, require the filing of financial reports {by municipal issuers} with the secretary of state,&quot; Mr. Taylor notes. &quot;Others have little or no supervision of the local units.&quot;    The Government Finance Officers Association has published guidelines on disclosure, but they are voluntary and don't apply to private projects, such as apartment complexes built with tax-free funds.    Richard Ciccarone, a vice president of municipals research at Van Kampen Merritt Inc. in Chicago, scoffs at the notion that any regulators are watching the municipals market effectively. &quot;It's most definitely unregulated,&quot; he says. </TEXT></DOC>