<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870916-0116 </DOCNO><HL> The Bond Bears:Debt-Securities PricesMay Slide for Years,Many Analysts Think---Accompanying Rise in RatesMight Eventually HobbleMuch of U.S. Economy---But Some See Drop Near End---By Matthew Winkler and Tim MetzStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGNBOND MARKET NEWS (BON)MUTUAL AND MONEY-MARKET FUNDS (FND)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The bull market in bonds, which had outshone even the stock market during much of the past five years, seems to be over. Moreover, there are growing fears that the slump in bond prices may stretch out for several years.    In the first 8 1/2 months of this year, the bond market turned in a worse performance than for any comparable period in modern history. An investor who paid $1,000 for a 30-year Treasury bond in January and sold it yesterday would have lost $147.20, because the drop in its price exceeded the interest paid by that amount. That 14.72% &quot;negative return&quot; is &quot;the worst ever&quot; for a benchmark Treasury issue, says Ronald Ryan, who heads Ryan Financial Strategy Group, a financial data service.    All told, some $360 billion has been wrung out of the U.S. bond market since last Dec. 31, according to securities-industry estimates.    And many Wall Streeters believe that a bear market in bonds has settled in for a long stay. &quot;We aren't anywhere near the end of it,&quot; contends Henry Kaufman, the chief economist at Salomon Brothers Inc. who earned the nickname &quot;Dr. Doom&quot; in the 1970s because of his gloomy predictions of higher interest rates.    The bond-market slump deepened yesterday after a moderate rebound late last week. Prices of many long-term government, corporate and municipal issues plummeted more than 1 1/2 points, or at least $15 for each $1,000 face amount. One of the reasons for the decline was a Commerce Department report of a record $41.1 billion deficit in the second-quarter current account, the broadest measure of U.S. trade with the rest of the world.    If the bond market fell into a prolonged slide, the repercussions could be vast. The roughly $4 trillion of U.S. government, corporate and municipal bonds outstanding constitutes the biggest securities market in the world and touches many facets of American life. A bond-price slide and accompanying rise in interest rates would increase the cost and could reduce the availability of consumer and corporate loans. It would threaten the profits of the millions of U.S. fixed-income investors -- especially the pension funds. And it would exacerbate the problems of beleaguered Third World debtors with floating-rate bank loans. Even some major money managers who remain heavily invested are worried.    &quot;There's still value in bonds,&quot; says Jeffrey Pantages, who manages about $8 billion of mutual-fund assets at Prudential Insurance Co. of America. &quot;But buying them now is like trying to catch a falling knife; you're apt to get bloody.&quot;    Many thousands of individual investors may get an especially rude awakening. They had long made easy profits by buying bonds directly and by pouring billions of dollars into fixed-income mutual funds. According to Lipper Analytical Services Inc., which tracks the mutual-fund industry, the average U.S. bond fund had a total investment return of 117% in the five years ended last Dec. 31, topping the 114% return for the average equity mutual fund. Bond funds' net asset values soared as interest rates tumbled from a peak of 15.24% on 30-year Treasury bonds on Oct. 27, 1981, to 7.11% on July 16, 1986.    But by yesterday, the yield on 30-year Treasurys was back up to 9.69% -- the highest since Dec. 10, 1985, according to Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. The easy profits are gone, and many investors may find their initial capital in jeopardy. Mutual funds investing solely in taxable bonds have incurred losses totaling $842 million this year, according to Lipper. This spring, when bonds hit a nasty pothole early in their downward drive, terrified holders cashed in nearly $15 billion of bond mutual-fund shares and fled for the relative safety of money-market funds.    The bond market's difficulties also have begun hitting corporate borrowers and their Wall Street underwriters. Hours after acquiring $100 million of Pitney Bowes Credit Corp. 10-year notes on Sept. 8, underwriters led by Goldman, Sachs andamp; Co. couldn't sell nearly half of the offering because prices in the bond market had plummeted nearly $20 per $1,000 face amount. A day later, Goldman let the notes trade freely in the market, and they dropped $13.50 or so for each $1,000 face amount. Meanwhile, Pennsylvania Power andamp; Light Co. sidestepped the mayhem: The Allentown, Pa., utility canceled a $125 million issue.    Whether bonds will drag stocks into a bear market remains to be seen. From the peak on Aug. 25, the Dow Jones Industrial Average has fallen 160 points, or nearly 6%. Yesterday, the average tumbled 46.46 points to 2566.58. Many analysts expect stocks to shake off the bond-market gloom and even climb to new highs. But some warn that a prolonged rise in bond yields would, as in the past, eventually attract enough capital out of stocks to end their record-breaking five-year surge.    Ultimately, a bear market in bonds could choke off economic growth, too, mostly by raising borrowing costs for companies and consumers alike. But that might not happen as quickly as in the past because deregulation has made the nation's financial system more flexible. &quot;Only dramatic increases in short-term interest rates&quot; could throttle the economy, Salomon's Mr. Kaufman says.    Although few, if any, bond experts doubt that a bond-market slump is under way, not all are totally pessimistic. Some suspect that the drop in bond prices, and the rise in yields, may be nearly over. &quot;A bell doesn't ring when you're at the top for bond yields,&quot; though the higher they climb, the better bonds look as an investment, says Peter Hegel, who manages about $6 billion of mutual bond funds for Van Kampen Merritt, based in Lisle, Ill. &quot;I don't believe things are as bad as they might appear.&quot;    Also, a major change in the tax code this year could help the credit markets. The tax change forces companies, for the first time, to include pension surpluses in their earnings reports and thus may encourage pension managers to try to preserve these gains by selling their stockholdings and buying bonds or cash equivalents, such as Treasury bills.    &quot;It's clear to us that bonds will become a more important part of the portfolio&quot; because of the tax changes, says John Werring, the president of Prudential Fixed-Income Advisors, which manages about $8 billion of fixed-income pension assets.    So why has the bond market plunged? Nothing startlingly new popped up to spook the market this year, but some long-running problems managed to entangle themselves in a way that seems to foreclose any quick turnaround.    The nose dive began last April, a few weeks after the dollar suddenly began dropping against most major currencies. That slide, like its previous drops, was caused by fears that the staggering U.S. trade deficits would further depress the dollar.    To bond investors, the dollar's drop and expectations of consequent price increases on many raw materials and imports signaled higher inflation ahead. A rise in inflation typically drives up bond yields as investors demand higher returns to compensate for the sinking real value of their capital.    To complicate matters, the U.S. bond market fell into a cross fire between foreign and domestic investors.    Foreigners, who have shouldered a growing share of the huge U.S. budget deficits by buying Treasury bonds, feared that the dollar's drop would wipe out their investment gains. When Japanese investors, for example, convert their holdings back into yen, the lower dollar would buy less of the Japanese currency. Thus, Japanese investors have been hit directly by the decline in the dollar as well as by the drop in American bond prices. A Japanese buyer of long-term Treasury bonds at the end of 1986 is currently facing an investment loss exceeding 30%, or more than $300 for each $1,000 bond.    As a result, foreigners have lost some of their appetite for U.S. bonds, and the slackened demand has helped reduce bond prices and drive up yields. In addition, foreign investors are being rattled by weak performances and increased volatility of the Japanese and West European bond markets, which also have become more sensitive to currency-rate changes.    &quot;As Americans, we no longer control our own debt markets,&quot; says David Hale, the chief economist at Kemper Financial Services Inc. in Chicago. &quot;Short of driving short-term rates up sharply and risking a recession, monetary authorities can't do much to keep the dollar from falling and pulling bond prices down.&quot;    American investors also fear that higher inflation will cut their net real returns on bonds, and they, too, are demanding higher yields. Moreover, many investors think that the lower dollar will stimulate the economy by aiding U.S. exporters and will permit domestic producers to increase prices as import prices are forced up; both forces would exacerbate inflation pressures. In addition, a stronger U.S. economy would raise demand for credit.    &quot;Five years into an expansion, the economy still looks buoyant,&quot; observes Lacy Hunt, the chief economist at Carroll, McEntee andamp; McGinley, an investment firm. As a result, he adds, &quot;The bear market in bonds could last for another couple of years.&quot;    Salomon's Mr. Kaufman and other economists say the huge budget and trade deficits, which have made the U.S. the world's largest foreign debtor, aren't likely to narrow significantly without a further sharp decline in the dollar.    &quot;We expect the dollar to decline another 30% over the next three years,&quot; says John Paulus, a managing director at Morgan Stanley andamp; Co. &quot;Obviously, that won't be encouraging for the bond market.&quot;    With the outlook so unpromising, beleaguered bond investors, traders and others are being forced into tough decisions about whether to stay in or get out of the market, and, if they stay in, how to survive.    Following mid-April's bond-price collapse -- during which prices of long-term Treasurys lost almost 8% of their value in a few days -- many people redeeming mutual-fund shares were retirees who for years had been transferring maturing certificates of deposit into bond funds to try to maintain their incomes. These people &quot;weren't really investors -- they were converted savers,&quot; says Michael Lipper, the president of Lipper Analytical. &quot;They got into the bond funds essentially to replace their high-yielding CDs that were maturing.&quot;    Amateur investors aren't the only ones dropping out of the bond market. One professional who did so is Timothy Essaye, a Long Island investor who, between 1973 and mid-June of this year, earned his living by trading his own money in the bond market every day. But he hasn't traded a bond for 2 1/2 months, he says, because &quot;it's just too difficult to make money at it. The price swings are too violent. Every time the dollar hiccups, the bond market falls out of bed.&quot;    Institutional investors who can't just stay home are sharpening their &quot;market-risk management&quot; -- in other words, reducing the effects of volatile prices with hedging techniques. Most money managers also are restructuring their portfolios. They are moving money out of 20- to 30-year bonds, whose prices decline fastest in a bear market, into issues maturing in about 10 years or less, whose prices are dropping more slowly. Many also are buying bonds close to maturity.    &quot;There are a lot of ways to deal with a bear market,&quot; Prudential's Mr. Pantages says. &quot;You can sell financial futures contracts, you can buy or sell options on your bond holdings, or you can just sell your bonds.&quot; But he adds that unless an investor is willing to sell short -- to sell borrowed bonds in the hope of returning to the lender bonds bought more cheaply later -- &quot;it's going to be very difficult to make big profits in a declining market.&quot; Mr. Pantages says that beginning last month, he began buying options to hedge against price declines in his bond funds.    Some mutual-fund managers also have been increasing their cash reserves. They want to avoid being caught short of cash and hence forced to dump bonds to meet any surge in redemptions. When that happened to many funds last spring, it worsened the price slide.    At the Vanguard Group of Investment Companies, based in Valley Forge, Pa., &quot;We're as defensive right now as we ever get, and we've been that way since early July,&quot; says Ian MacKinnon, the senior vice president responsible for 17 bond funds with assets totaling $11 billion. He adds that cash in the funds &quot;now runs between 10% and 15%&quot; of assets, up from an average of 6% just before the spring debacleeven though net redemptions last month were &quot;under 2%.&quot;    Precautions don't always forestall trouble, however. Among the notable victims of the plunge last spring were the big Wall Street securities firms, which are also the biggest bond dealers and presumably among the savviest players.    Even major bond dealers, including Goldman Sachs, Salomon and Merrill Lynch andamp; Co., frequently must commit much of their total capital to carry the extensive bond inventories needed for largescale trading. Consequently, these firms almost always hold offsetting &quot;hedge&quot; positions whose value should increase when bond prices fall. It was the failure of these &quot;hedges&quot; -- such as financial futures and options -- to work properly that largely set off last spring's plunge.    Specifically, the spread between prices of government securities and those of other instruments commonly used to hedge bond portfolios grew so abnormally wide that &quot;our hedges were rendered ineffective,&quot; says Eugene H. Rotberg, executive vice president of Merrill Lynch, who got his job in a management shakeup following the firm's highly publicized $377 million in bond-trading losses in the second quarter.    Adds a managing director at First Boston Corp., where spring bond-trading losses topped $100 million: &quot;We're not taking the risks we were taking earlier this year. We may not make as much money as we could, but we won't lose as much, either.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>