<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880822-0088 </DOCNO><HL> Europe: Czechoslovakia: Still Under Ice After Two Decades </HL><AUTHOR> Alex Pravda </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP FREST </CO><DATELINE> LONDON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The year 1988 brings a spate of anniversaries for Czechoslovakia. It's been 70 years since the establishment of the state, 50 years since the Nazi occupation, 40 years since the Communist takeover, and 20 years since the Soviet intervention that ended the Prague Spring. This year is made all the more poignant by the blossoming in Moscow of reform strikingly similar to that led by Alexander Dubcek. In fact, when asked last year what separated the two reforms, a Soviet foreign ministry spokesman simply replied &quot;nineteen years.&quot; &quot;Perestroika&quot; has begun to reverse the time-honored political lag of the Soviet Union behind most of Eastern Europe. Rather than feeling constrained by Moscow from undertaking reforms, many East Bloc leaders now feel pressured to go faster and further than they would like.    Prague, along with Bucharest and East Berlin, is among the most reluctant to take the perestroika road. And with good reason. The Czech regime embodies Eastern European Brezhnevism, a system designed to stifle movement for change under a blanket of comforting material welfare interwoven with corruption and bureaucratic rule. Those who welcomed the Soviet intervention and forcibly expunged the traces of 1968 by what is euphemistically called &quot;normalization&quot; still dominate the party leadership. They are united by a fear of losing power rather than by ideology. If leaders in the Kremlin can be seen as riding a reform bicycle that has to keep moving forward to keep upright, those in Prague inhabit a political house of cards, aware that movement may topple their edifice of power.    Prague has been slow and nervous in its response to perestroika. Mikhail Gorbachev's visit to Czechoslovakia last April increased the conservatives' discomfort. While the Soviet leader studiously avoided saying anything positive about the Prague Spring he gave strong hints about the need for reform. Moscow stepped up consultations with those in the leadership more able than the ailing Gustav Husak to change while maintaining control. However, the replacement of Mr. Husak with Milos Jakes as general secretary last December was not masterminded from the Kremlin. Rather, Mr. Jakes emerged as the choice of the Czech party machine, as somebody who would undertake the minimum of reform necessary to preserve the regime: a &quot;conservationist&quot; reformer.    To maintain stability in a country sandwiched between the two states in the region most attracted to perestroika, Poland and Hungary, Mr. Jakes is now showing a certain willingness to contemplate reform in order to salvage his major and fast-waning asset: the economy. Long renowned with East Germany for its relatively respectable economic performance, Czechoslovakia has lately been displaying worrying symptoms of the ills that have, in fact, long been eating away at its core. Underinvestment and bureaucratic overcentralization have produced an aging stock of equipment, the usual piles of unsold goods, wage leveling, massive subsidies and poor distribution. Last year, one in three enterprises failed to fulfill production plans. While the debt burden remains low by Eastern European standards, hard currency exports are performing badly and 1987 saw the balance of payments go into the red for the first time this decade.    The &quot;sweeping&quot; reforms, introduced last year and now more vigorously promoted by Mr. Jakes, are officially slated for full implementation by 1990, a hopelessly unrealistic target according even to many Czech economists. Moreover, the reforms do not go far enough, nor is anyone sure whether the country has the administrators and managers capable of running a more flexible system.    Mr. Jakes himself oversaw the purge of more than 300,000 members from the Communist Party, including many of those most suited to an entrepreneurial role. The party, which now includes something like one in six of the adult population, overflows with loyal executors of directives but few well qualified for management jobs in which talent and initiative matter. Aware of this, the leadership is now calling for a re-gearing of recruitment; loyalty remains necessary but is no longer sufficient to secure key jobs in administration and management. Mr. Jakes plans to cut the bureaucratic machine by one-third and is reportedly allowing some economists associated with 1968 back into the institutes from which they were expelled.    But it will take more than this to reinvigorate the economy. To produce the improvements in productivity necessary to revive flagging living standards, the politicians need the active cooperation of the work force. The problem is one familiar to all reformers in Communist states -- how to persuade people used to an easily earned if modest income to work harder and accept higher differentials today and austerity measures for a possibly better tomorrow.    Mr. Jakes has the most egalitarian-minded population in the region, and one deliberately encouraged to avoid involvement in public affairs and concentrate on private welfare. With the exception of a few Czech loyalists and a higher proportion of Slovaks, who have gained from the federal structure established in 1968, the great majority of the population is at best indifferent to what remains a system without legitimacy.    In one sense, popular indifference has helped maintain political stability for 20 years. &quot;Normalization&quot; has benefited from the historical tendency of the Czechoslovakians toward a rather fatalistic acceptance of a status quo backed by overwhelming odds. In other and increasingly important respects, resignation and withdrawal mean that there is no other official group or institution that commands respect or real authority. Those that come closest represent dissident views (Charter 77) and countercultures (the Jazz Section).    It is significant that after long years of political inactivity the Roman Catholic Church is becoming a focus for critical opinion. So far, 500,000 people have signed a petition calling for the restoration of religious freedom. Such a religious groundswell has contributed to official efforts to improve relations with the Vatican, including a recent agreement on three Episcopal appointments, the first for 15 years, which still leaves nine of the 13 sees vacant.    As for non-religious dissent, Mr. Jakes is taking an even harsher line than Mr. Husak. The deportation last month of foreign participants in Charter 77-sponsored seminars evidenced Prague's concern that any concession to &quot;glasnost&quot; may have destabilizing consequences, a line repeatedly pressed by Czechoslovakia at the recent Warsaw Pact summit. Mr. Jakes seemingly calculates that streamlining the economy and bureaucracy plus nodding toward &quot;democratization&quot; -- invigorating elections and the parliament -- are enough to hold the situation without reassessment of 1968, let alone serious political reform.    In 1969 not even the gloomiest of prophets forecast that Czechoslovakia would remain politically frozen for two decades. Now that we are witnessing a thaw in Moscow and cracks in the political ice in most &quot;socialist states,&quot; there is at last some ground for supposing that we may see the weakening of constraints on democracy in Czechoslovakia, the country with the strongest democratic traditions in Eastern Europe.    ---   Mr. Pravda is director of the Soviet foreign policy program at the Royal Institute of International Affairs in London. </TEXT></DOC>