<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880908-0002 </DOCNO><HL> The SEC's Case Against Drexel -- Street Fight: SEC Accuses Drexel Of a Sweeping Array Of Securities Violations --- Michael Milken, Victor Posner Are Also Cited as Agency Files Its Civil Complaint --- Using Ivan Boesky as a Front? </HL><AUTHOR> James B. Stewart and Daniel Hertzberg (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> PEC </CO><IN> STK BON SCR </IN><G> SEC JUS </G><TEXT>   In its most sweeping enforcement action since passage of the nation's securities laws, the Securities and Exchange Commission charged Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc., Drexel junk-bond chief Michael Milken and five other persons with insider trading and other numerous securities violations. The defendants used the organization of now-imprisoned former takeover speculator Ivan F. Boesky &quot;as a front,&quot; the SEC alleged.    The 184-page civil complaint, approved by the SEC last June, alleges a series of illegal schemes that, if proved, are an encyclopedia of securities-law violations. Besides insider trading in four transactions, the complaint charges Drexel and other defendants with stock manipulation, parking of securities to conceal their true ownership, false disclosures in SEC filings, maintaining false books and records, aiding and abetting capital-rules violations, and fraud in securities-offering materials.    The complaint also charges two corporate raiders and Drexel clients: Miami financier Victor Posner and his son Steven. Also named as defendants are Lowell Milken, Michael's brother, who, the complaint alleges, has substantial responsibility for the Milkens' investment partnerships; Cary Maultasch, a Drexel senior equity trader who worked for Michael Milken; and Pamela R. Monzert, a trader in Drexel's Beverly Hills, Calif., office.    The SEC's wide-ranging civil charges pave the way for related criminal charges, since nearly all of the alleged violations are covered by criminal securities law provisions. The standard of proof in a criminal case, however, is tougher.    The SEC and the Manhattan U.S. Attorney's office have been cooperating on the Drexel investigation, and the SEC has dispatched some of its enforcement staff to help in the nearly two-year-old criminal investigation by a federal grand jury. The SEC had held off filing its case at the request of the U.S. Attorney's office, and a person familiar with the case said the Manhattan U.S. Attorney had acquiesced in the SEC's decision to move now, ahead of any possible criminal charges. John Sturc, SEC deputy director of enforcement, said the timing of the SEC action &quot;doesn't mean anything.&quot; A spokesman for U.S. Attorney Rudolph Giuliani declined comment.    &quot;If this turns out to be true, it's a sad day&quot; for Drexel and for Wall Street, said Robert Pirie, the president of the investment-banking firm of Rothschild Inc. &quot;It sounds like the SEC has loaded all its shotguns,&quot; said Alan Bromberg, a professor of securities law at Southern Methodist University in Dallas.    The complaint focuses on a total of 16 transactions -- most of them takeover-related -- involving Drexel and Mr. Boesky's organization, and two alleged insider-trading incidents in deals in which Mr. Boesky wasn't involved. The SEC's Mr. Sturc said that despite its length, the complaint &quot;doesn't purport to be exhaustive&quot; and that the agency's investigation of Drexel and others is continuing.    The complaint, filed in federal court in Manhattan, asks that the defendants be enjoined from future violations of securities laws, and it seeks a court order requiring Drexel, Michael Milken and Mr. Maultasch to pay civil penalties under the Insider Trading Sanctions Act of 1984 &quot;in the amount of three times their illegal trading profits gained or losses avoided.&quot; In only a few instances did the complaint specify any dollar amounts.    The complaint also seeks an order requiring all the defendants &quot;to account for and disgorge all profits and monies received, and losses avoided, as a result of their illegal conduct.&quot; Finally, the SEC asked the court to grant &quot;all further relief&quot; warranted.    If found liable, the defendants also face potentially devastating sanctions. The SEC could seek to put the people charged, and even Drexel, out of the securities business.    The SEC alleged a close, secret alliance between the powerhouse investment-banking firm of Drexel and its junk-bond chief, Michael Milken, and Mr. Boesky, then Wall Street's most powerful stock speculator. The SEC alleged that from 1984 until late 1986, Mr. Boesky was a virtual agent of Drexel, repeatedly acting at Drexel's direction, buying stocks in takeover situations involving Drexel clients and manipulating securities prices in ways favorable to Drexel.    The SEC alleged that Drexel and Mr. Boesky sometimes shared profits and losses on stockholdings and that Drexel provided Mr. Boesky with confidential inside information on two takeover deals -- Occidental Petroleum's aborted 1985 bid for Diamond Shamrock Corp. and Wickes Cos.' unsuccessful 1986 bid for National Gypsum Co.    Frederick H. Joseph, Drexel's chief executive officer, said, &quot;We disagree with the charges filed by the SEC and in due course we expect to be vindicated.&quot; Despite a review by the SEC of hundreds of Drexel deals, he said, &quot;there is little in the filing that is not based on Ivan Boesky's allegations.&quot; In an apparent reference to earlier settlement talks between Drexel and the SEC, which collapsed, Mr. Joseph said, &quot;It is unfortunate that these matters couldn't be resolved out of court. We are eager to resolve them.&quot;    Michael Milken said in a statement, &quot;For the past 22 months, I have been the subject of a shadow trial of systematic leaks and innuendo based upon false accusations.&quot;    He expressed confidence that &quot;I and my colleagues will be fully vindicated.&quot;    A statement released on behalf of Lowell Milken by his lawyer, Michael Armstrong, said: &quot;The naming of Lowell Milken in the SEC's massive but specious civil complaint is unwarranted and unfair. His name appears in only two of the transactions.&quot;    Andrew Lawler, the attorney for Ms. Monzert, said the SEC's charges are &quot;unwarranted&quot; and &quot;unfounded.&quot; Mr. Maultasch's lawyer, Reid Weingarten, couldn't be reached.    The 18 transactions cited by the SEC include many major takeover contests in the years 1984-1986, deals in which Drexel played an important role. Among them are successful or attempted takeovers of Fischbach Corp., Harris Graphics Corp., Phillips Petroleum, Storer Communications Inc., Diamond Shamrock, National Gypsum and Pacific Lumber. They also include a number of non-takeover-related transactions, such as securities offerings.    Apart from Drexel officials, only the Posners were named as defendants in the SEC's complaint. But besides the Posners, those involved in the transactions cited by the SEC include some of America's best-known corporate raiders and dealmakers: Carl Icahn, Saul Steinberg, Ted Turner, Sanford Sigoloff, Charles Hurwitz -- all Drexel clients. None of these individuals were charged in any way in the complaint.    The unveiling of the SEC's charges isn't expected to have any immediate major impact on Drexel or on its successful high-yield, junk-bond operation. During the nearly two years the closely held firm has been under intensive investigation by the SEC and the Manhattan U.S. attorney, Drexel's business has been thriving, and even competitors have acknowledged the extraordinary loyalty of Drexel's clients, especially to Mr. Milken, who has made many of them millionaires.    But internally, Drexel officials have indicated they were worried by the prospect of actual charges being filed. Employees and customers have been warned repeatedly about the likelihood of charges, in order to soften the impact. Officials of the firm backed away from earlier assertions that any charges would be merely &quot;technical.&quot; Drexel has spent millions of dollars on a big television advertising campaign and other efforts to keep clients from defecting and to burnish its public image. And it has said it has paid more than $120 million in legal and accounting fees in preparing to meet the charges.    The SEC's complaint makes clear that Mr. Boesky will, indeed, be the star witness in the government's case should Drexel decide not to settle charges and go to trial. Despite the presence of two non-Boesky transactions, the SEC's case relies heavily on allegations by Mr. Boesky.    The now-imprisoned former takeover speculator is an admitted felon. He agreed to pay $100 million in 1986 to settle civil insider-trading charges and to cooperate with government investigators. He pleaded guilty to one felony for a conspiracy involving Mr. Posner's Fischbach Corp. -- a transaction that also figures prominently in the SEC's charges against Drexel -- and Mr. Boesky is currently serving a three-year prison sentence for that offense.    While Drexel has repeatedly castigated Mr. Boesky's accuracy and motives, people familiar with the case have indicated that the SEC has numerous corroborating witnesses and documents. Also, two transactions cited in the SEC case -- the Lorimar-Telepictures merger and a proposed buy-out of Viacom -- aren't connected to Mr. Boesky at all. Both involve allegations that Drexel traded the companies' securities on inside information.    A crucial part of the government's case involves allegations that Mr. Boesky and Drexel tried to conceal their arrangements, falsifying books and records in the process. They even went so far, the SEC alleged, as to &quot;purposefully destroy&quot; documents as a result of the &quot;new environment&quot; that followed the arrest of former Drexel investment banker Dennis B. Levine on insider-trading charges in May 1986.    At the heart of the SEC's case is a $5.3 million payment by Mr. Boesky's securities firm, Ivan F. Boesky Corp., to Drexel in March 1986; one person familiar with the charges characterized the payment as the &quot;linchpin&quot; of the government's case because it is supported by witnesses other than Mr. Boesky and by written records.    As reported by this newspaper more than a year ago, the $5.3 million payment was allegedly part of a wide-ranging scheme between Mr. Boesky and Michael Milken to profit illegally from corporate takeovers. The complaint alleges that the payment represents, in large part, the profit by Drexel on stock it parked with Mr. Boesky, after subtracting the profit that Mr. Boesky earned on stock parked with Drexel. Drexel has repeatedly said the payment was for &quot;investment-banking and advisory services.&quot;    The complaint details how in several cases Drexel, using Mr. Boesky as its agent, allegedly put companies &quot;in play&quot; as takeover targets. One example is Mr. Posner's Drexel-backed takeover of Fischbach, where, the SEC alleged, Michael Milken in early 1984 had Mr. Boesky acquire more than 10% of Fischbach, freeing Mr. Posner from an earlier standstill agreement. Mr. Posner later gained control of Fischbach.    Mr. Boesky filed a 13D schedule with the SEC reporting his ownership of the Fischbach shares when, in fact, Michael Milken, Drexel, the Posners and their Pennsylvania Engineering Corp. were the beneficial owners of the stock and should have disclosed this, the SEC said. Pennsylvania Engineering was named as a defendant in the SEC suit.    In another situation involving Harris Graphics Corp., Drexel, Michael Milken and other Drexel employees owned substantial chunks of Harris stock, the complaint alleged. In May 1985, the SEC charged, Michael Milken instructed Mr. Boesky to buy more than 5% of Harris stock and approach Harris management with an offer to buy the company. At the same time, Drexel and Mr. Milken were encouraging other clients to attempt to buy Harris, the SEC said.    In June 1986, AM International, a Drexel client, acquired Harris for $22 a share; this meant big profits for those at Drexel who had acquired much of their Harris stock for $1 a share, the complaint charged.    Throughout the complaint, the SEC accused Drexel of gaining profits and avoiding losses through the misuse of inside information. For example, the SEC complaint says that as a result of Drexel's allegedly unlawful trading in Storer securities, Drexel profited by more than $1 million.    The complaint also alleged that as a result of Drexel's and Mr. Milken's getting &quot;material nonpublic information&quot; about a proposed Viacom International leveraged buy-out in late 1986, Drexel avoided a loss of about $1,780,000 that it would otherwise have incurred had Drexel continued to hold a short position in Viacom stock. Drexel purchased stock to cover its short position after getting the information, the SEC charged.    The SEC also accuses Drexel and Mr. Milken of allegedly defrauding Drexel's client, Maxxam Group Inc., by using the Boesky organization as nominee to buy for Drexel the stock of Pacific Lumber Co., which was the target of Maxxam's tender offer in 1985. The complaint says Drexel received more than $22 million in fees from Maxxam for services rendered in connection with its acquisition of Pacific Lumber.    Many Wall Street officials and securities lawyers turned their attention to the issue of whether Drexel would seek to settle the charges. The stakes are high because, if Drexel loses in court on the major charges, the SEC &quot;could put Drexel out of business,&quot; Prof. Bromberg said.    But Sam S. Miller, a securities lawyer at Orrick, Herrington andamp; Sutcliffe and a former general counsel at PaineWebber Group Inc., said, &quot;Drexel is hanging tough. It looks like it intends to litigate.&quot;    ---   Lee Berton and Steve Swartz contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>