<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870727-0025 </DOCNO><HL> Meese's Vagueness Is Expected to VexIran-Contra Panel Eager to Fill Gaps---By David RogersStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 07/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Attorney General Edwin Meese goes before the Iran-Contra inquiry this week in what is expected to be a tug-of-war with House and Senate investigators exasperated by his frequent claims of being unable to recall events.    Mr. Meese played a lead role in deliberations within the Reagan administration as the controversy became public last fall, but his responses in private depositions before the House and Senate committees often have been vague, according to investigative sources.    The same pattern was seen in public testimony this month by former National Security Adviser John Poindexter, and with time running out, the inquiry faces significant gaps in its understanding of the affair.    The vagueness of both men contrasts strikingly with the detailed testimony provided by Secretary of State George Shultz last week, and this comparison has contributed to concern that facts are still being withheld from Congress. While Mr. Meese has cast himself as a neutral party among President Reagan's foreign policy advisers, the cumulative testimony so far has portrayed him as an ally to those, like Adm. Poindexter, who promoted the Iran-Contra operation.    Apart from being privy to discussions with President Reagan, the attorney general met at a crucial juncture last Nov. 22 with former Central Intelligence Agency Director William Casey. Earlier the same day, Justice Department attorneys had discovered evidence that arms-sales profits had been diverted to Nicaraguan insurgents. Separately that day, Mr. Shultz privately expressed fears to Mr. Meese that the Iran operation might be linked to the Contras.    Mr. Meese has told investigators that when he went to Mr. Casey's home that evening, he didn't discuss the diversion. But testimony last week established that the next day, Nov. 23, Mr. Casey sent a letter to the president urging that Mr. Shultz be replaced.    Mr. Meese was an intermediary two days later in arranging for Adm. Poindexter's resignation, but it remains unclear as to why the same treatment wasn't accorded the admiral's aide, Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North. At that time, the attorney general characterized Col. North as the only person in the administration fully familiar with the diversion. But in his deposition, sources said, Mr. Meese raises questions as to whether the White House ever meant to fire Col. North, but instead intended to simply allow the Marine to return to a military assignment.    Mr. Meese has portrayed himself as being only a peripheral player in the Iran initiative before last November. As attorney general, however, he became involved in preparing a January 1986 authorization that shaped the decision to sell U.S. arms through the CIA and retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord.    The finding served to circumvent requirements under the Arms Export Control Act to notify Congress, but its legal basis rested on a ruling by former Attorney General William French Smith to a very different set of circumstances involving an earlier intelligence operation.    A second entanglement for Mr. Meese is a controversial plan by Col. North to use Drug Enforcement Administration agents to pay ransom and bribes to free U.S. hostages in Lebanon. The Marine officer has testified that he briefed the attorney general on portions of the operation and the use of funds, but Mr. Meese has said he never knew it had gone beyond efforts to collect intelligence.    Apart from Mr. Casey, who died in May, Mr. Meese was the political confidant closest to Mr. Reagan as the administration tried to cope with the Iran-Contra disclosures last fall. His association with the president far exceeded that of Donald Regan, then White House chief of staff, and Adm. Poindexter has testified that he assumed Mr. Meese's signal to him to resign came after the attorney general had talked to the president.    That decision also fit a plan that, Col. North has testified, was outlined by Mr. Casey as a means for the administration to contain the controversy. In his extraordinary news conference announcing discovery of the diversion of funds, Mr. Meese sought to insulate Mr. Reagan from the matter and misstated the president's knowledge of earlier arms shipments to Iran through Israel in 1985.    Mr. Shultz was himself defensive of the president, but Mr. Meese appears to have been the person most attuned to Mr. Reagan. As the Iran initiative began unraveling, the president himself urged his advisers in a Nov. 10 meeting to follow a line of avoiding &quot;specifics&quot; about the arms sales and showing unity in the face of criticism that the policy amounted to one of arms for hostages.    Mr. Meese joined Mr. Casey in backing this approach, according to notes of the session released last week, and the president in turn later supported the late CIA director in his struggle with Mr. Shultz over supervision of the Iran policy.    &quot;He was still trying to protect the hostages,&quot; a White House official said yesterday in defense of the president's approach, describing the same concern that blunted Mr. Shultz's counsel that the policy was flawed.    While Mr. Shultz ultimately won control over the Iran policy, the significance of his victory is diminished by the fact that Mr. Casey never had a chance to test that control after his hospitalization in December. The secretary said Friday that he refused to believe that the president had deceived him personally. Yet under questioning, he acknowledged that Mr. Reagan never informed him during their regular meetings of the findings he had signed authorizing steps in the Iran initiative.    More than ever, Mr. Shultz's testimony has established that Israel was a willing partner to the infighting that isolated him in the Reagan administration. Both Col. North and Mr. Casey emerge as close allies of intelligence figures in Jerusalem, and a State Department cable in May 1986 makes clear that high Israeli officials knew that Mr. Shultz had been cut out of the operation.    An Israeli assessment of Iran's position in the war was used by the National Security Council staff in a crucial memo to Mr. Reagan in January 1986, and Mr. Shultz acknowledged that he had been concerned later in the year that Mr. Casey had suppressed an adverse U.S. intelligence report that found Iranian involvement in support of terrorism.    ---   Andy Pasztor contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>