<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870202-0090 </DOCNO><HL> Men Lose Freedom if Women Lose Ground---By Shirley Sloan Fader</HL><DD> 02/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   The rise in the '80s birthrate, with its attendant demands on women's strength, time and emotions, has produced media reports suggesting that the feminist's dream of &quot;having it all&quot; -- career, husband, children, home -- is unrealistic.    Nowhere do any of these reports even hint at the fact that if her dream smashes, her husband has as much to lose as she does.    On the simplest level, the man will go back to the full-time pressures of being the family's sole breadwinner. To replace his wife's financial contributions and maintain his family in its current standard of living will be a wearisome -- if not impossible -- task for him. There are 23 million American working wives. And the Conference Board, a nonprofit business-research organization, reports that it is wives' earnings that &quot;are rapidly boosting modest income families into the middle and affluent brackets . . . of $25,000 (plus). . . . When a family reaches $40,000-$50,000 annually, 70% have working wives.&quot; If it proves unrealistic for her to attempt it &quot;all,&quot; and she gives up her job, living standards will drop for her and for him.    Her retreat from a career-plus-home life would limit his world in four other important ways that are seldom admitted.    In 1971 I wrote a research article on the then virtually unheard of idea of mid-life career change. I found that men who tried it were almost universally condemned. &quot;Irresponsibility about your family's welfare&quot; was the typical criticism. Today, everyone knows a man who has changed careers. Government statistics indicate at least 12 million Americans do so annually.    If a husband today has society's approval for a career change, it's largely because he has a working wife. Her ability to tide the family over economically during his career change is the new factor that has so increased his options. In his survey for &quot;The Career Changer's Source Book,&quot; Gene R. Hawes found that half of the time when a man chose a new career paying less than his former occupation, his wife's earnings made it possible. When he discarded salaried life for entrepreneurship, his wife's financial efforts in some form were essential in almost all of the families.    If a husband loses his job, many of the torments of unemployment are mitigated for him by his wife's ability to earn not an old-fashioned woman's pittance, but real money in what used to be men's professional, white-collar, sales, technical and blue-collar jobs.    It's not just that she's bringing home dollars to purchase family necessities during his unemployment. More important, she's subsidizing his self-esteem and ego. Without her money, he'd have to do as generations of hard-pressed men have done -- quickly provide a family paycheck by snatching at just any job. Many career experts, such as Brenda Ruello, partner in Heidrick andamp; Struggles Inc., an international executive-search firm, confirm that because of their wives' paychecks, both white-collar and blue-collar men now have &quot;a new pattern: the luxury of search time to locate the best job opportunity.&quot;    It isn't just the career changers or the unemployed among today's men who profit. All men whose wives make significant contributions to the family exchequer feel less pressure to devote themselves single-mindedly to work.    Ronald C. Pilenzo, president of the American Society for Personnel Administration, the world's largest professional personnel society, notes that this new worker attitude has revolutionized how managers must deal with people. &quot;When a family had a single wage earner,&quot; Mr. Pilenzo says, &quot;that man often had to accept many kinds of unattractive work obligations. Now men are saying no to overtime, to heavy travel, to unpleasant work conditions -- even to longer . . . self-employed hours. They're saying, 'I'm not willing to do that anymore because I don't have to. I'd rather have a better quality of life.'&quot;    Mr. Pilenzo adds, &quot;But the freedom to put life style first comes only with the fact that the man has a second income, namely his wife's.&quot;    In addition, judging from the scores of books and articles that have been published on the subject in the past five years, more men seem to be discovering the joys of fatherhood. In many of these celebrations of paternity, the author recalls how different his boyhood was. He remembers a father so busy earning a living that he had little chance to know his children. Simultaneously, the author often remembers his mother, whose only outlets were home and children. Starved for opportunities to use their competence, these mothers frequently seized control of the domestic sphere. Father became a family outsider not only because he truly was busy supporting them, but because his wife arranged it that way.    The message for men in the '80s is clear. Their longing for deep emotional relationships with their children is doomed if the women's world contracts. If women are forced to retreat to home only, they will protect their tiny domains by moving their husbands back to being income machines and family outsiders.    Redefining ancient male and female roles as our society is doing is not easy. To go further as many of the reports do and intimate that the solution lies in backtracking to &quot;pre-feminist values&quot; is to forget how grim many aspects of pre-feminist life were for men.    So women's &quot;having it all&quot; turns out to be a matter of grave, masculine self-interest. If because of the current baby boomlet, too many women give up career goals, men will also be losers. They'll be pushed back to the narrow confines of their traditional roles. Only by more equitable sharing of the family's domestic, as well as its economic, responsibilities can both wife and husband win. If she can't have it all, he quickly will discover that neither can he.    ---   Ms. Fader, the author of two recent books on women's careers, is a columnist for Ladies' Home Journal and Working Woman magazine. </TEXT></DOC>