<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880412-0110 </DOCNO><HL> October Crash Proves Need for National Market System </HL><AUTHOR> Donald E. Weeden </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> STK SCR </IN><G> CNG </G><TEXT>   Fundamental to the Exchange Act of 1975 was establishment of a national market system for exchange-listed stocks. Thirteen years later, such a system is not yet in place. Would it have made a difference on Oct. 19 if there had been one?    An answer to this critical question should be sought by those studying the October crash. Yet nowhere in the Brady commission report nor in the voluminous study by the Securities and Exchange Commission is there any mention of a national market system or even of the Exchange Act itself.    If the answer to the question is yes -- or even maybe -- the second question is: What should Congress, the Securities and Exchange Commission, the securities industry or others do to bring one about? Also, just what is a national market system? Its final structure was never precisely drawn, but Congress had something clear in mind when it mandated to the SEC the job of guiding the industry toward building one.    First and foremost, Congress contemplated that any securities firm wanting to make markets and compete for the public's business should be allowed to do so, and the way to do it in a centralized system was to link such firms electronically. It was Congress's intent that a public customer, wherever he entered the system, would find equal access to market information and timely execution. For those with limit orders (orders left with a specialist to sell or buy when a stock reaches a certain price) a central limit order book that pools the limit orders of all exchanges into a composite book would give priority to public orders. Suitable regulation over all participating dealers could be established by the SEC to ensure adequate protection for the public.    Certain elements of a national system were obvious and quickly made their way into use. The first was a composite tape that brought information from various market centers onto one ticker tape. A composite quotation display system soon followed, allowing customers and brokers to see quotes from all markets on a single screen. And an Intermarket Trading System allowed orders coming to various exchange floors to flow from one exchange to another quickly, easily and at no cost.    What was not accomplished was the final step of interlinking all the firms that might want to make markets in listed stocks. This was the most difficult step because it seemed to threaten the very existance of exchanges.    Would this last step have made a difference last October? I think so. One thing is clear: More money made available to individual firms for market making through a national system would have been welcome. On Oct. 19 and 20 it might have significantly damped the volatility and greatly moderated the negative psychological and economic reactions.    Several weaknesses in the market structure (both listed and over the counter) added greatly to price volatility on Oct. 19 and 20. Insufficient capital in specialists' hands was cited by the Brady report and the SEC study. This was particularly critical in those stocks considered market leaders.    It's not clear how much market-making capital would be attracted to New York Stock Exchange stocks under the open-access rules of a national system. The government bond and over-the-counter markets provide some clues. There, unobstructed, dealer capital tends to gravitate to securities with high volume and continuing customer interest.    My best guess is that almost every firm currently seeking business with institutional investors would participate to some degree and probably would be joined by most of the retail firms. Eventually, as the national system took on international positions, every major firm around the world would participate.    Another problem in October was the deficiency in critical instantaneous information. No one but specialists had a clue (and even they were uncertain) as to just how much selling pressure there was. A national system could have informed widely scattered dealers of order imbalances. The Intermarket Trading System could be easily expanded to include institutional trading desks and modified to include a central limit order book. This would automatically consolidate and publicize imbalances in orders as well as limit orders.    Some progress, especially in market access, is being made. The inadequate linkage between market makers in Nasdaq (the National Association of Securities Dealers Automated Quotation system) will be eliminated soon -- or substantially corrected -- by the introduction of user-friendly terminals. Combined with new rules requiring maintenance of markets and their timely update, this should go far to make the market more responsive and responsible.    The exchanges seem less focused in their reaction to Oct. 19, tending to complain about one another's use of the Intermarket Trading System, concentrating their criticism on the trading practices of certain customers, and trying to make derivative markets the fall guy. There is some recognition by the New York Stock Exchange of the imperfect nature of the specialist system, but it is limited to replacing one monopolist with another.    One positive fact coming out of the studies so far is recognition that the marketplace and those within it do not have a responsibility to prevent downturns. It is possible only to minimize the violence and reduce the volatility.    In the early '70s, Wall Street had a paper-crunch crisis that led to many failures of firms and losses to their customers. Out of that came the congressional hearings that resulted in the Exchange Act of 1975 and legislation creating the Securities Investor Protection Corp., a federal and industry agency that provides limited insurance to customers of failed brokerage houses.    There is an analogy between that crisis and the one in October. It was never suggested then -- nor should it be today -- that the solution was in putting restraints on customers. Rather, the job of the securities industry is to improve its capability to serve the customer and thereby help prevent another Oct. 19.    To the amazement of most, the Exchange Act catapulted the securities industry into its greatest period of growth, profitability and customer satisfaction. Oct. 19 pointed out some deficiencies still existing in market structure.    A national market system as envisioned by Congress is a worthy goal, even more so today than 13 years ago. The coming public hearings on the October crash would be an appropriate time to determine how to finish the task.    ---   Mr. Weeden is chief executive officer of a New York securities firm. </TEXT></DOC>