<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870205-0030 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Reagan administration officials last summer knew more about the ostensibly private arms network supplying the Nicaraguan rebels than they have acknowledged.    In fact, sources said, officials concluded then that weapons the network was providing were overpriced and of poor quality.    On Aug. 8, according to a chronology released last month by Vice President George Bush, former Central Intelligence Agency operative Felix Rodriguez reported his fears about the arms network to two of Mr. Bush's aides, Donald Gregg and Col. Samuel Watson.    According to administration sources, Mr. Rodriguez reported that arms being sent to the rebels, known as Contras, were overpriced, sometimes by as much as 300%; that some of the airlift's pilots weren't equipped to fly at night; and that maintenance of the aging planes was so shoddy that the crews were in constant danger of being killed in a crash.    On Aug. 12, according to the vice president's chronology, the two Bush aides met with U.S. Ambassador to El Salvador Edwin Corr; Deputy Assistant Secretary of State William Walker; Marine Lt. Col. Robert Earle, an aide to Lt. Col. Oliver North, who has since been fired from the National Security Council staff; and a CIA officer to discuss Mr. Rodriguez's warnings. According to participants in the meeting, the CIA officer agreed with Mr. Rodriguez's fears and called the private arms supply network amateurish and unreliable.    Administration officials said last autumn that they were generally aware of the private supply operation, but didn't know many details about it. However, the new disclosures about Mr. Rodriguez's comments indicate that some top White House, CIA and State Department officials knew a great deal about the private arms network. It also suggests that the network, which was the Contras' primary source of weapons for the two years when Congress prohibited U.S. military aid to them, wasn't very effective.    In September, following a detailed briefing from the head of the CIA's Central America task force, President Reagan signed a secret National Security Decision Directive putting the State Department and the CIA in charge of delivering $100 million in aid that Congress had approved for the Contras beginning the following month.    Attorney General Edwin Meese in November disclosed that profits from secret U.S. arms sales to Iran had been diverted to the Contras. Since then, the Pentagon has confirmed that at least some of the weapons sold to Iran were overpriced. Congressional investigators and a special prosecutor still are trying to trace the flow of funds.    Administration officials said this week that CIA officers and operatives in El Salvador and Honduras began expressing deep concern about the quality of the private aid network as early as last May. According to intelligence sources, U.S. diplomats and CIA station chiefs in Central America had been instructed not to investigate the Contras' sources of weapons, and the operatives' concerns weren't forwarded to Washington until early August.    Administration sources said Mr. Rodriguez, a Bay of Pigs veteran who sometimes used the code name Max Gomez, had been recruited by Col. North in August or September of 1985 to help manage a secret Contra airlift based in El Salvador. Col. North, the sources said, had sworn Mr. Rodriguez to secrecy about the operation, but by early August Mr. Rodriguez was so concerned about the poor quality and excessive cost of the operation that he broke his vow of silence and went to see Mr. Gregg, who was a longtime friend.    Meanwhile, CIA operatives in El Salvador and Honduras had reported similar reservations about the private arms network's operations at Ilopango air base in El Salvador and at the Aguacate airfield in Honduras, intelligence sources said.    In addition, the sources said, some CIA officers were troubled by evidence suggesting that one of Col. North's partners in the Contra aid network was former CIA agent Thomas Clines, an associate of Edwin Wilson, another former CIA agent, who was imprisoned for selling explosives to Libya.    Last year, intelligence sources said, Col. North tried to persuade the CIA to use an arms ship for the Contras as a platform for covert propaganda broadcasts to Libya. The CIA, the sources said, had difficulty beaming propaganda to most Libyans, who live along the Mediterranean coast. But the sources said the CIA refused the offer of the ship because officials believed that Mr. Clines was a part owner of the vessel, the Erria.    Administration sources said Col. North's boss, then National Security Adviser John Poindexter, became concerned about Col. North's Contra aid network in August and tried to ease Col. North out of his role as overseer of the administration's Central American policies.    Although Col. North had served as the administration's chief liaison to the Contras since 1984, Adm. Poindexter assigned another NSC staffer to attend the CIA briefing for the president in September, administration officials said. Also, the sources said, the administration's new interagency group to oversee the Contra aid program didn't include Col. North.    &quot;Ollie (Col. North) was excluded and the private effort was to be suspended,&quot; said an official familiar with Mr. Reagan's directive. &quot;But Ollie didn't take that sitting down.&quot;    Administration sources said Col. North pushed hard to be included in the new group and eventually succeeded.    Officials said the private arms network, overseen by Col. North and retired Air Force Maj. Gen. Richard Secord, continued operating even after the administration created its own Contra-supply mechanism, partly because congressional delays in approving a new budget forced the CIA to postpone setting up its own network.    Col. North didn't close the private operation until one of its planes was shot down in Nicaragua Oct. 5, administration sources said.    When the new interagency group met a few days later, its members discussed finding someone to take responsibility for the plane and to contact the families of the two men killed in the crash, according to administration sources.    The group's chairman, Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams, suggested getting retired Army Gen. John Singlaub, who had helped provide nonlethal aid to the Contras, to claim that the plane was delivering supplies at his instruction. The sources said Mr. Abrams also told the group that he would &quot;talk to Ollie&quot; about contacting the families of the dead crewmen.    But administration officials began hinting that Gen. Singlaub was responsible for the downed plane before Mr. Abrams could contact him, and the general heatedly denied any involvement with the Contra airlift. </TEXT></DOC>