<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871116-0073 </DOCNO><HL> Lender Limbo:Insolvent Sandamp;Ls StayOpen, Losing Billions,Despite Disposal Plan---Borrowed Managers PrepareThem for Sale or Merger,But the Delays Are Many---FSLIC Lacks Money to Act---By David B. HilderStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GOVMTBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM)REAL ESTATE, REITS, LAND DEVELOPMENT (REL) </IN><TEXT>   At first it seemed an elegant solution to a staggering problem, one threatening the very existence of the government fund that protects deposits in savings and loan associations.    The Federal Home Loan Bank Board would seize control of insolvent Sandamp;Ls and turn them over to crack management teams borrowed from healthy thrift institutions. They would stabilize the Sandamp;Ls, take stock of their assets and clean them up for a quick sale or a government-aided merger. The threat to the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp. would end.    The management assignments were to be strictly temporary; the teams would stay no more than 90 days.    Two and a half years later, the stand-in managers are still standing in. And 60 of the insolvent thrifts are still alive and bleeding. &quot;All these institutions are losing money every single month,&quot; says Peter H. Pickslay, the temporary president of one of them. &quot;The longer you keep an institution open losing millions of dollars a month, the bigger the drain on the system.&quot;    The tab already is enormous. Sandamp;Ls in the Management Consignment Program, as it is called, ran up a total of $2.5 billion of operating and $2.1 billion of non-operating losses during its first two years, according to Bank Board data compiled for this newspaper by Kaplan, Smith andamp; Associates in Glendale, Calif. They also recorded $1.28 billion of losses relating to earlier periods.    These losses -- much heavier than a recent tally by the General Accounting Office for a briefer period -- cover the operations only through last March 31. The whole thrift industry ultimately bears them, as it has to finance the FSLIC. And the totals don't include the largest insolvent thrift of all, American Savings andamp; Loan Association in Irvine, Calif., which technically isn't in the program. The Financial Corp. of America unit has had operating losses of $127.2 million since 1984, while being run by managers picked by the Bank Board.    All in all, the sick Sandamp;Ls kept open under federal control had a tangible net worth on March 31 of a negative $5.74 billion.    What has gone wrong? The problems have been many, ranging from bureaucratic snags in asset sales to friction with healthy thrifts to an absence of the money needed to arrange mergers or liquidations. Some critics question the borrowed managers' qualifications for their task or even see a conflict of interest in the role. In any case, the thrift industry, which finances the FSLIC through insurance premiums, faces steadily deepening losses unless the Management Consignment Program starts closing the books on insolvent institutions soon.    The FSLIC set up the program in April 1985, alarmed at the number of Sandamp;Ls sliding into insolvency. Most of them got into trouble as an outgrowth of deregulation, which let them move beyond the field they knew well: lending for single-family homes. Many ventured into commercial real estate, investing in it as well as lending, and some even did so in geographic regions unfamiliar to them.    The dangers to the deposit insurer were growing fast; managers of some of the thrifts took ever greater risks in the hope of gambling their way out of trouble.    Unfortunately, the FSLIC and its parent agency, the Bank Board, lacked the skilled people to take over these Sandamp;Ls and straighten out their affairs. Hence, the idea of asking healthy thrifts to help manage the ailing ones. It came initially from Anthony M. Frank, the chairman of First Nationwide Bank, Ford Motor Co.'s thrift unit, based in San Francisco.    When the new managers arrived, they sometimes were shocked at what they found. Record keeping was so poor that just figuring out how bad things were was a challenge. &quot;Nobody realized how messed up these shops were, particularly from a management-information standpoint,&quot; says David Smith of the Kaplan Smith consulting firm. &quot;The information was in the heads of the guys who were there, and once they walked, it was gone.&quot;    At Beverly Hills Savings, for instance, records of a $1 billion portfolio of construction loans apparently were kept only on a single floppy disk in a personal computer in the office of an aide to the thrift's president, Mr. Smith says. &quot;We couldn't find records of either a backup or printouts,&quot; he says.    Most new managers sought to restructure loans that were in default, sell certain other troublesome loans and unload foreclosed real estate. But these moves needed approval by regulatory agencies. And many regulatory employees were young, inexperienced -- and overwhelmed by the sudden volume of the requests.    &quot;There have been delays and there have been deals that died,&quot; says Mr. Pickslay. &quot;The type of buyer you're dealing with in a distress situation will say, 'I've got the money today if you can give me the property tomorrow.'&quot;    At the same time, say some critics within the real-estate field, the managers have sometimes been too quick to sell foreclosed real estate, resulting in unnecessarily large losses. &quot;Lenders aren't trained as developers or in real-estate marketing,&quot; says Robert Knutzen, a Los Angeles consultant who has worked with two insolvent thrifts. &quot;They're trained in lending. But the lending on these projects has already been done. When the patient is dead, you bring in an undertaker, not another doctor.&quot;    Some of the thrift institutions in the program have run up huge legal bills as they fought to gain control of collateral on bad loans or fought claims of former executives and owners. American Diversified Savings Bank in Costa Mesa, Calif., for example, has paid $8.1 million to a single law firm. The bill swelled with the need to research legal problems on more than 200 different assets and 67 separate real-estate partnerships, says Thomas J. Haupert, the president brought in by the borrowed-manager program.    Then there is the question of conflicting loyalties. Some healthy thrifts have refused to participate on the ground that managing a competing institution, however troubled, would create a conflict of interest. &quot;How can one company, competing with another, intelligently come up with a competitive strategy and still perform the function it's supposed to for its stockholders?&quot; asks an executive of one major thrift that isn't taking part.    Critics also blame part of the delay on a lack of explicit incentives. When Mr. Frank first suggested borrowing managers from healthy thrifts, he said their home institutions should be compensated according to how much money they saved the FSLIC. But there wasn't time to work out such contracts. As Mr. Pickslay explains, &quot;When you're asked to go into an institution that you don't know anything about -- and you're asked on a Friday to go in on a Monday -- you can't enter into a contract on anything but a cost-plus basis.&quot; (He has spent 2 1/2 years running San Francisco's Eureka Federal Savings on loan from Home Federal Savings andamp; Loan Association in San Diego.)    Officials of the Bank Board agree that the program would work better with incentive-based contracts. It and Mr. Frank's institution now are negotiating one, and the Federal Home Loan Bank of Dallas is working on a possible standard contract.    As it became clear that the thrifts in the Management Consignment Program were going to stay open a long time, healthy institutions began complaining. They said the cost of their funds was being pushed up as insolvent rivals bid for deposits. The MCP thrifts paid an average of 0.6 percentage point more for deposits than other institutions from the outset of the program through the end of 1986, though that premium has since narrowed.    They also have been aggressive marketers. Some Sandamp;Ls in the federal program have promoted the high interest rates they offer with national ads and toll-free phone numbers. Beverly Hills Savings runs ads for its &quot;Classic CDs&quot; that picture Ferraris or mink coats and advise, &quot;The little pleasures in life are something you shouldn't deny yourself for very long.&quot; Customers can name their own maturity.    Despite all the delays and criticism, the Management Consignment Program has yielded some significant results. When new managers were assigned to Centennial Savings in Santa Rosa, Calif., they uncovered a $2.8 million embezzlement by a former executive.    The team, on loan from Great Western Financial Corp. in Beverly Hills, &quot;just started auditing the wire-transfer account and started trying to reconcile exchange checks that were written on Centennial's account with its correspondent bank,&quot; says Peter Robinson, an assistant U.S. attorney. He successfully prosecuted three former Centennial employees and five former customers on bank-fraud charges.    The program also got results at Southern California Savings. James C. Schmidt, who ran the Los Angeles institution on loan from Great American First Savings Bank in San Diego, says that $175 million of non-earning assets were converted to cash or earning assets.    The Los Angeles thrift is one of the few to have graduated from the borrowed-manager program. The FSLIC sold it to investors led by former Treasury Secretary William Simon.    But to do so, it had to sweeten the deal with $217.5 million of FSLIC cash. And that isn't something the insurance fund could do very often. It hasn't had the money.    Even if the borrowed managers had wound up their assignments in 90 days, the FSLIC -- for lack of reserve funds -- couldn't have moved quickly to close or merge the insolvent Sandamp;Ls. Liquidating a sick institution takes money because all the depositors have to be paid; merging one takes money, too, because someone has to be induced to become the merger partner. Since the borrowed-manager program began, the FSLIC has been waiting for Washington to provide it with access to more cash.    Last July, a money bill finally passed. Congress authorized the FSLIC to borrow up to $10.83 billion over three years by selling bonds. The first proceeds came last month, $600 million.    Yet that was barely enough to close the books on even one of the larger Sandamp;Ls. It is estimated that the case of Financial Corp. of America alone will take $1 billion to $3 billion to resolve. Meanwhile, as other thrift institutions run into trouble, they are expected to tumble into the Management Consignment Program, too.    So it seems destined to be around for a while. Despite the overly optimistic 90-day schedule, the new chairman of the Home Loan Bank Board, M. Danny Wall, speaks of the program as if it were more or less permanent. &quot;It is a necessary tool for us when we are dealing with hostile managements of thrifts that are insolvent or on the verge of insolvency,&quot; Mr. Wall says. He wants to give MCP managers more specific marching orders, along with incentives to carry them out.    But some problems of insolvent thrift institutions seem beyond the control of any manager. If you ask Mr. Haupert of American Diversified how much money is lost per quarter, he responds, &quot;It depends on which way the wind blows.&quot;    He isn't being evasive. The savings bank owns a wind farm where 242 turbines generate electricity that is sold to a local utility. American Diversified had a loss of $415 million in 1986 and has a negative net worth of an astonishing $581 million. Still, says Mr. Haupert, &quot;When the wind is blowing well, we make money.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>