<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870609-0067 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Rogue India</HL><DD> 06/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST </IN><TEXT>   If India's Prime Minister Rajiv Gandhi doesn't want a war, he'd better let the world know soon. Last week's parachute drop of relief supplies into Marxist guerrilla areas of Sri Lanka over that government's objections was the latest in a series of high-tension activities. China and Pakistan also have come to the brink of conflict with India recently. It all suggests that the world's most populous democracy is spoiling for a fight.    Saber-rattling might strike Mr. Gandhi as a proven way to divert public attention from his rising domestic problems. These include the recent riots in the Punjab, poor election showings by candidates of Mr. Gandhi's Congress (I) Party, grumbling among India's own Tamils in the southern state of Tamil Nadu, unrest among the Gurkhas in Darjeeling, quarrels in the cabinet and economic reforms stalled by bureaucracy and special interests.    These internal problems remind us that governing India is never an easy assignment. But outsiders who have wished Mr. Gandhi success in his efforts to modernize his country's political economy have cause for concern at this turn in India's foreign relations. Mr. Gandhi lately has been blaming India's mounting troubles -- both internal and external -- on a &quot;grand design of destabilization&quot; by his pro-Western neighbors and the United States. In fact, only one country would benefit materially from a war between India and any of its neighbors -- the Soviet Union.    Take Pakistan. For all its quarrels with India, Pakistan's greatest threat is in Soviet-occupied Afghanistan. The task of the some 115,000 Soviet troops there includes building military facilities, such as the Soviet air base at Shindand. Those facilities conform to a strategy of forward movement -- pushing across Pakistan or Iran to the oil routes of the Persian Gulf and Arabian Sea.    The Soviets must have found it heartening earlier this year when India massed more than 200,000 troops and 1,000 tanks for a military exercise along the Pakistan border. Pakistan responded with its own buildup, and until hasty negotiations were held, it looked as if the two countries might be heading into their fourth war since independence. Any such engagement would have left Pakistan far more vulnerable along its Afghan front. The advantage to the Soviets in such a scenario would be immense.    In Sri Lanka, what began years ago with the grievances of the 18% Tamil minority has become a guerrilla struggle to establish a Marxist Tamil state. A few years ago, the free-market initiatives of Sri Lanka's President Junius Jayewardene provided the best hope of improving conditions for the country's Tamils. Since then, Tamil terrorists have largely pushed aside that option with bombings and shootings. Armed by East bloc supporters, these guerrillas now control Sri Lanka's Jaffna peninsula.    For these reasons Sri Lanka launched a military campaign against the Tamil guerrillas in recent weeks, pitting 3,000 government troops against roughly 1,000 Tamil guerrillas. On Thursday, India sent air force transports -- reportedly escorted by jet fighters -- to drop 25 tons of relief supplies into the rebel areas. If such support forces the Sri Lankan government eventually to accommodate the Marxist and Indian pressures, another pro-Western regime will be neutralized.    Finally, China. A big buildup of troops and weapons has been taking place along both sides of the disputed Sino-Indian border in Tibet, where the two countries fought a brief war in 1962. A war would tax China's military resources, and might ultimately weaken its position along the heavily defended Sino-Soviet border.    As these troubling incidents recur, India may feel it has little to fear from the Soviets. It has a friendship treaty with the Russians and receives two-thirds of its arms from them. Mr. Gandhi, however, might want to ponder China's own flirtations with the Soviets. China abetted the Soviet Union's support of North Vietnam in the war with the South and the U.S. But not long after the American withdrawal, Vietnam was a full-fledged Soviet dependency, its air and naval bases were in Soviet hands and Hanoi was China's enemy. The view from Peking these days is of a China virtually surrounded by the Soviets, their clients and friends. There are SS-20s on the Mongolian border, troops in Afghanistan and huge military bases in Vietnam.    If India plays the rogue elephant and starts trampling its neighbors, the entire region, including India, will suffer; the Soviet Union will benefit. If Mr. Gandhi cannot or will not understand the larger dangers implied by his border confrontations, it's time for his real friends in Europe and the U.S. to start reminding him. </TEXT></DOC>