<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880106-0003 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. VOTED in the U.N. against Palestinian deportations by Israel.    The unanimous Security Council vote marked the first time since 1981 that the U.S. has opposed its chief Mideast ally in the world body. In the Gaza Strip, Israeli troops killed at least one Palestinian during a riot at the Khan Younis refugee camp. An army spokesman said troops fired only after other means failed to stop the crowd from pelting soldiers with rocks and bottles. Eight injuries were reported, and camp residents claimed two youths were killed.    Protests sparked by Israel's decision to deport nine Palestinians also were reported in Bethlehem, in camps around Jerusalem and in the West Bank.    ---   Ashland Oil Inc. disclosed that it may not have gotten proper clearance to fill a storage tank that collapsed Saturday and sent one million gallons of diesel fuel into the Monongahela River upstream from Pittsburgh. Meanwhile, industries and businesses curtailed operations because of inadequate water supplies.    ---   El Salvador's President Duarte said that a suspect has been arrested in the October killing of a human-rights leader and that he has confessed to being a member of a leftwing guerrilla group. Colleagues and relatives of the suspect denied the charge. Duarte also said three other members of the group are being sought in the killing.    A watchdog commission arrived in Nicaragua and met with government and opposition leaders to check compliance with a fivenation Central American peace plan. The 15-member international group travels next to Guatemala, Honduras and El Salvador. The group's report is due Jan. 15.    ---   The Navy plans to remove the battleship Iowa and a helicopter carrier, the Okinawa, from the Persian Gulf. In Kuwait, Defense Secretary Carlucci said during a tour of gulf states that the U.S. would consider a Soviet proposal for a U.N. naval force in the gulf only after exhausting efforts to secure a cease-fire in the Iran-Iraq war.    ---   Fourteen candidates registered to run for president in Haiti's military-run election Jan. 17. Seven were barred by the original electoral council from running in a November election because of ties to the Duvalier dictatorship. Four leading candidates from the November vote, canceled by violence that killed 34, are boycotting the election.    ---   A trial began in Dusseldorf, West Germany, for Lebanese-born Abbas Ali Hamadi, accused of involvement in the 1987 Beirut kidnapping of two businessmen to force the release of his brother, suspected TWA hijacker Mohammed Ali Hamadi. The defendant denied any role and appealed for release of the sole hostage still held.    ---   U.S. officials met with the leaders of the seven main Afghan rebel groups in Pakistan and assured them of continued backing from Washington until Soviet troops pull out of their homeland. Moscow, meanwhile, was silent about Foreign Minister Shevardnadze's current visit to Kabul, the highest-level Soviet visit to Afghanistan in a year.    ---   Postmaster General Tisch said he will resign his post in the spring, becoming the third consecutive postal chief to leave after serving for only a brief period. Tisch, who gave no date for his departure, said he will return to New York-based Loews Corp., his family's business.    ---   The Soviet Union leased a nuclear-powered submarine to India, and New Delhi radio said the move could affect the maritime balance of power in South Asia. India becomes the second Asian nation after China to have a nuclear-powered vessel in its fleet. Moscow said the vessel contains no nuclear weapons or &quot;imitations of such weapons.&quot;    ---   A NASA official said a prototype rocket nozzle part that was successfully tested in an August firing of the redesigned space shuttle booster is the leading candidate to replace a similar part that failed in a test last month. Use of the existing prototype could allow the space agency to avoid an additional full-scale booster test-firing.    ---   The U.S. Customs Service said it is stepping up inspections of imports from Colombia because of Bogota's release of suspected drug kingpin Jorge Ochoa from prison last week. Western diplomats in Bogota said the U.S. also is restricting the granting of visas to Colombians because of the release.    ---   The Polish government said it would hold talks with Lech Walesa and other Solidarity leaders if they agreed to stop illegal political activities and renounce assistance from the West. Walesa, asked about the unusual offer of conciliation, said he would only agree to talks &quot;without conditions.&quot;    ---   Vatican Radio said Pope John Paul II will visit Austria in June and meet with President Waldheim. The pope received Waldheim at the Vatican last year, angering Jewish leaders. The Austrian leader and former U.N. secretary-general has been accused of complicity in Nazi war crimes.    ---   Brazilian police put down a rebellion by inmates at a penitentiary in the southern state of Rio Grande do Sul, leaving two prisoners and three hostages dead since the uprising began Monday. Prison rebellions have mounted in Brazil in recent months because of overcrowding, officials said.    ---   South African police sent reinforcements to black townships outside Pietermaritzburg in Natal Province in an attempt to curb a power struggle between the United Democratic Front and the Zulu Inkatha. Police reports from the townships say five more people were killed and one was wounded in fighting between the rival groups.    ---   The Census Bureau said 10% of the babies born in the U.S. in 1986 were the offspring of foreign-born mothers. In 1983, the rate was 7.5%. From 1983 to 1986, the number of foreign-born women in the U.S. rose from 3.3 million to 3.8 million, with Latin American women accounting for the vast majority of the increase for the period.    ---   Died: Stuart Perlman, 60, co-founder of Caesars World Inc., Monday, in Miami. . . . Pete Maravich, 40, former professional and college basketball star, in Pasadena, Calif., of a heart attack. </TEXT></DOC>