<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870414-0121 </DOCNO><HL> Better Prognosis:Research on ImpotenceUpsets Idea That It IsUsually Psychological---Cause Often Is a MedicationOr a Treatable ProblemWith Nerves or Arteries---New Drugs Are Aiding Many---By David StippStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 04/14/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> PHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   Ronald, a 44-year-old resident of Newport, R.I., assumed for a decade that &quot;it was all in my mind,&quot; before finding out it wasn't. Similarly afflicted, John, 22, of Birmingham, Ala., quit dating, became depressed and developed a drinking problem. And Bruce MacKenzie, 64, of Maryville, Tenn., found a simple surgical remedy for the same thing only after frustrating years of psychotherapy.    Their problem was impotence, one of America's most widespread but least talked-about disorders. It affects an estimated 10 million American men, for many of whom it is a painful secret. &quot;You can tell your best friends you have cancer,&quot; says Mr. MacKenzie. &quot;But who can you tell you're impotent? So you live a lie.&quot;    The problem is compounded by widespread misconceptions. For one thing, many older men -- and some of their doctors -- believe such difficulties are an expected part of aging about which nothing can be done. But that is much too pessimistic a view. Moreover, expert opinion about the causes of impotence has changed sharply in recent years. It used to be said that 90% or more of the cases were wholly psychological, and this remains the conventional wisdom among many laymen and plenty of doctors. But researchers studying the disorder now agree that the majority of cases of impotence in men over 40 spring from physical causes, especially glitches in the nerve and circulatory mechanisms.    In fact, diagnosing and treating the physical causes of impotence is rapidly becoming a hot area in medicine. Impotence research accelerated in 1983 with the advent of drugs that have improved treatment and shed light on what goes wrong physiologically. New ways are being developed to pinpoint and surgically correct the vascular problems that are often at fault. And implantable prostheses offer hope for even the most difficult cases.    Psychiatrists and psychologists caution, however, that even when impotence is based in a physical problem it may have important psychological aspects that shouldn't be overlooked. For example, the onset commonly prompts &quot;performance anxiety,&quot; which can make matters much worse. Some sex therapists complain that urologists oversell the physical causes and treatments.    The performance-anxiety issue bears on another bit of confusion in this matter, namely, just what constitutes impotence. The term properly refers to a chronic inability to have firm enough erections for intercourse. Transient erection problems aren't impotence; such problems happen to almost all men at some time in their lives, doctors say.    Meanwhile, the disorder is beginning to come out of the closet. A group called Impotents Anonymous offers counseling to men and their partners through about 100 chapters nationwide. In Los Angeles, potency clinics advertise in newspapers and on television. And media coverage of the AIDS epidemic is lessening the shock of public discussion of sexual matters.    Still, impotence remains largely an invisible problem. John Morley, a geriatrics researcher at a Veterans Administration hospital in Sepulveda, Calif., reports a striking finding. &quot;We did a study,&quot; he says, &quot;in which one out of three men over 40 coming in to see a doctor for reasons other than impotence turned out to be impotent.&quot;    Even less appreciated is the turmoil that often results for women. &quot;When he started becoming impotent, I had all kinds of worries and strange thoughts,&quot; says Maggie, a Boston woman who lives with her fiance. &quot;I thought I was doing something wrong, or that he didn't love me or that he was gay.&quot; She says it was &quot;a wonderful relief&quot; when doctors traced his problem to nerve damage from back surgery and treated it with a muscle-relaxing drug.    When taking a medical history, most doctors don't ask their patients whether they have erection difficulties, notes Paul C. Rousseau, a geriatrician at the VA Medical Center in Murfreesboro, Tenn. He adds, &quot;Patients don't like to mention it, especially to female nurses&quot; who typically record medical data.    Even when a patient doesn't hide anything, adds Dr. Rousseau, oftentimes &quot;doctors will say, 'You're getting old.' But that's not a good answer.&quot; Aging does affect male sexual performance -- increasing, for instance, the time and stimulation needed for erection. But it doesn't, by itself, make even a 90-year-old impotent.    When Mr. MacKenzie sought help from his family doctor, he says he was told that &quot;it's all in your mind.&quot; Counseling from the doctor didn't help, so he turned to sex therapists. He says they didn't help either. &quot;Three years went by, and the clock was still running,&quot; Mr. MacKenzie says. &quot;Finally, I went to a urologist, who did some tests that showed my impotence was 100% due to diabetes.&quot;    While recovering in the hospital from implantation of a penile prosthesis, Mr. MacKenzie met two patients with similar stories. Soon after, he and his wife founded Impotents Anonymous, a nonprofit group whose chapters, each associated with a urologist, offer information and counseling. The group has been bombarded with inquiries.    Physically based impotence usually appears gradually, and some erection capacity may remain. But purely psychological cases often develop abruptly following some traumatic event such as the death of a spouse.    In trying to tell whether the problem is mainly physical or mainly psychological, doctors take advantage of the fact that men normally have erections during the dream phases of sleep. It isn't certain why these occur, but when they are significantly lessened, a physical cause is sought.    A simple test involves wrapping and sealing postage stamps around the flaccid penis at night; if they are broken in the morning, the doctor is prompted to look for psychological factors. Most doctors now use electronic devices to monitor nighttime tumescence more precisely.    The physiology of erection is complex, and researchers still don't know all the ways it can break down. Simply described, the process begins when nerve impulses signal certain muscle fibers to relax. These muscles usually are contracted and restrict penile arteries. When relaxed, they permit up to a sevenfold increase in blood flow to the organ, filling spongy tissue.    The nerve signals needed to start erection can be interrupted by many things, among them injury, disease or radical prostate surgery. An especially common source of trouble is diabetes, which often damages both nerves and blood vessels. Occasionally, impotence is due to hormonal imbalance, resulting from something like a tumor of the pituitary gland.    Drugs and alcohol also can be culprits. In fact, erection difficulties induced by blood-pressure drugs lead many patients to stop taking them. (Changing to a different drug sometimes solves the problem.) The problem also can result from some ulcer remedies, tranquilizers, antihistamines and many other drugs.    Perhaps the most common physical causes of impotence are blood-vessel and circulation disorders. Like the coronary arteries, those supplying blood to the penis can be damaged by buildup of cholesterol deposits or by high blood pressure.    In fact, researchers are finding that major causes of cardiovascular disease also are closely associated with impotence. &quot;Smoking may be the most important risk factor for erection problems,&quot; says Irwin Goldstein, a urologist who researches impotence at University Hospital in Boston. He says about 80% of the impotent men he treats are smokers.    In young men, an increasingly recognized cause is artery damage due to blows to the groin. &quot;We have seen cases from bicycle seats, basketball players who went up for a dunk and came down on somebody's knee, and a guy who fell on top of a fence,&quot; says Dr. Goldstein.    An angiogram, involving X-rays and a dye put in the bloodstream, discovered such artery damage in John, the 22-year-old from Birmingham. &quot;I used to jump on bikes and was in a couple of fights in my younger life, but I couldn't tell what caused it,&quot; he says.    For him, the treatment was akin to that given to many heart patients: He had bypass surgery. Doctors grafted undamaged blood vessels into his groin area to restore an ample flow of blood, and John woke up in the recovery room with his first erection in years. Because of the incisions &quot;it hurt like hell,&quot; he says. &quot;But it was a nice pain.&quot;    Veins rather than arteries are at fault in other cases. (Whereas arteries carry blood from the heart to organs, veins return it to the heart.) Alan Schwartz, a radiologist at the University of Washington in Seattle, offers an analogy: &quot;Think of an erection as filling a bathtub,&quot; he says. &quot;Even if you increase the faucet flow, if you don't close the drain, you won't get an erection.&quot;    The penile veins normally are squeezed partly shut during erection, but in some men they drain blood too fast. Just why still isn't clear. In such cases, surgeons are experimenting with tying off or removing certain veins to slow the flow of blood out of the penis.    &quot;Leaky veins may be the main problem in older men,&quot; says Joseph Bookstein, a radiologist at the University of California in San Diego and pioneer in the field. &quot;I think that we're going to find ways to prevent or get rid of this problem in the next few years.&quot;    His optimism stems partly from the recent development of erection-producing drugs, which have revolutionized diagnosis and treatment in the U.S. Researchers trace the new approach to a 1983 urology conference in Las Vegas, Nev., where a British researcher presenting a paper on one of the drugs astonished an audience of doctors and their wives by interrupting his talk to exhibit an erection he had induced in himself with the drug. Says Boston's Dr. Goldstein, who witnessed the presentation: &quot;It really was impressive. Within a few days of the meeting, I and a few others were trying {drug therapy} with our patients.&quot;    The most commonly used drug in the U.S. is a mixture of two muscle relaxants, papaverine and phentolamine. When injected into the penis (it supposedly doesn't hurt much), the mixture gives many impotent men erections that last for more than an hour. The drugs also enable doctors to see exactly what is going on, avoiding the need for several nights of monitoring the patient during sleep.    Adrian Zorgniotti, a New York urologist and pioneer in the use of such drugs in the U.S., says that to determine whether they can help an impotent man, he injects the patient and sends him to meet his partner in a nearby hotel. &quot;Some patients say their erections are better than before they became impotent,&quot; he says.    The drugs don't always work, particularly in those with severe blood-vessel problems. But about 14,000 U.S. men now use them, many by injecting themselves at home. &quot;It's a marvelous drug,&quot; says Alan, a Boston man who was made impotent by a spinal injury. &quot;It's really painless to inject, and psychologically, it's like getting my manhood back.&quot;    In about 5% of patients, the drugs cause priapism -- prolonged erection that can permanently damage penile tissue if not corrected in a few hours. Reducing the dosage usually prevents a recurrence. Still, the effects of long-term usage aren't known. Though the muscle relaxants can be legally prescribed, the Food and Drug Administration has never approved them for this specific use.    Despite the new drugs, internal prostheses remain the most widely used solution for physically caused impotence. There are several versions, ranging from semi-stiff rods that can be bent down or up to fancy models that enable the user to simulate erection by means of a surgically implanted pump and fluid reservoir. They are implanted in simple operations that typically require a day or two in the hospital and are covered by health insurance.    They are not without criticism. Michael Perelman, a New York sex therapist, believes that &quot;quite often, urologists are rushing to put in implants in patients based on limited assessments of their problems.&quot; He says some physically based erection problems can be compensated for with sex therapy, such as by teaching couples techniques that increase arousal.    A prosthesis makes a natural erection all but impossible. But it usually doesn't interfere with ejaculation or orgasm, and has little effect on appearance. Some 30,000 prostheses are implanted annually in the U.S., mostly with good results. Some men with implants say that the ability to sustain erections at will makes them feel more potent than they did as young men. </TEXT></DOC>