<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890814-0081 </DOCNO><DD> = 890814 </DD><AN> 890814-0081. </AN><HL> Growing Exodus:@  East Germans Fleeing@  To the West Double@  Last Year's Numbers@  ---@  Legal and Illegal Departures@  Raise Tensions and Herald@  Work-Force Crisis in East@  ---@  The Hungarian Escape Route@  ----@  By Terence Roth@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 08/14/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><TEXT>   Drenched with sweat, his heart pounding, Mario crouched behind a bush in Hungary and looked out at Austria and freedom.    He was still about 30 yards away from the empty fenceposts that mark the border. Rusting coils of barbed wire were piled up beside them, confirming what the 20-year-old East German carpenter had heard months earlier on West German television: The Hungarians had torn down their piece of the Iron Curtain.    Mario had gone to Hungary a week ago from Dresden under the guise of a vacation. Now, alone, scared and contemplating the two years minimum he would serve in prison if caught, Mario marshaled his courage and began to run. He stumbled on the uneven ground -- he couldn't seem to run fast enough -- but he heard only the sound of his own breathing: no shouts from border guards, no gunshots, no sirens.    He came to a village, saw Austrian license plates on the cars, and knew he was free. He has since been taken to a refugee camp in the West German town of Giessen, where he told his story. Within a few days, he will leave the camp, a newly minted West German citizen.    East Germany is hemorrhaging people this summer. Like Mario, many of them are young and frustrated by widespread deprivation and rigid state controls. Once they leave, they routinely reproach their Communist leaders for clinging to Stalinist policies even as the Soviet Union and other East Bloc nations undertake reforms.    More than 55,000 East Germans have fled to West Germany this year, and the number is expected to reach 100,000 before the year is out, or more than double the exodus of last year. Many of those who are leaving have permission, as the East German government has relaxed its visa policies, issuing 46,000 already this year, or more than it issued all of last year.    But even the liberalized procedures can't keep pace with the number of people anxious to leave. For most applicants, getting permission to emigrate is as chancy as hitting the lottery.    Dozens have been flooding into Hungary each day since that East Bloc nation took down its Iron Curtain in May. About 300 more have taken the desperate step of holing up in West German consulates in Prague and Budapest or West Germany's mission in East Berlin.    (On Thursday, East Germany pledged that those who have gone underground in Hungary or are seeking asylum at West German diplomatic missions can return home and seek to emigrate without fear, Hungarian officials said. So far, no one has accepted such offers.)    Should the growing exodus continue, as West German authorities expect, East Germany faces a work-force crisis, as its 20 million population is drained of its younger workers. For Erich Honecker, East Germany's 76-year-old party chief, &quot;it should become clear that he has an internal crisis on his hands and only he can solve it by giving people hope for the future,&quot; says Peter Danylow, a specialist on that country at the German Society for Foreign Affairs in Bonn. &quot;The ideological idealism in East Germany has sunk to zero,&quot; he says.    The dispute between East and West intensified Thursday as the East German Communist Party newspaper, Neues Deutschland, warned that West Germany was &quot;provoking East Germany to take a tougher stance&quot; on the refugee issue. At the same time, East Germany denied Western reports that it was halting travel to Hungary.    Tensions between Bonn and East Berlin are now at their highest level since 1961 just before East Germany erected the Berlin Wall to halt emigration to the West, says Mr. Danylow. &quot;It doesn't have the showdown character of the Wall era, but it is badly upsetting the balance of cooperation and conflict that is peculiar to German-German relations,&quot; he says.    The East German government has accused Bonn of meddling in its internal affairs by not evicting the East Germans from West German missions. The West German government, whose constitution obliges Bonn to welcome East Germans with open arms, has responded sharply that the blame for the flood of refugees lies in East Berlin's refusal to accommodate a growing desire for reforms.    The Bonn government did close the doors of its East Berlin mission last week, asserting that the 130 people inside had exhausted capacity. It also said that, today, it will close its Budapest embassy to the public &quot;for the time being.&quot; West German officials then urged East Germans to pursue legal exit routes.    &quot;There is very little else Bonn can do,&quot; says Eduard Lintner, the speaker on German affairs for the ruling conservative majority in the West German parliament. &quot;It is an East German problem. Only East Berlin can create better conditions to prevent the acts of desperation by its people. We urge them to adopt the kinds of reforms shown by the Soviet Union, Hungary and Poland. But their leadership remains stubborn.&quot;    For three decades, East Germans have been making hair-raising escapes from their country. They have burrowed under the Berlin Wall or soared over it in balloons. Most sought to swim rivers or vault fences. Thousands have made it through, but dozens have been killed by border guards or exploding mines, and countless others have been caught and imprisoned.    East Berlin withdrew its standing order to shoot on sight under pressure from Bonn, but it wasn't until the Hungarians dismantled their border fence as part of their own reforms that East Germans unwilling to wait for a visa got a better chance to flee.    Now the East German government has mounted a disinformation campaign against the Hungary-Austria escape route. &quot;We were still scared after we entered Austria,&quot; says Michela, a petite 21-year-old textile worker from Dresden who arrived in Austria via Hungary a week ago. &quot;We were told that the Austrians would return us to East Germany.&quot;    Nonetheless, &quot;more will come, if they still can,&quot; says Ingo, a 24-year-old machinist from Erfurt who is in Giessen after escaping through Hungary. Ingo, Mario and other refugees wouldn't give their last names, saying they feared retribution against relatives still living in East Germany.    &quot;Most of the people our age have had a snootfull and feel that they are wasting their lives,&quot; Ingo says. &quot;There's not much to do but work, and with no chance of ever doing anything else than the job you're doing. Even on the job, the machines are always breaking down because there aren't any spare parts.    &quot;You can't buy anything, no matter how much money you have. Imagine, you can't even find work clothes in a worker's state,&quot; he says. Prospects for advancement are dim &quot;unless you sign up for the army for three years and are a member of the Free German Youth,&quot; a party organization, Ingo says. His friend, Frank, tells of problems getting parts for his lathe at work or enough wood to build a tool shed.    Michela from Dresden says basic foodstuffs and clothing are scarce. &quot;Just trying to find an orange or a pair of jeans is impossible,&quot; she says. She adds that her neighbors in East Germany still count on Christmas packages from relatives in the West for, not toys, but coffee and bed sheets.    Then there is the omnipresent East German state security agency, the Ministerium fuer Staatssicherheit. &quot;The 'Stasi' are everywhere,&quot; says Ingo. &quot;Most of their 'ears' are people who committed minor crimes but got off with a promise to listen around in the discos and the factories to what you're saying.&quot; He recalls how a fellow worker sauntered over recently to ask why Ingo was going to Hungary for vacation. &quot; 'Come on,' he tells me, 'just between us, you're going to hop to the West, aren't you?' I kept my mouth shut.&quot;    On the other hand, many of the East German refugees recount tales of the help they received from Hungarians. Joerg, a 32-year-old machinist from Potsdam, says he drove his Polish-built car to Hungary but got hopelessly lost in a border town. A villager looked at his East German license plates and asked where he was going. &quot;I took a chance and told him I wanted to get to the border, and he said he'd take me there in the morning,&quot; Joerg says.    After a night of drinking wine, they drove to the border, where Joerg handed him the keys to his car and struck off into the woods. (East German refugees say they saw dozens of cars with East German license plates abandoned near the Hungarian border.)    After doubling back a few times to avoid watchtowers, Joerg got lost again. But a Hungarian forester pointed him in the right direction. He then picked his way through the forest for about an hour until he saw a woman bicycling down a country lane. &quot;She smiled and said 'welcome to Austria' when I asked her where I was. She knew exactly where I came from,&quot; Joerg says.    Enough get through to make it hard for the center at Giessen to keep up. Roughly 90% of the refugees, all of whom receive citizenship automatically, come to Giessen first for passports and orientation, says Peter Hartmann, the center's harried deputy director. He chain-smokes cigars and describes how the throng rose from 1,300 a month in early 1988 to 3,400 last January, to 5,000 a month in April, to more than 8,000 in May and nearly 10,000 in July.    &quot;From the numbers and what the people are saying, all signs are that East Germany has become a social pressure cooker,&quot; he says. &quot;Before, we dealt with only small groups. Now we're at a hundred or more a day.&quot; The 2,000-bed facility is putting the overflow up in hotels and sports halls.    More than half of the East Germans entering West Germany are between 20 and 40 years old, and about half are in blue-collar occupations. Last year, nearly half were industrial workers with varying skill levels. About 10% were highly trained engineers and technicians, and 10% more were civil servants.    Doris Cornelsen, an analyst at the German Institute for Economic Research in West Berlin, says East Germany already has problems maintaining a steady work force as its population ages. East Berlin has imported 100,000 workers from Third World communist states, including 43,000 from Vietnam and 14,000 from Mozambique. &quot;If they continue to lose their own workers at 100,000 a year, especially from the young generation, they are certain to be faced with a big problem,&quot; Ms. Cornelsen says.    Most refugees remain at Giessen only a few days. They are then eligible for unemployment insurance until they can find work.    Once past the initial adjustments, East German refugees have tended to become quickly integrated into West German society, says Uwe Berlinghoff of the Hesse state social ministry. In their favor are a common language and familiar job training procedures.    But there is some initial culture shock, beginning when the refugees step off the train. West German salesmen, sensing an opportunity, have descended on Giessen, hawking everything from life and medical insurance to new furniture.    &quot;We try to ease the culture shock as much as we can,&quot; says Mr. Hartmann. &quot;The two Germanys have grown so far apart in social and economic development that this is a first step into a new world for them.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>