<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880322-0024 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   NICARAGUA ANNOUNCED a cease-fire during peace talks with the Contras.    As both sides began their first face-toface truce negotiations inside Nicaragua, Managua said it would halt its military offensive during the three days of talks. The rebels attending the talks in Sapoa agreed to the temporary suspension of fighting. The Sandinistas also withdrew their forces from the Nicaraguan-Honduran border. Tegucigalpa said its troops would search the border area &quot;inch by inch,&quot; but President Azcona said the U.S. troops in Honduras probably wouldn't be needed much longer.    A U.S. helicopter crashed while participating in military exercises in Honduras, and Army officials said all 10 soldiers aboard the aircraft were injured.    ---   NORIEGA HAS OFFERED to resign before next year's presidential election.    In a national television address, Panama's acting president said Noriega would step down as armed forces chief by May, but only if opponents agree to talks with his regime aimed at ending the country's economic and political crisis. The announcement came after the start of an opposition-led general strike that disrupted most business and industry in Panama City. Noriega, meanwhile, promoted about 100 military officers to fill posts left vacant by arrests and a purge following last week's failed coup.    The Pentagon has increased the number of security personnel in Panama, sending more than 300 soldiers to the country in the past three days.    ---   Shultz and Shevardnadze held a round of pre-summit talks in Washington aimed at breaking a deadlock on an Afghan peace accord and making progress on a U.S.-Soviet pact to cut long-range nuclear arsenals. The Soviet foreign minister predicted that specific dates for a Moscow summit, expected later this spring, would be set this week.    ---   Thousands of Armenians rallied in Yerevan following indications that Moscow wouldn't redraw boundaries to reunite a disputed region of Azerbaijan with Soviet Armenia, witnesses said. Meanwhile, Soviet authorities said more than 400 people have been arrested or charged in last month's rioting in the Azerbaijan city of Sumgait.    ---   South African blacks staged strikes throughout the country to mark the anniversary of the 1960 Sharpeville massacre, in which 69 blacks were killed. Despite Pretoria's ban on opposition groups, hundreds of thousands of people defied emergency rules and participated in the protest, which disrupted many factories and businesses.    ---   Iranian gunboats attacked a Liberian tanker and a Spanish freighter near the Strait of Hormuz in the Persian Gulf, setting the vessels ablaze. And Norwegian officials said as many as 54 crew members were missing and presumed dead in a weekend raid by Iraqi jets on two Iranian tankers.    ---   Israeli troops killed a Palestinian teenager in continuing unrest in the Gaza Strip, and a PLO leaflet exhorted Arabs to attack soldiers and settlers in the occupied areas. Meanwhile, Shamir said in a Wall Street Journal interview that it was Israel's &quot;duty&quot; to stiffen its crackdown against Arab protesters.    ---   The PLO defied a Reagan administration deadline to vacate its U.N. observer mission under a U.S. anti-terrorist law. Washington prepared to take legal action. The General Assembly held an emergency session over the matter and was expected to urge the U.S. to desist from its eviction efforts.    ---   Bush indicated that he supported Reagan's veto of a major civil-rights bill, even as Congress was poised to override the president's action. In remarks to a group of black supporters in Washington, the vice president called the anti-discrimination legislation &quot;imperfect.&quot;    ---   El Salvador's rightist party scored a landslide victory over the ruling Christian Democrats in Sunday's municipal and legislative elections. The Republican Nationalist Alliance reportedly won the mayoralty of San Salvador and control of the nation's legislature, in what was considered a severe setback for U.S.-backed President Duarte.    ---   Irish Republican Army gunmen killed a policeman in a Roman Catholic district in Londonderry. The IRA claimed responsibility for the slaying, which came as the British and Irish governments announced emergency talks to tackle a new wave of violence, including Saturday's killing of two British soldiers at a funeral in Belfast.    ---   East bloc dissidents issued an appeal for the right to refuse military service. More than 400 dissidents from five East bloc countries and Yugoslavia, in an unprecedented joint action, signed a document calling on delegates at the Vienna Conference on Security and Cooperation to consider individuals' rights to conscientious objection.    ---   The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether public officials may be sued when their alleged gross negligence permits a child to be abused by a parent. In a separate case, the justices left unresolved the question of whether public-school students enjoy any constitutional protection against corporal punishment by school officials.    ---   The Pentagon said Lt. Col. North's request to retire from the Marine Corps later this spring was approved. Meanwhile, the Chicago Tribune said the Iran-Contra independent counsel has evidence that Secord and Hakim, indicted along with North and Poindexter, skimmed nearly $1 million from Iran arms-sales proceeds.    ---   Died: Gil Evans, 75, composer, arranger and jazz pianist, Sunday, in Cuernavaca, Mexico, of peritonitis. . . . Lee B. Thomas Sr., 87, founder and chairman of Vermont American Corp., in Lake Wales, Fla. </TEXT></DOC>