<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880809-0043 </DOCNO><HL> Miami Mystery: Paid to Treat Elderly, IMC Moved in Worlds Of Spying and Politics --- Medicare Money Flowed In; Only Mr. Recarey Knows Where It Flowed Next --- Contras, 'Bugs' and the Mob </HL><AUTHOR> Sydney P. Freedberg (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> GOVMT LABOR </CO><IN> FIN PHA BIO </IN><G> JUS EXE CNG </G><DATELINE> MIAMI  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Miguel Recarey Jr. was a big man in this town. An immigrant from Cuba, he built a firm called International Medical Centers into America's largest health-maintenance organization for the elderly. He knew people, important enough people to be invited at least three times to the White House.    But then last year Mr. Recarey started getting invitations to court. A grand jury accused him of conspiring to bribe union leaders to get patients for IMC. A second indictment charged him with running an illegal wiretapping operation. Finally came yet another indictment, charging him with defrauding the U.S. government.    By this time, Mr. Recarey had vanished. His company collapsed. And investigators found themselves puzzling over what had happened to nearly $1 billion in federal Medicare funds that had poured into IMC since 1981.    While they're at it, they're trying to figure out exactly what Miguel Recarey's game was.    For this clearly isn't just another steamy south Florida business fraud. The secret doings of Mr. Recarey and IMC, an investigation by this newspaper shows, lead mysteriously off in many different directions, in a maze that seems to grow more complex the more it is pursued. For starters:   --Mr. Recarey had longstanding business ties to the late Santo Trafficante Jr., who prosecutors say was the Florida underworld boss -- and who told Congress he once was part of a botched Central Intelligence Agency plot to kill Fidel Castro.    --Mr. Recarey told an associate he had sought a loan from Robert Vesco, the fugitive I.O.S. Ltd. financier.    --Mr. Recarey, a big political contributor, got formal lobbying help from ex-Reagan aide Lyn Nofziger and informal help from a son of Vice President George Bush.    --Though deriving most of its revenue from U.S. health programs, Mr. Recarey's business empire had financial dealings in Panama, the Bahamas, the Cayman Islands, Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic and England.    --Mr. Recarey's companies engaged at least a dozen people who had worked in foreign intelligence. (The resume of one claimed training by both the CIA and the KGB, plus work for the Cuban DGI.)    --IMC was tied into the private network that sent aid to the Nicaraguan Contras, and its hospital arranged to treat wounded Contras.    --Even the U.S. agent who eventually brought Mr. Recarey down has intelligence links, having served as a Drug Enforcement Administration liaison with the CIA on South American affairs.    The last-mentioned connection is &quot;just a coincidence,&quot; says William Teich, the boss of that agent. And conceivably the other hints of intelligence-agency involvement are, too, given Miami's status as a mecca of spies and subversion. It's possible IMC was just an unusually byzantine business fraud, pulled off by a man who by all accounts relished intrigue.    Yet there are enough intelligence footprints on IMC to raise the question whether this was one of those twilight-zone places where the world of spies and the world of outlaws intersect. &quot;You may have found where a criminal enterprise may be interfaced with intelligence operations,&quot; says Mr. Teich, who heads the U.S. Office of Labor Racketeering in Miami. &quot;Probably it was as a result of people subverting their contacts that they may have had while working in intelligence.&quot;    The CIA, following its policy, won't comment on whether Mr. Recarey might have had some intelligence role -- as a medical supplier, say, or a provider of information, or a financier in the shadow war against communism. Mr. Recarey now is believed holed up in Venezuela. He couldn't be reached to comment on this or to explain some other curious facts:   --He and IMC continued getting lucrative federal Medicare contracts despite long-suspected underworld links and repeated complaints that the HMO wasn't giving the elderly adequate care.    --Various federal inquiries into Mr. Recarey's dealings over a generation went nowhere, in spite of leads suggesting kickback schemes, tax evasion, illegal campaign giving, payment of hush money, bribery of public officials, use of phantom employees, forged HMO enrollments, falsified records and phony billings.    --Mr. Recarey had an easy time skipping the country while under felony indictment. His passport wasn't taken away, and he got an expedited income-tax refund of $2.2 million. So far he has proved untouchable abroad.    Adding to the mystery are the personal qualities of Mr. Recarey, a man trained as an accountant -- and known as a marksman. Now 50, he was born into a well-to-do Cuban family that fled from Castro. Associates say he once had a serious cocaine problem. He also is described as fascinated with plots, always giving an impression something was afoot. Yet for all his machinations, he is himself open to manipulation, contends one of his former lawyers, the political consultant John Sears.    By all accounts Mr. Recarey is a charming fellow with a gift for making people trust him. But he evidently doesn't trust many of them. While operating IMC he had a secret code name, Pluma Blanca -- or White Feather -- that his security people used when referring to him over the phone. He traveled with armed bodyguards and told confidants he feared assassination, especially by poison. He had his security people equip their mobile car phones with voice scramblers. (On the bumper of one of his Mercedes-Benzes, though, was a &quot;Support Your Local Sheriff&quot; sticker.)    For a time, Mr. Recarey or one of his businesses kept a bachelor's pad in the Mutiny Hotel in Coconut Grove, available for use by his business and political visitors. It was equipped with a round bedplus a two-way mirror, a secret microphone and a hidden video camera.    Mr. Recarey's own bedroom, a former security chief said, had bulletproof windows and a door of steel.    He also felt safer with his Heckler andamp; Koch 9mm pistol, which he customarily packed under his jacket. In his million-dollar estate near Miami, he kept a cache of sterner stuff: Uzis, Colt AR-15s and at least one AK47 assault rifle. &quot;I don't think I ever saw a civilian who was as accurate with a weapon as Miguel,&quot; says Roberto Sasso, a former Secret Service agent who guarded him. He recalls Mr. Recarey telling him, &quot;I have a lot of enemies.&quot;    Yet few in the government, it would seem. &quot;He was inside the pockets of the big boys,&quot; claims a close confidant. &quot;He felt protected.&quot; Until the very end, adds Don Zell, the Office of Labor Racketeering agent who finally brought him down, &quot;Mike's friends always presumed that he had the government behind him.&quot;    Government prosecutors dismiss this idea, the notion that Mr. Recarey might somehow have been protected from the law. One federal prosecutor, however, asserts that Mr. Recarey did pay bribes to &quot;selected government officials.&quot; The charge was made by Joseph DeMaria of the Justice Department's Miami organized-crime strike force, in a memo to defense lawyers in the union-bribery case. His memo didn't state the purpose of the alleged bribes or name their recipients, and he won't elaborate.    Washington Contacts   About one kind of giving, Mr. Recarey was open: political contributions, most notably to Jimmy Carter, Ronald Reagan, George Bush and Claude Pepper. Mr. Recarey or his associates gave at least $45,000 to the Democratic Party and Carter campaign in 1980, and at least $20,000 to Vice President Bush's political-action committee in 1985-86.    And when Mr. Recarey needed lobbyists, he aimed high: He hired former White House aide Nofziger and the firm of Black, Manafort, Stone -- also well connected in the White House; each drew about $400,000 from his businesses. When IMC needed a lawyer, it picked Mr. Sears, a onetime Reagan campaign manager, paying his firm about $306,000. When it needed a real-estate consultant, it hired Jeb Bush, son of the vice president, paying his firm $75,000 though it closed no deals. Mr. Recarey also hired more than a dozen former officials of a federal cabinet department (Health and Human Services) that sent IMC tens of millions of dollars each month to care for Medicare patients as it saw fit. As its chief of staff IMC hired Juan del Real, who had been general counsel of HHS. For a press aide Mr. Recarey hired Mr. del Real's wife, Claire, who was a press aide at HHS. And he knew how to write a paycheck: Starting salary for Mr. del Real was $325,000 a year and a $40,000 car allowance, for his wife $130,000 and a $12,000 car allowance.    Mr. del Real says that he and his wife did nothing wrong by accepting good jobs at IMC, and that he didn't take part in any IMC business while at HHS. After leaving government, he says, he was careful not to discuss IMC business with his former HHS colleagues for a year.    His Washington contacts gave Mr. Recarey a certain access, as evidenced by his invitations to several gatherings at the Reagan White House. (Even in the corridors of power, though, he did things his way. In April 1985 he punched two Saudi men, one a diplomat, outside a Washington hotel. Charged with assault, he pleaded self defense and won acquittal.)    Politics was not the only world to which Mr. Recarey gained entree. As far back as the 1960s he had ties with reputed racketeers who had operated out of pre-Castro Cuba and who later forged an anti-Castro alliance with the CIA.    The most notable was the late Mr. Trafficante, whom prosecutors termed the head of the Florida mob and of an international narcotics empire; a declassified CIA report lists him among gangsters recruited in the early 1960s to poison Mr. Castro. (Mr. Trafficante, who died last year, denied the mob and narcotics charges; he didn't deny a role in anti-Castro plotting but claimed to be merely a go-between and translator.) Several Recarey associates say Mr. Trafficante helped out when Mr. Recarey needed business financing.    Mr. Recarey also sought financing from the Teamsters union's Central States pension fund, according to Frank Ragano, a lawyer who represented Mr. Trafficante and also Jimmy Hoffa, the late Teamsters president. He was looking for backing for a private hospital, which he later took over and made the core of IMC. &quot;I told him it was out of the question because it didn't meet the criteria of the fund,&quot; the lawyer says. The Central States fund was mob-run and notoriously corrupt at the time.    Then there was Alberto Inocente Alvarez, a Robert Vesco lieutenant who, the Securities and Exchange Commission said, helped install the fugitive financier in Costa Rica in the early 1970s. Mr. Alvarez shared a yacht with Mr. Recarey and invested $200,000 in a Recarey real-estate project, say a former Recarey lawyer and a Miami police report. And according to Luke Rader, a doctor and former partner at IMC's hospital, Miami General, Mr. Recarey said he had sought a business loan from Mr. Vesco himself.    Mr. Recarey also sought financing from an anti-Castro Cuban financier named Rafael G. Navarro, traveling to see him in London with one of IMC's founders, Fernando Penabaz, who doubles as a right-wing radio commentator. IMC had been formed to treat Cuban refugees under a federal program but fell deeply in debt to Mr. Recarey's hospital, and in 1977 Mr. Recarey took control of the HMO. He placed both the hospital and the HMO within a holding company, Recarey Enterprises Inc., which grew to include numerous companies.    Their roles, however, were flexible; one, Associated Auditors andamp; Collectors Inc., was ostensibly a debt-collection agency, but Miami FBI spokesman Paul Miller says it was a front that paid for wiretapping. Mr. Recarey had &quot;a number of ways of hiding anything he wants to hide,&quot; Prosecutor DeMaria said at the bribery trial.    Filing for Medicare   To win a share of federal Medicare funds, the HMO had to be &quot;qualified&quot; by what's now the Health and Human Services Department. This could have presented a problem, because of Mr. Recarey's background.    For instance, he had failed to file income-tax returns for two straight years, 1969 and 1970 -- even though his resume says he is an accountant. He was convicted and spent a short time in prison.    In 1964 he was ordered deported because of immigration violations. It isn't clear whether the order was carried out.    In the early '70s, he left a job as a comptroller of a Miami children's hospital amid rumors of an embezzlement. No charges were brought, but investigators say two persons have implicated Mr. Recarey, one saying he helped teach Mr. Recarey how to set up shell companies to send the hospital phony bills.    In addition, Mr. Recarey's alleged ties to organized crime had long been part of south Florida police records. And in 1980, with IMC's Medicare application pending, the company was being investigated on suspicion of fraud by the Justice Department and the HHS inspector general.    The HHS investigator, however, was taken off the case. So was an HHS regulator who had indicated she would reject the application. The investigation was closed. An HHS team headed by Arthur Goulet then qualified the health-care company to receive Medicare funds.    Five months later, Mr. Goulet accepted a job with IMC. He says that he never discussed a job with IMC before ruling on its application, and is &quot;100% clean.&quot;    He didn't last long at IMC. He says he did an audit, discovering shoddy medical care and an organization that was basically &quot;a fast-moving shell game for government inspectors.&quot; IMC had some conscientious physicians, but Mr. Goulet says he also found &quot;the sleaziest bunch of nondoctors you could imagine.&quot; Shortly after his audit, he says, he was fired.    Complaints About the HMO   The Medicare money started flowing in 1981. Almost from the start, IMC came in for criticism. Patients complained of being denied access to specialists or to hospitalization for serious illnesses. Vendors complained of not being paid. HHS regulators told of &quot;inaccurate data&quot; and &quot;misleading&quot; marketing materials at the HMO.    In addition, a Florida state investigator said in a secret 1982 report that proceeds of some loans Mr. Recarey got &quot;are being put in banks outside the country.&quot; Mr. Recarey also put on the payroll several people who had only vague duties, including at least a couple with intelligence backgrounds. Blue Cross and Blue Shield disallowed many IMC hospital expenditures, including some found to be bodyguard expenses, interest payments and the $70,000 cost of a Christmas party. (Mr. Recarey dismissed IMC's various problems as &quot;growing pains,&quot; and complained in 1985 that some associates were cheating him.)    Instead of cutting off IMC, HHS added to its take. The department was trying out a new payment system in which, instead of reimbursing for each medical procedure, it would give an HMO a flat fee. Though an HMO suspected of inadequate care might seem the worst candidate for such a program, HHS in 1982 gave IMC a demonstration grant for the new payment system. It began sending IMC monthly checks for millions of dollars, essentially relying on the HMO's word that it was treating the elderly adequately with the money.    The department did this over the sharp objections of the regional head of the agency administering the program. &quot;At stake is the correct and prompt payment of millions of the taxpayers' dollars, as well as the government's image in the Miami area,&quot; George Holland of the Health Care Financing Administration's Atlanta office warned in a memo.    About the end of 1983, HHS gave IMC a curious $1 million special payment -- part of a pattern that prompted an HHS accountant to warn that the government was funneling &quot;too much money too fast&quot; to IMC. The accountant said the payment was approved by Wayne Fowler, an official who also wrote a reassuring letter about IMC to the father of an IMC celebrity spokeswoman, singer Barbara Mandrell, when the father became upset by a negative newspaper story about IMC.    Recruiting in Washington   After leaving the government, Mr. Fowler went to work for IMC at an annual salary of $165,000 plus a $12,000 car allowance. Mr. Fowler confirms writing the Mandrell letter but says that he doesn't recall approving the extra $1 million payment, adding that he made all his decisions at HHS in the best interest of the Medicare program without influence by IMC. But, he says, &quot;it was pretty general knowledge throughout the government that they knew people.&quot;    IMC also gained various waivers of HHS rules, among them lucrative waivers that let the HMO draw more than 50% of its revenue from Medicare. C. McClain Haddow, a top aide to HHS Secretary Margaret Heckler in 1985, testified to Congress that he approved such a waiver on her instructions -- after both he and Mrs. Heckler had received telephone calls from Vice President Bush's son, Jeb. Secretary Heckler told Mr. Haddow &quot;she had received input from other people outside of the department . . . from the White House and from other sectors,&quot; he testified. Jeb Bush says he can't remember calling them.    In 1986, a few months after leaving HHS, Mr. Haddow became a consultant to IMC. In 1987, he was convicted of violating federal conflict-of-interest laws in a case unrelated to IMC.    Ms. Heckler, through a spokesman, declined to comment about IMC. So did Richard Schweiker, who headed HHS from early 1981 until early 1983. His predecessor, Patricia Roberts Harris, is dead.    It wasn't until 1986 that the FBI and HHS became seriously interested in what was being learned about IMC by Mr. Zell. The Office of Labor Racketeering agent was well equipped to probe such a tangled subject, having earlier helped unravel several international narcotics-trafficking cases as a Drug Enforcement Administration agent. By this time the business was falling apart, even though it was getting up to $29 million a month in federal Medicare funds. Part of the reason apparently was that IMC kept lending millions to other Recarey ventures.    &quot;IMC is the classic case of embezzlement of government funds,&quot; says Mr. Teich. He calls it a &quot;bust-out operation&quot; where money was &quot;drained out the back door&quot; and disappeared down &quot;a black hole.&quot;    A Steady Supplier   Looking for new capital, Recarey Enterprises raised $1 million through an obscure Panama-registered firm called Jumbalaya Investments, headquartered in a Swiss bank in the Bahamas. It raised a similar amount for IMC from a supplier, Calmaquip Engineering Corp. Calmaquip is a story in itself.    Calmaquip is a hospital supplier, airport and hotel builder, and provider of communications gear. It says that IMC was just another customer, and the two had no special relationship.    Yet IMC and its hospital bought nearly all their supplies from Calmaquip, except food and prescription drugs, in a contract that specifically said the supplier didn't promise &quot;the best available prices.&quot; Calmaquip's chairman, Raul Gutierrez, was an early investor in the hospital Mr. Recarey took over. And Mr. Recarey stored IMC documents at Calmaquip warehouses, along with a stuffed grizzly bear.    IMC was also unusual among Calmaquip's customers in being a domestic U.S. firm. Most of the other customers are in the Third World or are Third World governments. Calmaquip has shipped merchandise to El Salvador's defense ministry, equipped a police hospital in Colombia, and arranged for treatment by IMC of some Peruvian military officers. Calmaquip benefits from U.S. export-aid organizations, and has received references from Federal Aviation Administration officials, even though it isn't listed in the World Aviation Directory.    There is also a personnel link between IMC and Calmaquip. Rene Diaz de Villegas left a Calmaquip executive post in early 1984 to become an executive of IMC, where he helped negotiate the purchasing agreement -- before returning to work for Calmaquip.    While at IMC, he engaged a former Calmaquip overseas sales contractor, Landon K. Thorne III, for a real-estate task. Mr. Thorne is an active Marine reservist serving in an intelligence post under control of the Defense Intelligence Agency. He says he had no intelligence role before or while he worked with IMC or Calmaquip; &quot;I'm just a God-fearing financial consultant trying to earn a living,&quot; he says.    Mr. Diaz de Villegas also hired for IMC (as a construction supervisor) Jose Basulto, a veteran of the CIA-sponsored effort to oust Castro 27 years ago. In the early 1980s Mr. Basulto advised Argentine intelligence officers active in Central America, he told a reporter for this newspaper 20 months ago, adding that he later coordinated humanitarian and medical aid for the Nicaraguan Contras. He told of attending a meeting at IMC's hospital between a top Contra leader, Adolfo Calero, and Felix Rodriguez, a Basulto friend who worked in Col. Oliver North's Contra-supply operation. Friends of Mr. Basulto say he helped bring wounded Contras to IMC's hospital for free treatment.    Mr. Basulto won't comment to a reporter now, except to say: &quot;You're trying to hurt the administration.&quot; But he gave Calmaquip a statement saying he had never acted as a CIA operative or done any intelligence work while at IMC, nor any related to Calmaquip.    Calmaquip Chairman Gutierrez, who the company says is semiretired, declined to be interviewed. A Calmaquip lawyer says the company goes where the business is and has no political agenda. The company's treasurer, Armando Paz, emphatically denies that Calmaquip has any links to U.S. intelligence. &quot;We have no ties to the U.S. government,&quot; he says. &quot;We have no spies, no counteragents.&quot;    Mr. Paz says Calmaquip is a victim of IMC. He says his company is owed over $3 million by the HMO and Recarey Enterprises, which it is suing to recover.    Good Political Contacts   While at IMC, Mr. Diaz de Villegas also arranged to have the HMO pay Jeb Bush $75,000 to find it a new headquarters building. Mr. Bush, whose father is a past recipient of Recarey campaign giving (and, of course, past CIA director), never closed a deal.    He seemingly had better luck with another task: seeking a &quot;fair hearing&quot; for IMC when it wanted a federal rule waiver. Though Mr. Bush can't recall telephoning HHS Secretary Heckler or Mr. Haddow on IMC's behalf, as Mr. Haddow claims, he does remember phoning another HHS bureaucrat, Kevin Moley, a former George Bush political operative. IMC's request -- for a waiver from the rule limiting its Medicare revenue -- was granted. Mr. Bush, who was then Miami-area Republican chairman, says that he didn't know at the time how serious IMC's problems were. The office of the vice president refers inquiries about Mr. Recarey to Jeb.    As for Mr. Moley at the HHS, he now says it was a &quot;mistake&quot; for the government to deal with IMC, adding that he had doubts about the company as early as mid-1985. He contends part of the blame for its long continuation as a Medicare HMO belongs to the Florida Department of Insurance, which for years looked into IMC's finances and its lending to other Recarey enterprises without shutting it down. The department says there was never enough evidence to move in court until after the first Recarey indictment.    The Florida insurance commissioner received $26,000 in IMC-related campaign contributions in 1985-86, but a spokeswoman for the commissioner says there was &quot;no relationship between the contributions and any actions he took.&quot; The commissioner, Bill Gunter, now is a candidate for the U.S. Senate.    Pressing IMC's case for many years was another large recipient of Recarey campaign contributions, Florida Rep. Claude Pepper. A Pepper aide was listed as a reference on Mr. Recarey's resume. Rep. Pepper, widely known for his advocacy of the rights of the elderly, went to bat for IMC as recently as February 1987, long after the HMO had come in for criticism for its care of Medicare patients.    &quot;I didn't think their problems were serious,&quot; Rep. Pepper says. &quot;All of a sudden it blew up.&quot; He adds that &quot;nobody has a single piece of evidence that I ever tried to prevent any investigation or do anything improper.&quot;    Internal Spying   Throughout this time Mr. Zell was investigating how IMC had obtained a health-care contract from a reputedly mob-linked union, Local 355 of the Hotel Employees and Restaurant Employees International Union. In April of 1987 a federal grand jury indicted Mr. Recarey and three others on bribery conspiracy charges. He was accused of paying off union officers to win the contract, without which IMC wouldn't have had enough members to qualify for Medicare work.    The second indictment of Mr. Recarey six months later was the strangest one, accusing him of tapping phones and bugging a conference room in his hospital and headquarters. It was a &quot;massive&quot; enterprise, says Mr. Miller of the FBI, lasting many years and costing hundreds of thousands of dollars. It employed two dozen people, including secretaries who typed transcripts off cassettes. The precise purpose of the operation remains obscure, but the FBI believes it ultimately was to protect Mr. Recarey from the law.    Mr. Miller says witnesses told the FBI Mr. Recarey had been involved in bugging since the 1970s and upgraded his system in the early 1980s. The man assigned to expand it was Manuel Espinosa, the spy with the cosmopolitan background: CIA, KGB, Cuban DGI. By 1981 Mr. Espinosa was going about fingering people to U.S. authorities as Castro spies. Mr. Recarey hired him as his security chief, giving him the code name &quot;Gustavo Abreu.&quot;    In 1986 this versatile spy pulled another switch and began secretly cooperating with a few U.S. agents trying to nail Mr. Recarey. He became a vital grand-jury witness in the case against IMC, before dying unexpectedly a year ago.    The wiretapping case hasn't gone to trial, what with Mr. Recarey's unexcused absence, but his three co-defendants in the bribery case have been convicted. (All are appealing.) Two of the three are spy-agency veterans: Antonio Fernandez, a former union official and veteran of the Bay of Pigs invasion of Cuba in 1961, and Mr. Recarey's brother Jorge, whom the CIA had named to an infiltration team to prepare Cuba for an uprising.    Also helping the government (in the wiretapping case) was another man of obscure background, Omar Elesgaray. He came from Cuba in the 1980 Mariel boatlift and promptly went to work at IMC doing sophisticated wiretaps. Federal agents and Recarey associates wonder how such a polished wire-man could have been let out of Cuba. Whatever his earlier loyalties, he cooperated on the investigation of IMC. But then Mr. Elesgaray disappeared. A Drug Enforcement Administration agent says he is a suspect in a narcotics conspiracy case. Various reports have him kidnapped, killed or in Cuba.    In other legal tangles, Mr. Recarey and his right-hand man for financial affairs, Eddy F. Fernandez, face charges of defrauding Medicare of $355,000, which the indictment says was to be used to pay Mr. Recarey's criminal defense bill. And the Florida Insurance Department has filed civil-theft charges against, among others, the accounting firm of Touche Ross andamp; Co. It claims that as IMC's auditor, Touche Ross should have informed the state that Recarey Enterprises was going to receive $2.2 million in federal income-tax refunds -- which it got shortly before Mr. Recarey left town. Touche Ross rejects the charges, saying an accountant's information about a client is confidential.    The Internal Revenue Service says it appears that Recarey Enterprises followed normal procedures for getting an expedited refund. Meantime, regulators also are sorting through $222 million in unpaid bills that IMC left behind.    The indictments halted the flow of Medicare money to IMC. A court declared the HMO insolvent, and the state took it over. Its remains were sold to Humana Inc., the big Louisville-based health concern, for $40 million.    Mr. Recarey was due in court last Oct. 8 for a bond hearing on his second indictment. He didn't make the appointment.    Skipping the country wasn't all that hard. After his first indictment, he was freed on a personal surety bond, without having to put down any money, and his passport wasn't taken away.    Instead, Mr. Recarey obtained passports for his small children and liquidated many of his assets, including two condos, his Ferrari, his BMW and his Mercedes-Benzes. Then the IRS came through with the expedited refund. At the last minute, agents got word that Mr. Recarey might flee. But it was too late.    Numerous reports now put Mr. Recarey in a suburb of Caracas. The U.S. has an extradition treaty with Venezuela, but it hasn't helped much. The U.S. embassy in Caracas says it doesn't know anything about Miguel Recarey. </TEXT></DOC>