<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881102-0001 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   SHAMIR SAID Israeli election results will allow Likud to form a government.    The Israeli prime minister made his remark in Tel Aviv as returns showed his Likud Party running neck-and-neck with the Labor Party of Foreign Minister Peres, who refused to concede the race. With about three-quarters of the vote counted, the results indicated that Likud would have the edge in forming a coalition with small right-wing parties. Israelis cast ballots in the nationwide election amid an 11-month-old Palestinian uprising. Arabs staged a strike in the Israeli-occupied areas, and sporadic violence was reported.    Israeli warplanes blasted Arab guerrilla bases in southern Lebanon, two days after a firebomb attack in the town of Jericho, in which four Jews died.    ---   Solidarity activists called for a meeting with management of Poland's Lenin shipyard in Gdansk to seek a reversal of a government order closing the plant Dec. 1. The union said it would protest the planned closing of the birthplace of Solidarity, but wouldn't call an immediate strike. The government said it was prepared for strikes.    ---   Bush said that, if elected, he would seek an early meeting with Gorbachev. Speaking at Notre Dame, the GOP nominee said he wanted a &quot;direct examination&quot; of superpower relations. Dukakis, meanwhile, pushed economic nationalism in Ohio's steel region, telling a union audience that the only label he likes is &quot;Made in America.&quot;    ---   The Soviet finance minister complained of big wage increases that have heightened inflation concerns, and threatened new taxes for firms that allow pay to rise faster than productivity. He also said Moscow has had an annual budget deficit for the past decade, and that it was &quot;critically large&quot; in the mid-1980s.    ---   The Justice Department concluded that there is strong evidence of misconduct in House Banking Committee Chairman St Germain's dealings with the Sandamp;L lobby. The finding is complicating the re-election campaign of the Rhode Island Democrat, who held a slim lead over a Republican challenger.    ---   A deadline passed without agreement for the implementation of a U.S.-mediated plan for Namibian independence from South Africa. While differences remain, officials said Pretoria is prepared to end its rule of Namibia next August if Cuban troops agree to withdraw from Angola within two years.    South Africa suspended publication of a leading anti-apartheid newspaper for four weeks, calling the Weekly Mail a &quot;threat to public safety.&quot; The ban marks the third time this year that Pretoria has halted publication of an anti-government periodical.    ---   The U.S. accused the Soviet Union of recently deploying in Afghanistan missiles capable of hitting Pakistan. A State Department spokesman said the discovery of the new missiles and the use of advanced Soviet warplanes in recent bombing attacks &quot;calls into question&quot; the Kremlin's desire for a settlement of Afghanistan's civil war.    ---   Iran and Iraq held direct talks in Geneva aimed at a permanent cease-fire in the Persian Gulf war. Acknowledging what the U.N. secretary-general termed a &quot;sense of urgency,&quot; the foreign ministers agreed to accelerate the pace of the discussions, which are all to be face-to-face meetings.    The Pentagon ordered the return of a U.S. warship from the gulf. The guided-missile frigate headed to Japan. It was the first such reduction of U.S. forces in the gulf since August's Iran-Iraq truce.    ---   A court in Cairo opened the trial of 20 men, including the son of former Egyptian President Nasser, in connection with terrorist attacks against Israeli and U.S. diplomats. Nasser's son, who fled to Yugoslavia before the indictment was announced last February, is being tried in absentia.    ---   Leftist Salvadoran rebels attacked national guard headquarters in San Salvador, killing at least four soldiers and wounding 37 people, officials said. The assault came a day after rebel leaders said they would be open to talks with El Salvador's government about ending the civil war.    ---   A U.S. jury in Atlanta awarded $1.6 million to a 35-year-old man who said he contracted AIDS from a blood-based drug. The hemophiliac had sued Miles Laboratories, makers of the clotting product that he took to control bleeding after minor surgery in 1983. The firm said it intends to appeal.    ---   The State Department said Prince Sihanouk should lead any future government of Cambodia. The expression of U.S. support came ahead of peace talks in Paris this weekend between a coalition of three guerrilla groups and the Vietnam-backed Phnom Penh government. It will be the third such meeting this year aimed at a settlement.    ---   Three bombs exploded in northern India, killing at least 23 people and injuring about 60 others. Police in Punjab blamed the blasts on extremists fighting for an independent Sikh homeland in the northern state. </TEXT></DOC>