<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870122-0108 </DOCNO><HL> Citrus King:Brazil's Jose Cutrale,Helped by Coca-Cola,Is Taking on Florida---His Orange Juice ConcentrateIs Sold to Minute Maid;U.S. Growers Cry Foul---Glut and Saturated Markets---By Roger CohenStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/22/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM KOCOMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><DATELINE> SAO PAULO, Brazil  </DATELINE><TEXT>   On the night of Dec. 12, 1962, a bitter frost hit central Florida, killing millions of the state's orange trees. And, here in Brazil's industrial capital, an idea was born.    It was simple enough: The orange juice that Florida lost, Brazil could supply. The thought struck Jose Cutrale Jr., a struggling orange wholesaler in this city's bustling market. The son of a Sicilian immigrant, he was restless. &quot;Sometimes he was in here working at 3 in the morning,&quot; says Gilberto Bernardini, who still minds the old Cutrale market stall.    Mr. Cutrale (pronounced koo-TRAH-lay) himself has moved on. He now owns 6.7 million orange trees -- more than anyone else in the world. His company, Sucocitrico Cutrale S.A., supplies much of the orange juice in Coca-Cola Co.'s Minute Maid frozen concentrate.    Mr. Cutrale has pioneered a huge citrus industry that has made Brazil the world's leading producer of orange juice. In the process, he has amassed a personal fortune estimated at $600 million, and he has made a lot of enemies.    Angry Florida growers accuse him -- and other Brazilian producers -- of dumping juice in the U.S. And they are preparing to fight to regain their lost dominance. Brazil now accounts for 90% of the world's exports of orange-juice concentrate and commands 60% of the total world market.    &quot;Those Brazilians are rookies, and we're gonna whip 'em,&quot; says Ben Hill Griffin Jr., a millionaire Frostproof, Fla., grower.    Mr. Cutrale also has clashed bitterly with his Brazilian competitors. Overplanting and plunging prices have set the stage for a damaging glut in Brazil and throughout the world.    But Mr. Cutrale, whose company alone constitutes nearly 35% of the Brazilian orange-juice-concentrate industry, professes to be unperturbed. A look at this secretive, domineering man tells much about how business is done in developing nations. He has exploited close government ties, subsidies, cheap labor and concessions to exporters to build an empire in which virtually everything is decided by him.    His personal story also illustrates the paradoxes and tensions in U.S. relations with Brazil. For while Florida orange growers are at his throat, a linchpin of Mr. Cutrale's empire is a U.S. company. Coca-Cola helped launch his business, and for nearly 20 years he and Coke have enjoyed what Eugene Amoroso, the president and chief executive officer of Coca-Cola Foods, concedes is a &quot;very special relationship.&quot; A competitor, a director of Cargill Corp.'s Brazil citrus unit, estimates that Coke buys, &quot;if not all its Brazilian juice, then 99.9%&quot; from Mr. Cutrale.    Thus, Mr. Cutrale has benefited from one American multinational while angering American orange growers. Meanwhile, Brazil's booming export industries have pleased American bankers dealing with this country's $105 billion foreign debt and angered U.S. trade officials concerned with balancing U.S.-Brazil trade.    In 25 years, Brazil's annual export of orange-juice concentrate has increased to close to $1 billion from $84,000. The number of orange trees has grown from 39 million in 1970 to 130 million today -- more than twice the number in Florida. And more than $1.5 billion has been invested in orange-processing factories scattered throughout northern Sao Paulo state.    The 60-year-old Mr. Cutrale is now one of Brazil's leading businessmen. But he doesn't like to talk to reporters about his empire -- or about anything else.    His new headquarters, a cluster of low-slung granite-gray buildings in the midst of Sao Paulo state's orange-growing country, reflects his secretive nature. Surrounded by two rows of barbed-wire fence and patrolled by armed guards, the complex is referred to by the townspeople of Araraquara as &quot;the concentration camp.&quot;    Inside his antiseptic headquarters, workers are careful to shut doors because, says one, &quot;Mr. Cutrale hates us to waste the air conditioning.&quot; There are no pictures on the walls, and there are no potted plants. &quot;Mr. Cutrale doesn't like plants,&quot; says a secretary. And despite repeated promises to a reporter that Mr. Cutrale would see him, there is no Mr. Cutrale.    Confronted a few days later at 8 a.m. in his Sao Paulo office, this tall, elegant gray-haired man says he can't talk because he must rush to a dentist. Relenting, he allows the reporter to accompany him.    Asked about his success, he replies: &quot;Never take a holiday. Work for quality, quantity and competitive price.&quot; About Coca-Cola: &quot;We have a good feeling.&quot; And what of the problems of the citrus industry? &quot;I enjoy myself. We've never had excess juice, and I don't think we ever will.&quot;    This bluff optimism is partly bravado. But it also reflects the remarkable success of Mr. Cutrale since the Florida freeze of 1962. It was shortly after that that he bought his first small orange-processing plant and contacted Coca-Cola, which began a relationship that Coke's former finance director, Sam Ayoub, calls a beautiful marriage.    The importance of this relationship is suggested by the fact that the only book in the Araraquara office of Jose-Luis Cutrale, Mr. Cutrale's son, is &quot;The Real Coke, The Real Story&quot; by Thomas Oliver.    But the younger Mr. Cutrale, who is 40, is as suspicious of journalists as his father is, and he doesn't like to talk about Coca-Cola. Asked about sales to the company, he smiles: &quot;I just don't have that figure in my head.&quot;    Michelle Beale, a spokeswoman for Coca-Cola Foods, won't give that figure, either. But Mr. Ayoub, the former Coke director, describes Jose Cutrale as &quot;one of the top suppliers to Coke. In Florida's bad years, he has been selling between $100 million and $200 million {in juice concentrate}.&quot; Certainly, it is likely that any regular U.S. consumer of Minute Maid -- and it leads the $3.3 billion U.S. retail market with a 22% share -- is drinking some of Mr. Cutrale's juice.    It all began when Mr. Cutrale, seeking to improve his standards, persuaded Coke to send technicians and agronomists to assist him in planting and cultivating new trees and in developing industrial techniques for juice production. Coke had become worried about the uncertainty of Florida supplies shortly after it acquired Minute Maid in 1960.    Coke's assistance continued over the years. And today, Mr. Ayoub says, if &quot;Cutrale's production is 100 and Coke needs 80, he provides it.&quot; He adds that Mr. Cutrale's telephoned promise to deliver is considered an absolute guarantee. &quot;Coke will never let him down because he has never failed to produce the goods.&quot;    That situation irks Bobby F. Mckown, the general manager of Florida Citrus Mutual, the state's orange growers' association. He comments that it is a &quot;bit like the {Reagan administration's} Iran deal, where we're helping the guys supposed to be our enemies.&quot;    The cash flow from Coke helped Mr. Cutrale get where he is. But he also availed himself of Brazilian government subsidies offered to planters of orange trees, and he aggressively bought smaller factories. He now processes oranges in eight plants scattered across Sao Paulo state.    People who know him say he has always had the compulsive desire to be the biggest -- to have more orange trees, more plant capacity and more money. And that has led him to repeated and bitter clashes with his main competitor, the German-Brazilian group Citrosuco Paulista S.A., and particularly with the company's managing director, Horst Happel. &quot;I like to roll up my sleeves and fight,&quot; Mr. Cutrale says.    Insiders talk of explosive industry meetings in Sao Paulo in which Mr. Cutrale and Mr. Happel have hurled abuse at each other: &quot;The clash of two huge egos who have taken on the world and are the best,&quot; says Cesar Denardi of Citropectina S.A., a small juice-concentrate company.    Mr. Happel declined repeated requests for an interview. But most analysts believe that Mr. Cutrale's Sucocitrico remains marginally bigger than Citrosuco, with the two groups holding close to 70% of Brazilian concentrate production.    It isn't just Citrosuco that has felt the brunt of Mr. Cutrale's combative manner. When, in 1981, Cargill Corp.'s Brazilian unit, Cargill Citrus Ltda., introduced the cost-saving idea of transporting juice as oil is transported, in bulk tankers rather than in barrels, Mr. Cutrale fought the innovation, complaining to friends in the Brazilian government. He suggested to them -- altogether seriously -- that the tanker Cargill owned should be divided on the basis of export shares, of which Mr. Cutrale's happened to be the largest.    &quot;He wanted to socialize the bulk system, and he came close because he had excellent links with the {former} military government,&quot; says one official. In the end, Mr. Cutrale bought his own ship -- the Orange Blossom. It is the largest juice-concentrate carrier in the world, with a capacity of 13,000 tons.    Smiling broadly and speaking in evident good humor, Jose-Luis Cutrale says something that sounds like a veiled threat: &quot;We'll soon be producing 300 million boxes of oranges in Brazil. Florida produces 130 million. I think it's time we sat and talked to ensure that everyone is happy.&quot;    Florida growers don't view things quite that way. After seeing their own output plunge from more than 200 million 90-pound boxes to an estimated 130 million this year as a result of four freezes in the past six years, they are determined to reclaim most of the U.S. market that has become vital to the Cutrales and to other Brazilian producers. &quot;Is it unfair to kick 'em {the Brazilians} out?&quot; asks Mr. Hill Griffin, the grower. &quot;No,&quot; he answers, &quot;it's economics.&quot;    &quot;Although U.S. consumers think their juice is from Florida, it's in fact often from Mr. Cutrale,&quot; says Dan L. Gunter, the executive director of the Florida Department of Citrus. Now, however, the Florida industry argues that new trees planted in the southern part of the state will be enough to return production to about 200 million boxes by the early 1990s. With the orange-juice market expected to grow only slowly, after doubling in the past 20 years, industry leaders say that Florida will have enough juice to meet most domestic demand and thus to squeeze out the Brazilians.    At the same time, the industry is pursuing aggressive commercial tactics. A petition brought by the Florida Citrus Mutual led to the imposition in October by the U.S. of a still-disputed 8.54% anti-dumping duty on juice concentrate sold in the U.S. (The duty on Mr. Cutrale's juice, however, was set at only 0.5% because he was found to be selling only slightly below cost.) This protectionist mood seems sure to grow stronger.    Other problems, too, are looming for Mr. Cutrale. The unprecedented succession of freezes in Florida has led to a wild boom in orange-tree planting in Brazil. Coffee, cane and other crops have been ripped out. The 10,000 saplings surrounding his &quot;concentration camp&quot; headquarters are among about 25 million planted during the past two years as growers sought to cash in on a price boom brought by the U.S. frosts.    But this price, which reached $1,800 per ton of orange-juice concentrate on the New York commodities market in 1985, has now slumped to about $1,000 as supply has overtaken demand.    As a result, Brazilian growers want more money for their fruit than Mr. Cutrale and other industrialists are prepared to pay. (Mr. Cutrale is Brazil's largest grower, but he also buys oranges from many other suppliers.) In 1985, the industrialists lost several hundred million dollars after paying high prices for fruit as international juice prices plunged. This in turn led to the dumping charges, as the Brazilians sought to get rid of their costly juice.    Now, Mr. Cutrale and others are refusing to budge from a price of $1 a box -- compared with a price of $3.50 in 1985. A dispute is raging and seems likely to go on. Moreover, trees still are being planted, making a worse glut probable soon.    It is clear to most analysts that the 1985 debacle marked the end of unbridled optimism and the beginning of conflict between growers with too many oranges and industry with saturated markets.    The industry hopes to calm the situation by establishing a new &quot;participatory&quot; system under which growers will be paid according to futures prices in New York. New markets for oranges are also being sought in the Soviet Union, Japan and China, while an attempt is being made to stimulate a growing Brazilian domestic market.    The younger Mr. Cutrale says he is unworried by this turmoil. &quot;I know I have a high-quality product,&quot; he says. &quot;I don't worry too much about the rest.&quot;    His father seems to be similarly blase. After all, droughts, tree cankers and new markets could easily change things as unexpectedly as that 1962 Florida freeze. &quot;I'm happy,&quot; he says, &quot;because I have more orange trees than anyone else in the world.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>