<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871231-0093 </DOCNO><HL> British Empire's Sad Lesson for America---By Norriss S. Hetherington</HL><DD> 12/31/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   America is now the world's leader in science. But history shows that this leadership can shift, and with it goes technological, economic, political, military and cultural leadership, to say nothing of relative living standards and general prosperity.    Look at the fate of Britain. Once leader of the Industrial Revolution and ruler of an empire, Britain is now largely an obsolete industrial society. British power, once taken for granted, has vanished.    The power vanished, in large part, because too few Britons understood and helped preserve its foundations. The empire was based largely on science and technology, subjects largely absent from England's leading schools and universities, and correspondingly absent from the concerns of Britain's leaders. The shameful history is recounted by Correlli Barnett in &quot;The Pride and the Fall: The Dream and Illusion of Britain as a Great Nation&quot; (1987) with an entire chapter devoted to &quot;Education for Industrial Decline.&quot;    In 1864, the Clarenden Commission had warned that &quot;natural science . . . is practically excluded from the education of the higher classes in England. Education with us is, in this respect, narrower than it was three centuries ago, whilst science has prodigiously extended her empire. . . . This exclusion is, in our view, a plain defect and a great practical evil.&quot;    The educational evil continued little ameliorated. In his anniversary address of 1903, the president of the Royal Society noted that &quot;expenditure by the Government on scientific research and scientific institutions, on which its commercial and industrial prosperity so largely depend, is wholly inadequate in view of the present state of international competition. . . . The cause . . . lies in the absence in the leaders of public opinion, and indeed throughout the more influential classes of society, of sufficiently intelligent appreciation of the supreme importance of scientific knowledge and scientific methods in all industrial enterprise and indeed in all national undertakings.&quot;    A telling example of the consequent overall backwardness of British industry is found in trade statistics for 1937. Only 4% of British exports to the U.S. were dependent on modern invention or design, while the U.S. exported to Britain more than 10 times as much of such products.    A half-century later, one could substitute the U.S. for Britain, and Japan for the U.S. (although the U.S. is still an innovator while the Japanese adapt innovations and Japanese trade barriers distort the picture somewhat). Disturbing parallels also can be drawn between Britain's earlier neglect of science education and trends in contemporary America.    In 1827, the common core curriculum at Amherst College included 2 2/3 years of physical science, 2 1/3 years of mathematics and a year of biology, along with 2 2/3 years of language arts, 1 1/3 years of philosophy and religion, and one term of history. In 1850, the curriculum at Harvard included a course in science or mathematics, or both, in every semester of every year.    In the century and a half that followed, science and technology became even more important facets of American and world civilization. Yet Harvard's graduation requirements in 1987, after the faculty instituted a core curriculum, include but two half-year courses in science. Nor are the science requirements any greater at many other prestigious American colleges and universities.    All this has led F.H. Westheimer, Morris Loeb professor of chemistry, emeritus, at Harvard, to assert in his Hitchcock Lecture at the University of California this spring that our universities are rotten at the &quot;core.&quot; Science students do learn a modest amount about the humanities, but humanists cannot make a reciprocal claim. The majority of students graduating today know almost no science.    America's future depends upon the scientific literacy of its citizens, both as voters and as leaders. Americans must be able to follow the arguments of scientific experts and to discern where wisdom lies among conflicting claims of experts and purported experts.    Unfortunately, abstract arguments about good citizenship and future benefits, however logical and important for the long run, have little import for short-run problems such as getting through the next school year or winning the next election. But growing concern in the U.S. over a declining competitiveness in international markets and a growing trade deficit may provide the impetus for real reform. This concern is manifest in many forms, including a growing concern about the quality of American education. The Carnegie Forum on Education and the Economy recently recommended that teachers in all disciplines have a solid liberal-arts education.    Expanding upon the Carnegie project, and with support from the Carnegie Corporation, the American Association for the Advancement of Science has begun a project on liberal education and the sciences. The AAAS hopes to determine what should constitute a liberal-arts science education, to find ways of teaching science to non-scientists, and to place its considerable prestige behind efforts to implement improvements in science education.    While the AAAS recommendations are not expected before early 1989, some general principles have already appeared in papers presented at a AAAS conference on science and liberal education and in discussions at the initial meeting of a AAAS study group.    While one purpose of a liberal education is to benefit the nation, another is to benefit the individual. College science and engineering students may suffer a nerdish image, but their understanding and sense of control over a predominantly scientific and technological environment leaves them more liberated than many humanities students trying desperately to cope in an increasingly alien world understandable only in terms of esoteric scientific and technological concepts. Freedom comes from knowledge; knowledge includes astronomy, biology, and chemistry as much as drama, English literature, and fine arts.    Science students at the California Institute of Technology and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology devote about 20% of their studies to the humanities; humanities students should devote no less a portion of their studies to science. A science course every semester of college should be the minimum right and aspiration of every liberal arts student, even if a shortage of science teachers now sadly makes this impossible to implement in every American college and university.    The content of science courses for liberal arts students is another concern of the AAAS. Lists of what every educated person should know may be fashionable, but an emphasis on current scientific facts leaves students ill prepared to deal with future issues. Understanding the process of science -- the way in which scientific information is obtained, tested and validated -- is more important than knowledge of any specific product of science.    Both for understanding the process of science and for appreciating the intellectual beauty of a scientific achievement, in-depth study of a small realm of science is necessary. The specific topic is less important than the generalizations that may be drawn about the nature of science and applied to future issues.    The above considerations are, of course, familiar to thoughtful scientists and educators. But now the time is ripe for reform. With the current crisis in America's industrial productivity and balance of trade, the stakes are too high to ignore.    ---   Mr. Hetherington is a research associate at the University of California and a member of the American Association for the Advancement of Science study group on liberal education and the sciences. </TEXT></DOC>