<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881003-0177 </DOCNO><HL> Law: 'Rehnquist Court' Comes Into Its Own --- Bias and Drug Cases Could Get Conservative Stamp </HL><AUTHOR> Stephen Wermiel (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> SUP EXE </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   For several years now, legal experts have greeted the first Monday in October with the prediction that the Reagan Revolution would finally take hold at the Supreme Court. Each year, they have been proved wrong. In the term starting today, however, President Reagan may finally prevail.    This will be the first full term together for &quot;the Rehnquist court&quot;: President Reagan's three appointees -- Sandra O'Connor, Antonin Scalia and Anthony Kennedy -- and Chief Justice William Rehnquist, whom President Reagan elevated.    Because Justice Kennedy didn't join the court until February, these four conservatives, chosen by President Reagan to alter the course of American law, had little chance to act cohesively last term. Indeed, Chief Justice Rehnquist spent much of the term surprising legal specialists by mustering relatively moderate majorities.    But the agenda of cases to be argued in the new term, already 60% filled, gives the conservatives a chance to tackle volatile issues and, with Justice Byron White as a potential fifth vote, to change the court's direction, if they are so inclined. These issues include drug testing for government and railroad workers, affirmative action in awarding state and city contracts to minority firms, civil rights suits against private businesses, the death penalty for juveniles and a new federal sentencing system for criminals.    Because of the conservative justices' relative youth, their impact is likely to endure. By the time the new court term ends next June, the average age of the nine justices will be 68 years old, with three liberals in their 80s at one end of the ideological spectrum and three conservatives in their 50s at the other end. Three others are in their 60s and 70s.    &quot;This court is almost as old as the one Roosevelt went after with his court-packing plan,&quot; says Thomas Krattenmaker, a Georgetown Law School professor. &quot;One of the things to watch for is signs that one or more of the justices is considering retiring.&quot;    Although there aren't any known retirement plans thus far, rumors that the 71-year-old Justice White is considering stepping down next spring have persisted for some months among his former law clerks. But even before any changes in the court's makeup are likely to occur, the current members will have to grapple with a number of major cases.    In two appeals, the justices must review the constitutionality of drug testing. In one case, a federal appeals court in New Orleans upheld a U.S. Customs Service plan to test employees promoted or transferred to drug-related jobs (National Treasury Employees Union vs. Von Raab). In the other, an appeals court in San Francisco struck down federal regulations requiring testing of railroad workers involved in accidents or safety-rule violations (Burnley vs. Railway Labor Executives' Association).    Neither case involves the broader question of whether government agencies may require random testing of workers, an issue certain to be raised in other appeals during the term. But lawyers who have followed the issue say the court's ruling in these cases may influence random testing of government workers, as well as the widespread use of drug testing by private employers.    The justices must also decide whether local governments may require that a share of their construction funds and other public contracts be awarded to minority-owned firms. The ruling may have widespread consequences because, according to the National League of Cities and the U.S. Conference of Mayors, some 32 states and 160 local governments have adopted such affirmative-action plans. The dispute tests a requirement by the city of Richmond, Va., for 30% minority contracting, challenged by J.A. Croson Co., a construction company there (Richmond vs. J.A. Croson Co.).    In another, equally emotional civil rights case, the high court will decide whether to overturn a 1976 ruling that permits a range of civil rights suits against private people or businesses. In April, the court's conservative majority ordered reconsideration of the 12-year-old ruling expanding the scope of Civil War-era civil rights laws to cover private, not just government, conduct. The dispute involves a black clerk at a credit union in North Carolina who sued, alleging racial harassment, after she was laid off (Patterson vs. McLean Credit Union).    The justices will wrestle with a new sentencing system for criminals in federal courts. Critics say the commission created by Congress to set up the new system violated the Constitution's separation-of-powers principles, but the Reagan administration defends the new rules (U.S. vs. Mistretta).    Other issues on the court's agenda that are of importance to business and industry include:   --Should evidence of sexual stereotyping of workers make it tougher for employers to defend against charges of illegal sex discrimination in the workplace? The case pits the accounting firm Price Waterhouse against a former manager who sued when she was denied a promotion (Price Waterhouse vs. Hopkins).    --Under separation-of-powers principles, may Congress give the comptroller general, who is accountable to Congress, power to delay the awarding of federal contracts while studying bid complaints? The Reagan administration appealed such a delay in a dispute with Ameron Inc., a contractor in Monterey Park, Calif. (U.S. Army Corps of Engineers vs. Ameron Inc.).    --May states tax income that oil and gas producers derive from offshore drilling, which is regulated by federal law? Shell Oil Co., a unit of Royal Dutch/Shell Group, is challenging an Iowa tax (Shell Oil Co. vs. Iowa Department of Revenue).    --Is it constitutional for the Federal Home Loan Bank Board to require that all claims against insolvent thrift institutions, even when based on state law, be handled through administrative action by the Federal Savings and Loan Insurance Corp., rather than in court? Coit Independence Joint Venture of Dallas objected to the FSLIC's handling of its claims against FirstSouth F.A., a Pine Bluff, Ark., thrift placed under FSLIC receivership in December 1986 (Coit Independence Joint Venture vs. FSLIC).    --May states tax the net income of oil companies without allowing them to deduct the amount of the windfall-profits tax paid to the federal government? Fourteen major oil and gas companies are disputing a New Jersey law (Amerada Hess Corp. vs. Director, Division of Taxation; Texaco Inc. vs. Director, Division of Taxation).    --Is it an unconstitutional taking of property for a state supreme court to interpret state law to bar a utility from charging consumers for the cost of unused nuclear power plants? The appeal was filed by Duquesne Light Co. and Ohio Edison Co.'s Pennsylvania Power Co. unit, in a dispute over Pennsylvania law (Duquesne Light Co. vs. Barasch).    --What evidence must a worker who sues an employer for age discrimination provide to avoid having the case thrown out before trial? The dispute involves a former employee of the Harbison-Walker Refractories division of Dresser Industries Inc. (Harbison-Walker Refractories vs. Brieck). </TEXT></DOC>