<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880805-0117 </DOCNO><HL> Ingredients of a Food Phobia </HL><AUTHOR> Thomas W. Hazlett </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> CHM FOD </IN><TEXT>   California's professional regulators have discovered a remarkable fact. Environmental and consumer activists, while pushing through landmark legislation to establish the toughest food-safety standards anyplace not vacuum sealed, go easy on one set of particularly lethal poisons -- natural carcinogens.    While great resources are expended pursuing the risks of chemical additives listed in parts per million or billion, the quantum dosage leap to natural toxins in parts per thousand fails to bring sellers of such foods under any obligation even to label the life-threatening risks involved, let alone eliminate them. With the curious exception of tobacco, we see a strong bias for death by natural causes.    The idea that carcinogens are a fact of modern (or ancient) life, and not an innovation of evil corporate alchemists, ought no longer to be a scientific secret -- not with the news that mushrooms, peanut butter and the dreaded lima bean may pose health risks far above those augured by the average prepackaged, thoroughly processed all-American food treat.    Alerted to the hazards of Mother Nature, the public presumably would make some tradeoffs, balancing natural vs. additive risks. This would lead to a crash landing for the &quot;zero-tolerance&quot; policy of the consumerist lobby, which largely argues that since carcinogenic chemical additives are essentially unannounced intrusions into the consumer's digestive tract, they should be held per se illegal at any level (as in the federal Delaney Clause) or above a very low risk level (as in California's Proposition 65), no matter the alternatives or consequences. As Laurie Mott of the Environmental Defense Fund puts it, there exists &quot;no room for consideration of the benefits of pesticides.&quot;    Ms. Mott's comment was made at a recent symposium on &quot;Chemicals in the Human Food Chain,&quot; put on by the University of California's Agricultural Issues Center. It was there the state's regulative staff testified to being often at loggerheads with such zero-tolerance fundamentalists, as well as with headline-hawking legislators.    The activists pain regulators by diverting attention to the chemically sensational, to a place where public hysteria and a particular ideological agenda are hoped to intersect. The legislators are lagging indicators, issuing directives to agencies for radically shifting resources into assessing each day's most blood-curdling new health hazard, making a mockery of the regulatory process. In a day when ribbon-cuttings have largely been replaced by flashy press conferences announcing the newest and grimmest health risk yet discovered, agency resources flow not toward the most toxic dangers, but to those sporting the highest television ratings.    As a result, people probably die. The expert consensus is that today's bona fide health risks -- at the margin -- do not concern the great mass of consumers swallowing trace toxins over a lifetime of diverse eating, but laborers repeatedly exposed to intensive quantities of pesticides and other chemical compounds. Yet the quest for &quot;consumer protection&quot; is a bit more politically effective than concentrating where the toxins concentrate -- on largely non-voting, non-English speaking, non-affluent migratory farm labor. Toxins aren't the only thing alien in the human food chain.    Most consumers, reeling from the vigilant death watch maintained by news organizations (yes, in the '80s we found out that sex does cause cancer) would suffer acute toxic shock to know less than 5% of dietary-induced cancers spring from synthetic chemical additives; natural fats and tobacco leaves account for the overwhelming majority of the known cancer risk. The pervasive public ignorance can be fatal, for it allows prevailing winds to blow regulators into low health priority areas, with Eyewitness News directors making our choices on risk and food toxicity.    Those choices are becoming ever more difficult, for the fruits of technology -- modern chromatiographics and a high-resolution mass spectroscope can catalog ingredients down to parts per trillion -- quickly sour in the world of collective choice-making. Whereas the zero-tolerance standard was once philosophically offensive, it had relatively little effect as most trace elements were, indeed, untraceable.    The constraint of technology provided, in effect, a workable de minimus standard, whereby chemical risks had to exceed a significant threshold to be detected and, hence, cause concern. Today, having expanded our sensory perception exponentially, we have managed to &quot;prove nothing's safe anymore,&quot; and whip the common folk into a synthetic chemical-induced tizzy. The public-policy reality is that regulators no longer can hide behind implicit de minimus standards provided by low-tech; now that we know with precision what lurks, we must squarely confront the question of acceptable risk levels.    But the increased politicization of risk brings on new life-threatening exigencies of its own, as former Food and Drug Administration chief Donald Kennedy (now president of Stanford University) &quot;scientifically&quot; discovered. When the FDA found that a nonfat dry milk substitute -- casein -- could make equally tasty and healthful ice cream at reduced cost, Mr. Kennedy moved quickly to help gain agency permission for the ingredient change. What greeted the pro-consumer gesture was the best attended congressional hearing the commissioner ever faced. The fact was that U.S. dairymen didn't like the taste of British-born casein -- nor did &quot;their&quot; representatives. Mr. Kennedy got a triple scoop of Washington-style abuse, and a lesson in hard ball. The Washington Post played the story as if he were permitting foreign chemicals in ice cream.    The argument underlying regulation of chemicals in the human food chain is that consumers, being nonspecialists in environmental toxicology, are ignorant of the health risks they face, while strongly desirous of having qualified experts certify a safe food supply. But as science is increasingly adept at discovering and quantifying, and Prop. 65's celebrated labeling-overkill is soon to demonstrate, in absolute terms there ain't no such thing as a safe lunch.    If ignorant consumers are the problem, ignorant voters offer a funny kind of solution, particularly when they can be herded to stampede virtually between commercials. In making public choices, voters are under no obligation to be consistent. The regulator who takes his or her mission seriously will quickly learn that toxins are to be avoided at &quot;all&quot; cost -- until the very first aphid lies limp on some poor househusband's broccoli casserole. Then it's all-out, thermonuclear-policy panic -- and full throttle on the pesticide gun.    The outcome of the system is a crazy-quilt regulatory scheme that largely connects the dots between crises. It's a wonder we survive at all. But we do. As Jim Wells, head of the pesticide-use branch of the California Department of Food and Agriculture, notes, &quot;We cannot escape one fact: we are living older, healthier and more mentally acute than we have ever lived in the history of mankind. You just can't discount that because it's convenient for television.&quot;    It turns out the market rewards those who reduce chemical toxins to &quot;safe&quot; levels, given the constraints of taste and preferences. Brand names zealously guard product integrity; food processors routinely require farmers to maintain a &quot;pesticide log&quot; on cumulative toxic buildups. Supermarket chains are increasingly using private labs to double-check government monitoring, a practice industry experts see as a response to consumer fears rather than to certified health risks.    It appears that the real health hazards relate less to the farmer's use of chemical additives and more to the consumer's taste buds. Cheeseburgers are downright poisonous compared with the chemical purity to be found in a cup of carrot juice, but most of us would like the luxury of picking our own poison. The corner Quickie Mart stands dutifully ready to sell us either. Not all political agendas, however, are quite so liberal. The attempt to impose a zero-tolerance policy, as much as the gimmickry of the incumbents' publicity machines, is likely to be the more serious threat to our health as consumers of food and as citizens of a democracy.    ---   Mr. Hazlett teaches economics at the University of California, Davis. </TEXT></DOC>