<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871221-0076 </DOCNO><HL> End of OPEC's Fixed-Price System Ushers in New Era---Free-Market for Oil Will UpendDecades-Old Practices in Industry---By James TannerStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDESTPETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   Last week's plunge in world oil prices heralded the end of the fixed-price system so laboriously built in recent decades by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.    But the decline of nearly $4 a barrel in the price of oil on spot and futures markets since mid-October is only a symptom, not the cause, of the system's collapse. Among the causes of the breakdown of the structure, with far-reaching implications for oil consumers as well as for the producers, has been widespread flouting of official selling prices by OPEC members -- to the point of irreversibility.    Indeed, with free-market pricing taking hold throughout the oil industry, OPEC itself is showing signs of apathy toward its arbitrarily set benchmark price, turning instead to production controls to try to prop up prices. When interviewed after a meeting of cartel ministers in Vienna last week, Alhaji Rilwanu Lukman, the president of OPEC, was asked whether the fixed-price system was obsolete. &quot;Maybe yes,&quot; he replied, &quot;maybe no.&quot; But, he added, &quot;people should comply primarily with the production ceiling, and prices will follow.&quot;    For the time being, however, traders remain unconvinced that the 13 members of OPEC can curtail their currently excessive production, much less defend the cartel's $18-a-barrel benchmark price. As a result, average world oil prices fell below $17 a barrel last week in the wake of the oil ministers' meeting. And unless OPEC can restore its credibility as a cartel able to control its output, industry analysts expect oil prices to drop to $15 or even lower in the short term -- with even more volatility, perhaps, than occurred during last year's oil-price collapse.    For the U.S., the permanent dislodging of the official OPEC price is mostly good news -- so long as the general market trend is down, as it is now. To investors, the current price decline holds out so much hope of lower inflation that Treasury bonds have rallied in lockstep with the declining price of crude on spot markets.    For consumers, the $4-a-barrel drop in recent weeks translates into savings of nearly 10 cents a gallon on fuel, equal to $65 million a day in savings on petroleum products. Even if, as analysts expect, profit-starved refiners keep half these savings for themselves, U.S. motorists would save $5 billion during the next year from the resulting reduction of five cents a gallon in the price of gasoline.    Of course, the irrelevance of the OPEC benchmark means that prices could shoot up just as quickly as they have fallen. Indeed, any sign that OPEC members are cutting output could quickly reverse the latest price cuts.    All told, the end of arbitrarily set oil prices may create more pricing volatility -- on the upside or the downside -- in the short term. While creating trading opportunities for speculators in futures contracts and in other &quot;paper&quot; and &quot;video&quot; barrels, volatility will render the already challenging job of planning and budgeting even more difficult for the oil industry. The erosion of price stability -- every bit as much as the erosion of the price itself -- also raises fresh doubt about the nascent recovery of the long-depressed oil patch.    This erosion can only accelerate the decline in U.S. oil production, analysts and oil companies say. Domestic output of crude oil, currently less than 8.3 million barrels a day, already has fallen to its lowest level in more than 20 years, increasing the nation's reliance on foreign oil.    Petroleum imports averaged more than 6.4 million barrels a day through November, up more than 300,000 barrels a day from the year-earlier period. At 39% of total U.S. oil consumption, petroleum imports have helped to swell the nation's burdensome trade deficit. Although lower oil prices will help reduce the trade deficit, higher import volumes could offset those gains. And if oil prices should return to last year's low of $10 a barrel, the renewed devastation in the oil industry would likely revive lagging interest in a tariff on imported oil.    But over the long term, oil-price volatility is likely to diminish, with OPEC permanently abandoning a fixed-price structure, many analysts say. Before OPEC created the system, oil prices were relatively stable for decades on end, as oil companies balanced world production with demand for their refined products. OPEC itself is now emphasizing production rather than price -- just as the oil companies did in bygone years -- letting prices seek their own level.    &quot;You're seeing the beginnings of a two-decade-long restructuring; now everybody starts from scratch,&quot; says Norman P. Higby, a Menlo Park, Calif., energy forecaster. OPEC and oil companies alike will be forced to adopt new means of pricing, marketing and projecting revenues, he says. With consumers more than ever the driving force behind oil prices, he explains, the exporters and the companies will have to learn a whole new system of accurately forecasting demand for fuels and for &quot;achievable pump prices,&quot; and then of working backwards to determine a feasible cost basis for crude oil.    OPEC briefly vacated fixed prices previously -- with disastrous consequences. In a scramble for market share in late 1985, most members launched so-called netback pricing schemes, under which crude costs to refiners were based on the value of the products processed from the petroleum. The subsequent collapse in world oil prices set the stage for OPEC's short-lived revival of its fixed-price system this year.    But last week in Vienna, the diminishing importance of OPEC's benchmark price was evident in the communique issued after the meeting. Over the vociferous objections of Saudi Arabia -- among the last and staunchest supporters of a fixed price -- the official release didn't even mention a benchmark, long the cornerstone of OPEC's pricing mechanism.    The Persian Gulf kingdom for years was the bulwark of the benchmark, adjusting its production to the vagaries of demand for OPEC oil. But this year the kingdom renounced its role as &quot;swing&quot; supplier, indicating an intention to produce all of its OPEC quota of 4.3 million barrels a day.    In the strongest terms yet, Saudi Arabia last week reiterated its refusal to reassume that role. &quot;We will never be the swing producer, neither now nor any other time,&quot; Hisham M. Nazer, the oil minister of Saudi Arabia, told a small group of reporters in the wee hours of Tuesday morning as the OPEC meeting concluded.    What Mr. Nazer is really saying, insists Bryan Jacoboski, an oil analyst at PaineWebber Inc., is that &quot;OPEC is off fixed prices.&quot;    Under a fixed-price system, someone has to be willing to expand and contract production to maintain a targeted price. Saudi Arabia, OPEC's leading producer, was the logical choice so long as it was willing. But now, &quot;if you don't have a swing supplier, you don't have a fixed-price system,&quot; Mr. Jacoboski explains.    He and other analysts agree that even today only 20% or less of OPEC's estimated production of 18.5 million barrels a day is being sold at official prices. A portion of the remainder is consumed domestically by the OPEC members. But the bulk is being sold on spot markets; traded under barter transactions; marketed through discounts disguised as processing arrangements; refined into products that are exported at whatever prices the market will bear; or increasingly being sold under market-related agreements linked to North Sea Brent crude or even to the price of West Texas Intermediate, a key U.S. grade.    &quot;Brent and WTI are the world's new benchmarks for oil prices,&quot; says a top trading official of a major European oil company.    In weak markets, those freely set oil prices invariably will remain below whatever benchmark is established by OPEC. In a weak economy, &quot;how often do you see someone paying list price for a car?&quot; asked one representative of an Arab oil exporter.    OPEC has, of course, revived the fixed-price system once, and possibly could do it again. But oil executives and analysts maintain that the collapse of the system that has served OPEC and the rest of the oil industry so well for decades is an egg that can't be unscrambled. &quot;No refiner, trader or consumer-country agency can afford to continue buying at the official selling price when so many deeply discounted alternative crudes are available,&quot; Charles Maxwell, senior energy strategist at Cyrus J. Lawrence Inc., said in a mid-November report that predicted the OPEC price system was coming apart.    But while the fixed-price system is dead -- with the setting of the benchmark only an academic exercise, or a target -- don't count OPEC out. Despite the pain from the loss of revenue in the 13 revenue-hungry countries that make up the cartel, the current fall-back in oil prices may well strengthen OPEC in the long run.    While the current weakness of prices on top of last year's oil-market crash is further curbing the search for new oil supplies, the decline in prices for refined products may send false signals to oil consumers, encouraging them to use more energy.    Eventually, and certainly by the mid-1990s, OPEC's excess capacity will have drained, oil analysts generally agree. That means that with only slight adjustments in its production levels, OPEC will be able to manipulate world oil markets at will. The flexible, market-related pricing of oil taking hold today can just as easily send prices soaring as plummeting. </TEXT></DOC>