<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880824-0044 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88 -- The Issues: Conflicting Views -- Presidential Candidates Differ on How to Deal With the Soviet Union --- Dukakis Wants Cooperation, Bush Remains Skeptical; A Dispute on Star Wars --- Cold War and McCarthyism </HL><AUTHOR> Gerald F. Seib and John Walcott (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>      {First of a Series}   WASHINGTON -- Michael Dukakis thinks he knows what's propelling the Soviet Union to negotiate on issues ranging from arms control to regional hot spots. &quot;They are in such serious trouble economically that I think that's what's driving the process,&quot; he says.    George Bush begs to differ. &quot;I don't think that everything is being driven by their economics,&quot; he says. Instead, he credits the Reagan era military buildup with bringing the Soviets around.    That simple disagreement goes a long way toward explaining the different approaches that Mr. Dukakis, the Democrat, and Mr. Bush, the Republican, take toward the paramount foreign-policy issue of the presidential campaign. Their views on U.S.-Soviet relations in the Mikhail Gorbachev era, and their prescriptions for dealing with a changing adversary, spring from distinctly different analyses of the forces at work in Moscow.    In Mr. Dukakis's view, Moscow's own economic predicament has created a historic opening to &quot;challenge&quot; the Kremlin diplomatically to cut conventional forces, stop arming Nicaragua, help achieve Middle East peace -- and even to begin working jointly on such problems as the environment and space exploration.    And because he doubts that the Reagan arms buildup alone forced the Soviets to the negotiating table, Mr. Dukakis reasons that he wouldn't lose leverage in arms talks by curbing the Reagan administration's expensive plans to modernize the U.S. strategic nuclear force -- a force he already considers &quot;massive {and} survivable.&quot; He prefers shifting funds to improving conventional, non-nuclear forces.    Mr. Bush, by contrast, talks more skeptically of a &quot;watch and see period&quot; in U.S.-Soviet relations. Mr. Bush says he would continue supporting anti-Communist rebels while looking for improved Soviet behavior in Central America, Southern Africa and Eastern Europe as a sign that Moscow genuinely has changed its ways. As Mr. Bush and his aides note, Central Intelligence Agency Director William Webster and other senior military and intelligence officials share his skepticism; they say they haven't seen evidence that Moscow has adopted a purely defensive military doctrine or slashed military aid to major Third World clients.    The Soviets also are rapidly modernizing their long-range nuclear forces, and Mr. Bush insists the U.S. should keep working on all the Pentagon's new strategic weapons programs until the strategic arms reduction treaty (Start) now being negotiated is completed. He &quot;readily&quot; concedes, though, that in the long run, the U.S. can't afford to fully deploy all the systems.    &quot;We ought not to cut unilaterally our strategic modernization in the hope that economics will drive them to making concessions themselves,&quot; Mr. Bush says.    Interviews with the two men, their advisers and independent analysts suggest that a Dukakis administration would take a more activist -- and, some argue, riskier -- course in shaping the U.S.-Soviet relationship of the 1990s. Mr. Bush probably would hew to a more skeptical -- and, some argue, unimaginative -- course.    &quot;I think a Dukakis administration will make more of an attempt . . . to be proactive rather than reactive,&quot; says Harold Brown, who was defense secretary under President Carter. Mr. Dukakis also may be less likely than President Reagan -- and perhaps Mr. Bush -- to make U.S.-Soviet relations the overriding issue in American foreign policy.    &quot;The Soviet menace haunted Reagan, but it hasn't haunted Dukakis,&quot; says Harvard Professor Marshall Goldman, an adviser on Soviet affairs. &quot;What haunts Dukakis is whether America is going to be able to compete. He may regard Japan as a more important competitor.&quot;    For his part, Mr. Bush is more &quot;a Rockefeller Republican: fairly hardheaded and skeptical about the Soviet Union but without the emotion that conservatives at the beginning of this administration brought to it,&quot; says Ford administration national security adviser Brent Scowcroft, an informal Bush adviser.    Both men face tough questions about their approaches, though Mr. Dukakis, the Massachusetts governor and foreign-policy neophyte, faces tougher ones than does Mr. Bush, the vice president, former director of the CIA and past envoy to China and the United Nations.    Critics assert that Mr. Dukakis is naively optimistic about mellowing Soviet intentions and the power of diplomacy, and wonder whether he would bet too heavily on the survival of Mr. Gorbachev and his policies. Former national security adviser and occasional Bush confidant Zbigniew Brzezinski suspects that Mr. Dukakis, who once barred his state's National Guard from service in Central America, has a &quot;strong pacifist impulse, deeply rooted.&quot; And even some Dukakis advisers privately wonder whether the headstrong governor would listen to expert advice on the complexities of U.S.-Soviet relations, or instead rely on his own instincts.    At the same time, many observers suspect Mr. Bush is sounding so hard-nosed about Soviet relations simply because he wants to appease the right wing of the Republican party, rather than reflecting his own more moderate beliefs. In any case, Mr. Bush would &quot;feel constrained&quot; in office by pressure from the right, says Mr. Brown. And some wonder whether Mr. Bush might be so cautious and suspicious that he would miss opportunities offered by Mr. Gorbachev, who is cut from different cloth than the stodgy Soviet leaders Mr. Bush analyzed in-depth while he was at the CIA more than a decade ago.    Mr. Bush and Mr. Dukakis do, however, have broad areas of agreement. Both are naturally careful men who stress that the U.S. must move guardedly in responding to the Gorbachev era. &quot;I'm an optimist and a pragmatist at the same time,&quot; says Mr. Dukakis. Says Mr. Bush: &quot;My view is the jury's still out, and that's what makes me cautious.&quot;    Both strongly believe that the U.S. must keep pressing for continued human-rights improvements in the Soviet Union. And each favors continuing the current push for an arms agreement cutting superpower strategic arsenals by 50% -- though they disagree sharply on whose approach would make a pact more likely.    Still, their views of the Soviets have been shaped by distinctly different personal experiences. Mr. Bush, 64, is largely a product of the Cold War years following World War II. More importantly, his most intense experience in Soviet relations came when he was head of the CIA in 1976 -- a time when Soviet adventurism was rising and skepticism about Moscow's good will, and the wisdom of detente, was growing.    &quot;The experience of the '70s is an important one because it's obviously a period when the Soviets thought they were the superpower on the rise and we were the superpower on the decline,&quot; says Dennis Ross, a Sovietologist and former National Security Council staff Mideast expert who directs foreign-policy issues for Mr. Bush's campaign. &quot;The kind of hubris you saw on the Soviet side would have colored his thinking.&quot;    The 54-year-old Mr. Dukakis is more a product of the 1950s, and as a young man he was appalled at the excesses of Sen. Joseph McCarthy's virulent brand of anti-communism. But he also has been deeply influenced by what he has seen in his hometown of Brookline, Mass., which has become a port-of-entry for Jewish refuseniks fleeing the Soviet Union and exiles from Soviet repression in Hungary and Czechoslovakia.    As a result, friends assert, Mr. Dukakis doesn't harbor any illusions about life in the Soviet bloc. And Mr. Dukakis insists that American willingness to expand trade with the Soviets &quot;has to be linked to the Soviets' commitment to the Helsinki Accords&quot; on human rights.    &quot;National security and economic security go hand in hand,&quot; Mr. Dukakis says, and that belief helps shape his views on strategic-arms policy. He favors air-launched cruise missiles and developing the Stealth bomber and submarine-launched D-5 missile.    But he would stop the single-warhead Midgetman missile. He would also end a plan to put multiple-warhead MX missiles on railroad cars -- to move them around and make them more difficult targets -- arguing that the plan would cost a fortune but only marginally improve the missiles' ability to survive a Soviet attack. With the U.S. facing $150 billion budget deficits, Mr. Dukakis argues, defense budgets won't grow and money should be diverted to correcting &quot;very, very serious weaknesses in conventional forces.&quot; He says he would later consider other ways to modernize the U.S. land-based nuclear missile force.    Mr. Dukakis acknowledges that the Reagan defense program may have had &quot;some effect&quot; on Soviet willingness to negotiate. Still, he would sharply cut Mr. Reagan's Strategic Defense Initiative, or Star Wars missile-defense program, which he says now constitutes the &quot;principal obstacle&quot; to closing the arms deal both he and Mr. Bush want.    More broadly, Mr. Dukakis's aides say he probably would try at the outset to establish a strong personal rapport with Mr. Gorbachev, a man they say the Massachusetts governor might find a rare intellectual equal.    &quot;I'd challenge them to the negotiating table,&quot; Mr. Dukakis says. &quot;I'd challenge them when it comes to regional conflict. If Gorbachev was serious when he told the president they were prepared to stop military aid to the Sandinistas if we get behind the peace process, let's challenge them on that. . . . Are they willing to talk to some of their friends in the Middle East in the interest of a peaceful settlement? Let's go at it.&quot; Meantime, he would end aid to the rebels fighting Nicaragua's government, which is friendly with Moscow.    In some cases, Gov. Dukakis favors cooperating in confidence-building gestures. For instance, he favors a mutual moratorium on nuclear testing, which Mr. Bush opposes.    The first test of Mr. Dukakis's faith in carrots and diplomacy could come in southern Africa, where the Reagan administration is aiding rebels fighting the Cuban-supported government of Angola. Mr. Dukakis has pledged to end the aid.    The Reagan administration has helped set the stage for a withdrawal of Cuban troops from Angola through complex negotiations in which Cuba has said its forces will leave if South Africa gives independence to neighboring Namibia. But it remains to be seen whether the Soviets would have any incentive to prod their Cuban clients to leave if the U.S. unilaterally ended aid to the rebel forces there.    If Mr. Dukakis seems eager to experiment with carrots, Mr. Bush seems likely to continue the current administration's reliance on sticks. With Soviet troops already pulling out of Afghanistan, Mr. Bush clings to the Reagan philosophy that hanging tough will eventually persuade the Soviets to negotiate an end to regional conflicts. He says he would continue current policy on Angola and would push hard to restore military aid to the Contras. He expresses interest in expanding trade to encourage Soviet private initiative, though he won't allow export of what he considers to be security-related items.    He would keep both the Midgetman and rail-mobile MX alive until a strategic-arms pact was worked out with the Soviets, though he acknowledges that &quot;you wouldn't have the money&quot; to fully develop both projects in the long run. &quot;I would like to leave the budget the way it is until we probe further on the strategic-arms agreement,&quot; he says.    And, after initially sounding dubious about deploying an SDI system, Mr. Bush now appears increasingly enthusiastic about going ahead with it as quickly as possible. Mr. Bush's running mate, Indiana Sen. Dan Quayle, has been one of the most vocal proponents of early deployment of space-based missile defenses.    But Mr. Bush would be likely to alter the American approach to arms control in two significant areas. He says he would like to move negotiations aimed at cutting conventional forces to &quot;an equally fast track&quot; with talks on strategic arms. Cutting Soviet conventional forces, he argues, is essential to calm European nerves as the U.S. approaches an agreement that will shrink the nuclear umbrella intended to deter Soviet aggression. &quot;As you move forward on Start, it's important that Europe know that there's nothing in this that's going to decouple us,&quot; Mr. Bush says.    And Mr. Bush pledges to move forward on an issue that has become increasingly important to him in recent years: a pact eliminating chemical and biological weapons. &quot;It isn't going to be easy&quot; because of verification problems, Mr. Bush says. &quot;But that really is a passion of mine.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>