<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880114-0004 </DOCNO><HL> Texaco May Face $6.5 Billion in Back Income Taxes; IRS Staff Claim Could Complicate Chapter 11 Plan --- Amount Covers 1985-1986 Some Analysts Skeptical U.S. Can Collect Sum --- A Wall Street Journal News Roundup </HL><SO> </SO><CO> TX PZL TWA TAXES </CO><IN> PET BCY TNM </IN><G> IRS </G><TEXT>   Texaco Inc., already facing payments of more than $5 billion to emerge from a bitter bankruptcy-law case, said Internal Revenue Service staffers told the company it might owe $6.5 billion in back taxes.    Texaco and parties to its bankruptcy-law proceeding, including Pennzoil Co., its largest creditor, were stunned, notwithstanding skepticism that the IRS would ever collect all -- or any -- of its claim.    Texaco said it didn't believe the issue &quot;presents any reason for delay in the presentation of its proposed settlement agreement to its stockholders for approval&quot; -- an assertion with which Houston-based Pennzoil concurred.    However, the presentation of so stunningly large a claim, however uncertain, is bound to present new complications. For one, bankruptcy Judge Howard Schwartzburg will have to assess how to handle a highly contingent claim -- the exact amount of which doesn't even appear to have been set -- while also deciding how to deal with a competing reorganization plan that has been put forward by Texaco's largest and most dissident shareholder, Carl C. Icahn. And the claim could prompt new concerns among Texaco's creditors, said Charles Luce, chairman of the creditors committee in the bankruptcy-law case.    Moreover, Texaco could choose to contest the claim in the bankruptcy court, attorneys say. A complex tax dispute like this can take many years to resolve.    Meanwhile, the IRS claim comes amid separate indications that Texaco's own plan for reorganization is in jeopardy because several significant shareholders say they intend to support Mr. Icahn. And Texaco was said by sources close to the case to be quietly preparing contingency plans in case its settlement with Pennzoil should begin to unravel.    In composite trading on the New York Stock Exchange, Texaco closed at $37.50, down $1.50 after trading as high as $40.625 earlier in the day. Trading in Texaco shares was halted shortly before the company disclosed the IRS claim about 3:24 p.m. EST, and the shares didn't reopen on the Big Board. After the announcement, its shares were quoted at $37.50 bid in active trading at Jefferies andamp; Co., the brokerage unit of Los Angeles-based Jefferies Group Inc., which specializes in so-called third market trades.    Texaco's counsel, David Boies, said the IRS hasn't disclosed the theory behind its claim, which covers the tax years 1965 through 1986. The company did say the IRS estimate includes claims related to the company's purchases of crude oil from Saudi Arabia during 1979 to 1981. Texaco disputed the notion that it owes any additional taxes for those transactions.    Mr. Boies speculated that the IRS claim was prompted by a deadline occurring next week in Texaco's bankruptcy-law proceeding. After the deadline, which is several days before a hearing on Texaco's disclosure statement to shareholders soliciting their approval of the company's reorganization plan, the court won't recognize any further creditors' claims, Mr. Boies said. Even if the IRS claim were upheld, said Mr. Boies, it is unlikely that Texaco would ever have to pay anywhere near the full amount.    A source close to Texaco suggested that the matter is controversial even within the IRS. As late as yesterday morning, the source said, &quot;the IRS was giving some consideration to backing off that position because some of the higher-ups realized the potential for disruption&quot; of Texaco's tangled legal affairs. However, &quot;if they had let it go by until after Texaco had emerged from bankruptcy, they would have waived the claim forever,&quot; said the person close to Texaco.    In Washington, IRS officials refused to comment, citing prohibitions against the disclosure of confidential information about taxpayers.    Some independent tax lawyers and analysts tended to discount the seriousness of the claim against Texaco. IRS auditors tend to &quot;err on the side of the IRS&quot; when putting numbers to assert in a bankruptcy-law proceeding, said Ralph Muoio, a tax litigation partner in Caplin andamp; Drysdale, a Washington law firm. The assertion of such a claim doesn't mean it will ever be paid, he said. That &quot;would be fought out&quot; in possibly protracted litigation when so much money and a new theory of tax law were involved, Mr. Muoio said. While the size of the IRS claim seems frightening, Mr. Muoio said: &quot;Personally I don't think it is any cause for alarm.&quot;    One Wall Street oil-industry analyst scoffed at the federal government's staggering claim. &quot;All it is is some bright guy at the IRS who would like to get an extra star,&quot; he said. &quot;My guess is it will not hold up any water. This is so far after the fact that if there were any fire, the smoke would have come up years ago.&quot;    Other industry watchers were more cautious. &quot;Recent history suggests it isn't wise to downplay the significance of these things just because they're out of the ordinary or the numbers are large,&quot; said Bryan Jacoboski, a PaineWebber Inc. analyst.    &quot;Texaco originally described the lawsuit by Pennzoil as a nuisance lawsuit,&quot; Mr. Jacoboski noted. He also pointed to a recent case in which the U.S. Department of Energy levied a claim for a $2.1 billion refund against Exxon for allegedly overcharging purchasers of oil produced from the Hawkins Field near Tyler, Texas. When the government first made its case, Exxon dismissed the claim as a wrong-minded technicality, said Mr. Jacoboski. But in 1986 the Supreme Court refused to hear an Exxon appeal, forcing it to make the payment, then the largest court judgment to become final against a single private defendant in American history.    The IRS claim heaps new problems on Texaco even as new uncertainties rise around the company's efforts to settle its best-known liability -- the $3 billion it has agreed to pay Pennzoil to settle their litigation.    Texaco filed last April 12 for court protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the federal Bankruptcy Code in order to forestall enforcement of the history -- making $10.3 billion judgment against it awarded to Pennzoil by a Texas jury in December 1985. That judgment arose from Pennzoil's claim that Texaco's 1984 acquisition of Getty Oil Co. had illegally interfered with a prior Pennzoil contract to acquire part of Getty.    The IRS claim makes it Texaco's second largest creditor after Pennzoil and &quot;if allowed in full, would precipitate a very serious financial crisis&quot; for Texaco, said Mr. Luce, the creditors committee chairman. In any case, Mr. Luce pointed out, banks could be more reluctant to lend Texaco money in light of this huge new claim. Whether the IRS would be willing to subordinate its claim to any claims that could arise from the banks is a crucial consideration, Mr. Luce said.    He added that he was &quot;totally surprised&quot; by disclosure of the claim yesterday, and said, &quot;Texaco had advised us that it believed it had set aside enough reserves to take care&quot; of the IRS claims.    Wilbur Ross, investment banker for the equity committee in Texaco's bankruptcy-law proceedings, said he was also surprised by the IRS claim but isn't taking it too seriously. &quot;Creditors in Chapter 11 proceedings tend to file aggressive estimates of what their claim might be. They always put in the highest figure. In the wonderful world of Texaco's bankruptcy, there is always another loose end,&quot; he added.    Texaco said it, too, was surprised by the full scope of the $6.5 billion IRS claim, which Texaco said IRS staffers first disclosed in meetings with Texaco officials late Tuesday. A series of phone conference calls between Texaco and the IRS followed early yesterday.    The IRS claim consists of two broad categories. The first pertains to Texaco's ordinary course of business, such as depreciation and tax schedules. Texaco was aware of those claims and had put aside reserves to cover them. Texaco officials won't disclose how much money it has set aside, but it is clear that it doesn't have anywhere near enough money to settle the second category of the IRS claim, which involves the purchase of Saudi Arabian crude oil during 1979, 1980 and 1981.    According to Mr. Boies, the Texaco counsel and a partner in the firm of Cravath, Swaine andamp; Moore, the IRS is claiming that Texaco owes taxes because it, as well as other oil companies, was buying Saudi oil at below-market prices during those years. Mr. Boies said the IRS has given Texaco &quot;very limited information on the nature of its theory.&quot;    However, one source close to Texaco explained that oil companies purchasing Saudi crude at that time were required by the Saudis to resell the oil at the same below-market price or risk being denied future purchases of Saudi oil. He theorized that although some of the oil was resold without a profit, much of it was run through the company's refineries. Companies such as Texaco could net a profit by selling products at market prices that had been refined from that lower-priced crude oil. Taxes on those profits may be at issue, Texaco lawyers suggest.    Meanwhile, sources close to the case said that the White Plains, N.Y., oil giant is quietly stepping up plans to carry the two-year-old Pennzoil judgment to the U.S. Supreme Court on the chance that the settlement may fall through. A new round of controversy over the future of the agreement is prompting Texaco to hurry up its legal briefs for a High Court appeal and take others steps to ready itself for litigating to the death, according to people close to Texaco.    Although all parties to the case have a strong incentive for completing the settlement, its approval by Texaco holders doesn't appear as certain as the company initially believed. Calls and letters from individual shareholders have been &quot;overwhelmingly against&quot; the settlement, said one source close to the company. &quot;People in the company who want this to go through are getting scared.&quot;    And with good reason. Although individual holders who are complaining to Texaco might not represent the majority view of the settlement, their votes are critical to the outcome. With 243 million shares, Texaco has one of the world's most widely held stocks. Institutions, who generally seem to favor the $3 billion settlement, own 38% of the company's shares.    In addition, Mr. Icahn, the investor who owns 12.3% of the shares, is attacking Texaco's reorganization proposal as a plan that would entrench management by preserving the company's battery of takeover defenses. In the course of his attacks, Texaco officials believe, Mr. Icahn could open the door for renegotiation of the entire settlement with Texaco -- and failing that, for an appeal to the U.S. Supreme Court.    Mr. Icahn declined to comment.    A more likely prospect, according to some Texaco strategists, is that Mr. Icahn's attacks on the plan will arouse more shareholders to vote against it -- and with two-thirds required for approval, the plan may need every vote it can get. &quot;Icahn doesn't realize he is playing with fire,&quot; said a lawyer involved in the case.    Mr. Icahn, whose own reorganization plan for Texaco would strip away the company's takeover defenses, has been picking up support. Today, for instance, the committee of equity holders in the bankruptcy is expected formally to announce that it supports his competing reorganization plan -- even though the committee was a signatory to the plan that Texaco is submitting to shareholders.    &quot;The committee is like a weathervane in a windstorm,&quot; a Texaco lawyer said.    In addition, briefs supporting Mr. Icahn's efforts to present a competing plan were submitted to the bankruptcy court by the California Public Employees' Retirement System, which owns 760,000 shares, and the Pennsylvania Public School Employees' Retirement System, also a major holder.    &quot;Texaco's plan has nothing for shareholders,&quot; said Steven H. Felderstein, bankruptcy counsel for the California fund, because it preserves the company's takeover defenses. A lawyer for the Pennsylvania fund, however, added that while the fund favors Mr. Icahn's plan, it would vote in favor of Texaco's if it had to help bring the Pennzoil litigation to an end.    In some quarters of the embattled company, officials relish the prospects of the settlement falling apart. &quot;There are people in the Texaco camp who would be happy to see the case go to the Supreme Court,&quot; said the individual close to the company. &quot;There are a few who wouldn't be. There is a great deal of ambivalence&quot; about the settlement.    Indeed, Texaco in recent days has seemingly gone out of its way to call attention to Mr. Icahn's opposition to the plan -- and to the effects of his opposition. In a letter to Mr. Icahn, which Texaco distributed to the news media late Tuesday, Texaco's Chief Executive Officer James Kinnear said the investor's actions had introduced &quot;a fatal element of uncertainty as to whether or not the reorganization will be affirmed.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>