<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861224-0005 </DOCNO><HL> FBI Halted Iran Arms Probe for 26 Days;Previous Justice Assertions Contradicted---By Andy PasztorStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/24/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MDESTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)CONGRESS (CNG)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Federal Bureau of Investigation suspended a probe of suspected arms-smuggling to Nicaragua insurgents for at least 26 days -- nearly three times longer than previously indicated -- after Attorney General Edwin Meese asked for a delay.    The latest information conflicts with assertions by senior Justice Department officials that the delay lasted only about 10 days. They have asserted that the suspension was a brief, routine move to make sure the probe wouldn't interfere with U.S. shipment of arms to Iran in an attempt to win the release of American hostages in Lebanon. They maintain that the delay didn't impede the progress of the investigation.    In response to questions, department spokesman Terry Eastland disclosed yesterday that the probe, which was halted at the end of October, wasn't resumed until Nov. 26. That was nearly a month after the last U.S. shipment of arms to Iran, and two days after Mr. Meese first disclosed publicly that profits from the arms sales were diverted to anti-Sandinista insurgents in Nicaragua.    The delay already has embarrassed the FBI by raising questions about its independence. Now, the new discrepancies concerning the length of the delay threaten to damage the credibility of Mr. Meese and the rest of the Justice Department.    Three congressional committees are investigating whether Mr. Meese or his aides improperly tried to impede or obstruct the probe. The FBI, in conjunction with the Justice Department's Office of Professional Responsibility, also is looking into the same questions. And Lawrence Walsh, the independent counsel charged with investigating the entire Iran-Nicaragua scandal, also is expected to look into the chain of events that led to the delay.    The delay involved an FBI probe that focused on Miami-based Southern Air Transport, which, besides being suspected of ferrying arms and supplies to Nicaragua insurgents, was hired by the U.S. to carry arms to Iran.    Shortly after the FBI investigation was resumed late last month, a federal grand jury began delving into the operations of Southern Air as part of a larger probe of suspected illegal arms shipments to the Nicaraguan rebels.    Mr. Meese's unusual request for a delay in the investigation prompted controversy and concern at the highest levels of the FBI, according to law enforcement officials and congressional aides. Senior FBI officials, including director William Webster, made repeated requests for clarification of the delay order, or for authority to resume the criminal investigation, these officials said yesterday.    Weeks before the Justice Department publicly confirmed that Mr. Meese requested and obtained a delay, the FBI on its own, apparently without informing Mr. Meese or other superiors at the Justice Department, began an internal review of the circumstances surrounding the delay.    The exact cause and timing of the Justice Department probe is one of several major questions that remained unanswered as Congress yesterday completed the first round of hearings on the Iran scandal and lawmakers headed home for the holidays.    Yesterday, Richard Secord, a retired Air Force general whom reports have linked to the plan to funnel profits from the secret Iranian arms sales to the Nicaragua rebels, appeared before the House Intelligence Committee. As he has in the past, Mr. Secord refused to testify, citing his Fifth Amendment right against self-incrimination.    After three weeks of hearings by three committees, lawmakers are still uncertain who authorized the flow of funds to the Nicaraguan rebels, known as Contras. Committee members said this question can only be answered by Lt. Col. Oliver North, who was fired from the National Security Council staff for his role in the incident, and by Vice Adm. John Poindexter, the former national security adviser, who resigned. Messrs. North and Poindexter both have refused to testify, citing their Fifth Amendment rights.    Mr. Eastland said yesterday that Justice Department officials, after reviewing the sequence of events surrounding the Southern Air investigation and its delay, determined that they didn't give the green light for the FBI to resume the probe until Nov. 20. Congressional aides and other law enforcement officials familiar with the issue, however, asserted that the Justice Department's approval to resume the probe may have come several days later than that.    Mr. Eastland said the bureau didn't formally crank up the probe until Nov. 26 because of bureaucratic delays.    Investigators who are piecing together the chain of events said top FBI officials were worried about the length of the delay and took steps to try to distance themselves from the decision.    &quot;There certainly were a number of contacts back and forth&quot; between FBI Director Webster and Associate Attorney General Stephen Trott, who conveyed Mr. Meese's request for a delay, according to one law enforcement official who has reviewed documents about the matter. These contacts reportedly included a number of requests from the bureau to resume its work.    FBI officials have declined to comment on the matter, but they have promised to provide all their files and preliminary conclusions to Mr. Walsh.    For the past 10 days, the Justice Department has described the sequence of events differently from the version Mr. Eastland put out yesterday.    On Dec. 12, Mr. Meese authorized his spokesmen to release a statement indicating that at his request, the FBI agreed for national security reasons to suspend its probe of Southern Air for about 10 days. Department officials assured reporters that the investigation was under way again by the second week of November.    Last Thursday, Mr. Eastland said the delay occurred after then-White House National Security Adviser John Poindexter personally alerted Mr. Meese that &quot;certain personnel (of the airline) were scheduled to perform a mission in the Middle East&quot; related to the release of the hostages.    Officials have said that when Mr. Poindexter contacted Mr. Meese to urge a delay in the Southern Air investigation, he already knew about the diversion of funds to the Contras. Federal investigators believe that Mr. Poindexter's decision to seek a delay in the Southern Air investigation was part of a broader effort, including steps by Lt. Col North, to try to hold off criminal investigations that they feared could hinder release of the hostages or expose links between secret arms sales to Iran and shipments of weapons to the Contras.    Mr. Meese has said that he didn't suspect until Nov. 22 or Nov. 23 that millions of dollars received from the Iranian arms sales had been diverted to the Nicaragua insurgents. On Nov. 25, during a televised news conference, Mr. Meese announced that as much as $30 million may have been diverted and criminal laws may have been broken. FBI chief Webster has said the bureau began its broad criminal investigation of the Iran-Contra affair Nov. 26.    Meanwhile, law enforcement officials said FBI agents in November discovered a document indicating that Lt. Col. North had contacted Oliver &quot;Buck&quot; Revell, one of Mr. Webster's top aides, to request a delay in the Southern air probe. The FBI started its investigation of the airline after a cargo plane carrying supplies to the Contras was shot down in Nicaragua Oct. 5 and one of its American crew members was taken prisoner. </TEXT></DOC>