<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870630-0143 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor:Iran-Iraq War Could Engulf Everyone</HL><DD> 06/30/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDESTTRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)PETROLEUM (PET) </IN><TEXT>   In response to Frederick Kempe's June 22 editorial-page article, &quot;How to End the Gulf's Tanker War&quot;: The sudden renewed interest in the Iraq-Iran War is a welcome change from more than six years of dismissing the conflict as a local, containable clash between neighbors. But the rekindled alarm about a wider war could end up doing more harm than good if it were to focus on, and seek solutions for, only the spillover effect and not its roots.    The debate in the United States and elsewhere over measures to help Kuwait protect its ships against unwarranted Iranian attacks appears to center on the freedom of navigation in the Gulf and the need to safeguard the free flow of the region's oil to world markets. These are undoubtedly important objectives, but the chances of achieving them would be slim if they were predicated on plans to &quot;sanitize&quot; the war and confine it to the land frontier between Iraq and Iran. This conflict has run too long a bitter and destructive course for it to be tucked away and ignored again.    Iraq, which has been calling for a negotiated settlement almost from the start of hostilities, has repeatedly warned that the conflict could spread at any moment. Unfortunately it took nearly seven years, a million lives and vast devastation, to say nothing of regional instability, to make clear what has been obvious all along: that this war is a major international threat.    It is gratifying for Iraq that freedom of navigation in the Gulf is attracting so much attention now, years after Iranian attacks shut down the Port of Basra -- Iraq's only outlet to the Gulf -- which used to handle 80% of Iraq's trade, including two million barrels a day of oil, prior to the war. Iranian troops also occupied Faw in the Basra region in February 1980. By contrast, Iran enjoyed unhindered access to its own ports, now better defended by Hawk missile batteries bringing in military supplies and exporting oil to pay for them -- until Iraq retaliated.    But even when Iraq decided to interdict Iranian shipping, it publicly designated Iranian territorial waters as exclusion zones and restricted its military activities to those waters. The regrettable accidental attack on the USS Stark was the first such mishap in nearly four years of Iraqi air operations over the Gulf. Iran showed no such restraint, however, attacking ships under some 30 flags that were not headed for Iraq. Many of them were hit in the territorial waters of other Gulf states.    Iran's aim was clearly to couple its manic, though futile, land offensives against Iraq with attempts to intimidate, even blackmail, the other Gulf states into abandoning support for Iraq. Indeed, Iran's justification for the recent targeting of Kuwaiti ships was Kuwait's backing for Iraq, even though Kuwait is only one of many Arab states supporting Iraq in the war. This support from Arab and other countries is based on Iraq's longstanding readiness to negotiate an honorable end to the conflict, in accordance with international law, United Nations resolutions and various peace initiatives. Iran has adamantly rejected any and all attempts to settle the conflict, insisting on exacting a price no sovereign state would pay.    In this context, Iraq appreciates international efforts undertaken by the United States to help end the war by exerting pressure on Iran. We do not view these attempts, as some do, as either a &quot;tilt&quot; toward Iraq or as a violation of the rules of neutrality. We do not seek military support, but ask for the application of international law provisions in a conflict where one side refuses to accept peace.    Attempts to halt or weaken U.S. peacemaking efforts could undermine U.S. credibility and cause adverse repercussions in the Gulf region and beyond. Worse, they would encourage Iran to intensify the war, widen its campaign to intimidate its neighbors, export its anarchic doctrine, and deepen its involvement in terrorism throughout the Middle East and Western Europe. Let it be clear that we, paying dear sacrifices for the seventh year, by no means are going to stop attacking any ship that sails to and does business with Iranian ports as long as Iran continues its war.    Therefore, efforts to deal with the threat to navigation in the Gulf must be based on the larger, more important aim of ending the war itself, which is the root of the regional instability. The security of the sea lanes cannot be considered without giving due weight to Iraq's right to live peacefully as other nations. Freedom of navigation and security of Gulf waters would be mere fiction if Iran were to be guaranteed free passage while Iraq remained sealed off from the sea. A speedy end of hostilities will benefit everyone concerned, including the United States.    Nizar Hamdoon   Ambassador   Republic of Iraq Embassy   Washington</TEXT></DOC>