<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871105-0034 </DOCNO><HL> Treasury View:James Baker StressesHolding Down RatesEven if Dollar Suffers---He Sees Liquidity as the KeyTo Calming the MarketsAnd Avoiding a Recession---Will the Germans Cooperate?---By Alan Murray and Walter S. MossbergStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP JAPANFINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Reagan administration's top priority is to avoid a recession caused by high interest rates, even at the risk of a falling dollar.    In an interview, Treasury Secretary James Baker said he wants to &quot;make sure&quot; that the Federal Reserve keeps &quot;sufficient liquidity in the system.&quot; His goal is to calm the tremors in financial markets from the Oct. 19 stock-market crash and to provide enough money to fend off a recession.    Mr. Baker believes that tight monetary policy and rising interest rates contributed to the market plunge. In retrospect, administration officials now think that in September the Fed made a mistake in increasing its bellwether discount rate -- its rate on loans to member banks -- although at the time Mr. Baker supported the move.    Mr. Baker also said that after completing budget-reduction negotiations with Congress, he hopes to negotiate a new agreement with other industrialized countries that would get them to stimulate their economies and would help stabilize exchange rates. But he emphasized that he isn't going to try to maintain ranges for the dollar at the expense of U.S. monetary policy.    Nigel Lawson, Britain's chancellor of the exchequer, said in a speech last night that he believes Germany and Japan are prepared to cut interest rates if the Reagan administration and the U.S. Congress agree soon on sizable reductions in the American budget deficit. If that agreement is reached, &quot;then I believe the other major nations of the world would agree to making it part of a wider international accord involving, among other things, a reduction in interest rates.&quot;    The financial markets were rife with speculation yesterday that the West German central bank might lower its discount rate or other important rates to stem the dollar's slide.    As a result, the dollar, though still falling yesterday, was cushioned somewhat -- amid disagreement among traders on whether the Germans really would act so quickly. The rumors also helped drive U.S. bond prices -- which move inversely to interest rates -- higher for the second day in a row. But the stock market ignored the talk about lower interest rates and fell in moderately active trading.    Any help the German reports gave the dollar appeared to have dissipated when trading opened in Tokyo Thursday, however. By mid-morning there, the U.S. currency had reached a record low against the German mark, breaching the 1.70-mark level for the first time, as well as a 40-year low against the Japanese yen.    The current crisis of confidence in Washington has left the Treasury secretary in the unusual position of being responsible for every major aspect of the administration's economic policy. In the coming months, he must pursue delicate negotiations on at least four different fronts.    He must continue to work closely with Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan, whose desire to battle inflation may conflict with the administration's insistence on preventing recession. He has become the central player in budget negotiations with Congress -- overshadowing Budget Director James Miller -- and he will have to persuade the president to accept any tax increases resulting from those negotiations. He faces extremely difficult negotiations with foreign finance ministers, especially West Germany's, who continue to resist U.S. suggestions that they stimulate their economies. And he is leading administration efforts to stop a protectionist trade bill, which would further agitate the markets.    Each of these negotiations is filled with pitfalls, and a misstep could have serious consequences. If Secretary Baker can't reach agreement with Congress or with the other industrialized nations, he could precipitate a new crisis of confidence in the markets. If he can't persuade the Fed to follow an easy-money policy, he risks recession.    Some critics doubt that he is up to the task. Trained as a lawyer and a politician, Mr. Baker has relatively little experience in financial markets. And his heavyhanded effort to browbeat the Germans into cutting interest rates -- a move that many analysts say contributed to the stock market's crash -- has raised serious questions about his timing and judgment.    &quot;He is a very good politician and a good negotiator, and that may be what we need right now,&quot; says Alan Stoga, an economist at Kissinger Associates. &quot;But he doesn't have a long background in this stuff -- in economics and the markets. In the days before the crash, his analysis was absolutely correct, but his style and presentation were very bad for the markets. He faces the same danger now.&quot;    But despite the considerable risks, the Treasury Secretary seemed optimistic yesterday. He acknowledged a risk of recession but said, &quot;I think there is some chance that the possibility of recession would have been greater&quot; if the stock market hadn't fallen and broken the &quot;inflationary psychology&quot; in the credit markets.    Before the market's crash, interest rates were rising sharply. A lower dollar sparked fears of inflation, and the Federal Reserve was tightening credit in response to those fears. Mr. Baker blames the West German efforts to raise interest rates in September and early October as contributing to the problems.    Mr. Baker believes that it was necessary to break out of the interest-rate spiral early this fall. That is the reason he publicly chastised the Germans and suggested he might seek a lower trading range for the dollar. That proved to be a mistake because it helped scare a stock market that was already sliding nervously just before the crash.    The Treasury chief acknowledges that the international agreement to stabilize the dollar, known as the Louvre accord, may have encouraged the Fed to be too tight in its policies.    With the presidential election only a year away, Mr. Baker has a deep personal interest in keeping the economy growing, both to preserve his own reputation and to help the political prospects of his good friend Vice President George Bush. But by pursuing a policy of easier money and a lower dollar, Mr. Baker appears to be betting that the stock market's plunge has rid the financial markets of their inflation fears.    If he has miscalculated and the markets begin to worry that the administration's and the Fed's new policies are providing even more fuel to inflation, then interest rates could start rising again and ultimately trigger the economic problems that he hopes to avoid.    So far, interest rates have stayed calm despite the dollar's fall and remain more than a percentage point below their levels before the stock-market crash.    Much of what Mr. Baker said already has been the subject of recent speculation and rumor in the financial markets, both in the U.S. and abroad, and thus may have been discounted somewhat.    &quot;If I were Baker, I'd be much more concerned about anything that caused a recession than about holding up the dollar,&quot; said Robert Kirby, chairman of Capital Guardian Trust Co. &quot;I think the dollar could afford to drift a little lower.&quot; But the policy could backfire if the dollar begins to fall too far, too fast.    Mr. Baker said a crucial part of the administration's efforts to fend off a recession and calm the markets will be new negotiations with Germany, Japan and the other major industrial nations. The aim is to strike a deal on economic policy coordination and, possibly, to stabilize exchange rates at some new, lower level.    &quot;I don't accept the idea that we should somehow stop trying to coordinate our economic policies. That's just a nonstarter,&quot; he said. But he said negotiations can't begin until the U.S. government has settled on a new budget-deficit-reduction plan.    &quot;You shouldn't have a meeting until you know you've got at least the potential for a successful meeting,&quot; he said. Once a U.S. budget agreement is in place, he said, &quot;then you've got the opportunity, it seems to me, to continue to pursue mutually compatible moves by our trading partners.&quot; U.S. officials hope all countries will be willing to alter policies as part of a new deal.    He stressed that any U.S. agreement to help stabilize the dollar's exchange rates -- a goal likely to be sought by Bonn -- wouldn't involve any willingness to defend the dollar by raising domestic interest rates and risking a recession.    And he added that no exchange-rate deal would be possible unless other countries adopt &quot;fundamental&quot; economic policies -- such as commitments to growth -- compatible with the desired exchange rates.    &quot;Stable exchange rates are in the interest of the international financial system -- very much so,&quot; he said. &quot;But it is not in the interest of the United States, or other economies, to go through a stabilization exercise that is not supported by underlying economic fundamentals.&quot;    If the Germans persist in refusing U.S. pressure for greater domestic stimulus, he indicated, it might be tough to get an agreement. Without a new pact, the Treasury might leave the level of exchange rates to the markets. Mr. Baker, though, doesn't want a free fall of the dollar and believes that too steep a decline might be counterproductive.    But he is clearly hoping that, if the dollar keeps slipping against the German mark without roiling the bond and stock markets, he will get a powerful card to play against the stubborn German government. Bonn has doggedly stuck to a tight-money, low-growth policy out of fear of inflation, despite pledges to stimulate its economy and scant evidence of price rises. But Germany's huge export sector could be threatened if the mark keeps rising against the dollar.    There may be limits to that strategy, however. For one thing, Mr. Baker's reluctance to use U.S. interest rates to help manage the dollar leaves only the limited tool of central-bank intervention, which may undercut the value of any U.S. concession. Further, the markets themselves may at some point begin buying dollars, without government prodding, if the greenback appears to have gone too low. And even Mr. Baker concedes that too low a level for the currency could spur recessions in Germany and Japan, which the U.S. would want to avoid.    Mr. Baker acknowledged that the situation in the financial markets remains shaky. &quot;I think markets are still fragile,&quot; he said. &quot;I don't think we're out of the woods yet.&quot;    But he insisted that he was optimistic about the outlook and the challenges ahead. &quot;I guess I could be practicing law in Houston, Texas,&quot; he said, &quot;but right now I'd a hell of a lot rather be here.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>