<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880324-0074 </DOCNO><HL> Can Bush Bring Blacks Back to the GOP? </HL><AUTHOR> Joseph Perkins </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   An adviser to George Bush tells of accompanying the vice president on a quiet visit to an African family that had suffered harassment from the Ku Klux Klan shortly after moving to the U.S. Mr. Bush said that, as vice president, he wanted to assure them, &quot;We're not all like that.&quot;    The adviser, Thaddeus Garrett Jr., with the help of several dozen other black supporters of Mr. Bush, organized a salute to the vice president Monday. More than 500 blacks attended the $150-a-plate dinner, which was put together in only three weeks' time.    Most of the headlines from the affair went to the vice president's position supporting the president's Grove City veto. The black attendees seemed satisfied with Mr. Bush's explanation that the legislation contained serious &quot;imperfections,&quot; and they cheered him when he said that institutions receiving federal dollars should be required to comply with civil-rights laws. Mr. Garrett maintains that the enthusiastic response Mr. Bush received is a testament to the good will he has built up in some segments of the black community.    In this year's primary campaigns, Rep. Jack Kemp earned the reputation as the Republican candidate most eager to open his party to blacks -- sometimes as the only Republican candidate appearing with the Democrats before high-profile black audiences. Still, over Mr. Bush's tenure as vice president, he has also made a conscious effort to reach out to blacks, visiting churches, colleges, neighborhoods -- going to places in the black community where Republicans are rarely seen or heard. He has not always been greeted with open arms, but he is one of the few Republican leaders trying to bridge the gulf that separates Republicans and blacks.    Such gestures define George Bush's attitude on race relations, says Mr. Garrett. &quot;You have so many built-in sensitivities with George Bush that you just don't have with any other candidate,&quot; except, of course, Jesse Jackson.    Mr. Bush's &quot;sensitivity&quot; to race relations may be explained partly by personal circumstances, says Mr. Garrett. &quot;Here's a man who, in his own family, has people of color.&quot; (One of Mr. Bush's daughters-in-law is Hispanic.) &quot;When your grandchildren tell you that the kids at school tease them because of their color, that's not going to affect you?&quot;    Be that as it may, Mr. Bush still faces the difficult task of broadening the base of his black support to include not only black Republican stalwarts such as Mr. Garrett, who are familiar with the vice president's personal and professional history, but also the growing number of black &quot;independents&quot; -- voters who are disenchanted with the direction of the Democratic Party, but who still feel uncomfortable moving to the Republican column.    Mr. Bush said as much at the dinner in his honor Monday night. The Republican Party &quot;must strive for . . . the politics of inclusion,&quot; he said, adding: &quot;If I am the Republican nominee, and I believe I will be, I want to attract to this party, the party of Lincoln, the broadest base of Americans possible . . . and that includes blacks, Hispanics and all minorities.&quot;    Mr. Bush's undertaking may not be as daunting as it appears on the surface. For while it is true that blacks continue to vote overwhelmingly for Democrats, demographic changes in the black population bode well for Republicans. There has been a drift of black voters away from the Democratic Party over much of this decade and a growing interest in the Republican Party among younger blacks.    A survey last year by the Joint Center for Political Studies, a Washington-based think tank devoted to black issues, indicated that while three-quarters of blacks continue to identify themselves as Democrats, their attachment is not nearly as strong as it once was. The number of blacks who consider themselves &quot;strong Democrats&quot; dropped to roughly 40% last year, from 50% in 1986 and 55% in 1984. While blacks have not realigned with the GOP, a de-alignment from the Democratic Party is certainly under way.    This trend may be explained by the fact that 18-to-29-year-old blacks have far less allegiance to the Democratic Party than do older blacks. Only about 25% of this young cohort considers itself strong Democrats, the Joint Center reports. At the same time, nearly 20% of young blacks identify themselves as Republican, twice the rate for blacks as a whole.    Young blacks now constitute one-third of the black electorate and their ranks are growing. &quot;They should be a major target for Republican recruitment efforts,&quot; said Joint Center President Eddie Williams at a forum last autumn sponsored by the Council of 100, a leading black Republican organization.    But it is not enough for Mr. Bush and the Republicans merely to invite blacks to join the party. Republicans have made hollow appeals to black voters before and have never followed up by going into black communities and working for their votes. Republicans must deliver a real message to blacks, and must lay out a program that makes sense to them. Again, the task is not as daunting as it appears. The pieces are already there.    The problem Republicans -- particularly conservative Republicans -- have had in wooing black voters is that they viewed blacks as being somehow different from other voters. But blacks are really no different. Indeed, the Joint Center survey last year indicated that white and black voters listed the same top concerns -- education, employment, income, crime, etc.    Moreover, surveys of recent years suggest that blacks are preponderantly conservative on a range of issues. For instance, while blacks quite naturally endorse the concept of equal opportunity (as do practically all Americans), most oppose racial quotas. Most blacks oppose school busing. Most oppose abortion. Most favor school prayer. And most favor tough criminal sentencing. What this means is that Republicans don't have to compromise their principles to draw black votes.    Part of the problem Republicans have had in building their black base is that they are nearly always on the defensive when it comes to black concerns. The Reagan administration has spent most of the past eight years defending its positions on affirmative action, South Africa, civil rights and social programs. These are important issues, but there are other concerns in the black community as well.    Some blacks will remain loyal to the Democratic Party out of appreciation for the social-welfare policies pursued by Democratic presidents, from Franklin Roosevelt to Lyndon Johnson. But the majority of the black population -- two-thirds -- is not impoverished, and is not concerned exclusively about social programs. The burgeoning black middle class is almost as concerned about economics -- inflation, interest rates, taxes, etc. -- as it is about traditional civil-rights issues.    Economics could be a major selling point with blacks this fall, and Mr. Bush is trumpeting the right message. &quot;We must bring black Americans and other minorities into the free-enterprise system,&quot; he said Monday night. &quot;A Bush administration will help build the bridge of capitalism and entrepreneurship to the black community. I want to help more black Americans and other minorities experience the pride and dignity of ownership, of building something in the private sector.&quot;    The vice president promised to &quot;restore and reinvigorate&quot; the Commerce Department's Office of Minority Business Enterprise, which in recent years has been rather ineffectual. That's well enough, but Mr. Bush will have to go much further to win black support. He will need a full-blown program that addresses blacks' main concerns and interests. He has already laid out a few of his ideas. He says he will work to improve the quality of education black children receive, and that he will target certain black school districts for special support. He also says he will work to support black families by insisting that absentee fathers fulfill their responsibility to their children. And he says that he will make his attorney general accountable for civil-rights enforcement. To this agenda he should add: welfare reform, education vouchers, resident management of public housing and criminal-sentencing reform.    It has been exactly 40 years since blacks and the Republican Party went their separate ways. In the two presidential elections prior to 1948, blacks split their vote evenly between Republicans and Democrats, and in elections prior to 1940, blacks were solidly Republican. Recent demographic and attitudinal changes within the black electorate present Republicans the best opportunity in nearly four decades to gain ground on the Democrats. If George Bush is serious about broadening the Republicans' voter base, he will not let this opportunity pass.    ---   Mr. Perkins is a Journal editorial writer. </TEXT></DOC>