<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880509-0005 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   MITTERRAND WAS RE-ELECTED to a second term as France's president.    According to computer projections, the 71-year-old Socialist won a second seven-year term with about 54% of the vote, to conservative Premier Chirac's 46%. Chirac, who conceded defeat shortly after the polls closed in the runoff election, is expected to submit the resignation of his government within the next few days. Mitterrand's victory portends continuity in foreign policy, a small change in the emphasis of economic policy and a period of potential political uncertainty in France.    Police in Paris said eight people were injured in election violence involving extreme-right groups. Sporadic clashes also were reported in New Caledonia.    ---   POLISH STRIKERS RESUMED talks with shipyard managers in Gdansk.    As a result of the talks, leaders of the seven-day-old work stoppage offered to end the action and postpone demands for reinstatement of the Solidarity union in return for wage increases and other conditions. Police continued their four-day blockade of the plant. Meanwhile, Warsaw produced a draft law to authorize the central officials to enforce a market-oriented program of decentralization, including the power to suspend the right to strike.    U.S. officials denounced the crackdown on strikers and said Washington's support for Poland's economic recovery plan would remain frozen.    ---   Reagan administration aides said Bush was told in 1985 about allegations that Noriega was involved in drug trafficking, the New York Times reported. A former U.S. envoy to Panama denied he had briefed Bush. The article contradicts Bush's insistence that he didn't know of Noriega's ties to drugs until this year.    ---   Ecuadoreans elected Borja as president. With the count nearly complete, the 52-year-old law professor and leader of the Democratic Left Party had 1.6 million of the votes to 1.3 million for Bucaram, a populist. Borja, who will succeed pro-American president Febres, pledged to reverse the government's free-market policies.    ---   Soviet police disrupted meetings of hundreds of dissidents seeking to challenge the Communist Party. At least 20 people were detained, dissidents in Moscow said. Organizers said the meetings were held to form an alternative political party, called the Democratic Union, and to attempt to break the Kremlin's monopoly on publishing.    ---   Israel's Supreme Court blocked the deportation of an Arab-American advocate of civil disobedience, and gave the government three days to explain its expulsion order. Mubarak Awad was arrested Thursday and accused of inciting Arab unrest. In the Gaza Strip, Arabs protested army orders that 300,000 Palestinians obtain new identity cards.    ---   Rival Shiite Moslem militias battled in Beirut, ending a 16-hour truce. At least seven people were killed and about 25 others were wounded, Lebanese police said. The fighting was sparked Friday by an ambush in which four Amal militiamen were killed. Amal blamed Hezbollah. Iran and Syria mediated the cease-fire Saturday.    ---   The White House is considering a multinational economic-recovery plan for the Philippines. The proposed five-year package, which could total as much as $10 billion, would consist of U.S. aid grants beginning in fiscal 1990, as well as debt restructuring, debt-for-equity swaps and increased private investment.    About 4,000 pro-Marcos loyalists marched through Manila demanding that the former leader be allowed to return to the Philippines for his mother's funeral. President Aquino reiterated that Marcos couldn't return from exile in Hawaii because his presence might destabilize the nation.    ---   Singapore defended its ouster of a U.S. diplomat. E. Mason Hendrickson, first secretary for political affairs at the U.S. Embassy, was accused of urging opposition activists to contest elections that are expected later this year. The Singapore government also arrested prominent lawyer Francis Seow Tiang Siew, a government critic.    ---   Pope John Paul II visited Uruguay's impoverished northeastern region and expressed strong support for labor unions and workers' rights. The pope, on a four-nation tour of Latin America, also gave his approval Saturday to strikers in Poland during his flight to Montevideo from Rome.    ---   The Social Democrats defeated Chancellor Kohl's ruling Christian Democrats in local elections in the West German state of Schleswig-Holstein, ending nearly 40 years of CDU rule in that state. According to official results, the Social Democrats won about 55% of the vote against 33% for the CDU.    ---   Hailstorms killed at least 21 people and destroyed about 15,000 homes in eastern China, officials said. In central Hubei province, what is viewed as China's worst drought in a century has left about 1.3 million people without water and has affected about three million acres of farmland.    ---   Renewed ethnic violence erupted in Karachi, leaving at least 26 people dead and more than 100 injured, Pakistani hospital officials said. The army imposed a curfew in most areas of the capital, where rioters set markets ablaze. More than 400 people have died in rioting in Karachi since 1986. </TEXT></DOC>