<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870119-0165 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Television:Mornings With Mariette and Rolland---By George V. Higgins</HL><DD> 01/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Last fall, when CBS scratched its perennial ratings loser, the two-hour &quot;CBS Morning News,&quot; it delivered a pledge that provoked many snickers: It would separate the hard news from the fluff, delivering the facts between 7 and 7:30 a.m. and turning the soft features over to an entertainment operation for delivery from 7:30 to 9. This commendable candor was widely taken as admission that the news operation made preeminent by Edward R. Murrow and Walter Cronkite was too spavined to compete anymore with ABC and NBC, and was being put out to pasture.    The new arrangement debuted a week ago, the spongier three-quarters of it renamed &quot;The Morning Program.&quot; I liked the concept, in the abstract serving both us self-proclaimed cerebral types who want the news and not the pap, as well as less self-consciously driven onlookers whose interests lie not in the Persian Gulf states but in the newest couches, accouchements and Cacherels. It was the execution of the concept that failed to satisfy.    The 30-minute news show with Faith Daniels and Forrest Sawyer was crisp and neat and clean. The 90-minute feature show? Well, it could use some work -- such as lowering its sights a bit and relaxing its personnel.    If I read the minds of executive producer Bob Shanks and director Mary Madeirkas correctly, they think that Mariette Hartley is the perfect daytime counterpart of &quot;Entertainment Tonight's&quot; Mary Hart and that she could give Joan Rivers a run for her money. Ms. Hartley, 46, could have cited a resume of 25 years' experience on stage, screen and TV to rebut that estimate, but she did not so elect. Instead she opened the enterprise by gagging around with a Polaroid One-Shot, taking co-host Rolland Smith's picture, thus reminding her fans whose denominators are lowest and commonest why she looks familiar: She was James Garner's lippy sidekick in the wise-cracking camera ads of several years ago. Ms. Hartley doesn't condescend well, and she knows it. Her discomfort showed to home viewers, regardless of its joyful reception by her 400-plus live audience, and got things off to a threatening start.    Mr. Smith, his position as enviable as that of catcher on a javelin team, responded manfully. Humiliated by Ms. Hartley's gratuitous defense of him as &quot;not just another pretty face,&quot; he attempted several times to quell her interruptions of guests John Madden and Pat Summerall. CBS's National Football League announcers, under the impression they'd been summoned at that ungodly hour to talk football -- i.e., hype the Super Bowl -- retreated into non-committal courtesy as she repeatedly butted in with deliberately vapid remarks establishing (a) her boredom with the sport and (b) her determination to make them talk about their families. Someone -- perhaps Johnny Carson, during one of her many guest appearances on his show -- convinced Ms. Hartley she's vivacious; she's going to throw her back out some day, living down to that.    The supporting cast includes Bob Saget, a young man whose ambition, I take it, is to succeed either Don Pardo or Ed McMahon, in the unlikely event that he ever grows up. On the show's second day, his supine willingness to play the fool brought a hat trick of bad taste: First he admitted his wedding had been videotaped; then he showed the tape; while the tape was running, he made vulgar remarks about his kin by blood and marriage, and guests at the celebration, capping the performance with a coarse double entendre about his diminutive bride. Ms. Saget should have the locks changed between 7:30 and 9 some morning, and consult reputable counsel.    The weatherman is Mark McEwen. A burly fellow in the Willard Scott tradition, he initially evinced the disquieting intention of emulating his &quot;Today&quot; counterpart's buffoonery. On Monday, he recklessly invited retribution for a bad sally by saying &quot;Shoot me, please,&quot; but no one took him up on it. A good thing, too, because that preserved him for Tuesday, when he assumed his additional weekly duty of interviewing someone's favorite teacher (nominations to come from young viewers, who should be in school at that hour, not in front of the TV). He kicked this feature off by interviewing his own 10th-grade writing teacher, Charles Wilkerson, dropping the clownish pose and conducting the discussion with finesse and ease.    Newly elected Rep. Joseph P. Kennedy 2nd (D., Mass.) performed with similar grace, making all feel good. Thing of it was, Mr. Kennedy was a guest on the show, not a member, and Ms. Hartley and Mr. Smith were supposed to be interrogating him. If I were Lt. Col. Oliver North's press attache, I would book him for the duo in a trice. In the alternative, if I were Mr. Shanks, I would remind myself of the mission -- which is to televise fluff, not to mimic &quot;This Week With David Brinkley.&quot; So far as is apparent, neither Ms. Hartley nor Mr. Smith was hired for inquisitorial skills; visitors certain to exploit that deficiency should be avoided.    So this is a faulty piece of machinery. The live audience is an abomination. You get out of bed and there you are, smack dab in the middle of a lodge meeting. The &quot;Comedy Club,&quot; short tapes of aspiring young kidders, belongs in the ashcan out in the back. But it's all right for Hollywood correspondent Robert Osborne to play sycophant to his subjects. Heck, he probably has to if he ever wants another story. And I always like Roy Blount Jr.'s humor, even when he's forced to pretend it's conversation. I do have some reservations about culture critic George Kirgo's witty putdown of ABC's five-hour weekend miniseries starring Shirley MacLaine (for which he was soon and lengthily rebuked by Mr. Osborne). Just how disinterested is CBS's critic when he views the competition's prime-time product? And those personals (&quot;Brenda, D2-WI,&quot; of Pasadena, wants &quot;a man with good morals&quot;) must go. I can't imagine what function Daisy, Ms. Hartley's golden retriever, will perform, unless the lady plans to wing shoot a few pheasants on camera. But if you grant the premise that airheads have morning air rights too, this could become a parade Marie Antoinette would sob to join. </TEXT></DOC>