<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880909-0006 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   BURMESE STAGED demonstrations in Rangoon to demand democracy.    About one million people participated in the protests against the country's 26 years of one-party rule, state radio said. While the demonstrations were mostly peaceful, security forces fired on a crowd of about 500 looters in the suburbs of the capital, wounding 17, and vigilantes beheaded three people who tried to poison protesters. Opposition leaders in Rangoon said more demonstrations were planned for today.    A general strike closed Rangoon's airport, preventing the U.S. and about a half-dozen other embassies from evacuating diplomats' families.    ---   THE U.S. BEGAN DESTROYING its arsenal of intermediate-range missiles.    The rocket motors of two nuclear missiles were burned at an ammunition plant in Texas, becoming the first of 867 U.S. missiles to be destroyed under the U.S.-Soviet INF treaty. Bush, who viewed the static firing with a team of Soviet inspectors, hailed the action as &quot;the day we began to reverse the arms race.&quot; Dukakis, meanwhile, said that &quot;a mountain of debt&quot; built up by Reagan threatened the national defense.    Moscow already has started destroying its medium-range missiles and rocket launchers as part of the pact signed by Reagan and Gorbachev.    ---   Brezhnev's son-in-law pleaded guilty to abusing his office as a top Interior Ministry official. But Yuri Churbanov told a military tribunal that he was innocent of the capital crime of accepting bribes. The plea came during the fourth day of a corruption trial in Moscow against the son-in-law of the late Soviet leader and eight co-defendants.    ---   The House approved an amendment to an anti-drug bill that would permit the execution of those convicted in federal courts of drug-related killings. It also voted to allow courts to impose prison terms of at least 20 years for such killings, and to narrow the constitutional principle barring evidence gained illegally.    ---   Shultz accused Iraq of &quot;unjustifiable and abhorrent&quot; use of chemical weapons against its minority Kurdish population. The secretary of state, in a meeting with a senior Baghdad diplomat, threatened to reverse the recent improvement in U.S.-Iraqi ties.    ---   The Bush and Dukakis campaigns agreed on Sept. 25 as the tentative date for the first debate between the two presidential candidates. A second debate would be held Oct. 13 or Oct. 14, depending on major league baseball's television schedule, Dukakis's campaign chairman said. The vice presidential candidates are to meet early next month.    ---   Firefighters closed all but a small section of Yellowstone National Park, where wildfires have charred more than one million acres. Reagan dispatched a cabinet-level team to the West to determine what additional federal assistance is needed in battling the blazes, including the possibility of sending more troops to fight the fires.    ---   Reagan plans to meet with allied officials during his two-day visit to the U.N. this month, but the White House denied that the president was seeking to use the opening of the General Assembly for a Western summit. Meanwhile, sources said Shultz will meet with Shevardnadze Sept. 22-23 to discuss superpower ties and arms control.    ---   Discovery's astronauts conducted a practice countdown, and NASA said it plans to announce next week a date for the first space shuttle launch since the 1986 Challenger explosion. Liftoff is expected between Sept. 26 and Sept. 29. Separately, NASA officials said Soviet scientists lost contact with an unmanned probe heading toward Mars.    ---   North Korean leader Kim Il Sung called for increased technological and economic ties with capitalist nations, and said he would welcome a delegation from South Korea to discuss reunification. In Seoul, demonstrators protested the Olympics and demanded the release of political prisoners.    ---   Officials in Bangladesh said that river levels were stable or receding and that the Dhaka airport was reopened so relief supplies could be flown in. Distribution of aid to flood victims was described as slow, however, and the death toll rose to 609 since the floods began with monsoons in June.    ---   South Africa's negotiator said talks over a Cuban troop withdrawal from Angola showed little progress. He said hopes for implementing a plan for Namibian independence from Pretoria's rule by a Nov. 1 target date appeared dim. The U.S. is mediating the round of regional talks, which began Wednesday in Brazzaville, Congo.    ---   A University of Edinburgh report found that men who smoke heavily are nearly twice as likely as nonsmokers to die from a common form of leukemia. The analysis, based on a previous study of 248,046 U.S. veterans, offers the firmest link yet between cigarette consumption and the disease.    ---   Archbishop Tutu risked prosecution by repeating a call for blacks to boycott South African municipal elections next month. He already is under investigation for a similar statement in defiance of emergency law. In Washington, GOP members of the Senate said it would be difficult to build support for new, stern sanctions against Pretoria.    ---   Pope John Paul II is to leave tomorrow on a 10-day trip to Africa, his fourth to the continent. The pope will visit Zimbabwe, Botswana, Lesotho, Swaziland and Mozambique, but will avoid South Africa.    ---   Afghan rebels downed a military transport plane, killing at least 16 people, including two Afghanistan army generals, Radio Kabul reported. The plane, shot down Wednesday, was en route to Kunduz, near the Soviet border, from Kabul. </TEXT></DOC>