<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871208-0039 </DOCNO><HL> Gas Prices Rise Sharply Due to U.S. Rule---Less-Expensive SuppliesAre Being Withheld---By Alan BaylessStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> RD SCNATURAL GAS, PIPELINES (LNG)ENERGY DEPARTMENT (ERG) </IN><TEXT>   Natural gas prices on the spot market are shooting up after a four-year period of decline.    Spot prices for gas at the wellhead are currently $1.75 to $1.85 a thousand cubic feet, up about 35% from $1.30 to $1.40 in September, says Benjamin Schlesinger, a natural gas analyst in Bethesda, Md. Vinod Dar, president of Dallas-based gas marketer Hadson Gas Systems Inc., says spot market prices could jump 20% to 35% more within a few months.    This price upturn is partly the result of an unintended reaction to a new U.S. regulation called Order 500. Under the regulation, a crediting mechanism unfavorable to producers is scheduled to take effect Jan. 1. Mr. Dar says some producers are already responding by withholding less-expensive gas supplies from the spot market. He adds that prices are also rising because of unexpected gas purchases by pipelines for storage facilities.    The crediting mechanism was developed by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission to ease the terms of thousands of old, so-called take-or-pay gas purchase contracts. Those contracts have helped push U.S. gas sales volumes to their lowest levels in two decades by locking pipeline companies into paying energy-crisis prices that are now much higher than those on the spot market.    Indeed, as energy prices collapsed in recent years, producers have undermined these pipeline-supply contracts by making less expensive, direct sales to third parties. At the same time, many pipelines have refused to take, or pay for, some of the more expensive supplies despite the strict contract terms. The pipelines argue that they might go bankrupt trying to resell the more expensive gas.    Part of Order 500, called the crediting provision, allows gas pipelines to escape from at least a portion of those high-priced purchase commitments. For each cubic foot of less expensive gas a pipeline ships on a direct sale from a producer to a third party, another cubic foot of gas would be credited against the more expensive gas that the pipeline is contracted to buy from that producer, thus lowering the pipeline's commitment to buy the higher priced gas.    But neither producers nor major industrial consumers are happy with the arrangement. For example, Dyco Petroleum Co., a Minneapolis-based independent gas producer, acknowledges that the new crediting mechanism will change its sales policies. &quot;We couldn't allow one cubic foot of gas to touch a pipeline that would have the privilege of taking credits,&quot; says Jaye Dyer, Dyco's president. For an executive to undermine take-or-pay commitments would be tantamount to &quot;giving away corporate assets just as though he were out on the street signing checks.&quot; Dyco, on behalf of 36 independent U.S. gas producers, has asked the energy regulatory commission to withdraw Order 500.    A consumer group of major industrial users says the new policy may cause a &quot;drastic reduction in the availability of low-priced gas on the spot market . . . unless producers virtually throw in the towel in their take-or-pay disputes with the pipelines.&quot; The U.S.-based umbrella group is pushing for modification of the policy.    The natural-gas industry already has been savaged by conflict over the high-priced contracts and the huge sums involved. The American Gas Association, a trade group, says pipelines already owe $7.9 billion for failing to take high-priced gas. The organization says the pipelines face additional &quot;billions of dollars in prospective liabilities&quot; before the contracts expire.    To enforce the terms, producers have launched at least 400 lawsuits, and legal observers say pipelines have lost most of the judgments so far. Meanwhile, major industrial users eager to buy gas at lower prices on the spot market are sometimes unable to get it because gas pipelines are hesitant to ship supplies that they aren't contracted to buy.    In the Pacific Northwest, for example, James River Corp. is suing Northwest Pipeline Corp., alleging that the Salt Lake City-based pipeline company won't ship the less expensive supplies that the forest products concern wishes to buy directly from producers. As a result, James River said it is being forced to pay an additional $350,000 a month for gas, which it currently purchases from Northwest Pipeline.    Another forest products concern, Boise Cascade Corp., says it's burning oil rather than gas at an Oregon pulp and paper mill because of Northwest Pipeline's policy on direct sales shipments and because of a rate dispute with a local distributor.    The situation is &quot;ridiculous,&quot; says Richard Baxendale, an attorney for Boise Cascade. If the company could buy gas directly from producers it could save &quot;millions of dollars a year,&quot; he says.    Northwest Pipeline says that it would transport the less expensive gas, but only if federal regulators allow the company to charge its customers for at least part of its take-or-pay costs, as well as other things. The energy regulatory commission hasn't set a date to take up the matter.    According to Mr. Schlesinger and other industry analysts, pipelines with high-priced contracts usually follow a strategy that includes honoring some contracts, refusing to honor others, and buying out the remainder at a discount. Whatever the mix, the strategy impedes the efficient marketing of gas from willing sellers to willing buyers, they say.    When contracts are honored or bought out, prices are inflated because a pipeline passes on at least part of the costs to consumers. The practice encourages users to buy more supplies directly from producers at lower prices, thus boosting the pipeline's liabilities for gas not purchased. To control such liabilities, pipelines limit the transport of direct-sales supplies whenever possible.    Meanwhile, the high-priced contracts have helped push down U.S. gas sales to levels not seen since the 1960s. In 1986, consumption was only 16.22 trillion cubic feet, down 6% from the previous year and 26% from the peak of 22.1 trillion cubic feet in 1972. Some observers see a slight turnaround this year, but the U.S. energy department forecasts a further 3% decline, to 15.78 trillion cubic feet.    Other factors also contributed to the decline. Some big industrial users, such as steel mills, have closed down in the face of offshore competition. Some electric utilities use less gas, as they commission new nuclear plants. Many gas users found ways to conserve fuel after the energy crisis.    But the impasse over the contracts remains a crucial factor. &quot;As long as the high-priced contracts remain, the industry is going to be crippled,&quot; says Michael German, spokesman for the gas association trade group. &quot;They are a cog in the wheel that is causing the machine to grind to a halt.&quot;    Nevertheless, the crediting provision in Order 500 remains controversial. Some critics, like Mr. German's group, are suing the U.S. energy regulatory commission for even more contract relief. Shell Oil Co. has sued the commission seeking a review of the policy. The energy producer claims crediting might hurt activities such as exploration and property sales.    Responding to such pressures, the commission in mid-October changed its original plan, under which crediting would have been implemented Nov. 1. The commission says it will seek public comments before eventually preparing final rules, but it still insists that it won't delay crediting past Jan. 1.    Unless the policy is changed, however, analysts expect the rise in gas prices to continue as producers continue to keep less-expensive gas off the market to avert having to comply with the crediting provision. </TEXT></DOC>