<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880422-0136 </DOCNO><HL> Medicine andamp; Health (A Special Report): Cost vs. Care --- Comparison Shopping: Companies Seek New Data on Health-Care Costs To Gain Leverage in Bargaining for Services </HL><AUTHOR> Richard Koenig </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> AA LABOR </CO><IN> INS PHA </IN><TEXT>   A DECADE AGO, Richard Wardrop asked how much Aluminum Co. of America paid for employees' appendectomies. Nobody had a clue. Besides, he was told, as an employee-benefits manager, he wouldn't know what to make of the numbers, anyway.    Today, Mr. Wardrop admits that was a fair reply. &quot;We were buying dumb,&quot; he laments.    When it comes to medical care for employees, buying smart has eluded much of corporate America. Medical practice often differs among hospitals and doctors. Cost doesn't necessarily equate with quality. And the bill keeps ballooning. The medical marketplace, in sum, has an enduring power to bewilder.    So Mr. Wardrop is still trying to transform Pittsburgh-based Alcoa from passive payer to savvy shopper. Quite simply, he wants the company to buy medical care with the same authority it would show when buying equipment for a rolling mill. A new position created for him last year, director of health-care cost management, allows him to devote all his time to medical-benefit issues.    He has told Alcoa employees: &quot;When we buy a car or a household appliance, we bore in like lions. When we buy health care, we act like lambs. We do exactly what we're told to do, because we simply don't have enough information to make good decisions.&quot;    Alcoa is trying to change that. It is gleaning details from health-insurance claims to compare costs. Reluctant to buy on price alone, though, the company is also attempting to evaluate clinical performance. Ultimately, hospitals and doctors that don't measure up could find Alcoa steering its 33,000-member U.S. work force to others.    Mr. Wardrop says Alcoa is being forced to look for value -- quality care at reasonable cost -- because it can no longer afford not to. On a per-employee basis, the company's medical bill has grown at a compounded annual rate of 9.9% over the past decade -- and by 12% in 1987 alone. Its total tab last year, for people on its pension rolls as well as active employees, came to $130 million, a significant amount even for Alcoa, which had 1987 revenue of $5.49 billion.    With mixed results, Alcoa has already tried some cost-cutting measures, including health-maintenance organizations, mandatory second opinions on proposed surgery and required approval for non-emergency hospital admissions. Some Alcoa plants share refunds with employees who discover any erroneous hospital charges; a plant guard in Badin, N.C., spotted a charge for the use of a water bed he had never slept in. At least one plant, trying to keep its workers healthy, has brought in a hypnotist and an acupuncturist to help those who want to break their smoking habit.    But now Mr. Wardrop is pressing for deeper change. Alcoa is well along in trying to measure hospital costs, which it culls from insurance claims, brakes out by diagnostic category and sorts according to plant site. In one community, for example, a scan of claims showed charges for hysterectomies that varied by about one-third from the low end of the market to the top.    Constructing a yardstick for clinical performance is much trickier. Yet Alcoa is encouraged by hospitals' growing use of computer software such as MedisGroups, which weights various clinical findings to establish the severity of illnesses and then tracks them to determine the outcome of the treatment. The company also wants to get data on hospital-related infections, staffing levels in intensive-care wards and other information typically regarded as management tools for hospitals but not for their corporate customers.    &quot;Many {corporate} benefits guys are still scared to death of medicine, scared of doctors,&quot; says Charles Jacobs, the chairman of MediQual Systems Inc. of Westborough, Mass., which markets MedisGroups. &quot;Dick Wardrop stopped being afraid.&quot;    A 60-year-old veteran of Alcoa's management ranks, Mr. Wardrop has a lot to accomplish in little time. Before his retirement, planned for next year, he is to advise 19 Alcoa sites across the U.S. on finding ways locally to carry out the company's cost-cutting strategy. &quot;He's been our major strategist, coach and cheerleader,&quot; says Lori Leonard, a personnel supervisor.    He spends about half his work days on the road, visiting Alcoa plants or attending industry conferences. Trying to heed his own words on fitness, he takes extended walks in airports.    The cost-cutting tactics of Mr. Wardrop and his colleagues at Alcoa vary from place to place.    In Pittsburgh, the company and other members of the Pennsylvania Business Roundtable, a group of major corporations, have joined a so-called Buy Right project to convince certain hospitals that opening themselves to corporate scrutiny is ultimately in their best interest. For hospitals that can show they offer good care at reasonable prices the incentive is to prevent companies from simply scurrying to low bidders.    The Buy Right project, under way in several Pennsylvania cities, is proceeding cautiously. Alcoa, USX Corp. and Mellon Bank Corp., among other companies, last month signed a limited agreement with six Pittsburgh-area hospitals that will give the companies access to information, including MedisGroups data.    In the initial stage of the project, this information is to be coded so that individual hospitals won't be identifiable. But Mr. Wardrop says that it will be helpful because it will include data that will allow the companies to compare individual cases and see how the cost of care relates to the clinical results.    What's more, just after the Buy Right project was started, the Pennsylvania legislature passed a law that will require disclosure of cost and quality data by all hospitals in the state. Business and labor dominate the state cost-containment council created by this legislation; hospitals and doctors together control only two of 21 seats. The information probably will start to flow from hospitals this year, with Mr. Wardrop heading a committee that is supposed to disseminate it -- and it will name names.    In Alcoa, Tenn., where Alcoa employs 3,500 people at a smelter and rolling mill, the company is acting on its own. After analyzing insurance forms, it detected a slight drop in employee admissions to Blount Memorial Hospital. The company then proposed a plan whereby it could cut costs while the hospital boosted its share of a competitive market for Alcoa employees.    At first, some medical professionals had reservations about such corporate initiative. A hospital official recalls this attitude: &quot;You make beer cans. Don't tell us how to practice medicine.&quot; Last month, however, the hospital started to discount room rates for Alcoa employees. It also agreed to use MedisGroups and then disclose certain clinically related data to the company. And many doctors at the hospital have agreed to cap their fees.    In Wenatchee, Wash., Alcoa is still seeking a way to bargain. Though the town is the site of a big Alcoa smelter, it has only one major hospital and a dominant clinic, so the company may have to rely on persuasion, not competition. One option being considered: Hire a clinic doctor as the company's medical director in Wenatchee, partly to smooth relations.    Doctors in some communities, though, are less than enthralled with this probing into their affairs. They question whether computer analyses can measure the art and science which is medical practice. Especially worrisome is the prospect that loose or distorted use of this information will make pariahs of capable care givers.    Alarmed by the politics of disclosure in Pennsylvania, doctors at Sewickley Valley Hospital, near Pittsburgh, recently formed a committee to try to strengthen their voice in discussions about which information should be entrusted to outsiders. Despite the force of the state law on disclosure, the measure remains open to interpretation, and some question how far it can reach into the practices of individual doctors. &quot;Obviously, if you can't get the doctors to buy into it, it isn't going to work,&quot; says Donald Spalding, the hospital president.    Mr. Wardrop agrees that any blunders in trying to make sense of the voluminous data to be disclosed would discredit the whole effort. &quot;If we blow it early,&quot; he says, &quot;we lose the charter we have.&quot;    Reaching a workable accord with doctors and hospitals would lead to the next task for Mr. Wardrop, getting support from Alcoa employees. Rather than rely on education alone, he would like to create financial incentives by providing better insurance coverage when employees patronize the providers of medical care favored by Alcoa.    At that point, though, his work will merge with labor relations, because altering the design of insurance plans must involve the unions that represent most Alcoa employees. In ending a strike in 1986, Alcoa gave back to certain unions a medical benefit that virtually frees their members from hospital costs and, Mr. Wardrop says, removes the incentive to shop around.    Walter McClure, a medical-cost analyst who has advised Mr. Wardrop and the Pennsylvania Business Roundtable companies, argues that they can economize and do right by their employees in guiding them to the providers with high &quot;batting averages.&quot; Still, the strategy assumes a much more assertive role for the corporation.    Mr. McClure, the chairman of the Center for Policy Studies, a Minneapolis think tank, has written that the individual patient &quot;can no more determine the quality and efficiency of his providers from one or two medical episodes than he can tell the quality of a hitter after watching one or two ball games. . . . Who sees the whole season for the providers? The purchasers.&quot;    ---   Mr. Koenig is a staff reporter in The Wall Street Journal's Philadelphia bureau. </TEXT></DOC>