<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880628-0086 </DOCNO><HL> Justices Ease U.S. Contractors' Liability In Accidents Caused by Product Defects </HL><AUTHOR> Stephen Wermiel (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> UTX TAXES LABOR </CO><IN> TEL ENV ARO FIN </IN><G> SUP DEF </G><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Supreme Court gave federal contractors a powerful shield against liability for accidents caused by defects in their products.    The court ruled, 5-4, that companies selling equipment to the U.S. government may escape having to pay damages for injuries if the details of their contracts were set by the government and were followed by the manufacturers, and if the manufacturers warned the government of the dangers of using the products.    The ruling involved the death of a serviceman using military equipment, but the decision, written by Justice Antonin Scalia, isn't limited to defense contracts. It may also help contractors avoid liability in a broad range of nonmilitary federal projects, from the construction of the space shuttle to the design of Postal Service equipment.    The Supreme Court's majority relied on a major Pentagon role in setting details for military contracts without making any mention of the extent to which contractors influence those specifications. That degree of influence has long been cited by those who oppose shielding contractors from liability, and has been more fully disclosed in the current Defense Department procurement scandal.    Manufacturers are likely to make the decision an issue in a suit over the January 1986 explosion of the shuttle Challenger; in thousands of suits by workers exposed to asbestos at Navy shipyards or at private shipbuilding companies with Navy contracts, and in new suits against the manufacturers of the defoliant Agent Orange that aren't covered by an earlier settlement.    Moreover, the pendency of the case in the Supreme Court has held up distribution of an estimated $230 million paid by chemical companies to settle earlier Agent Orange disputes. Kenneth Feinberg, a courtappointed lawyer who will administer the fund, said if the Supreme Court later this week turns down two appeals in light of yesterday's ruling, distribution of the funds to Vietnam veterans could begin over the next three to five months.    The decision doesn't bar suits against government contractors, but it gives those companies a chance to prove that they are entitled to what is known in legal circles as the &quot;government-contractor defense.&quot;    The decision is a major victory for the defense industry and for other government contractors. It will make it much tougher, if not impossible, for military people and civilians injured because of defects in government equipment to recover damages for their injuries.    The ruling doesn't eliminate liability, however, for suits based on negligence in the manufacture or maintenance of equipment, rather than on design defects.    The government-contractor defense is a comparatively new concept, arising in part out of the growth in personal injury suits and the increase in the size of damage awards in recent years. First discussed by a federal appeals court in 1983, a defense similar to the one adopted by the Supreme Court has been recognized primarily for military contractors by federal appeals courts in San Francisco, Philadelphia, New York, New Orleans and Richmond, Va.    Without such a defense from liability based on federal law, manufacturers say they would be subject to 50 different state laws governing personal injury suits.    The court ruled on a case involving the 1983 crash of a Marine helicopter made by United Technologies Corp.'s Sikorksy Aircraft division. In the accident, which occurred in the Atlantic Ocean off Virginia Beach, Va., three crewmen escaped, but a co-pilot drowned.    The co-pilot's family sued United Technologies alleging negligence in the design of the escape hatch, and a federal court jury in Richmond ruled that the company owed the family $725,000 in damages.    But the federal appeals court in Richmond ruled in May 1986 that United Technologies wasn't liable because it followed the government's specifications for the helicopter. The high court sent the case back to the appeals court to make sure the government-contractor defense was properly applied in the case.    In the majority opinion, Justice Scalia observed that, under a 1950 Supreme Court ruling, military personnel can't sue the federal government over accidents in the line of duty. He said that allowing suits for damages against military contractors would in effect contradict the 1950 ruling.    &quot;The financial burden of judgments against the contractors would ultimately be passed through . . . to the United States itself, since defense contractors will predictably raise their prices to cover, or to insure against, contingent liability,&quot; Justice Scalia wrote.    In a dissenting opinion, Justice William Brennan, joined by Justices Thurgood Marshall and Harry Blackmun, said the &quot;breathtakingly sweeping&quot; ruling makes contractors immune based on &quot;no more than a rubberstamp from a federal procurement officer who might or might not have noticed or cared about the defects.&quot;    Justice John Stevens dissented separately, saying it should be up to Congress to decide whether contractors were immune from such suits.    Residential Picketing   The justices, by a 6-3 vote, upheld the right of local governments to ban picketing in residential neighborhoods. In an opinion written by Justice Sandra O'Connor, the high court said the First Amendment doesn't bar such a ban passed in Brookfield, Wis., in 1985.    The town adopted the ban after antiabortion demonstrators picketed the home of a local doctor. Some demonstrators challenged the law in court, and a federal district judge in Milwaukee and a federal appeals court in Chicago said the local law violated their free speech rights.    Justice Brennan dissented, joined by Justice Marshall. Justice Stevens also dissented.    Other Cases   In other actions yesterday, the high court:   --Agreed to decide whether a state may tax retirement benefits paid to former federal workers while exempting from taxation pensions paid to state and local employees. The court will review a Michigan law.    --Let stand a 1985 federal court ruling ordering an intrastate telephone rate increase of $10.5 million for Hawaiian Telephone Co.    --Agreed to review a state law that requires the posting of a bond equaling 150% of a damage award to have the award stayed during an appeal of a civil case. The court will review a Louisiana law challenged by Modjeski andamp; Masters, bridge engineers based in Pennsylvania. The Louisiana law is similar to the Texas law that Texaco Inc. challenged in its dispute with Pennzoil Co. The Texaco case was settled before the Texas law could be reviewed by the U.S. Supreme Court.    --Agreed to decide whether federal agencies must include in all environmental-impact statements fully developed plans for reducing environmental harm and an analysis of &quot;worst case&quot; environmental damage.    --Said it will rule on whether a fee agreement between a plaintiff and his lawyer serves as a limit on the amount of attorney's fees that a defendant may be ordered to pay in a civil rights case in which the plaintiff wins.    A 1976 federal law provides that defendants may be forced to pay the attorney's fees of the persons who successfully sued them in civil rights lawsuits. But a federal appeals court in New Orleans ruled that federal judges should reduce the size of attorney-fee awards if there is an agreement between the plaintiff and the lawyer setting a fee.    The court will also decide in the case whether the time spent by law clerks and paralegals should be calculated in such fee awards. </TEXT></DOC>