<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870610-0081 </DOCNO><HL> Legal Pothole:GM's Chairman RunsInto Bizarre ProblemUnder German Law---Smith Is Being InvestigatedFor Firm's Debt TacticsTied to Terex Unit's Sale---He Is Said to Be 'Outraged'---By Doron P. Levin and Thomas F. O'BoyleStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GM EUROPAUTOS, AUTO PARTS (AUT)BANKRUPTCIES (BCY) </IN><DATELINE> DETROIT  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Roger B. Smith, the General Motors Corp. chairman who has been sharply criticized over the past year, has run into a highly unusual problem in West Germany. He has come under criminal investigation.    A fairly minor transaction by GM has degenerated into an embarrassing legal tangle at an inauspicious time for a man who has been under fire for GM's lackluster profits, sagging market share and costly buyout of former dissident director H. Ross Perot.    GM officials say Mr. Smith hasn't done anything wrong and is outraged by the criminal investigation. But the investigation is at least serious enough to have prompted him to take some unusual steps. Before he made a routine visit to Germany last year, GM attorneys checked with a German prosecutor's office to make sure their chairman wouldn't be arrested. And when the GM board held its regular monthly meeting May 4, Mr. Smith informed its members of the investigation and asked the audit committee to conduct its own review to satisfy itself that he had acted properly.    The affair stems from GM's sale of its money-losing Terex subsidiary, which made earth-moving equipment, to IBH Holding AG of Mainz in 1980. Over the next two years, before IBH declared bankruptcy in 1983, GM made four equity investments in the increasingly troubled German holding company. But in return, the auto maker received immediate repayments of millions owed to it by IBH.    Such a maneuver, called &quot;round-tripping,&quot; is generally considered illegal, unless properly disclosed, in West Germany -- though not in the United States. The Germans contend that it could hide a company's true financial condition and thus mislead investors and creditors. However, white-collar prosecutions are unusual in West Germany, and there isn't any way of knowing whether round-tripping, disclosed or not, is common practice there or elsewhere.    Prosecutor Hans Seeliger of the state of Rhineland-Palatinate says he has been investigating the GM transactions and specifically the role of Mr. Smith, who directly called the shots on some of them. GM internal memos indicate that Mr. Smith may have proceeded with the transactions even though his lawyers warned him that they might be illegal under German law. &quot;There was no cash behind {GM's investment in IBH},&quot; the prosecutor says. &quot;They were just polishing up IBH's image.&quot;    The IBH transactions are giving GM other legal problems as well. A wealthy Saudi sheik, who lost millions in the IBH collapse, is suing GM in district court in Mainz. He charges that GM helped deceive him into investing in IBH and is asking for damages of at least 150 million marks (about $83 million). Moreover, a bankruptcy court in Mainz has ordered GM to pay 62.8 million marks to cover disputed investments in IBH. (GM is appealing the court's decision. Wolfgang Petereit, the bankruptcy-court receiver, has also filed an appeal, for a bigger award.)    GM apparently didn't intend to violate German law or deceive investors; the stakes in the IBH transactions weren't terribly high for the world's largest manufacturing company. Instead, the internal memos seem to indicate that GM was too quick to structure transactions to accommodate Horst-Dieter Esch, IBH's flamboyant founder and chairman who now is serving a German prison sentence for fraud.    Mr. Smith and other GM financial executives were eager to sell Terex but hadn't been able to find a buyer. And although a sale to Mr. Esch -- a young, relatively inexperienced businessman who came to GM's attention through an article in Business Week magazine -- represented possible legal risks, they were risks that Mr. Smith and others apparently were prepared to accept.    &quot;The cautious warnings of lawyers . . . gave way to risks of business rewards,&quot; according to GM's own account of the affair, a memo written in 1984 by William B. Slowey, then a staff attorney. The memo, which was among documents seized by Prosecutor Seeliger three years ago from the office of GM's West German counsel in Frankfurt, describes a split so deep between GM's financial and legal staffs that, at one point, a GM lawyer said the company's involvement in IBH &quot;stinks to high heaven.&quot;    GM, responding to questions about the criminal investigation, says it carried out its transactions with IBH lawfully and &quot;with the advice of very able counsel.&quot; GM officials say Chairman Smith doesn't expect to be indicted and add that he is &quot;outraged&quot; that he remains a target of an investigation that has dragged on for three years -- a delay that the prosecutor blames on the time it took to convict Mr. Esch. Mr. Smith officially declines to comment; GM lawyers have advised him that if he elaborates on the company's statement, he might antagonize the prosecutor and increase his chance of being indicted.    Because Mr. Smith is a U.S. citizen, the prospect of his standing trial in Germany is remote, say German lawyers close to the case. The extradition treaty between the countries covers only acts considered crimes in both. Most lawyers agree that, at worst, Mr. Smith might be fined in absentia. Mr. Seeliger, who is an appointed civil servant in a job deemed nonpolitical in Germany, promises to wind up the investigation by year-end.    GM's involvement with IBH began innocently enough. GM's Terex unit had long been a money-loser, and in 1980 GM needed to conserve cash to deal with the auto industry's depression and to begin a $40 billion capital-spending program.    The 36-year-old Mr. Esch, meanwhile, had become West Germany's &quot;wunderkind.&quot; In just five years, he had combined several distressed European construction-equipment makers to form IBH, on the theory that economies of scale would make them profitable. He was eager to expand into North America.    But even as early as 1980, IBH was in trouble -- and some German banks suspected as much. Mr. Esch's business strategy was &quot;exclusively based on rising sales,&quot; according to the criminal judgment against him rendered last October by the district court in Koblenz. &quot;The continuing recession in the construction-machine market . . . had the effect that IBH's products sold very poorly,&quot; the court said. &quot;It became more and more difficult to obtain fresh capital since the German banks . . . were very reluctant&quot; to lend IBH money.    As a result, IBH and its affiliated companies were undercapitalized. Mr. Esch hoped that GM, in its eagerness to shed Terex, might be the source of more capital. At the very least, he knew a GM investment in IBH would improve his company's image, making it easier to obtain capital from other investors.    On July 10, 1980, a GM limousine whisked the entrepreneur from Detroit Metropolitan Airport to the exclusive Bloomfield Hills Country Club to meet with Mr. Smith, then GM's executive vice president for finance. Mr. Esch, who is cooperating with prosecutors while serving his 6 1/2-year sentence, says that the next day he and Mr. Smith reached a gentlemen's agreement: IBH would buy Terex, and GM, in turn, would invest in IBH.    After obtaining GM's backing, &quot;I felt like I was ready to conquer the world,&quot; Mr. Esch recalls today. The bureaucracy-bound Mr. Smith, in turn, was impressed by how quickly his new partner could move. Says a former GM official who heard Mr. Smith praising Mr. Esch: &quot;Esch ran his company the way Roger would like to run his, out of his vest pocket.&quot;    The final agreement worked like this: GM sold Terex to IBH, initially leaving the price open but later settling on $280 million. Instead of cash, GM accepted a note from IBH, which already was highly leveraged, for the entire purchase price. In essence, GM itself financed the purchase. Because IBH would owe GM a lot of money, GM was reluctant to invest even more cash in IBH. Thus, the companies agreed that GM's investments in IBH would be substantially offset by prompt debt repayments by IBH.    According to GM memos, however, the company's West German counsel warned it that such an investment could subject it to financial risk. Although GM apparently wasn't warned of the potential criminal charges against its officials, the memos did say the transactions might spark criminal charges against IBH's management. GM could have avoided all legal risk by disclosing the nature of its equity infusions. But, under German law, such a disclosure would have required an outside audit, and Mr. Esch, according to GM memos, said he wanted to avoid that. Yet despite Mr. Esch's keen interest in avoiding an audit, GM went ahead with the transaction.    After the Terex deal was closed, GM received about $23 million from IBH as partial payment of the $280 million purchase price. That sum equaled what GM was &quot;investing&quot; in IBH.    But GM's support didn't solve IBH's financial problems. In May 1981, Mr. Esch asked IBH shareholders, who included a major West German bank and other equipment companies, to invest an additional 69 million marks. GM's share of that amount was 31 million marks, of which 26.6 million marks was returned to GM -- again as partial payment of the Terex purchase price.    A year later, in the spring of 1982, IBH, along with the construction-equipment business world-wide, was sinking fast, and Mr. Esch again needed more money. Mr. Smith had taken over from subordinates direct supervision of matters involving IBH and Terex, according to an April 13, 1984, memo from Mr. Slowey to Paul H. Zalecki, then GM's associate legal counsel. (The Slowey memo is a 20-page, single-spaced review of GM's involvement with IBH from its inception.)    Mr. Esch's second request for more capital contained a new incentive: If GM and two other major shareholders would each invest 20 million marks through a reduction of debt, a new investor, Sheik Saleh Kamel, would put up 90 million marks in cash.    Sheik Saleh directed his financial empire, the Dallah Group, from a 14-story building in Jeddah, Saudi Arabia, and sometimes from a private 707 jet. When Mr. Esch went to the sheik's office to pitch an equity investment in IBH, he brought a color brochure with one name underlined. It was &quot;a name we had heard since we were children, General Motors,&quot; Sheik Saleh testified at Mr. Esch's trial. The sheik has testified that he didn't know that he would be the only one investing cash while GM and the others were simply reducing IBH's debts.    By this time, GM's own staff attorneys suspected that Mr. Esch might be deceiving the other shareholders. One of the lawyers was Thomas B. Leary, then a GM attorney but now in private practice. The Slowey memo says Mr. Leary suggested during two meetings in April 1982 that Mr. Esch was using GM's investments to &quot;fraudulently induce others to invest in IBH. . . .&quot; According to the memo, Mr. Leary also said the IBH investment &quot;stinks to high heaven&quot; and gave him a &quot;sour feeling&quot; in his stomach.    Nevertheless, on April 16, 1982, Mr. Smith mailed a one-sentence letter to Mr. Esch, at Mr. Esch's request, confirming GM's intention to invest 20 million marks if the other shareholders, including Sheik Saleh, went along. The letter, which Mr. Esch says he used to obtain the sheik's participation, didn't mention the debt repayment to GM.    Just two months later, a faltering IBH again asked GM for capital. IBH promised that if GM put up $17.8 million, GM would get back $31 million in debt payments. Sheik Saleh, meanwhile, promised to invest an additional 47 million marks in cash. This time, however, GM lawyers insisted that Mr. Esch notify the sheik and other shareholders that some of the money was being used to repay GM.    Still, GM's lawyers were troubled. GM's then general counsel directly expressed his reservations to Mr. Smith twice, according to the Slowey memo. But &quot;the result remained unchanged&quot; and GM proceeded with the transaction, the memo states.    A few months later, in August 1982, GM's legal team met in New York and reviewed the company's potential liability in IBH. By then, GM owned a 19.6% stake in IBH, and the sheik more than 25%. At that meeting, the Slowey memo says, &quot;the {GM} business people agreed . . . there would be no more round-tripping.&quot;    Mr. Esch asked GM for more money in 1982 and 1983, but the company says it refused. On Nov. 4, 1983, IBH filed for bankruptcy and now is being liquidated, although some of its operating units are still working under receivership and others have been sold.    Meanwhile, Mr. Seeliger, the prosecutor in Koblenz, has assembled a roomful of documents in his three-year investigation. So far, he has posed one written question to GM's Mr. Smith, through Mr. Smith's personal attorney. The question: Were the assets of Terex worthless?    &quot;It is a substantial company,&quot; Mr. Smith replied, according to a lawyer close to the case. </TEXT></DOC>