<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870128-0043 </DOCNO><HL> Iran-Contra Inquiry Could Be DelayedBy Bids to Block Access to Swiss Accounts---By Scot J. PaltrowStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/28/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM EUROPMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)EXECUTIVE (EXE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> BRUSSELS, Belgium  </DATELINE><TEXT>   U.S. attempts to unravel certain aspects of the Iran-Contra arms scandal may be hindered because of legal action to prevent the release of information about Swiss bank accounts.    The Swiss Ministry of Justice and Police in Berne said eight appeals have been filed so far by individuals and companies objecting to the release of information about bank accounts that may have been used to secretly funnel money in the arms sales. A spokesman for the ministry said the appeals could delay for months a decision on whether any information about the accounts can be turned over to U.S. investigators.    A source close to retired Maj. Gen. Richard V. Secord, a former Pentagon official, confirmed that an appeal was filed on Mr. Secord's behalf. It also was learned that an appeal was filed on behalf of Albert Hakim, an Iranian-born businessman. The identities of the others who filed appeals couldn't immediately be learned.    The bank account records are considered crucial to tracing the flow of money from covert sales of arms to Iran that were authorized by the Reagan administration. Investigators believe that the records would help establish, for example, how much money actually was diverted to the Nicaraguan rebels, and by whom.    Swiss authorities complied with a U.S. Justice Department request to freeze bank accounts that may have been used in the affair. But Swiss officials said the release of information about the accounts will have to wait until the appeals are decided, probably by the Swiss supreme court.    Jog Kistler, a spokesman for the Swiss justice ministry, refused to say on whose behalf the other appeals of disclosure were filed. Under Swiss law, details of the legal challenges aren't made public. But it was learned that Lt. Col. Oliver North wasn't among those who filed an appeal. Col. North is thought to have coordinated the transfer of funds from the Iran arms sales while he was on the staff of President Reagan's National Security Council. He was dismissed from the staff in November.    Among the accounts the U.S. Justice Department had asked to be frozen were accounts controlled by Col. North, Gen. Secord and Mr. Hakim. The U.S. later also requested the blocking of accounts associated with Adnan Khashoggi, a Saudi financier; Roy M. Furmark, a New York businessman and associate of Mr. Khashoggi; Manoucher Gharbonifar, an Iranian arms dealer and Khashoggi associate; Donald Fraser and Walter Miller, Canadian investors; and two attorneys in Geneva, Willard I. Zucker, who long has represented Mr. Hakim, and Jean de Senarclens, a Swiss national associated with Mr. Zucker.    Two companies also were named in the U.S. request: a fiduciary firm, Audifi S.A., of Fribourg, Switzerland, and a company about which little is known, Hyde Park Square Corp.    But a source said two of the companies that filed appeals weren't on the U.S. Justice Department's list, and Swiss authorities &quot;had never heard of them before.&quot;    Under Swiss law, appeals may be filed by individuals or companies who opened the accounts as well as by others who had transactions with the accounts and might be damaged by the disclosure of information.    Mr. Kistler said additional appeals still may be filed. He said the disclosure of information about any of the accounts probably will have to wait until all of the appeals are decided.    As a first step, the Swiss justice ministry will have to rule on the appeals, he said. A decision by the ministry is expected by mid-February. If the ministry turns down any of the appeals, then the individuals or companies may go to the country's supreme court. A decision by the court likely would take at least nine months, Swiss officials said.    Swiss law allows for the release of bank account information to foreign investigators in cases in which crimes have been committed, provided that the actions also would have been illegal under Swiss law. Lawyers filing the appeals are likely to argue that crimes haven't been committed in the affair, and that the disclosure law therefore doesn't apply.    As an indication of how long the Swiss legal procedures may take, experts in Switzerland cited the Philippine government's attempts to identify and recover assets held in Switzerland by ousted President Ferdinand Marcos. The Marcos cases have been pending in Swiss courts since early last year. </TEXT></DOC>