<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880927-0048 </DOCNO><HL> Bush, Dukakis Make Same Mistake on Conventional Arms </HL><AUTHOR> Frank J. Gaffney Jr. </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> NUK ARO </IN><G> EXE DEF </G><TEXT>   For all the efforts of the two presidential contenders to appear &quot;tough&quot; on the defense issue, the 1988 campaign suggests that irrespective of who wins the election the U.S. may undergo a sea-change in its deterrence strategy.    Every president since Harry Truman has recognized an objective reality: The U.S. and its allies cannot afford to fight, and are unlikely to be able to win, a major conventional war with the Soviet Union. The prospect that a future conventional war would be fought in -- and, inevitably, would devastate -- Western Europe has made the deterrence of conventional conflict the North Atlantic Treaty Organization's pre-eminent objective throughout the postwar period.    To this end, the West relies on a powerful nuclear arsenal to provide a disincentive to Soviet aggression of any kind. While it is true that the West has, since John Kennedy's day, maintained very substantial non-nuclear forces, they have never been equipped to fight and win a major conventional conflict with the Soviets.    Instead, they have been designed for two basic purposes: to provide a credible means with which to deal with contingencies short of all-out global war (e.g., protecting international shipping in the Persian Gulf); and in the event that deterrence fails, to buy time in the face of a Soviet conventional onslaught to consider and exercise appropriate nuclear retaliatory options.    In recent years, this strategy has come under increasing assault. The Soviets' acquisition of their own prodigious -- if not superior -- nuclear weapons calls into question the military utility of NATO's threatened response to conventional attack. Public opinion throughout the West reflects considerable antipathy to the threatened use of nuclear arms.    Partly in response to such factors, Western governments have adopted policies whose effect has been to diminish the moral and strategic underpinnings of nuclear deterrence. Particularly notable in this regard have been the Reykjavik summit meeting's emphasis on the elimination of nuclear weapons and the current preoccupation with arms-control agreements.    Michael Dukakis has made much of his commitment to a Conventional Defense Initiative as an alternative to the Reagan administration's Strategic Defense Initiative and its nuclear-force modernization plans. While the exact character and cost of CDI remains unclear, its intended purpose is not. Mr. Dukakis has committed himself, if elected, to developing the capability &quot;to fight and win a conventional war.&quot;    For his part, George Bush has, by and large, hewed more closely to the traditional view of deterrence. In particular, he has made clear his intention to press on with nuclear-force modernization programs supported by the Reagan administration and criticized by his rival. And yet, he suffers under the same confusion inherent in President Reagan's own thinking.    Mr. Bush has -- implicitly, if not explicitly -- embraced the logic that brought NATO to the brink of disaster at Reykjavik and that alarms the alliance about agreements like those imposing INF and strategic-arms reductions: Nuclear weapons are evil; the fewer of them around, the better. Mr. Bush's commitment to their modernization as a means of producing such arms agreements seems simply a different means to the same end Mr. Dukakis favors -- less reliance on nuclear forces for deterrence and increasing reliance on conventional arms. Put simply, this might be called a theory of &quot;conventional deterrence.&quot;    Before such a theory becomes orthodoxy or official policy, however, the electorate would be well advised to examine it critically. History and current trends suggest that conventional forces are unreliable means of preventing wars:   --Conventional weapons are, relative to nuclear weapons, very expensive. In an era of constrained military budgets, the inevitable interest in getting the most &quot;bang for the buck&quot; tends to argue against investing heavily in conventional arms.    --It is in the nature of democracies to resist the allocation of resources to defense in peacetime. As demographics shrink the available manpower pool, it will become even more difficult for the West to maintain current conventional-force and combat-readiness levels.    --Geography works against Western conventional defenses. The peculiarities of the NATO alliance make effective conventional defense against this threat particularly problematic. For one thing, most of the major ally's resources are thousands of miles away, across the Atlantic. For another, those of France are not integrated into NATO's military command, degrading the alliance's ability to respond efficiently.    --History has shown that conventional forces do not deter attack. Time after time, nations have -- in the absence of nuclear weapons -- calculated the risks and benefits of conventional offensives and chosen to go to war.    Conventional weapons will continue to have an important role in securing the peace and in underpinning the credibility of nuclear deterrence. Accordingly, systematic improvement of America's conventional arms is necessary. And yet, the policies foreshadowed by Mr. Dukakis's explicit statements and the implication of some of Mr. Bush's positions could precipitate a breakdown in deterrence and endanger Western solidarity and security.    The next president will need to make important decisions that will do much to determine the character and quality of America's future security. The president will have to address such problems as defense resource allocation; alliance burden-sharing; pressures for withdrawing U.S. forces from Europe; retaining overseas bases in the face of increasing local hostility; and negotiating an extremely complex arms-control agreement on conventional forces in Europe.    Such decisions will require a coherent vision of the role of conventional forces in the alliance and in U.S. security. It would be best to discover now if the next president's vision amounts to a Conventional Defense Initiative whose objective is to try to supplant with non-nuclear weapons the contribution that nuclear weapons now make to deterrence and stability. Such a CDI would be a dangerous departure from the deterrence strategy that now serves us so well.    ---   Mr. Gaffney, formerly in the Reagan Defense Department, directs the Center for Security Policy in Washington and is a senior fellow of the Hudson Institute. </TEXT></DOC>