<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880713-0087 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88 -- Picking the Ticket: Naming Sen. Bentsen, Dukakis Puts Politics Ahead of His Idealism --- Texan Lacks Reformer Image But Will Help Democrats In Bush's Back Yard --- Jackson's Stunned Reaction </HL><AUTHOR> David Shribman and David Rogers (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE CNG </G><TEXT>   Michael Dukakis's selection of Sen. Lloyd Bentsen as his running mate marks the certain Democratic presidential nominee as thorough, cautious -- and deeply political.    The Democratic senator from Texas represents a choice of competence over change, of tradition over daring. He is a safe Southerner with ties to the national business community and, most important, is positioned to make the Democratic ticket competitive in George Bush's electoral-vote-rich home state. In 1970, Mr. Bentsen defeated Mr. Bush in a tough Senate race there.    His selection now evokes memories of the Boston-Austin axis struck when Mr. Dukakis's political hero, John Kennedy, picked Sen. Lyndon Johnson as his running mate in 1960. But it also marks the culmination of weeks of deliberations, during which the Massachusetts governor backed himself into a corner and ultimately found it too difficult to meet many of the criteria he himself had established for his search.    Mr. Dukakis never put up the fight needed to keep Senate Armed Services Committee Chairman Sam Nunn of Georgia in consideration, for instance, and then he turned away from politically riskier choices like Rep. Lee Hamilton of Indiana, who more closely fit with his ruminations about the position.    Riding to the Massachusetts city of Fall River with four Democratic members of Congress last month, Mr. Dukakis vowed to select a running mate of such stature that no one would suggest he had acted politically. &quot;I want to pick someone that will make people say that Bush went for political considerations in his choice while I went for the best,&quot; New York Rep. John LaFalce recalls his saying. A second member of the group remembers a similar remark. Both thought immediately of Mr. Hamilton -- not of Mr. Bentsen.    &quot;It all boils down to one simple thing,&quot; says Harrison Hickman, a Democratic political consultant. &quot;If you win Texas with him, it was a very good choice. If you lose Texas, then it wasn't.&quot;    The selection was well-received by many yesterday. &quot;Not since 1960 have the Democrats had such a geographically well-balanced ticket,&quot; said Democratic Sen. Brock Adams of Washington. Even Senate Republican leader Bob Dole said Mr. Dukakis &quot;could not have picked a better man.&quot;    Bush aides, predictably, dismissed the selection. Lee Atwater, the vice president's campaign manager, said that the Democrats &quot;are going to come up short, because people from Texas want a president, not a vice president, and they've got one in George Bush.&quot;    But in the short term, at least, the most significant response may be that of the Rev. Jesse Jackson, whose reaction yesterday was decidedly cool. The Dukakis camp obviously erred in failing to give him advance word of the selection; asked his reaction to the Bentsen selection early yesterday at Washington National Airport, Mr. Jackson was stunned, stammered for a moment and then said, &quot;No comment.&quot; In the end, however, most political professionals expect Mr. Jackson to come around and embrace the Dukakis-Bentsen ticket.    Mr. Bentsen, a successful businessman and now the chairman of the Senate Finance Committee, brings strong executive credentials and Washington experience to the ticket. But with the important exception of Mexico, his expertise is more in trade and domestic economics than in the foreign-policy and defense arena where Mr. Dukakis is most vulnerable. At age 67, the Texan would be the oldest vice president since Harry Truman tapped Alben Barkley in 1948.    Four years ago, Mr. Bentsen was considered but passed over by Walter Mondale for the vice presidential nomination, so his selection now sends a message of healing old wounds more than of looking to the future. That message may be most important in the South. The Texan's selection is a clear signal that Mr. Dukakis thinks he can build a winning coalition by reaching out to the conservative Democrats most identified with President Reagan.    Like many Democrats across the South, Mr. Bentsen supported the Reagan administration's early budget and tax cuts, and he has consistently backed U.S. aid to the Nicaraguan Contras -- a policy bitterly opposed by Gov. Dukakis. Mr. Bentsen's support for sweeping trade legislation may be an asset in industrial states as well. But his ties to the oil industry and position as a prominent party fund-raiser run counter to the reform image that Mr. Dukakis likes to project; these roles don't appeal much to voters' populist instincts and may hamper Democratic efforts to exploit the ethics issue, particularly now that Attorney General Edwin Meese is leaving and a respected figure, former Pennsylvania Gov. Richard Thornburgh, has been named to replace him.    Before the decision was made, an original list of more than 20 contenders was winnowed down to Mr. Bentsen, Rep. Hamilton, Sen. John Glenn of Ohio, Sen. Bob Graham of Florida and two former primary opponents -- Sen. Albert Gore of Tennessee and Rep. Richard Gephardt of Missouri. Paul Brountas, the Dukakis confidant who headed the vice presidential search -- and played a critical role in the selection -- assured Mr. Jackson that he, too, was being closely evaluated, but the civil-rights leader appears to have never been considered seriously.    According to knowledgeable sources, Gov. Dukakis all along preferred to pick a Southerner, reasoning that it would be a unifying move. The decision came in Mr. Dukakis's Brookline, Mass., kitchen shortly before midnight Monday evening, the final names being Sens. Bentsen and Gore. The governor polled the others in the room -- his wife, Kitty; campaign manager Susan Estrich; operations director Jack Corrigan, and Mr. Brountas. When Mr. Bentsen's name was mentioned, the governor said, &quot;That's my choice.&quot; He cited as an important factor Mr. Bentsen's reputation as a legislative heavyweight.    When the governor tried to call Mr. Bentsen Monday night, he couldn't get through; the senator was so weary of telephone inquiries he had taken the receiver off the hook. Instead, Mr. Dukakis gave him the word early yesterday morning.    That ended a process that had begun at an early-morning breakfast with Mr. Brountas the day after Mr. Dukakis won the New Jersey and California primaries to clinch the Democratic nomination. Mr. Brountas set in motion an evaluation effort that occupied a sealed-off floor of campaign's Boston headquarters. Members of the search effort guarded their secrets with such jealousy that other campaign aides dubbed them the Manhattan Project.    Gov. Dukakis's method &quot;certainly beats ours,&quot; says Michael Berman, a former Mondale aide who had a major role in the evaluation process that led to Geraldine Ferraro's selection four years ago. Though kept extremely private, the procedure ultimately revealed much about Mr. Dukakis's style and temperament as both an executive and a candidate.    The secrecy was nearly impregnable: Some news accounts as recently as yesterday morning had the choice narrowed to three men, and Sen. Bentsen wasn't among them; the day before the announcement, high-priced lobbyists were phoning around town to say that the pick would be either Sen. Glenn or Sen. Gore.    Before the process was concluded yesterday, it drew in eight lawyers across the country and a team of accountants, with an investigative firm on call. Mr. Brountas consulted with 200 people, 75 of them in person. Potential running mates were required to submit boxes of documentation and to complete a questionnaire so detailed that Sen. Glenn divided it among his advisers. The 50-question survey, which ran more than six pages single-spaced, itself served as a winnowing agent; Mr. Nunn drew the line at answering it, and House Majority Leader Thomas Foley's wife, who is also one of his closest advisers, found it onerous.    By the time Mr. Brountas and the candidate huddled this week in Mr. Dukakis's home, they had accumulated 10 years' worth of campaign finance documentation from possible running mates, FBI files and even the medical records of the contenders' wives. At the advice of Mondale advisers Berman and Richard Moe, who found out after Rep. Ferraro was selected that her son was involved with drugs, the investigators questioned the contenders' children about any drug use.    But in recent days, the very thoroughness of the search process began to undermine it. As it wore on, the governor began to look less deliberative and more indecisive. And the men who were waiting for the telephone call grew increasingly impatient. Although there were few surface indications, a half-dozen furtive campaigns for vice president developed, with each candidate seeking to maneuver for advantage while still proving his discretion.    Mr. Gephardt, a bitter rival in the primaries, asked his staff to prepare a list of everything the two men had said about each other; before they met in Massachusetts on July 5, the congressman also read a biography of the governor, as well as Mr. Dukakis's book about economic development.    Mr. Glenn, meanwhile, teamed up with Robert Farmer, who raised money for the former astronaut's 1984 campaign before taking on the same job for Mr. Dukakis, to hold a party fund-raiser in Mr. Glenn's Potomac, Md., home. The senator was so eager to appear with the governor at a campaign event July 1 that he awoke at 4:30 a.m. and flew his own twin-engine airplane to Dayton.    But by the time Mr. Dukakis had campaigned with all the finalists, he already had lost one of the most popular potential running mates, Sen. Bill Bradley of New Jersey. He also had failed to persuade another, Mr. Nunn, to stay in the running, and was deeply embroiled in negotiations with Mr. Jackson.    Mr. Bradley, who had declined to run for president but had established an easy rapport with Mr. Dukakis, called Mr. Brountas on May 18, a day when David Broder of the Washington Post reported that the New Jersey senator, along with Sen. Glenn, was a leading contender. Mr. Bradley told Mr. Brountas that a vice presidential campaign &quot;is not in the cards.&quot; Mr. Dukakis didn't call Mr. Bradley but didn't dismiss him from his mind, either. Finally, Mr. Bradley instructed his administrative assistant to call Mr. Brountas and reiterate his opposition.    As a Southerner with strong credentials in foreign policy and defense, Mr. Nunn ranked high on every list of potential running mates. But Mr. Dukakis and his campaign failed to move quickly to establish a personal relationship with him. As a result, when the subject of the vice presidency came up, the Georgian -- concerned about how much independence he would have if he took the job -- didn't feel comfortable enough to stay in the running.    In mid-June the senator drafted a letter withdrawing from consideration. But, at the urging of Mr. Brountas and Gov. Dukakis, he delayed sending it until a face-to-face meeting could be arranged. Even then, Mr. Dukakis was willing to tell the senator only that he would be &quot;one of&quot; his top choices, and didn't press him with the enthusiasm that some of Mr. Nunn's advisers had hoped for. For example, the two men didn't discuss ideas about possibly enlarging the role of the vice presidency in the National Security Council until Mr. Nunn had already withdrawn.    Mr. Brountas defends the process and insists it is &quot;wholly incorrect&quot; to suggest that the campaign failed to try to keep Mr. Nunn in the running.    Mr. Brountas began his sessions with Mr. Jackson in a meeting June 15 in an eighth-floor suite of the Howard Inn in Washington. Mr. Brountas told the candidate he was under serious consideration, but Mr. Jackson didn't leave the meeting with the impression that he would be chosen.    Later, Mr. Jackson sent conflicting signals, first saying he deserved the nomination, then indicating he knew he wouldn't get it, and finally, this week, saying he wanted it. Ultimately, Mr. Jackson was angry that, unlike other contenders, he had to learn the news from a reporter. In fact, Mr. Dukakis and Mr. Jackson didn't speak personally until about an hour later, and at a news conference, a somber Mr. Jackson deflected questions about whether he would enthusiastically support the ticket.    During the evaluation process, Mr. Dukakis did make many telephone calls himself to leading Democrats. And Kitty Dukakis asked campaign aides to assemble profiles of the leading contenders, especially Mr. Gore, for her to review.    Mostly, though, Mr. Dukakis dealt through Mr. Brountas, whose manner in these matters was subtle, almost secretive. Former Sen. Paul Tsongas of Massachusetts described a conversation with Mr. Brountas as being &quot;one person talking on the phone, and the other saying nothing.&quot;    After the announcement in Boston of Mr. Bentsen's selection, Mr. Nunn called the Texan &quot;a solid, fiscally conservative, common-sense Southerner.&quot; Former presidential candidate Paul Simon of Illinois described him as a &quot;skilled and seasoned lawmaker,&quot; adding, &quot;If there should be a tragedy, Lloyd Bentsen would make a superb president.&quot;    Some Democrats argue that the choice will be soothing to corporate America. &quot;It's very reassuring to the elements of the party concerned about fiscal prudence,&quot; said Rep. Vic Fazio of California. &quot;It's reassuring to the big money centers and the markets.&quot;    But Mr. Jackson's forces weren't so pleased. William Gibson, the chairman of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People's board of directors, said, &quot;We are in shock.&quot; And Jackson adviser Roger Wilkins warned that &quot;trust and loyalty are bound to wither&quot; if the lines of communication between the two camps are not kept open. &quot;I am very disappointed at the way the choice was made.&quot;    Ohio State Rep. C.J. McLin of Dayton, who was Mr. Jackson's Ohio chairman and ran Mr. Bentsen's presidential primary campaign in the state in 1976, had only a lukewarm endorsement. &quot;I don't think Jackson's people will be overjoyed,&quot; he said, &quot;but they won't be up in arms.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>