<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880108-0149 </DOCNO><HL> East Europe Discovered Glasnost First </HL><AUTHOR> Timothy Garton Ash </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP FREST </CO><TEXT>   Until recently it was quite difficult for the Western media to categorize new developments in Eastern Europe. But in the year 3 AG (After Gorbachev) the problem has been miraculously solved. Whatever happens -- riots in Romania, a referendum in Poland, a new leader in Czechoslovakia -- is now obviously a result of or response to -- wait for it -- glasnost and perestroika. The only difficult call a deadline-pressed reporter has to make is: Is this a Good Thing for glasnost or a Bad Thing for glasnost? Alas, this cliche image of glasnost and perestroika spreading precociously from Moscow to Berlin can dangerously obscure the real nature of what Mikhail Gorbachev means for Eastern Europe; what Eastern Europe has done for itself; and, most important, what Eastern Europe may have in store for Mr. Gorbachev.    When he came to power in 1985, Mr. Gorbachev had virtually no experience of Eastern Europe. But like Nikita Khrushchev in the mid-1950s and Leonid Brezhnev in the mid-1960s he was almost certainly dissatisfied with what he saw. He could hardly fail to notice that several East European nations were in a God- or Lenin-forsaken mess. He also judged -- how rightly is a matter of learned dispute -- that economically and militarily many of them were not &quot;pulling their weight&quot; inside Comecon and the Warsaw Pact.    Unsurprisingly, his book &quot;Perestroika&quot; contains no major reassessment of the Soviet Union's &quot;external&quot; European empire; indeed, it includes a somewhat delphic restatement of the so-called &quot;Brezhnev doctrine&quot; used to justify the Soviet invasion of Czechoslovakia 20 years ago this August.    So far, his direct impact has been ambiguous. On the one hand he has permitted a kind of pragmatic ideological latitude, for example in Poland, that was far more difficult for his immediate predecessors to achieve. In this sense, he has been a realist. On the other hand, he has made larger and harder economic demands on several East European states, and has pressed for a kind of integration in Comecon that most of them are privately loath to see.    One can by no means automatically assume that major political promotions in Eastern Europe precisely reflect the Soviet leader's wishes. But the message of the two major top-level advancements so far is hardly a clear and ringing endorsement of reform. Milos Jakes (&quot;YAK-esh&quot;), who last month became Gustav Husak's successor as Czechoslovak party leader, is the man who directly oversaw a purge of a half-million party members after the Soviet invasion. He has personally expelled more reform-minded comrades than most of us have eaten hot dinners. Before that he was for 10 years a senior functionary in the Interior Ministry, and widely believed to have the closest ties with the KGB.    In 1968 he belonged to the party faction that prepared the Soviet intervention. In his remarkable book &quot;Night Frost in Prague,&quot; the exiled Czech reformer Zdenek Mlynar refers to Mr. Jakes as &quot;a direct agent of the Soviets.&quot; Subsequently, he has been one of those most closely responsible for the advanced stagnation of the Czechoslovakian economy. In short, he has personally shoveled much of the muck into the Augean stables that he is now allegedly to clean (or is it purge?). Karoly Grosz, the new Hungarian prime minister, is, like Mr. Gorbachev, a forceful advocate of economic &quot;acceleration,&quot; but he is also one of very few Hungarian politicians prepared publicly to defend the record of Stalinism in that country.    A now-familiar Prague joke -- that Czech tanks will have to invade the Soviet Union this year to stamp out the Moscow Spring -- reflects an obvious irony about the persistent conservatism of gerontocratic leadership in Czechoslovakia or East Germany. But the more important truth is that several East European countries are miles ahead of the Soviet Union in respect of glasnost or perestroika. And they are thus far advanced not because of anything Mr. Gorbachev has said or done, but because their people have demanded and/or their communist leaders have felt (the two are closely related) that their affairs should be conducted in the more Western and European way to which they, unlike the Russians, have historically been accustomed. To adapt to Marx, East European countries do make their own history, though they do not make it just as they please.    Thus it is really an insult to describe the extraordinary de facto freedom of speech that prevails in Poland today as glasnost. Glasnost is a carefully controlled openness on (centrally) selected subjects in (centrally) selected media. The far wider openness of the official media in Poland, while permitted by Mr. Gorbachev, was actually caused by the blowing open of Polish public life by Solidarity in 1980-81, and the formidable competition now presented to the official press by the Catholic, underground, exile and Western media.    To describe the Hungarian economic reforms as perestroika also would be something close to an insult. The Hungarians have been working at it for more than 20 years; they have gone further in deeds than the Russians have in words; they now face problems of which the Russians can only dream!    Here is the third and most important point. Even before Mr. Gorbachev came to power, at least three East European regimes were in trouble. The terrible, senseless deprivation of Romania is the personal masterwork of Nicolae Ceausescu: the West's golden boy, not Moscow's. Inasmuch as it affects the unhappy lot of the large Hungarian minority in Romanian Transylvania, this also spills over into a fragile political situation in neighboring Hungary, whose own higher-level economic troubles -- the result of a Westernization that has gone either too far or not far enough -- come at a time when its veteran normalizer, Janos Kadar, is slowly moving into history. Gen. Wojciech Jaruzelski sits precariously atop a still-simmering pot.    These troubles are not of Mr. Gorbachev's making. But, like Messrs. Khrushchev and Brezhnev before him, he has unintentionally exacerbated them. On the one hand, the economic demands he feels impelled to make in the cause of perestroika have further squeezed already squeaking East European economies. On the other hand, his rhetoric of reform and above all of &quot;democratization&quot; has unsettled established leaderships, raised popular hopes and even given new heart to flagging oppositions. Behind the Berlin Wall, young East Germans chant &quot;Gorbachev! Gorbachev!&quot; at their own police. Czech demonstrators hide their faces behind posters of the Soviet leader.    Romania's misery has already spilled over into violent protest. In the country's second-largest industrial center, Brasov, thousands of workers took to the streets in November chanting, &quot;We want bread&quot; -- almost unbelievably, in a contemporary European land, bread is rationed to 300 grams a day -- and ransacked the local party headquarters. The Ceausescu leadership has responded with repression, not reform. Another explosion, perhaps a bloodbath, is sadly in the cards.    The authorities in Poland and Hungary have responded to their far more complex political-economic crises with a vigorous discussion of further reform. In both countries, sacred cows of Soviet-type socialist ideology are being slaughtered in droves -- on paper at least. Experts inside the system often come up with more radical critiques of communism than those outside it. The discussion really is extraordinary.    But two major caveats must, alas, be entered. First, the reality of reform lags way behind the rhetoric. Second, the major obstacles to reform at this moment are as much internal as external. The immediate problem is less the limits set by Moscow, though that of course remains the ultimate problem, than the vested interests of local nomenklatura and, interestingly, the fears of major sectors of the working population. The Hungarian reform, in particular, is tangled in contradictions of its own making. What is socialism? asks a Hungarian joke. Answer: the longest and most painful road from capitalism to capitalism.    Many of the best economists, in Poland as well as Hungary, maintain that the only possible cure for present troubles is to press on farther and faster down the capitalist road. What is more, a distinct impression arises (and there is some factual evidence to support this) that in Poland and Hungary at least there exists, particularly among the young, a considerable reserve of private entrepreneurial energy and initiative just waiting to be released.    Yet even among the most reform-minded powerholders in these two countries there are few who are even theoretically prepared to pay the political price for releasing these energies. A radical, remarketizing reform is both economically indispensable and politically impossible. The authorities in both Poland and Hungary seem set to get the worst of both worlds. A little reform is a dangerous thing.    In sum, there is now the possibility, even the probability, over the next year or two, of serious unrest or political upheaval in at least one East European country. If Mr. Gorbachev is to maintain his own position in Moscow -- a position that has been weakened rather than strengthened in recent months -- he will be bound to show his mettle in dealing with a crisis that may be -- albeit unfairly -- blamed on him, as the Polish and Hungarian crises in 1956 were blamed on Khrushchev. Even if his &quot;iron teeth&quot; are hidden behind the smile of an internal, &quot;patriotic&quot; solution, as in Polish martial law, this will hardly foster the new climate of East-West detente that he so badly needs to achieve his own goals.    Not an encouraging prospect. But there is no virtue in failing to anticipate possible developments simply because they are uncongenial. If there is one thing worse than being deceived it is deceiving ourselves.    ---   Mr. Garton Ash is a foreign editor of The Spectator, a senior associate member of St. Antony's College, Oxford, and author of &quot;The Polish Revolution: Solidarity&quot; (Scribners, 1984). </TEXT></DOC>