<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870902-0114 </DOCNO><HL> Europe:Britain's Social Democrats Set Sail Into Choppy Seas---By Amity Shlaes</HL><DD> 09/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP </IN><DATELINE> PORTSMOUTH, England  </DATELINE><TEXT>   David Owen sits back in the second row on the dais at the Social Democratic Party's convention here. The erstwhile SDP leader fiddles with his green party badge. It should be on his lapel. Instead, he slips the card into his pocket.    It seems an appropriate gesture. Among the founding SDP leadership, Dr. Owen is the only holdout for keeping the party intact. The other members of what is known as the Gang of Four -- Shirley Williams, Roy Jenkins, Bill Rodgers -- want to open merger talks with the Liberal Party. The Liberals had been the SDP's partner in a loose centrist federation called the Alliance, which, along with the Labor Party, was dealt an unexpectedly dire defeat by Prime Minister Thatcher's Tories in the general election in June. The SDP convention endorsed the merger talks overwhelmingly, and rallied to a new leader picked previously to replace Dr. Owen.    This convention marks the beginning of a broad reassessment among Britain's center-left politicians following the debacle in June. The Alliance of the SDP and Liberals, formed in 1981, had hoped to break the two-party hegemony over British politics long held by Labor and the Conservatives. In 1983 the Alliance put in a strong showing. In this spring's campaign it looked like it might have a chance of replacing Labor as the country's second party. But the Alliance won only 22 of 650 seats in Parliament; the SDP fielded only five of those 22. The announcement by Dr. Owen that he wouldn't go along with merger talks -- and his consequent retirement from leadership -- means now three groups float at Britain's center instead of only one.    Such fractionalization is occurring to one degree or another among center-left constituencies throughout Northern Europe. As the blue-collar work force that provided the base for the old postwar labor parties defects or disappears, left and center are looking for new formulas to compete with conservatives. In all these countries unemployment remains a problem. In Britain, it's just below three million. But instead of finding a coherent policy to attack this conservative failure, the labor parties, the splinter liberal parties, and other new groupings are presenting an increasingly divided front that gives victory, often by default, to the right. This is as dramatic in West Germany and France as it is in Britain. &quot;It will be a very long time before some fragment of the Social Democratic Party . . . could hope to have a real effect on the political process,&quot; Shirley Williams tells the convention here.    To listen to the SDP debate in the Guild Hall at seafaring Portsmouth is to hear a party so intent on self-dismemberment that it seems to have given up addressing policy. Passing swipes at various forwardlooking reform projects -- most of them in the field of education -- are made one morning. But mostly delegates bewail the party's failure at the polls. Part of the problem here has to do with the departure of Dr. Owen himself. The magnetic, darkbrowed leader, who had been Harold Wilson's foreign secretary in the 1970s, gives a more moving departure speech than his successor, Robert Maclennan, gives an arrival speech. But the keening at Portsmouth also reflects the SDP's confusion on Britain's central political issues.    Take defense. The leader of the Labor Party, Neil Kinnock, made this an important issue in the spring campaign, when he and his party endorsed what amounted to unilateral abandonment of a nuclear-defense strategy. As former navy minister, Dr. Owen was in a position to bring something to this debate. He remains an advocate of Britain's nuclear deterrent. But at a pre-election party conference of the partner Liberals in Eastbourne, members advocated a non-nuclear European defense. Within the SDP Shirly Williams and Roy Jenkins have both supported postponing decision on the replacement of Polaris, and Lord Jenkins is a patron of the nuclear freeze movement. At Portsmouth, both the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament and the Greens lobby. But no leader steps up to the debate; no policy is forged.    On the economy, the SDP also waffles. The party constitution calls for a balance between public and private: It &quot;aims to strengthen Britain's economy and is committed to fostering a healthy public sector and a healthy private sector without frequent frontier changes.&quot; During the last campaign the Alliance's response to Britain's high unemployment was Keynesian: The party advocated limiting incomes to control inflation -- and so yield higher employment. A post-mortem position paper by Robert Skidelsky, a professor at the University of Warwick, noted the problems with this approach. Mr. Skidelsky goes so far as to write that &quot;supply-side policy is highly relevant to the hope of reversing Britain's relative economic decline.&quot; But he also questioned whether a hands-off approach would have a revitalizing effect.    Social policy ought to be a strong suit for this party, which has heavy representation from the teaching, medical and other &quot;caring&quot; fields. But the party's posture is to support both public and private agencies. The SDP's position on Britain's controversial national health-care system, for example, is that private medicine ought to coexist with the state system but shouldn't be allowed to &quot;exploit it.&quot; This balancing act has gone over well in the kind of salons that hosted the Fabians earlier this century. The party's credentials in the intellectual arena were underscored by Lord Jenkins's victory over a former Tory prime minister, Edward Heath, for the prestigious post of Oxford chancellor. But academic prestige isn't winning the party parliamentary seats.    It's unlikely the SDP is going to have an easier time forging a coherent policy if it merges with the Liberals. That party long ago strayed from the free-market notions implied by its name. Today, like other European center parties called liberal, the British group seems to have two faces: a dovish foreign policy visage and a vaguely trade-oriented domestic one.    Even a merged SDP-Liberal party will face the formidable problem of the two-party voting system here. Replacing this rigid system with one of proportional representation has been part of the SDP plan from the start. In the June election, more than seven million people, or 22% of the votes, went for the Alliance. But under Britain's winner-take-all system, that shook out to only 22 out of 650 seats in Parliament.    For the time being, the stubborn Dr. Owen has been relegated to a rump think tank for at least five years. It may be a good place to be, given the party's problems. For the pro-merger grouping, the next step will be a party vote to finalize its divorce and remarriage in January. The goal is a new unified party ready in time for local elections in May 1988.    One party likely to be the gainer in the short term is Mrs. Thatcher's Conservatives. Norman Tebbit, her party general secretary, was among the first to grasp this. Fliers produced by his office littered the floor at the Guildhall here. &quot;Politics can be tough and bruising. And it gives me no pleasure to say that the brief history of the Alliance reinforces this view,&quot; read the text. It was printed beside a photo of the Victorian-looking Mr. Tebbit. The headline on the flier summed up the Conservatives' main message: &quot;Join us.&quot;    ---   Miss Shlaes is editorial features editor of The Wall Street Journal/Europe. </TEXT></DOC>