<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870527-0095 </DOCNO><HL> Shareholders Need a Knight-Errant---By Robert D. Orr</HL><DD> 05/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><TEXT>   In recent years many states have overreacted to hostile takeovers in an attempt to protect home-grown companies. While attractive politically, these efforts have failed to pass muster with constitutional mandates, federal law or market forces.    In the face of these failed attempts and in the midst of a national debate on takeovers, last month's Supreme Court decision upholding Indiana's hostile-takeover law is instructive. The debate on this issue is too often framed in the rhetoric of the takeover professionals in which a bidder is a veritable knight-errant galloping to the rescue of shareholders held hostage by inept managers. Ignored in this rhetoric are the two most critical issues: the rights of shareholders and the need for real economic growth in the U.S.    As one of the nation's 10 &quot;businessman-governors,&quot; I know well the hazards of protecting local companies at the expense of better use of economic resources. There is no convincing evidence, however, that hostile-takeover battles -- whatever wealth they may generate for investment bankers and lawyers -- make much, if any, contribution to the economic well-being of the nation. Indeed, hostile-takeover wars may have negative economic effects, leading management to focus on short-run profits at the expense of long-term investment and sustained real growth.    Shareholders often are placed at a distinct disadvantage in such battles. This is particularly true when, as in the Supreme Court ruling in April upholding Indiana's 1986 anti-takeover law, the bidder had not offered to buy all shares of the corporation, but instead had made a partial tender offer for what the bidder thought was just enough to give it effective control.    Success of the tender offer -- made last year by Dynamics Corp., a Connecticut-based manufacturer, for the Indiana-based electronics firm CTS Corp. -- would have converted CTS from a company that had a dispersed group of shareholders to an entity controlled by a single dominant shareholder. Clearly, this is a change in the nature of the shareholders' investment just as significant as a merger or consolidation -- both of which traditionally have required majority shareholder approval.    Its hostile nature made it even more significant. Down the road the shareholder sees the prospect of the freeze-out or bust-up transaction and the probability that his shares will then be exchanged, not for the cash offered in the partial tender offer, but for junk bonds or some types of preferred stock that may have limited real value.    Faced with these prospects, the shareholder, acting individually, sees little choice but to tender his shares, receiving some premium over the current market price, but probably less than what a real &quot;control premium&quot; for the corporation is worth. Since all other individual shareholders face the same pressures, almost all of them tender their shares, leaving the offer oversubscribed.    In the end, everyone gets the lesser premium for some portion of his shares. The bidder gets effective control. Shareholders are left to the &quot;un-tender&quot; mercies of the bidder and whatever freeze-out, bust-up, junk-bond or other back-end transactions he may have in mind.    This story has become commonplace in recent years. Unfortunately, its more regular future occurrence inevitably will force an overreaction at the national level. That's why the Indiana approach to hostile takeovers is today a beacon for other states to follow.    The Indiana law is moderate and sensible. It makes the playing field level for all the players in a hostile takeover. As a result, long-term real growth should become the winner. It does not deny shareholders the right to earn a profit on their invested capital. Indeed, it gives them the right to act corporately on the fate of their corporation, and to determine collectively a fair price for all shareholders.    Nor does the Indiana law provide life tenure for managers. It prohibits management from voting on whether the bidder's newly acquired &quot;control shares&quot; will have voting power, just as it prohibits the takeover bidder from voting any shares it may own on that question.    The Indiana law is the first in America to give long-term growth a fighting chance against short-term profiteering. Hostile takeovers will still occur but hostility will apply narrowly to the relationship between management and takeover bidder. It will be disinterested shareholders, who have nothing more at stake than their equity capital, who will decide the course for their company. The hostile takeovers that succeed will be the ones that offer a truly fair price and can provide a more profitable utilization of assets.    A capitalistic economy operating at peak levels should have both an efficient capital market and a natural bias toward the creation of real wealth. The Indiana law is the best approach yet to meeting these goals in the face of hostile takeovers.    ---   Mr. Orr is governor of Indiana. </TEXT></DOC>