<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880304-0064 </DOCNO><HL> Frequent Crier: American Airlines Boss Blossoms as Champion Of the Poor Passenger --- But Critics of Crandall Attack His Ideas as Self-Serving; A Grab For Airport Space? --- Saving $40,000 on One Olive </HL><AUTHOR> Francis C. Brown III (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> AMR </CO><IN> AIR </IN><DATELINE> FORT WORTH, Texas  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Pity the poor airline passenger. He suffers through long flight delays, then can't find his luggage. He gets bumped from overbooked flights. Stories of crashes and near-collisions fill him with dread. Is there no one who will champion his cause?    Try Robert L. Crandall, the combative chairman and president of American Airlines and its parent, AMR Corp. The same Robert Crandall, no less, who signed a consent decree nearly three years ago to settle -- without admitting or denying guilt -- price-fixing charges. And the same Mr. Crandall who, in a profanity-laced, taped telephone conversation with a competitor that became a cause celebre in the case, wasn't proposing lower fares.    Now, however, on issues ranging from overcrowded airports to unrealistic flight times, the 52-year-old executive is sounding off on the consumer's behalf. And sounding off. . . . And sounding off. . . .    In a six-week blitz last summer, he testified before Congress three times, delivered keynote speeches to groups meeting in Washington, D.C., Dallas and Chicago, and appeared on television's &quot;Meet the Press.&quot; His public-relations people have flooded reporters with copies of his speeches. He has penned guest columns for magazines, responded to air-travel questions from Ann Landers's readers, and launched a multimillion-dollar advertising campaign on airline shortcomings (one ad depicts a garbage can with wings). &quot;Things have gotten off track,&quot; he said in a typical recent speech. &quot;The entire system is creaking.&quot;    No one denies that the air-travel business has problems. A tremendous surge in air traffic since the industry was deregulated in 1978 has led to overcrowded airports, persistent flight delays and a harrowing series of crashes and close calls. Industrywide efforts to cut costs have triggered concerns over inadequate maintenance and inexperienced pilots.    To his supporters, Mr. Crandall's proposals -- including further limits on the number of flights at crowded airports and more restrictions on private planes -- represent the airline industry's best chance to stave off re-regulation. To his critics, including many competitors, his stands are self-serving at best and hypocritical at worst. They seem to benefit American Airlines disproportionately, his detractors say, often at the expense of competitors, private plane owners and, yes, consumers.    &quot;He's yelling fire so he can clear the theater and stage his own play,&quot; says John Baker, president of the Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association, the trade group of private aircraft owners. &quot;He is trying to structure the system to directly benefit American.&quot;    More than anyone else in the airline industry, Mr. Crandall has fueled the debate over the nation's airways. If, in the process, he has become a visionary to some and a viper to others, that isn't unusual for a man filled with staggering contradictions. Mr. Crandall is a chain smoker who jogs religiously, a patient explainer of issues publicly who is given to sudden bursts of temper in private.    Richard E. Murray, a former executive at American, remembers being fired by Mr. Crandall at several meetings, only to be rehired before adjournment. Once, Mr. Crandall got so incensed while lambasting a competitor that he inadvertently yanked some blinds off a window and onto his head. As aides rushed to his side, he sputtered: &quot;The hell with my head. What are we going to do about this problem?&quot;    In all discussions about him, however, there is one constant -- his fiercely competitive nature. &quot;He doesn't want anybody to beat him,&quot; says William Moore, the chairman of Recognition Equipment Inc., a Dallas maker of information-processing equipment on whose board Mr. Crandall serves. &quot;He's in business to put his competition out of business.&quot;    That goal, more than any desire to be viewed as an air-travel visionary, motivates American's top man, rivals contend. They zero in especially on his proposal to extend the system that limits the number of flights at overcrowded airports. It does this by allowing airlines to buy and sell among themselves a fixed number of flight slots set by the Federal Aviation Administration. His proposal &quot;would be economically disastrous for many airlines,&quot; Edwin I. Colodny, the chairman of USAir Group Inc., said recently. That's because, he said, &quot;there are too many deep-pockets carriers, one of which is American Airlines.&quot; He fears they would monopolize the slots and freeze other carriers out. And, most airline executives contend, Mr. Crandall's plan would divert attention from the real need -- airport expansion.    American figures to be a major beneficiary if excess traffic is diverted from crowded airports. Much of the overflow from Atlanta, for example, would probably go to nearby Nashville or Raleigh-Durham, where American has newly established hubs.    Mr. Crandall agrees that airport expansion is the best answer, but for now, he says, &quot;if you don't have enough total capacity, you must choose between capacity controls and inconvenience and delays.&quot;    A slot system is currently in use at four U.S. airports where congestion is particularly bad: New York's La Guardia and JFK, Chicago's O'Hare and Washington's National. Mr. Crandall wants to expand it to other overcrowded airports. He also calls for higher landing fees during peak hours. And he advocates higher landing fees at all times for general aviation -- private plane owners and commuter airlines -- in an effort to force this traffic to outlying airfields. He would also expand the number of airports requiring costly radar equipment on small planes.    Mr. Crandall contends that many private pilots aren't adequately trained and present a safety hazard, particularly those without sophisticated radar equipment. Such pilots, he says, &quot;certainly have the right to fly, but not in airspace used by the public.&quot;    He isn't alone in this belief, but private plane owners deny that they are a hazard. Mr. Crandall, they say, just wants to grab more airport space. The Aircraft Owners and Pilots Association is considering a boycott of American.    Other airlines have been upset by Mr. Crandall's voluble stand on such service issues as on-time performance, overbooking and baggage handling. When the rest of the industry proposed the voluntary release of data on such matters, Mr. Crandall pressed to make it mandatory. That looked brilliant initially: In the first three monthly reports, American topped the on-time rankings, a fact it didn't hesitate to ballyhoo in advertisements. The airline then started to slip, however. It finished fifth in the just-released fifth-month rankings.    In any case, competitors say that consumers eventually pay for the statistics, which are costly to generate. And most consumers ignore the information anyway, airline officials say. Undaunted, Mr. Crandall insists that the data give carriers &quot;a marketplace incentive to provide superior service.&quot;    Delta Air lines officials are fuming privately about advertisements implying that American has led the industry back to scheduling sanity. The ads attribute American's superior on-time record in recent months to its decision to stop using artificially short flight times; that practice grew widespread as airlines attempted to gain better display on the industry's pivotal computer reservations system. On the computer screens, airlines offering 7 p.m. flights from, say, New York to Chicago are listed in the order of arrival time. The flight scheduled to arrive first is listed first.    American itself, Delta officials contend, was hardly an unwilling participant in the practice of fudging on flight times. In fact, in a 1986 complaint filed with the Transportation Department, Delta alleged that it was American's widespread use of the tactic that forced other airlines to adopt it. Says Mr. Crandall: &quot;They are either wrong or deliberately misstating the facts; it simply ain't the case.&quot; He says American followed other carriers' lead. Delta dropped the complaint after American halted the practice.    Consumers certainly haven't benefited much from American's long court battle with Chicago's McTravel Travel Services. The travel agency, which offers rebates to its customers, was denied permission by American to issue tickets on its flights. Industry sources say American is protecting nonrebating agents with which it does business.    The widespread feeling that Mr. Crandall is often hypocritical is fed by his fervent advocacy of legislation requiring minimum health-care benefits for employees. That may seem like a noble cause that transcends the airline industry, but his critics say he is motivated less by altruism than by a desire to raise costs at archrival Continental Airlines.    The Texas Air Corp. unit had dumped its union contract after filing a bankruptcy petition in 1983 and then quickly slashed wages, instituted a lower-cost, contributory health plan and eliminated retirement benefits. The airline's lower costs enable it to consistently undercut American's fares.    &quot;He's willing to change the economic structure of tens of thousands of companies just to attain a single goal,&quot; says John Adams, a senior vice president at Continental.    Mr. Crandall argues that if Continental and other companies don't pay adequate health benefits, taxpayers eventually will. Moreover, he says, American and other airlines will be forced to drop health plans to stay competitive if the government doesn't decree minimum benefits. &quot;I'm not at all sure,&quot; he said in another speech, &quot;that a system which requires us to do that is really socially beneficial.&quot;    American's employees haven't noticed such concern for their economic well-being. The flight attendants' union at American says that a Draconian two-tier wage scale imposed by American in 1983 paid some starting flight attendants so little that they qualified for food stamps. Mr. Crandall says he paid prevailing market wages to new employees while protecting senior workers. Further, he notes that starting pay rose significantly in the most recent contract.    If all the public posturing is meant to establish American's market dominance, it hasn't been totally successful of late. In last year's fourth quarter, the parent company posted an $805,000 loss, its first in nearly five years. But securities analysts have great faith in Mr. Crandall. On his watch -- he has run the airline since 1980 -- American has expanded greatly and become innovative and generally highly profitable.    The carrier accounted for more than 25% of the industry's total operating profits over the past three years, says Airline Economics Inc., a Washington, D.C., consulting firm. A ruthless cost-cutter, Mr. Crandall delights in telling how American saved $40,000 a year by removing a single olive from each salad served in-flight.    Mr. Crandall believes that his strategy for the company and his agenda for the industry will be vindicated in the long run. To him, the choices are clear. To provide decent service and optimum safety, he says, &quot;we must accept a bit more noise, a planned and limited level of capacity, some limits on the rights of individuals to operate private planes and perhaps a few dollars more on the price of the cheapest tickets.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>