<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871019-0021 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 10/19/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   REAGAN MOVED closer to responding to Iran's attack on a U.S.-flagged ship.    The president said that he had decided how the U.S. should respond to the Friday missile attack on the Sea Isle City, but it wasn't clear whether he planned military, trade or diplomatic actions. The attack on the U.S.-flagged Kuwaiti tanker wounded 18. In Jerusalem, Shultz was told by Israeli and moderate Arab officials during his four-day Mideast tour that the U.S. should retaliate for the attack. A significant shift in Israeli policy appears to be developing.    The secretary of state, following three days of talks with Israeli officials, reported no progress in his drive to open Arab-Israeli peace negotiations.    ---   India said its troops in Sri Lanka captured the headquarters of the main Tamil guerrilla group outside Jaffna and were engaged in house-to-house combat in the city. New Delhi said it sent 1,500 more troops to the island nation and a spokeswoman estimated 102 Indian soldiers and 527 rebels have been killed in the weeklong offensive.    ---   A pro-Bork senator called on the Senate Judiciary Committee to investigate whether a panel aide pressured a black law professor into withdrawing from scheduled testimony to the committee in support of the Supreme Court nominee. Senate Majority Leader Byrd (D., W.Va.) said the full Senate could take up the Bork debate tomorrow.    ---   A French company is exporting Western technology illicitly to the Soviets, the French magazine L'Express said. The report said a unit of Societe Generale, France's third-largest bank, has sold the Soviets sophisticated machinery for making semiconductors. Western nations have reached accords banning such exports.    ---   The U.S. said it wouldn't consider rejoining Unesco, despite the nomination of Federico Mayor of Spain to succeed the U.N. agency's controversial director general. Mahtar M'Bow of Senegal, who led the agency for 13 years, agreed under pressure not to seek a new term.    ---   Nancy Reagan's doctors said final tests from her breast-cancer surgery show there has been no spread of the disease and that the &quot;prognosis for full recovery is excellent,&quot; the White House said. The first lady underwent surgery to remove her left breast Saturday after doctors at Bethesda Naval Hospital detected cancer cells.    ---   Commonwealth leaders ended a five-day summit in Canada Saturday. The meeting exposed a rift between Britain and her former colonies over how best to pressure South Africa's government to end apartheid. Prime Minister Thatcher refused to join other heads of government in calling for tougher action against Pretoria.    ---   Nicaraguan rebels killed 22 army troops in an ambush on a convoy 110 miles east of Managua Saturday, army sources said. The attack took place in the same area where fighting last week killed 91 Contras and 44 government troops, Managua said.    ---   Doctors were hopeful that they won't have to amputate the foot of an 18-month-old Texas girl who was rescued from a well Friday, 58 hours after she fell in. Jessica McClure is to undergo further surgery today at Midland Memorial Hospital to restore circulation to her right foot. She slept through a visit by Vice President Bush yesterday.    ---   Hospital officials said Baby Paul, the youngest infant to receive a heart transplant, was in critical but stable condition. Officials at California's Loma Linda University Medical Center said the Canadian infant, who underwent surgery three hours after birth Friday, was awake and moving.    ---   The U.S. said it wouldn't consider rejoining Unesco, despite the nomination of Federico Mayor of Spain to succeed the U.N. agency's controversial director general. Mahtar M'Bow of Senegal, who led the agency for 13 years, agreed under pressure not to seek a new term.    ---   Three Sikh high priests were arrested when Indian police raided the Golden Temple complex in Amritsar. The three were charged with &quot;threatening the security of the state&quot; in calling for a banned demonstration in support of a separate Sikh state. Fearing retaliation, police have closed all schools in the city for three days.    ---   The Deaver trial is scheduled to begin today, barring an appellate court ruling in favor of an unrelated challenge to the independent counsel law. The former Reagan aide faces perjury charges stemming from investigations into his lobbying activities after he left the White House.    ---   Swiss voters elected a new Parliament, with no major changes, early returns showed. Final results won't be known until today, but preliminary results showed the ruling four-party center-right coalition retaining control. The Green Party appeared likely to win nine seats, up from six.    ---   A secret file shows that the U.N. War Crimes Commission determined in 1947 that it had enough evidence to try Waldheim for &quot;crimes against humanity&quot; because of his World War II Nazi involvement, the Chicago Sun-Times said. The newspaper said the determination was among 185 documents in the Austrian president's U.N. file. </TEXT></DOC>