<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870210-0067 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO>  </SO><IN> FRESTNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><TEXT>   Ronald Reagan is fast approaching one of the seminal decisions of his presidency. He must either order the deployment process for strategic defense technologies to go forward, or he must leave that decision to the next president. Mr. Reagan discussed this matter last week with Secretary of State Shultz, Defense Secretary Weinberger and National Security Adviser Frank Carlucci. A second meeting is reportedly scheduled for today.    If the president opts for deployment of antimissile systems, he will most likely set in motion a great debate over the meaning of the Anti-Ballistic Missile treaty that was signed back in 1972 by Leonid Brezhnev and Richard Nixon. In Washington, opponents of the Strategic Defense Initiative are already saying the treaty's language forbids deployment and much testing, and SDI supporters are saying that an expansive interpretation of the treaty permits these actions. Sen. Sam Nunn (D., Ga.) recently raised the specter of a &quot;constitutional crisis&quot; if Mr. Reagan tries to push SDI through the cracks in the treaty's prose.    While much intellectual firepower is being brought to bear on who said what to whom from 1969 to 1972 and what they meant when they said it, the treaty's own language provides the means for resolving this ambiguity. Surely the president, Sen. Nunn and all the rest could agree on the meaning of Article XV:    &quot;1. This Treaty shall be of unlimited duration.    &quot;2. Each Party shall, in exercising its national sovereignty, have the right to withdraw from this Treaty if it decides that extraordinary events related to the subject matter of this Treaty have jeopardized its supreme interests. It shall give notice of its decision to the other Party six months prior to withdrawal from the Treaty. Such notice shall include a statement of the extraordinary events the notifying Party regards as having jeopardized its supreme interests.&quot;    President Reagan should grasp this nettle now, rather than get into arguments over the treaty's wording, an interminable, no-win game that will roll the real decision onto the desk of his successor. The provisions of the treaty are in any event already notoriously fuzzy; little details such as what counts as a &quot;heavy&quot; missile were somehow left unresolved, for example. There have been endless arguments over whether its provisions prohibit such Soviet activities as the encryption of telemetry. The Soviets even defend their Krasnoyarsk radar, which even dovish U.S. analysts agree is a blatant violation of the treaty.    Specific wording aside, the treaty's political bargain was clear enough. Agreement to limit ABM defenses was a trade-off for limiting offensive missiles, covered in the accompanying &quot;Interim Agreement.&quot; U.S. negotiator Gerard Smith solemnly announced at the time that further limitations on offensive missiles would be necessary to contain threats &quot;to the survivability of our respective retaliatory forces,&quot; that if this were not achieved within five years &quot;U.S. supreme interests could be jeopardized&quot; and that this would constitute &quot;a basis for withdrawal from the ABM treaty.&quot;    The Soviets promptly drove their SS-19 through the &quot;heavy missile&quot; loophole, an expansion that in itself threatened the U.S. land-based deterrent. They have continued to expand since. Now they are clearly proceeding with a large ABM program of their own, through loopholes and outright violations where necessary, counting on the 1972 treaty to confound similar efforts by the U.S.    It is interesting that in 1972 the negotiators understood clearly that strategic policy is an inherently dynamic process, that circumstances are likely to change. The opponents of SDI -- in Congress, the State Department and within the scientific community -- have now lashed themselves to the mast of a 15-year-old treaty, under the insupportable pretense that strategic policy is static. And it presumably follows that circumstances are little different now than they were in 1972 and that the treaty Leonid Brezhnev signed will protect us.    Mr. Reagan, as always, will have to trust his own instincts and sense of timing. The Strategic Defense Initiative was his idea. After announcing it, he caught Beltway flak, but support for the program has steadily increased. At Reykjavik, he learned two things: The arms-control process has become manic and the U.S. public supports missile defenses. From Washington, however, came more flak. The president has now learned that his commitment is bearing fruit -- missile defense is technologically feasible.    Mr. Reagan can now say that SDI is the right thing, let's get the whole shopworn treaty out of the way and do it. He'll catch more flak. So what else is new? He'll have seized the moral high ground, and in time the Beltway, Congress and the allies will come around again. </TEXT></DOC>