<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880602-0128 </DOCNO><HL> Which One's Reaching for Taxes in Budget Pinch? </HL><AUTHOR> Dan Walters </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> TAXES </CO><TEXT>   The personal and political lives of California Gov. George Deukmejian and New York Gov. Mario Cuomo offer uncanny parallels.    Both are New York-born sons of immigrants, both call St. John's University alma mater, both worked their way up the political ladder, both were first elected governor by narrow margins in 1982 and won re-election easily four years later, and both have been mentioned as potential presidential candidates of the future.    Govs. Cuomo and Deukmejian both inherited budget deficits from their predecessors, both raised taxes and cut spending to handle them, and both enacted tax cuts last year. Under Mr. Cuomo state general fund spending has risen 52.4% and under Mr. Deukmejian it has gone up 57.6%, although California also has experienced a much faster population growth.    Now Republican Deukmejian and Democrat Cuomo again have Excedrin-sized fiscal headaches in common.    The governors of the two largest states, as well as those of dozens of other states -- including Massachusetts' Michael Dukakis -- have seen their budgets clobbered by sudden drops in revenue because they miscalculated the effects of federal tax reform on capital-gains activity.    Put simply, the governors, having experienced windfall increases in revenues in 1987 as investors sold stocks and other assets to avoid an increase in capital-gains tax, underestimated the drop in revenues that would occur the following year. Or, more accurately, they all took the same bad advice from economists.    Mr. Cuomo's headache -- the gap between anticipated revenues and reality -- is about $900 million and Mr. Deukmejian's is slightly larger, about $1 billion. In California, the situation is complicated a bit by the state's adoption of its own tax-reform plan, which apparently contributed at least something to the revenue shortfall.    However much they may commiserate with one another, however, Govs. Deukmejian and Cuomo are parting company over how to handle their problems, and Mr. Deukmejian's approach could have an impact on the 1988 presidential campaign.    The New York governor, assuming that about two-thirds of the shortfall is a one-time affair, is planning to trim spending to bridge the gap.    Thus the liberal Democrat is taking the approach usually favored by conservative Republicans -- and is getting a little criticism from Republican state senators, who say the governor is overreacting with his spending cuts.    The California governor, who made his reputation as being tight with a public buck, is taking the opposite approach. He's assuming that the shortfall is not a one-shot event but a continuing problem and, therefore, is proposing substantial increases in state taxes to overcome it. He's taking heat from Republican state legislators, too, but for the opposite reason: They don't like to increase taxes in a state still dominated by the spirit of Proposition 13, the landmark tax-cutting measure adopted by California voters 10 years ago.    Mr. Deukmejian is not admitting that his plan to raise $800 million in taxes is a tax increase. He refers to his specific proposals as &quot;adjustments,&quot; but even Republican loyalists aren't buying that line. Chief among the proposed &quot;adjustments&quot; is a freeze on the indexing of income-tax brackets for inflation that could force middle-income taxpayers to pay more but would not affect those in the top state-income-tax bracket -- a fact also drawing criticism from liberals. The other major boost would affect corporations and is drawing some resistance from business groups.    Only a few Republican legislators are supporting Mr. Deukmejian's tax-increase plan. Most of them, facing re-election this year, don't like the idea. When Republican leaders of the state Assembly were asked about the plan during a news conference last week, they ran out of the room rather than answer.    The Democrats who control both houses of the Legislature, meanwhile, are chortling over the split between Mr. Deukmejian and Republican legislators. While they would prefer more taxes to more spending cuts, they want to extract maximum political mileage out of the situation and put GOP legislators on the spot during an election year.    Mr. Deukmejian's own &quot;Iron Duke&quot; reputation, meanwhile, is taking a beating. He had promised flatly when running for re-election in 1986 not to raise taxes.    The state Republican chairman, Robert Naylor, says of the governor's plan that it &quot;is clear that it is a tax increase.&quot; He worries that if it is enacted, it will tarnish Mr. Deukmejian's chances of winning a third term in 1990 -- especially since the governor has been bragging about pushing a $1.1 billion tax rebate through the Legislature in 1987.    &quot;On the face of it, it appears ridiculous to be rebating $1.1 billion just six months before you have a shortfall,&quot; Mr. Naylor told the Sacramento Bee last week. &quot;This fiscal crisis . . . reduces significantly the benefit of being able to brag about the rebate.&quot; Mr. Naylor is glum, too, because he and other state GOP leaders had been planning a campaign against Gov. Dukakis, the all-but-certain Democratic presidential candidate, to take advantage of California voters' celebrated dislike of taxes.    It will be difficult, he and other Republican leaders believe, for them to portray Mr. Dukakis as a tax-and-spend liberal, regardless of how he handles the $252 million Massachusetts shortfall, when their own governor is proposing major tax increases. And California, by common belief among leaders of both parties, could be the decisive state in determining whether Mr. Dukakis or George Bush is elected president this year.    ---   Mr. Walters is a Sacramento-based columnist for McClatchy Newspapers. </TEXT></DOC>