<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870205-0115 </DOCNO><HL> Mexico's Future: The Economic-Political Link---By Robert L . Bartley</HL><DD> 02/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAMMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><DATELINE> CHIHUAHUA, Mexico  </DATELINE><TEXT>    In this boom town of 700,000tumbleweed blows over the desert as it does on the other sideof the Rio Grande 200 miles to the north; Enrique goes by&quot;Ricky&quot; and Miguel by &quot;Mickey.&quot; As befits a town with zerounemployment, it is swept and spanking clean. But the&quot;Edificio Empresarial,&quot; the offices of three businessfederations, stands out like a New York subway car, withirregular splotches of gray paint not quite covering orangeand red graffiti.   The spectacle, a residue of the hotly disputed elections here last July, stands as a symbol of tension between the government and large swatches of the business community and middle class. Even, indeed, a symbol of Mexico's efforts to cope with its deep economic crisis. Top Mexican officials believe they are turning the corner in their efforts to open the economy and set the stage for growth. Yet a week of travel and interviews in the industrial north and the capital leaves a powerful impression that the economic opening will never fully succeed without some kind of political opening. If talented and affluent Mexicans cannot vote with their ballots, they will vote with their feet -- or at least with their bank accounts.    Mexico is just now entering the most crucial months of its six-year political cycle. If the usual schedule holds, the next president will be announced in September or October, spend a year running for office and be inaugurated in December 1988. Victory by the nominee of the PRI, or Institutional Revolutionary Party, is a foregone conclusion, and the process by which that nominee is chosen is shrouded in mystery. As the various contenders maneuver, we are in the period of the &quot;tapado,&quot; (covered one,) an allusion to the Aztec practice of parading the new king in a hood.    In the outcome of this curious process the U.S. has enormous interests. Mexico of course owes vast sums to U.S. banks; its foreign debt is now about $100 billion, not including $12 billion in the new package now being completed. Its citizens also have vast deposits in U.S. banks, a result of massive capital outflows over the years. It is the U.S.'s third-largest trading partner and vies with Canada as the largest oil supplier. With a flow of immigrants legal and illegal, Hispanics are the fastest-growing minority in the U.S. population, now over 7%. And of course, a 2,000-mile border gives the U.S. an immense stake in Mexico's stability and prosperity. In a list of nations important to the U.S., Mexico ought to rank second only to the Soviet Union.    The attitudes of Americans toward their southern neighbor have been distinctly volatile, most lately focusing on corruption, drug problems and disputed elections. As a political machine in place for nearly 60 years, the PRI government has certainly known its share of corruption, and even its officials rate it a continuing problem. But even the most thoughtful Mexicans tend to see drug-related corruption as something the U.S. inflicts on them, by creating a huge drug market by lax treatment of users north of the border. Some drug-ring leaders are on trial, and some 400 Mexican policemen are said to have died fighting them. The gringo image of government as a huge drug ring is seriously misleading, at once defaming the PRI and missing real problems it presents.    The PRI is better seen as Mexico's &quot;Best and Brightest.&quot; Its members are Mexico's elite -- the most educated, the most articulate, and by far the most experienced in the techniques of government. The PRI has never been an ideological party; its mission and accomplishment were to find some common ground in the aftermath of Mexico's bloody 1910-1920 revolution. The object of its modern government is not this program or that, but to retain power for the PRI.    An educated elite running a closed political system creates a curious dichotomy in Mexican society. Few officials have been anything but officials, and the private sector has historically avoided politics. &quot;Government people&quot; is the way private Mexicans typically describe any group of officials. A leading Mexican intellectual says of the PRI, &quot;They are the New Class.&quot;    Nowhere is this clearer than in the current tapados. All three of the leading presidential contenders are sons of prominent PRI officials. Planning minister Carlos Salinas de Gortari, whose selection would symbolize continuation of the current economic programs, is son of Raul Salinas Lozano, former labor secretary and currently a federal senator. Interior Minister Manuel Bartlett Diaz, whose selection would be seen as a move away from political opening, is son of Manuel Bartlett Bautista, governor of the state of Tabasco in the 1940s.    Most observers say the leading contender is Alfredo del Mazo, until last year governor of the state of Mexico and now secretary of energy and state industry. His father, also Alfredo del Mazo, was also governor of Mexico and later labor secretary. The elder del Mazo was a staunch ally of labor patriarch Fidel Velazquez against Communist unions in the 1940s and '50s, and it is Mr. Velazquez's support that makes the younger del Mazo the leading tapado today. Little in either Mr. del Mazo's record or in a conversation with him gives much suggestion of what direction he might take policy, but his anointment would clearly be a victory for PRI bloodlines.    The problem for the private sector, indeed the problem for Mexico, is how to introduce some predictability and accountability into this kind of political system. The various contenders are thought to represent various policies, but the truth is no one really knows. Their careers depend not on speaking their minds, but on loyalty to the PRI and its current leadership. Even more than most styles of politics, the system breeds hypocrisy and policy surprises.    When Luis Echeverria took office as president in 1970, he was regarded as a hard-line choice. He had been interior minister, after all, during the infamous Tlatelolco massacre of protesters just before the Mexico City Olympic Games in 1968. But in office he lurched the country to the left, setting off the first capital flight and starting the ongoing devaluation of the Mexican peso. Days before leaving office, he expropriated private farmlands in Sonora.    When Jose Lopez Portillo succeeded Mr. Echeverria, he was seen as a welcome pro-business choice. His expansive residential compound in Mexico City is now called &quot;dog hill,&quot; in remembrance of his promise to defend the peso &quot;like a dog&quot; -- days before devaluing it. Similarly, he praised the patriotism of Mexicans who held money in dollars in Mexico City banks, then confiscated those dollar deposits at an artificial exchange rate. And of course, in his final year in office, he nationalized the banking system, apparently even though (if not because) the move was opposed by his chosen successor, current President Miguel de la Madrid.    This is not a record designed to convince investors that current economic policies will remain in place in the long term. While denationalizing the banks would be so abrupt a reversal that it would undermine PRI authority, the de la Madrid government has tried to move toward an open and competitive economy. It has sold a number of public enterprises, agreed to enter the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade and has tried to encourage exports.    In recent months there have been hints that these policies are starting to work, at least well enough to stem the country's long economic slide. Mainly in response to interest rates that make local borrowing prohibitive, money has been flowing into the country rather than out. The Mexico City stock market is booming. Over the last two years, Mexico received no new loans while paying about $18 billion in interest; its private sector also repaid about $2 billion in principal. Foreign-exchange reserves increased by about $2 billion in 1986.    The price in terms of living standards has been high. Inflation over the last year has been about 100%, while wages increased only 70%. The left wing of the PRI, symbolized by Carlos Tello, the architect of the bank nationalization, favors a frankly autarkical policy totally at odds with the de la Madrid opening. Former United Nations Ambassador Porfirio Munoz Ledo has emerged as the current spokesman for this wing, heading the &quot;democratic tendency&quot; campaigning for a more open process of selecting the next PRI nominee. He favors a &quot;regulated and decreasing immersion in the world economy,&quot; denies suggestions of any current connection with former President Echeverria, and claims support among the party's youth.    (There are of course forces further to the left. The main leftist opposition, the PSUM, has abandoned the word &quot;communist&quot; but retains the hammer and sickle in its emblem. The left has been able to organize a strike at the 300,000-student National Autonomous University of Mexico over higher standards and proposed increases in tuition, which is currently equivalent to 50 cents a year. Few if any of the protest leaders are currently registered.)    Planning Minister Salinas says the policies of an opening represent a societal consensus and are in place &quot;for the rest of this century,&quot; but businessmen may be forgiven some residue of doubt. The manager of a plant actually exporting capital goods to Europe and America says his greatest worry is that the opening will prove painful in its early years and be prematurely abandoned. A former bank owner says his incentives are to spend his money on foreign travel; &quot;It may be good for me, but not for Mexico.&quot; A rising Mexico City industrialist says: &quot;I am building for the export market, but at the same time I am using all my contacts to sell my machinery to the government.&quot;    In this cynicism and dejection lies the real price of episodes like the Chihuahua elections, dominated by reports of ballot-stuffing and other blatant irregularities. No outsider, for that matter no Mexican, is in a position to say with confidence who actually won the July gubernatorial election. The declared PRI winner, Gov. Fernando Baeza, is an elegant and moderate figure who won back some business leaders who'd earlier supported the opposition. But he clearly benefited from irregularities, and protests over the outcome were initially widespread. The Edificio Empresarial was painted with graffiti when some businessmen called a strike, then painted again to cover the graffiti when the federations put up a sign saying it had been painted courtesy of the official party.    The opposition PAN (National Action Party) ran well in the 1983 elections, winning mayoral races in Chihuahua and Ciudad Juarez, the state's largest city. The reversal of these victories last summer was even harder to credit than the gubernatorial outcome. The PAN leadership, typically tieless and sometimes in leather jackets, strikes a contrast with the urbane governor and his entourage. To the taunt that they don't have the capability of running the national government, they reply that they never will if they're never allowed to run a state. Their mayors, including defeated gubernatorial candidate Francisco Barrio, seemed to run highly successful administrations.    While defending his electoral victory, Gov. Baeza adds, &quot;Mexican democracy is not a model.&quot; He says the situation in Chihuahua remains polarized, and says the goal of his governorship will be &quot;conciliation.&quot;    What kind of conciliation, a visitor to Mexico comes away wondering, would be necessary to cure the cynicism and distrust that hamper the efforts to regain prosperity and develop the country's enormous potential? At the end of a tour, it's harder than ever to believe that there will be real economic recovery without some kind of political opening. To enjoy confidence in the future, Mexicans will have to be convinced that the political structure can somehow be held accountable for its policies. Conciliation, accountability, the return of flight capital and future growth are going to depend on evolving some kind of reasonable democracy in which debates can be fought out and winners can be declared and accepted. </TEXT></DOC>