<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861202-0101 </DOCNO><HL> Defense Lawyers Fear Becoming TargetsUnder Sweeping Money-Laundering Law---By Michael AllanStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/02/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   A new money-laundering law has sent some defense lawyers scurrying for cover. Their fear: the possibility of going to jail for accepting &quot;dirty money&quot; in payment of legal fees.    At first glance, the measure, tucked away in the $1.7 billion Anti-Drug Abuse Act signed in October, seems innocent enough. By defining money laundering to include knowingly accepting money from someone who earned it illegally, Congress hopes to prevent criminals from enjoying the fruits of their crimes. The measure provides for jail sentences of as much as 10 years and fines of $250,000.    But some lawyers and legal scholars contend that the new statute could be used by federal prosecutors to indict defense attorneys for taking fees from lawbreakers who have no legitimate source of income. Some Justice Department officials say they plan to use the law sparingly against lawyers, if at all. But members of the defense bar say that as long as the measure is on the books, it may intimidate some lawyers into dropping a case or refusing to take on a prospective client. And that, they argue, will undermine a defendant's constitutional rights.    The bill is &quot;ominous,&quot; says William J. Genego, a professor at the University of Southern California Law Center who is researching attorney fee issues. &quot;It gives the government tremendous coercive power over defense lawyers.&quot;    While the bill seems particularly troubling for lawyers, it doesn't actually mention them. And legislators involved in drafting the measure say they didn't mean to target lawyers. But language in the House bill that would have specifically exempted the fees of criminal defenders was scotched at the last minute by Senate Judiciary Committee members, who strongly objected to making an exception for one group.    As passed, the law casts a wide net. It makes illegal, for the first time, classic money laundering: that is, helping to disguise criminal proceeds. But it also applies to anyone who &quot;knowingly engages or attempts to engage in a monetary transaction (of more than $10,000) in criminally derived property.&quot;    It's that phrase that has lawyers worried.    Legislators say the language is designed to allow law-enforcement officials to go after, for example, an auto dealer who sells a flashy sports car to a cocaine trafficker, knowing that the money he puts in the bank came from a drug sale. But car dealers and most other business people can argue they aren't privy to their customers' financial records, and therefore don't meet the knowledge test. (The exception would be a case in which they are &quot;stung&quot; by undercover agents who expressly state that the money is tainted.)    Defense lawyers can't claim ignorance as easily. It's part of their business to hear the privileged confidences of clients. Thus, lawyers fear, if they accept fees from people they know to be guilty of crimes, they could be subject to prosecution as well.    &quot;These kinds of provisions have the potential for seriously undercutting the right to counsel and the traditional protections that our system of justice provides criminals,&quot; says Michael J. Graetz, a professor at Yale Law School.    Irwin Lichter, a Miami lawyer whose clients are primarily South Americans facing drug charges, argues that the measure will &quot;change the face of criminal defense law as we know it. For over 200 years these rights have been fought for and bled for, and I just hate to see them overturned&quot; just to convict a few drug dealers. Mr. Lichter says he won't turn away clients because of the new law.    Because the law targets transactions of more than $10,000, not all defense lawyers would be affected by it. But $10,000 is about the minimum an established lawyer in Miami, the capital of the U.S. narcotics industry, will charge for a drug case. Fees in a complicated matter involving substantial amounts of drugs can easily run into six figures.    The Justice Department itself seems to be giving mixed signals about how vigorously it will pursue defense lawyers. In Miami, U.S. Attorney Leon Kellner has said that bona fide fees -- a lawyer's reasonable and ordinary charges to a client -- will not be the subject of prosecution. &quot;I have no intention of utilizing this law to launch a vendetta against defense lawyers,&quot; he says. An internal Justice Department memorandum also has cautioned restraint, and orders that any indictment against lawyers involving fees be cleared first in Washington.    But other Justice Department officials argue that successful criminals shouldn't be any more entitled to a high-priced lawyer than unsuccessful criminals. Accused drug kingpins who have no visible legal means of support can seek free legal help from public defenders, the officials say.    And Justice officials say they are pleased with the law's premise: Crime shouldn't pay for anybody, even lawyers. &quot;I don't think attorneys should be a privileged class,&quot; argues James Knapp, a deputy associate attorney general. &quot;They have no right to knowingly live off the fruits of illegal activities any more than any other citizen does.&quot;    For now, many defense lawyers are proceeding cautiously. To protect themselves, some are painstakingly documenting their conversations with clients to prove they don't know where their money comes from. Others say they are planning to ask for affidavits certifying that the fees they receive are clean. And in Washington, prominent defense lawyers already are lobbying to get the law amended by Congress -- before it gets applied in court.    The federal court system already is grappling with a related question concerning fees. It grows out of the Comprehensive Crime Control Act, which two years ago greatly expanded the government's power to pursue assets of hard-core criminals. Some prosecutors saw in that law a chance to attack the hefty legal fees paid to the criminals' lawyers.    One tactic, for example, has been to seek court restraining orders prohibiting defendants from transferring property pending the outcome of their trials -- including payments to their lawyers. Lower-court decisions on the issue have been mixed, and ultimately it may be decided by the Supreme Court.    But the willingness of the Reagan administration to pursue the cases is enough to leave defense lawyers wary about how it will apply the money-laundering law. Says H. Scott Wallace, legislative director of the National Association of Criminal Defense Lawyers: &quot;This Justice Department has shown itself very eager to get at criminals by going after their attorneys.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>