<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871008-0007 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 10/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   BORK MET with Reagan as opposition to the Supreme Court nominee grew.    During a 25-minute meeting at the White House, the president urged Bork to &quot;keep going&quot; in the battle to win confirmation for a seat on the high court. The meeting came as a group of Southern Democrats said they would vote against Bork, bringing the number of announced opponents close to a Senate majority. The announcements were spurred by Tuesday's decision by Sen. Heflin (D., Ala.) to vote against Bork. Southern votes are considered essential if Bork is to have any chance of filling the seat vacated by Lewis Powell.    While the White House said there wasn't any indication that Bork intended to withdraw, some GOP senators said he was considering such a move.    ---   REAGAN PLEDGED to &quot;fight&quot; for $270 million in new aid for the Contras.    Speaking to the Organization of American States, the president generally applauded a five-nation Central American peace plan signed Aug. 7 in Guatemala. But he said U.S. assistance to the Nicaraguan rebels would continue until the Sandinista government concludes &quot;an agreement for a cease-fire and full democracy is established in Nicaragua.&quot; Meanwhile, Ortega insisted that Managua intends to adhere to the peace plan, but warned that continued Contra aid &quot;brings into question our compliance&quot; with the accord.    The U.N. General Assembly endorsed the Central American peace plan, which must be implemented by Nov. 7. Ortega is to address the U.N. today.    ---   Tamil guerrillas ambushed a train and a bus during a series of attacks in eastern Sri Lanka, killing at least 150 people. Most of the dead were Sinhalese. The escalation of violence came despite an Indian-sponsored peace plan, signed in July. Indian peace-keeping forces stationed in the island nation were given shoot-to-kill orders.    ---   Philippine President Aquino ordered the closing of at least three radio stations for &quot;transmitting the propaganda of right-wing rebel groups.&quot; Hundreds of troops also were stationed around the presidential palace in Manila as the government warned of a new coup plot involving supporters of deposed leader Marcos and rebel soldiers.    ---   Hundreds of Chinese police patrolled the Tibetan capital of Lhasa to prevent pro-independence demonstrations on the 37th anniversary of Beijing's annexation of the Himalayan region. Communications with Tibet were severed and authorities moved to prevent foreign travel in the area. The exiled Dalai Lama urged peaceful protests.    ---   Congressional sources said Reagan has decided to nominate James Burnley, deputy secretary of transportation, to succeed Elizabeth Dole as secretary. Dole resigned Oct. 1. An announcement is expected as early as today.    ---   U.S. officials are seeking a U.N.-sponsored naval blockade in the Persian Gulf to cut off the flow of arms to Iran, United Press International reported. In the gulf region, Iranian gunboats fired rocket-propelled grenades at a Saudi Arabian tanker, and Iraq bombed an Iranian city in retaliation for recent attacks on Baghdad.    ---   Mayberry resigned as chairman of Reagan's AIDS commission. The resignation of Mayberry, head of the Mayo Foundation in Rochester, Minn., was followed by that of the commission's second-highest official, Woodrow Myers, the Indiana health commissioner. James Watkins was appointed to succeed Mayberry.    ---   Three Supreme Court justices expressed some skepticism about a Justice Department argument that a former reporter for The Wall Street Journal and two others violated securities law. The doubt was aired during oral arguments on an appeal by R. Foster Winans, convicted of securities and mail fraud in 1985.    ---   A Soviet official delivered to Reagan a message from Gorbachev and said a date for a superpower summit would be set while Shultz is in Moscow later this month. Separately, Weinberger ordered the Navy to proceed with a test next month of a new Trident II missile with 12 dummy warheads, despite concern that it could harm arms talks.    ---   Fiji's military chief named prominent anti-Indian extremists and one Indian to the South Pacific island chain's 19-member governing council of ministers. Col. Rabuka also said that a panel of ethnic Fijian chiefs would choose a president at a meeting in Suva tentatively set for next week.    ---   Bess Myerson was indicted by a federal grand jury in New York City on conspiracy, mail fraud and bribery-related charges. The former Miss America, who resigned as the city's cultural affairs commissioner in April, is accused of using her position to influence the judge at her companion's divorce.    ---   North Korean naval vessels attacked and sank a South Korean fishing trawler in international waters, the Seoul government said. At least 12 fishermen were believed killed in the assault. One person was rescued. Pyongyang described the trawler as a spy boat.    ---   A Syrian diplomat was killed outside his home in Brussels by two gunmen, police said. A Syrian extremist group took responsibility for the slaying of the first secretary of Damascus's embassy in Belgium.    ---   Reagan signed a declaration designating earthquake-damaged Southern California a disaster area. The move cleared the way for federal aid for more than 10,000 homeowners and businesses in the region.    ---   Chilean army troops and police fired on demonstrators in Santiago during a nationwide general strike. At least three people were injured. Dozens of other clashes also were reported throughout the country.    ---   Died: Joseph B. Flavin, 58, chairman of Singer Co., in New Canaan, Conn. </TEXT></DOC>