<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870116-0133 </DOCNO><HL> Seamstress Bucks Mexico's Establishment---Independent Union GrewFrom Quake Ruins---By Mary Williams WalshStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM LABOR </IN><DATELINE> MEXICO CITY  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Evangelina Corona, her gray hair braided into a neat bun and a sprig of felt flowers pinned to her lapel, stands in the shadows of a downtown alley, toe to toe with a man holding a wooden club. She's trying to argue her way past him into a dress factory she has been trying to organize.    Miss Corona, 48 years old, has been beaten up by men like these before and decides not to risk it this time. So she retreats into the safety of a nearby outdoor market.    A peasant who migrated to the capital 30 years ago, and a 23-year veteran of squalid garment factories, Miss Corona is today one of Mexico's few labor leaders unattached to the ruling party. Almost by accident, she has come to lead a tiny seamstresses union that takes its name -- the Nineteenth of September -- from the date a massive earthquake rocked Mexico City in 1985, leaving the garment district a jumble of fallen sweatshops, twisted steel and jobless women.    Since then, Miss Corona's life has been a string of red tape, threats, confrontations on street corners and long waits in governmental outer offices. To watch her snail'space maneuverings is to understand why people who buck the political establishment and thrive are so rare in Mexico.    Unions have been the bedrock of this nation's political order for decades. Of the country's 82 million people, something like 12 million are union members.    However, union membership here doesn't mean what it does in the U.S. Most Mexican unions are bound in a network linked to the ruling Institutional Revolutionary Party, known by its Spanish initials, PRI. In many sectors, workers have to join a union to get a job.    This system, more than anything else, has kept Mexico tranquil in these days of wrenching recession. But Miss Corona is a woman with a pig-iron determination not to buy into it.    &quot;The Nineteenth of September has had a lot of organizational problems, but Evangelina, with almost no education, has been able to bring about a kind of unity,&quot; says Bertha Salinas, an outside adviser to the union.    Union headquarters is a one-room building of corrugated metal at the back of a vacant lot in the garment district. Out front, a row of igloo-shaped tents stands pitched on the asphalt. They are home to seamstresses -- most of whom are unschooled single mothers like Miss Corona -- whose houses fell down in the quake.    Here, Miss Corona receives the jobless who file in. Nearby, donated boxes of coffee, canned milk and cooking oil are stacked for distribution among the unemployed. On the wall hangs a union poster showing a stern young Amazon woman hurling a spear -- in startling contrast to the short, motherly Miss Corona.    Her biggest opposition comes not from recalcitrant managements so much as from the nation's ruling-party labor establishment. &quot;We act with President (Miguel) de la Madrid as one,&quot; says Fidel Velazquez, an octagenarian who for half a century has led Mexico's biggest PRI labor group, the Mexican Workers Confederation, whose Spanish acronym is CTM. &quot;For the CTM, the interests of the workers are very precious, but the interests of the nation are even more precious,&quot; he says.    Seen from the flyblown garment district, official union leaders are a distant and privileged lot. Many seamstresses had such leaders before the earthquake.    &quot;They never told us what our rights were,&quot; says Miss Corona. &quot;Our union leader used to call the factory owner and tell him everything that happened in our meetings.&quot;    Outside, a powerful woman named Elena Ibarra is chopping parsley and peppers in one of the tents. She used to have a job ironing children's dresses, but last year, her boss decided to close up shop. The labor law stipulates how much a boss has to pay a laid-off worker, but this one decided to pay less. The union leader sided with him.    Across the street, fallen buildings are daily reminders of the quake. The closest one once housed 15 sweatshops, including the one where Miss Corona worked. Someone has scrawled the words &quot;tomb-building&quot; in red paint on what's left; 36 women died when it fell. Miss Corona's shift was about to start and she was walking to work when the quake struck.    The garment district was one of the most devastated neighborhoods. Survivors say some of the victims had been locked in by bosses who didn't want them taking breaks.    &quot;The tragedy was so extreme,&quot; says Carlos Monsivais, a political columnist. &quot;These women were fin de siecle slaves.&quot;    Miss Corona remembers walking through the district in shock. Around her, seamstresses stood sobbing; some clawed frantically at the fallen buildings to rescue trapped co-workers. Screams filtered up from beneath the broken concrete.    &quot;I wanted to be useful,&quot; she recalls. &quot;I thought about those television programs with Wonder Woman, all the women who can fly and do anything. But I felt impotent. All I could do was cry.&quot;    With the stricken city full of reporters, word of the seamstresses' plight spread as it wouldn't have in ordinary times. The women suddenly became a cause celebre. Lawyers appeared to help them. Feminists staged marches. Church groups sent aid from abroad.    The Labor Ministry -- which sanctions union activity -- agreed to let the seamstresses form a union outside the ruling-party establishment. The women then elected Miss Corona their leader. Organizers who had tried to get government approval for a seamstresses union before were amazed.    But getting government credentials and getting real-world clout are two different things. Labor lawyers say there are at least 700,000 seamstresses in Mexico City; the Nineteenth of September counts only about 3,000 members. Miss Corona still gets stymied by the official unions.    At one dress factory in Mexico City last year, for example, 18 gunmen from the CTM showed up on the day of a union vote, brandished weapons, and terrified the women into voting for a PRI-affiliated union. At a men's underwear factory, two busloads of thugs rolled up the night before a certification vote, climbed to the roof, and pelted voting seamstresses with rocks.    Government labor authorities sometimes reverse such votes. But each effort takes Miss Corona months of paperwork and hearings.    Mexico has had other Evangelina Coronas before, activists who tried to work for social change outside the political order. Many ultimately decide they can't get anything done and go work with the ruling-party groups. &quot;It's an old dilemma between saying the official unions are so corrupt there's no possibility of reforming them, and saying there's no point in having independent unions because they just get wasted away or beaten up by the official people,&quot; says Jorge Castaneda, a political scientist.    Miss Corona says she will stay on the outside. </TEXT></DOC>