<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871207-0024 </DOCNO><HL> Walsh Probes Whether North, SecordSpied on Reagan Critics, Sources Say---By Andy PasztorStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Federal prosecutors are investigating whether former White House aide Oliver North or retired Maj. Gen. Richard Secord ran an illegal domestic spying operation targeted at some Reagan administration critics, according to law enforcement officials and witnesses who have been questioned about the issue.    Lawrence Walsh, the independent prosecutor looking into the Iran-Contra scandal, recently broadened his grand jury investigation to determine if the two men, along with others, were involved in any unauthorized surveillance, intelligence gathering or other free-lance investigations to harass or discredit political opponents, these individuals said.    Mr. Walsh's move, combined with separate investigations of such allegations by aides for three congressional committees, threatens to put the spotlight on a new area of inquiry that could prove politically explosive for the Reagan administration. Among those who believe they may have been targets are U.S. and foreign journalists, lawmakers, various political activists and an independent Hollywood producer.    Investigators emphasized that their efforts are still in the preliminary stages, that nobody has acknowledged participating in such activities and, therefore, it's far too early to draw firm conclusions. Nevertheless, persons familiar with Mr. Walsh's strategy said his staff in the past few weeks has stepped up interviewing, and combed through White House and other documents to delve into the matter.    Meanwhile, a top Federal Bureau of Investigation official disclosed that law enforcement officials almost 18 months ago had exactly the same suspicions about the activities of Lt. Col. North and his trusted covert operative, Maj. Gen. Secord.    In an interview, Oliver Revell, head of the FBI's criminal investigations, said that in July 1986, he and other FBI managers were concerned that Col. North was using Gen. Secord and free-lance private detective Glenn Robinette, a former U.S. intelligence official, to run a possibly illegal &quot;plumber's unit&quot; from the White House.    Suspicions were raised at the FBI when the bureau learned that Mr. Robinette was conducting a private investigation of Jack Terrell, a disaffected supporter of the Nicaraguan resistance, who also came under FBI scrutiny. &quot;There was enough there to cause a suspicion&quot; that Col. North was conducting investigations &quot;outside his purview,&quot; Mr. Revell recalled. But FBI agents weren't sure who was giving Mr. Robinette his orders.    Agents were instructed to interview Col. North and Mr. Robinette about their relationship, and, according to Mr. Revell, the FBI considered the matter serious enough to warrant giving lie-detector tests to Mr. Robinette.    But according to Mr. Revell, all of the FBI's &quot;suspicions were allayed,&quot; and the entire matter was dropped quickly, after both men flatly asserted that Gen. Secord ordered and supervised the private investigation. Now, Mr. Walsh has revived interest in the issue, and sources said his aides plan to question Mr. Robinette and others about their earlier statements.    Thomas Green, Gen. Secord's lawyer, said yesterday that allegations of illegal surveillance are &quot;absolutely fanciful.&quot; He maintained that his client &quot;never engaged in, or directed domestic spying.&quot; Lawyers for Col. North couldn't be reached for comment, but in the past they have consistently declined to talk about any matters related to Mr. Walsh's investigation.    Mr. Robinette has acknowledged in interviews and in testimony to congressional committees that Gen. Secord asked him to investigate a list of individuals, including Mr. Terrell, who were &quot;making critical remarks&quot; about the administration's Central American policies.    Although he shared some of his information with Col. North, Mr. Robinette maintained that he never worked for the White House and never violated any laws. Yesterday in a brief interview, Mr. Robinette repeated that he didn't use any illegal methods to gain information.    A spokesman for Mr. Walsh declined to comment.    The Iran-Contra congressional committees previously touched on the issue of Col. North's manipulation of law-enforcement agencies, releasing a memo in which Col. North matter-of-factly informed John Poindexter, then White House national security Adviser, about a &quot;security officer&quot; working with Gen. Secord's operation. The memo refers to Mr. Robinette's Terrell investigation and its wording suggests that Project Democracy, the codeword for the covert supply operation managed by Gen. Secord under Col. North's direction, may have ordered investigations of other individuals.    But the panels stopped short of suggesting that Col. North or any of his associates may have directed or known about a so-called plumbers' unit. That phrase, used both by Mr. Revell and by Mr. Robinette when Col. North denied any such activities during his questioning by the FBI last year, became infamous during the Watergate scandal, when some of President Nixon's aides illegally targeted individuals for politically-motivated wiretapping and investigations.    Besides the situation surrounding Mr. Terrell, prosecutors are investigating whether Larry Spivey, an independent film producer from Los Angeles, may have been investigated and followed in 1986 by someone working for Project Democracy.    Mr. Spivey, who became involved with Col. North while pursuing a possible film about the Nicaraguan insurgents, known as the Contras, has told criminal investigators that his home was photographed by an unknown individual. He also said that records related to his contacts with Col. North were stolen during an alleged break-in, according to persons familiar with the investigation.    Mr. Robinette said he didn't know Mr. Spivey, and was never asked by Gen. Secord to investigate him.    ---   Edward T. Pound contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>