<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870108-0128 </DOCNO><HL> Myopic Managers?Trying to Streamline,Some Firms May HurtLong-Term Prospects---They Are Cutting Research,Investment and Products;U.S. Growth May Suffer---But Lower Costs Are a Help---By Ralph E. WinterStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/08/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO) </IN><TEXT>   Streamline.    In more and more corporate board rooms, that has become the buzzword.    Gone is talk of balanced, long-term growth; impatient shareholders and well-heeled corporate raiders have seen to that. Now, anxious executives, fearing for their jobs or their companies, are focusing their efforts on trimming operations and shuffling assets to improve near-term profits, often at the expense of both balance and growth.    Goodyear Tire andamp; Rubber Co. knows this well. To escape the clutches of Anglo-French financier Sir James Goldsmith, the Akron, Ohio, company recently was forced to jettison plans to build large energy and aerospace operations to balance its huge but slow-growing tire business. The newer operations will be sold to help finance repurchase of nearly half of Goodyear's outstanding shares, including those acquired by Sir James. Simultaneously, Goodyear is slashing operating budgets, including research and development spending, to increase profits this year and is paring plant investment to hoard cash for debt service.    Such emphasis on short-term profits and stock prices concerns a growing number of executives and economists. They worry that U.S. companies are damaging their future vitality, and even viability, through reluctance to undertake long-term investments and new-product development. Some see this myopia threatening the nation's economic growth.    &quot;I fear enough companies may become more short-term oriented to erode the competitiveness of American industry,&quot; says Ruben F. Mettler, the chief executive of TRW Inc., a big automotive, aerospace and electronics concern.    Until recently, Mr. Mettler says, he didn't take seriously the criticism about management shortsightedness. But now he worries &quot;about signs that a shorter focus may be developing, because competitiveness requires long-term investment and long-term goals.&quot; He notes that one sure way &quot;to pump up earnings very dramatically is to cut research and development spending.&quot;    On the other hand, John J. Nevin, Firestone Tire andamp; Rubber Co.'s chief executive, says that &quot;there are many industries where the interests of shareholders are best met by a willingness to downsize and focus the company&quot; and to return some capital to shareholders &quot;for them to invest in other businesses.&quot;    The issue has become a hot political topic. When corporate giants such as Goodyear, USX Corp. and Union Carbide Corp. -- long considered all but immune to takeover -- are threatened by raiders, lawmakers take notice. More than a half-dozen states have recently adopted laws intended to help directors resist unwanted takeover bids. Many of the statutes were modeled after Ohio legislation passed at Goodyear's behest when Sir James was threatening a takeover. However, prospects for federal anti-takeover legislation are considered slim.    Many companies concede that they are striving harder to increase profits over the next year or two and that sales growth will slow. But few admit to jeopardizing long-term profits or future competitive positions. In fact, some see streamlining doing the opposite, by making them lower-cost competitors.    In any event, companies are concentrating on their most profitable core businesses and on cutting costs. &quot;There is less loyalty to products and divisions that don't produce quickly enough,&quot; says Burnell R. Roberts, the chief executive of Mead Corp., a forest-products and electronic-information concern. So they are pushing plant shutdowns, layoffs, early-retirement programs and sales of lagging units.    &quot;Raiders are looking for cleanup situations, and we have done a lot of that ourselves,&quot; Mr. Roberts says. Mead, for instance, is pulling out of insurance. Time Inc. is slashing payrolls and dropping or postponing plans for costly new magazines, in part to thwart any prospective raider from identifying ways to increase profits quickly. Others, such as General Electric Co., are retreating from businesses exposed to foreign competition; wide swings in currency values can cause profits to gyrate or even abruptly disappear.    Stock repurchases and special dividend payments are also common. Indeed, Salomon Brothers Inc., an investment-banking firm, says that last year 268 U.S. corporations bought back or moved to repurchase $44.8 billion of their stock. Those buying back shares run the gamut from Gillette Co., a personal-care-products giant, and Kroger Co., a supermarket chain, to Westinghouse Electric Co. Few companies risk tempting a raider by holding a big wad of cash. And many find it prudent to return capital to shareholders instead of investing in new ventures that might take years to turn profitable.    Some concerns, such as GenCorp Inc., are announcing plans to repurchase stock with proceeds of asset sales well before they even have the cash. The Akron-based concern, with interests in tires, plastics, aerospace and broadcasting, agreed a year ago to sell two television stations and said it planned to use the cash to repurchase stock. The sale of the stations still awaits regulatory approval.    Some economists view the emphasis on current profits and cash flow partly as a healthy adjustment to a changing economy. &quot;It's forcing a lot of companies to restructure to cut costs, and that can be good,&quot; says A. Gary Shilling, a New York economic consultant. But he adds, &quot;We're seeing some of our clients become so preoccupied with short-term results that they don't spend the effort they once did on five-year and 10-year planning.&quot;    Some executives are convinced that it already is too risky to bore ahead on a long-term plan. &quot;A Monday-morning quarterback would be a little less aggressive in trying to expand,&quot; says William W. Boeschenstein, the chief executive of Owens-Corning Fiberglas Corp. The Toledo, Ohio, producer of insulation, roofing and industrial materials had been investing heavily in research and marketing to push into new areas with existing products, he adds. It also had jumped into entirely new products, such as aerospace materials.    But a takeover attempt by Wickes Cos., a building-materials retailer, recently forced Owens-Corning to restructure. Owens-Corning will abandon most expansion and diversification efforts, moves that will shrink sales by one-third and employment by 50%, Mr. Boeschenstein estimates.    As a result of the restructuring, Owens-Corning will become a lower-cost competitor in its core products, he says. The takeover threat &quot;made it possible for us to do things that two or three years ago we couldn't have done,&quot; pulling $100 million a year out of costs of continuing businesses. But growth prospects are severely limited, he concedes.    &quot;Today's investors want immediate payout, and they don't recognize in the price of the stock values that would materialize two, five or seven years down the road,&quot; Mr. Boeschenstein complains. &quot;It makes it more difficult to grow a business, enter new fields and otherwise broaden the business base.&quot;    Not everyone deems investors shortsighted, however. Michael Bradley, an associate professor of finance at the University of Michigan, comments that the market &quot;is rationally looking forward&quot; when it assigns a price to 20-year zero-coupon bonds that don't pay any interest until maturity. He contends that long-term corporate plans that aren't appreciated in the market are those in which investors have little confidence. He also believes that U.S. industry's redeployment of assets will produce &quot;a stronger economic base.&quot;    Just how healthy the current wave of restructurings is for the nation's economy partly depends on whether cash returned to shareholders through mergers, stock repurchases or special cash distributions is reinvested and on how well the units being sold later fare. Money reinvested in new companies is likely to create more jobs and a faster-growing economy than if major corporations had gone along unmolested, Mr. Bradley and some other economists say.    Many companies contend that their restructuring programs, besides bolstering short-term profits, also help over the longer term. Mr. Mettler believes that TRW has become more competitive through focusing its management and capital on fewer businesses. However, he notes that TRW spent more than a year planning how the company could best operate in a changing economy, a luxury many companies don't have these days.    In streamlining, TRW sold aircraft-parts and industrial-products businesses with annual sales of about $800 million and repurchased 21% of its shares. Simultaneously, it started aggressive growth and cost-reduction programs in remaining businesses and changed the method of compensating many of its employees to tie salaries more closely to job performance. And it sold its bearings operation to a bearings company, its foundry to a foundry concern, and other units to similar buyers that intend to operate them.    Mr. Mettler says that although takeover fears didn't spark TRW's restructuring, &quot;knowing we were vulnerable&quot; helped shape parts of the plan, such as the stock repurchase. &quot;We try to do what's best for the business, but we were casting an eye to the jungle of Wall Street,&quot; he admits.    The company spent $635 million on the stock buyback and has recovered more than $400 million of that from sales of units. &quot;We have given each {remaining} shareholder a larger stake in our best businesses,&quot; Mr. Mettler says.    Short-term remedies can help set off some future headaches. Large stock repurchases, for instance, can reduce equity and weaken a company in the event of a recession. Since Owens-Corning's restructuring, its debt exceeds the book value of its assets, Mr. Boeschenstein says; the company's negative net worth is more than $1 billion. Even on a market-value basis, debt is about 80% of capital, he says.    Nevertheless, when Owens-Corning's managers laid plans for weathering another recession, they found that &quot;our cash flow is satisfactory,&quot; the chief executive says. People forget, he adds, that cash requirements drop during a recession because companies reduce inventories and receivables. Furthermore, he says, Owens-Corning &quot;cut expenses about 25% on remaining businesses&quot; -- a move that also will help it in bad times.    However, Robert E. Mercer, Goodyear's chief executive, says his company's brush with a takeover has diminished its &quot;staying power.&quot; Previously, he explains, the company could &quot;make heavy investments in Topeka {Goodyear's construction-equipment-tire plant} at a time when earth-mover tires aren't moving.&quot; And it could absorb losses while converting an aging Tyler, Texas, auto-tire plant to a world-class facility.    But that won't be easy in the future, Mr. Mercer says, because Goodyear is being forced to cut production, marketing and product-development expenses of continuing tire and related businesses by $230 million annually, and capital spending by another $275 million.    &quot;The question is, What happens three years or five years from now?&quot; he says. &quot;Will we start losing something in the marketplace because of cutbacks in research and development, reductions in employment and postponed investment in new facilities?&quot; </TEXT></DOC>