<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870921-0065 </DOCNO><HL> Fiscal Lesson:Fate of Florida's TaxOn Services May MakeOther States Go Slow---Governor, Who Advocated It,Now Asks It Be Scrapped;Bad Levy or Badly Done?---How Advertisers Waged War---By Sydney P. FreedbergStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXESMARKETING, ADVERTISING (MKT) </IN><DATELINE> MIAMI  </DATELINE><TEXT>   At a time when the service economy is often seen as the wave of the nation's future, Florida's new tax on services has been seen by many outsiders as the tax of the future: an aggressive levy seeking to extend the state's tax reach far outside its borders.    But now, only 83 days after it took effect, Florida's tax of the future is about to become a thing of the past.    The Florida legislature today begins meeting in special session in Tallahassee to consider a proposal by Republican Gov. Bob Martinez, who pushed through the 5% tax last April, to kill the measure. Virtually everyone concedes that, one way or another, the Florida tax -- the most far-reaching tax on services yet implemented by a state -- is finished in its present form.    The tax's swift decline reflects politics, outside pressure and problems with the law itself. In recent weeks, polls have shown public opinion turning overwhelmingly against the measure -- apparently due, in part, to a ferocious anti-tax campaign by national advertising groups and others. Most of the state's major media outlets, which suffered ad-revenue losses because of the tax, have campaigned editorially against it. And, on a practical level, the tax itself has proven utterly confusing and a nightmare to administer.    Most experts say Florida's failure won't deter states from seeking ways of taxing their service sectors -- now largely untaxed although they are the fastest-growing segment of the nation's economy. In fact, many Florida politicians simply want to revise the present measure, which they say was badly drawn, and create a more acceptable services tax.    But the experience here should make other states move more deliberately, and less ambitiously, than Florida in writing and implementing such laws. The Florida experience is already being described as the prime example of how not to do a services tax.    &quot;Florida screwed up,&quot; says John Mikesell, professor of public and environmental affairs at Indiana University and a national authority on the sales tax. &quot;It perpetrated a piece of bad tax policy.&quot;    At least 24 states now tax at least a few services, but aside from Florida, only New Mexico, Hawaii and South Dakota have broad-based taxes. Florida's law was significant for the size of the state (the fourth or fifth most populous, depending on who's counting) and the sweep of the law. Under it, for instance, a national advertiser running a campaign in a national publication that circulates in Florida is liable for tax, based on its circulation here. That idea intrigued other revenue-hungry states.    &quot;Everybody would like to tax outsiders,&quot; says Dick Netzer, a professor of economics at New York University.    But the outsiders, such as national groups of advertisers and lawyers, recognized the threat. Even as they waged war on Florida -- withdrawing ads, canceling conventions -- they moved furiously to keep the national-tax idea from spreading. So far, they have succeeded.    Texas briefly toyed with a services tax similar to Florida's (although excluding advertisers), then dropped it. Minnesota, too, recently considered a Florida-like plan, but, worried about services moving out of state, settled on a less ambitious proposal to tax only some in-state services. Indiana had a broad-based plan on the boards, but it died quickly.    &quot;We don't tax outside our border,&quot; says Vickie Fisher, New Mexico's secretary of taxation and revenue. &quot;That would be overreaching. You have to be reasonable.&quot;    Even those who insist Florida was reasonable concede it mishandled the public-relations side of the tax. &quot;We didn't prove to the people why the tax was needed,&quot; says Florida Budget Director Glenn Robertson, who defends the levy itself.    Sam Bell, chairman of the Florida House's appropriations committee, says, &quot;Maybe we should just admit we've been beaten to our knees by Wall Street and Madison Avenue.&quot;    Rep. Bell, a Democrat, opposes Gov. Martinez's proposal to repeal the tax. Like many leading Democrats, who control both houses of the state legislature, he wants sharp changes in the law, but he wants to keep some sort of services tax as a revenue source.    Positions on the tax are in flux, and it isn't at all clear what will happen at the special legislative session, which is due to last only through midweek. Many politicians think the session will be extended, perhaps as long as a month, to allow lawmakers to work out a replacement for the services tax. Others suggest it may adjourn without doing anything, then come back later to work things out under lesshurried conditions. Whatever the tactics involved, the bottom line is that there is almost no political support for the service tax that now exists. Sharp change, whether now or later, seems certain.    Legislators knew the law would be controversial, for national advertising groups, among others, lobbied against it from the start. Nearly a dozen big consumer-products companies withdrew ads from Florida media, and other big companies canceled major conventions here. Several professional organizations filed suit against the tax. But political leaders expected that, and when, in late July, Johnson andamp; Johnson said it was giving up its boycott of Florida TV stations, many thought the opposition to the tax was crumbling.    In fact, quite the opposite was happening. The national campaign was seeping down to the grass roots. And grass-roots people were themselves feeling the effects of the tax. The complaints began drifting up to Tallahassee.    A Miami tax lawyer formed a group called STOP (Sales Taxes Oppressing People) and launched a petition drive for a referendum on the tax. Newspapers and other media continued to rail against the levy. A radio show on Tampa-based WRBQ offered listeners, as a tax protest, rolls of toilet paper with Gov. Martinez's photograph on each sheet. Dry cleaners began gathering signatures on petitions, claiming that the tax discriminated against people who wanted to look neat.    A judge in Pinellas County, which includes St. Petersburg, declared the tax unconstitutional in his county, pending review by a higher court. The ruling came in a drunken-driving case in which the defense argued that prosecutors had an unethical financial interest in the case's outcome -- because they, as representatives of the state, stood to gain the $25 services tax on the defense lawyer's $500 fee. Under the service-tax law, if a defendant is found innocent, he can file for a refund of the tax; if he is found guilty, the prosecutors keep it; if the charges are dropped, they still keep it.    Among the biggest complaints was that the tax was simply too confusing. The law itself is a 175-page document amplified by a 300-page administrative addendum that can be further clarified in formal letters to individual taxpayers who don't know what's going on. It taxes not only the end user but also people who render services all along the way, leading to a pyramid of taxes.    &quot;We pay tax for the chemicals,&quot; says Joy Carangi, owner of Bug Busters Inc., which controls the pests of about 2,500 Miami-area customers a month. &quot;We pay tax for the dusters. Then we have to charge our clients more and tax them.&quot;    It is even worse for those outside the state. WALA-TV, an NBC affiliate based in Mobile, Ala., says it loses &quot;enormous&quot; ad revenues because 33.66% of its household viewers happen to tune in from Florida's Panhandle. Thus, a company placing an ad with WALA owes Florida 33.66 percent of the 5% tax, or a 1.68% levy, says general manager Joe Cook.    About 20 other Alabama media outlets also have Florida listeners or viewers. &quot;There are 25 different taxes due on the same ad,&quot; says Mr. Cook. &quot;Hopefully any other state thinking about this will take a glimpse at the headaches in Florida.&quot;    The driving force behind the services tax was Florida's growing population -- more than 800 new residents a day attracted by warm weather and one of the lowest per capita tax rates in the country. Its taxation choices are more limited than most states, for Florida's constitution prohibits an income tax.    The state's big breadwinner is a 5% sales tax on goods. Also known as a &quot;sin tax state,&quot; Florida relies more heavily on revenues from alcohol than any state in the nation: $37.28 a year for each Floridian, $17 above second-ranked Texas. But the state has been hard-pressed for revenue. TaxWatch Inc., a nonprofit research foundation in Tallahassee, says that since 1982, Florida's tax-collection growth has been the second-fastest in the U.S., behind Arizona.    The services tax extends the sales tax to most services. The idea was a holdover from the previous, Democratic administration. Gov. Martinez embraced it a month after taking office, and, thanks in large measure to his support, it passed in the last hours of the state legislative session. Officials saw it as an &quot;easy&quot; revenue-raiser, hoping to collect between $16.7 billion and $18.7 billion over a decade -- about half the money projected for Florida's growth tab. They also saw the services tax as a way to avoid piecemeal tax increases and to delay indefinitely any talk of an income tax.    Sometime last month, protests began showing up in the polls. Both Democrat and Republican pollsters began noticing huge drops in public support for the tax -- and for Gov. Martinez, who was closely identified with it. Both sides began running for cover, doing their best to blame the problems of the tax on the opposing party. Gov. Martinez now seems to favor replacing the tax with spending cuts, while the Democrats say increases in other taxes will also be needed.    A retreat would mark the second time this decade that Florida has backed off from a controversial tax. In 1983, the state passed a tax on the world-wide income of multinational companies operating in Florida -- and 18 months later, after furious protests by big companies, repealed it.    The current maneuvering crested last Friday, with Gov. Martinez's call for repeal of the tax. Terming the services tax well-intentioned but &quot;a mistake,&quot; he said: &quot;That mistake has cost me the confidence of the people of Florida. More importantly, it has severely damaged the people's confidence in government generally.&quot;    Derek Dunn-Rankin, president and publisher of the Sun Coast Media Group, which publishes six weekly Florida newspapers, so opposed the tax that he distributed anti-tax cartoons and editorials to weeklies throughout the state. Of the tax, he says: &quot;It was the perfect example of democracy gone awry.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>