<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880513-0101 </DOCNO><HL> Board of Contributors: A Cure for Takeovers' Social Ills </HL><AUTHOR> Irving Kristol </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> TNM STK SCR </IN><G> CNG SEC </G><TEXT>   Put a handful of corporate executives in a room these days, and the conversation will quickly and inevitably (and, more often than not, heatedly) turn to the issue of &quot;takeovers&quot; -- i.e., hostile acquisitions. To some degree, of course, the anxiety these executives feel and the bitterness they express are self-serving. But only to some degree, and less frequently than many observers think. For there are serious and controversial issues of public policy involved in the current wave of &quot;takeovers&quot; -- complex, ambiguous issues.    One can reasonably predict that, in the not-too-distant future, Congress is going to address this issue and will almost surely come up with a relatively simple, wrongheaded &quot;solution.&quot; It would be desirable, therefore, if the corporate community could form a consensus around a sensible solution.    I say &quot;corporate community,&quot; and deliberately exclude the &quot;financial community.&quot; These two communities have antagonistic interests in this area, and there is little possibility of reconciling them. However close the links between the two -- and they necessarily work together most of the time -- when it comes to takeovers, they are enemies. &quot;Wall Street&quot; vs. &quot;Main Street&quot; puts it in overly melodramatic terms, but there is nevertheless a lot of truth in this antithesis. For the financial community, which makes a lot of money out of takeovers, is supremely indifferent to the human and social costs involved. Those costs are real, even though the corporate community seems to have great difficulty articulating them.    The current wave of takeovers, resulting essentially from an expanded definition of &quot;efficient markets,&quot; has created a stock market in corporate assets, in addition to one based on earnings, cash flow, and dividends -- criteria that the stock market previously focused on.    Actually, it is something of an exaggeration to put it that way. Classical &quot;value analysis&quot; of corporations did indeed look at corporate assets in its pursuit of &quot;undervalued situations.&quot; But when the investor did find such situations, he either purchased and held stock, in the belief that management would eventually realize the latent values, or he brought in new management to do the job. Those who used value analysis did not -- almost never, anyway -- envisage dismembering the corporation in order to sell off the parts, which, as things stood, were worth more than the market's evaluation of the whole.    It is such dismemberment, either through hostile &quot;takeovers&quot; or coerced leveraged buyouts, that creates so much controversy today. For the plain truth is that the vast majority of corporations now listed on the New York Stock Exchange are &quot;undervalued&quot; in terms of their assets, though not usually in terms of earnings or cash flow. If we look favorably on the idea of creating an &quot;efficient market&quot; in those assets -- as a great many free-market economists so blithely recommend -- then we are saying that all of corporate America is up for sale and possible dismemberment, either by existing or new management. If such is to be the case, we are talking about an economic convulsion that is also a social convulsion -- and there are powerful arguments against both.    From an economic point of view, the creation of a thriving and ever-expanding (&quot;more efficient&quot;) market in corporate assets means that corporate executives will find it impossible to take a longer-term view of their business prospects. Large capital investments, in plant or new technology or research, are always risky; if they don't work out, the value of those corporate assets will depreciate. So corporate executives will be disinclined to take such risks. Instead, they will concentrate on realizing, as much as possible, the current value of their assets as reflected in the price of their stock. They will do this -- indeed, they are doing this -- by borrowing against these assets and buying back their stock.    Such &quot;leveraging&quot; of corporate finance is already well under way. The debt-to-equity ratio of American corporations is on the rise, as corporation after corporation frantically tries to escape dismemberment. The trouble with such a strategy is that it makes these corporations more certain victims of economic distress should business slow down. In a sense, those undervalued assets represented a cushion against bad times. With that cushion removed, an economic downturn could lead to widespread corporate bankruptcies, with sinister consequences for the entire financial structure of the nation.    From a social point of view, takeovers involving dismemberment create real human suffering for individuals whose jobs are eliminated or whose lifelong careers are wrecked, and for entire communities that experience abrupt, painful economic dislocation.    The &quot;economic point of view&quot; is so powerful these days that it is easy for analysts and commentators to forget that a corporation is a sociological institution as well as an aggregation of economic assets. It is an institution capable of adjusting to gradual change, and the people who make up that institution often understand and appreciate that corporate change is synonymous with corporate survival. But abrupt, radical change, imposed from without for reasons having nothing to do with current business conditions -- that they cannot and will not accept.    Neither will the politicians who represent those people. Already one sees many anti-takeover laws being passed at the state level, and it is only a matter of time before Congress gets into the act. These are invariably bad laws. As those who favor &quot;takeovers&quot; argue, such laws favor existing management no matter how inefficient or self-dealing it is. This is an argument with considerable force. We do not wish to enable such management to perpetuate itself (and its perquisites). Nor can we rely entirely on the board to rectify any such situation. Directors are chosen by management and will challenge or dismiss that management only in extremity.    So something must be done, and it would be better done in such a way as to keep politicians at arm's length while responding to the problem posed by ineffectual or self-dealing management. Stockholders do need protection from such management -- even as workers, executives and communities need some protection from abrupt, coercive dismemberment.    I would suggest that we address this problem by redefining the category of &quot;stockholder&quot; and his rights. The main reason that hostile takeovers are relatively easy is that by the time the rumor mill has spread the word and the price of the stock has soared, a substantial portion of the stock outstanding will be in the hands of arbitragers.    These are not &quot;stockholders&quot; in the classical sense of the term. They are &quot;speculators&quot; in the classical sense of the term. They have no interest in the corporation as an institution, feel neither affection nor loyalty to the institution, and are in the action merely in the hope of a quick profit. They ought not to have so decisive a voice, therefore, in determining the future of the institution. Indeed, there is no reason for them to have a voice at all.    So the solution suggests itself: No stockholder should be entitled to a vote unless and until he has held the stock for one year. Such a &quot;residency requirement&quot; would not prohibit takeovers and would not allow management to perpetuate itself regardless of performance.    If a majority of such stockholders were intensely dissatisfied with management, a proxy fight could well result in its ouster. This would be a more authentic version of &quot;shareholder democracy,&quot; as against the current, factitious version in which speculators are given equal standing with stockholders. The process by which corporate assets realize their value would be more deliberate, since management would have the opportunity to state its case -- something that is now denied it. And this more deliberate process would surely be more acceptable to public opinion, as well as to all those whose personal lives and careers and fortunes are intertwined with the fate of the corporation.    Surely the SEC and the New York Stock Exchange could be convinced of the need for such a redefinition of a voting stockholder? The financial community would be violently opposed, it goes without saying, but it is not nearly strong enough to oppose the corporate community on such an issue. The puzzle is why the corporate community has not initiated such a reasonable reform. Can it be that corporate executives prefer to see all management entrenched and protected by future anti-takeover legislation, rather than allow any management to be put at reasonable risk? If so, the future of corporate capitalism in this country is dim indeed.    ---   Mr. Kristol is the John M. Olin professor of social thought at the NYU Graduate School of Business and a senior fellow of the American Enterprise Institute. </TEXT></DOC>