<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870312-0124 </DOCNO><HL> A Thirst for FirstsSends AdventurersTo the Polar Regions---First Feats on Mount Everest,It Seems, Are All Taken;Icecaps Are Full of People---By Robert E. TaylorStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/12/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Ned Gillette's friends think he is crazy. His partner quit and the winds and ice were against him, yet he spent two months recently at the southern tip of Chile hoping to row to Antarctica.    That's right, row. He and three companions were poised to brave 600 miles of storm-tossed sea and ice in a 28-foot craft named Sea Tomato for its shape. The feat would have been a first, but the brief Antarctic summer is fading without the wind they hoped for. So Mr. Gillette, who hails from Stowe, Vt., ski country, called off the trip until next year and, just for fun, went ski-touring on the frozen continent.    True, a boat trip to the Antarctic isn't the same as conquering Mount Everest, but achieving firsts is what counts to professional adventurers, and all the firsts on Everest seem to have already been achieved. Seekers of the limelight have even hang-glided from the mountain and kayaked down it.    In fact, Mr. Gillette himself has conquered Everest: Too late to beat Sir Edmund Hillary and Tenzing Norkay to the 29,028-foot summit, he became the first to ski and hike around it. His girlfriend, Jan Reynolds, circled it by balloon.    In their thirst for firsts, or seconds, many adventurers besides Mr. Gillette are going to polar extremes. Paul Schurke and six friends last year mushed dog sleds to the North Pole from Canada's Ellesmere Island. Without resupply, they hauled gear over countless ice ridges and floated it across stretches of open water in temperatures as low as 68 degrees below zero. Their achievement duplicated the 1909 feat of Adm. Robert Peary, but they ran into more passers-by than Peary did.    On their way across the moving ice pack, they bumped into French physician Jean-Louis Etienne, who was skiing to the pole. Returning, they met a pair of Frenchmen trying to fly there on ultralight aircraft -- basically hang gliders with motors. (One crashed; bad weather blocked the other.)    Clearly the icecaps are beginning to crawl with people. One Canadian tried riding a motorcycle to the North Pole, but his dirt bike couldn't climb the ice ridges. It stands permanently parked in the snow of Ellesmere Island, facing north. The handlebars are said to be stuffed with President Reagan's favorite emergency rations: jellybeans.    Australian millionaire Dick Smith prefers posher vehicles. Having circled the globe by helicopter, he tried twice last year to fly his chopper to the North Pole. Once his navigation instruments froze, and the second time a generator gave out. This month Arctic temperatures grounded two pilots trying to make the first pole-to-pole circle of the earth by single-engine prop plane. &quot;Everything froze,&quot; a spokeswoman explains.    Pam Flowers, a 95-pound veteran of Alaska's 1,100-mile Iditarod dog-sled race, hopes this spring to become the first woman to make a solo mush to the North Pole.    But the title of the world's most polarized people goes to the Japanese. The late Naomi Uemura was the first to reach the North Pole alone by dog sled. He inspired Mitsuro Oba, a rice and chicken farmer, to make the first round-trip hike to the magnetic north pole, about 750 miles south of the geographic pole. Actress Masako Izumi roared off for the geographic pole by snowmobile, but an early thaw forced her back.    Polar popularity brings an annual migration to the tiny village of Resolute Bay, Canada (population 160). &quot;Every spring it is teeming with crazies,&quot; says outfitter Barton Lewis. The attempts start in late February, when the light begins reaching the Arctic, and there isn't much time because the ice breaks up only a couple of months later.    Another outfitter in Resolute Bay, Bezal Jesudason, says the local Eskimos view the expeditions with bemusement. &quot;They're practical people,&quot; he says, so when a group of adventurers walks off for the pole, &quot;they wonder why they would do that when they could go by snowmobile.&quot;    As the Arctic grows more crowded, many adventurers are gravitating to the opposite pole. Mr. Schurke and his partner, Will Steger, hope to be the first to cross Antarctica by dogsled. And since teams from Germany and Idaho have similar ambitions, a race may ensue. &quot;It's one of the last true adventures that haven't been done, other than doing it by pogo sticks,&quot; says Mr. Lewis, the outfitter.    The toughest obstacle may not be the temperature but cold, hard cash. Mr. Lewis calculates that the Steger-Schurke expedition, supplied by aircraft, will cost $3 million.    Antarctic logistics make the Arctic seem accessible by comparison. Tall mountains, coastal ice and sheer vastness make it hard to reach by air or sea. Last year a British group walked to the South Pole but had to be rescued by the U.S. National Science Foundation after ice crushed the boat that was to have been used for the return voyage.    Just last month, a team led by Norwegian Monica Kristensen kept the NSF's Antarctic staff on pins and needles. The team failed to reach the South Pole by dog sleds or to arrange a rescue flight. But it finally straggled back to the Bay of Whales just in time to meet a ship.    The foundation is unhappy in its role as the continent's rescuer of last resort, a role that diverts equipment, time and money from scientific research. Peter Wilkniss, the NSF's polar-programs director, talks of making expeditions post a rescue bond before setting out.    The search for the unusual is drawing even tourists to the poles. Adventure-travel agencies now take well-heeled travelers to Antarctica to view coastal wildlife and climb 16,863-foot Vinson Massif. Several agencies fly people to the North Pole for champagne breakfast, hosted in one case by Edmund Hillary and astronaut Neil Armstrong. Like the expeditions, these trips aren't for tight budgets. The price of a planned visit to the South Pole is $25,000 per person.    Even Antarctic firsts are becoming hard to find. Chris Bonnington, a British climber who has led several Everest expeditions, plans an assault on an 8,000-foot side of a peak in Antarctica's remote Ellsworth Mountains, but the peak itself has already been scaled by another route. And Italian Reinhold Messner, who was first to climb Everest without oxygen, conquered Vinson Massif last year in hopes of claiming the title of first to scale the tallest peaks on seven continents, but two rival climbers assert they beat him to the title.    When it comes to conjuring up &quot;firsts,&quot; few have shown more imagination than Mr. Gillette, who remains determined to row his Sea Tomato to Antarctica.    Antarctic rowing isn't entirely new. Explorer Ernest Shackleton and his crew rowed and sailed a small boat to one of the Falkland Islands from Antarctica in 1916, after their ship Endurance was crushed by ice.    But no one has rowed to Antarctica or reached it in such a small boat, Mr. Gillette says. In today's competitive adventure business, he explains, &quot;you have to differentiate yourself.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>