<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871216-0147 </DOCNO><HL> In Hungary, Taxes and Tears---By Peter Keresztes</HL><DD> 12/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXES EUROP </IN><DATELINE> BUDAPEST  </DATELINE><TEXT>   &quot;Hungarians are the world's best weepers,&quot; says the Hungarian National Bank's first deputy president, Janos Fekete. &quot;People complain, sometimes to me personally, because they can't get a new car quickly enough to take it to their next vacation in Spain. Our people are rather well off, our infrastructure has been much improved, electricity is sufficient, the roads are smooth. And,&quot; he inquires, serving coffee in delicate Herend porcelain, &quot;you've eaten in our restaurants?&quot;    His point is that such improvements have cost money, and all the while Hungarians have not been asked to suffer great material hardships. After the relatively prosperous 1970s, this has meant a steep run-up in hard-currency foreign debt, net after reserve assets, to $9.7 billion. That's $924 for each man, woman and child in this nation of 10.5 million people -- Eastern Europe's highest such ratio. To stem the rise, economic restructuring is being introduced that Mr. Fekete says will require &quot;some sacrifices.&quot;    The sacrifices -- and tensions, about which officials repeatedly have been warning -- have already begun. In April, when meat prices went up 25%, people took to the streets. They decapitated a Lenin statue in the town of Nagykanizsa. In August, when the price of a kilo of bread went to 13 Hungarian forints (a dollar officially buys about 47 forints) from 11 forints, workers set a dozen factories ablaze. Fliers read: &quot;You raise prices on groceries, we burn down the factories!&quot;    Now there's hoarding. In anticipation of further increases, Hungarians have emptied stores of furniture, color TV sets, video recorders, refrigerators, gold jewelry and other goods. The binge frustrates efforts to reverse a feature of the economy that rankles the Communist Party's general secretary, Janos Kadar. This would be described in Hungary as more consumption than production, in the West as the failure of the communist system to produce. And, incredibly, Budapest will try to conquer this problem by introducing -- wait for it -- the personal income tax.    This will be the first such squeeze behind the Iron Curtain. It starts Jan. 1, and will hit earnings with a top marginal rate of 60%, which after some late modification is scheduled to kick in on annual incomes exceeding $12,766 -- seven times the national average. Enterprises will raise nominal base salaries to offset the tax. But bonuses, overtime and second jobs will be excluded from the offset requirement; as a result, earnings in the upper ranges will drop in many cases as much as 25%.    The lowest-paid people and some pensioners will be especially hard hit by the inflationary effects. The already entrenched black economy will take on increased significance as a tax dodge. The tax seems certain to erode what few incentives exist, but the regime's view is that it will make Hungarians feel they have a stake in the economy, thus enhancing efficiency and giving less moral justification for corruption. Graft is not a negligible part of socialist economies. Money passes under the table everywhere -- from the surgical room to the housing authority's office. Inventory shrinkage is a preoccupation for accountants at enterprises from agricultural collectives to construction-materials producers.    Besides the personal-income levy, a value-added tax also will go into effect in 1988. The idea is to provide a better indication of the profitability of enterprises than the old system of a turnover tax. That method has encouraged waste by measuring performance according to production volume, while haphazardly subsidizing losses. But some old taxes, and distortions, remain. Although most enterprises will be able to keep half of their profits, those with lower profit margins, such as agricultural and forestry concerns, will get to keep 60%, and marginally profitable operations such as some mines will be allowed to keep 90%. The most profitable, and promising, sector -- the small, private companies (6% to 8% of national income) -- meanwhile will pay a 20% surtax. This is to prevent the use of such firms for avoidance of personal-income restrictions.    One supporter, with reservations, of the reform is Andras Hegedus, the former premier who signed the invitation to the Soviets to come in and smash the 1956 revolution. He criticizes the restructuring for not guaranteeing a reduction in waste and not encouraging enterprise. In 1986, $2.13 billion was spent to support state enterprises, which account for about two-thirds of the economy, plus $1.28 billion for retail price subsidies. Dubious projects -- outdated steelworks, a dam project on the Danube and participation in a Soviet pipeline venture -- eat up a large part of the state's $4.89 billion annual capital investments.    Rezso Nyers, who in 1968 formulated Hungary's first economic reforms and who now is a member of the central committee and chairman of the parliamentary commerce committee, would like to see Parliament become more than just a rubber stamp. He says in an interview that the brake on reforms in the Brezhnev era set back progress 15 years and brought the country to its current economic crisis, necessitating the shotgun marriage of stabilization (cooling consumption via inflation) and reform (besides tax overhaul, the introduction of bankruptcy law, a two-tier bank system, and liberalized rules for travel, farm cooperatives and small enterprises). Mr. Nyers believes the effectiveness of these reforms is neutralized by continued restrictions on wages, imports, capital investment and credit. The system, he says, thus retains its aversion to allowing money to play the vital role it should in the economy and in entrepreneurial decisions.    Both men are distant enough from power to say economic reform isn't possible without radical political change. Mr. Hegedus believes Parliament will take on an increasingly important role. He predicts that such groups as independent ecological clubs will begin to challenge the party monopoly over nominations, now requiring at least two candidates for each seat. Mr. Nyers, an erstwhile Social Democrat whose party was forced to merge into the Communist Party in 1948, hopes for political -- though not multiparty -- pluralism in Hungary, with government and party independent of each other.    Political reform is key to the ideas of the head of the party's Patriotic Peoples' Front, Imre Pozsgay. In an interview, he says that he would like to see &quot;property interests&quot; become more important relative to &quot;distributive interests -- capital should not be distributed but should flow freely.&quot; The front includes trade unions, youth, consumer, social, family, local and cultural groups. Mr. Pozsgay wants to turn the front into a democratic forum providing a &quot;continuous and open dialogue&quot; between the party and the people within a constitutional framework.    Mr. Pozsgay has been involved in controversy, however, particularly over the front's sponsorship of an economic reform manifesto, &quot;Change and Reform,&quot; by the finance ministry's Institute of Financial Studies. It was written by 100 economists and social scientists from government, academia and the party. The paper offered a detailed analysis and remedies for the current crisis, and called for a consistent application of law rather than party directives in economic management.    The study won the courtesy of rebuttal on some points in the parliamentary discussion of the government's reform program by Mr. Kadar himself and Premier Grosz. But the document never received official recognition and the responsible institute was ordered closed. Vigorous objections brought about a compromise to make the institute &quot;independent.&quot; To the institute's economists, however, this means delegitimization, and they are job-hunting.    Laszlo Antal, chief editor of &quot;Change and Reform&quot; and a lifelong party member, believes Hungary's &quot;catastrophic&quot; outlook indicates an &quot;institutional crisis of the monolithic economy.&quot; He feels that &quot;attempts at fine tuning&quot; or &quot;simulating a market economy&quot; will fail because continued central planning by the state, severe restrictions on imports, and the supremacy of politics over market factors will continue to distort decision-making. Mr. Antal says old socialist myths -- catching up with the West, security, no inflation, full employment -- have been discredited. He believes free-market and private-property principles aren't at odds with socialism's basic aim, which he defines as a &quot;safeguard against institutional perpetuation of social inequalities.&quot;    The coming months will be decisive. Political opinion already is polarizing. A parliamentary session scheduled to begin today will consider changes in the government under instructions issued last week by the party's Central Committee. The extent and direction of these changes are not clear, but Mr. Grosz gave a hint of the government's current inclination when he accused the unofficial opposition of spreading &quot;malicious lies&quot; about his austerity program and warned that &quot;we have our means -- not only political -- to counter it.&quot;    Counting on Hungary's network of well-organized and well-armed worker guards, the government can make sure basic political changes do not take place. Without such reform, however, economic decline can only accelerate. The people know this and have ample cause to weep.    ---   Mr. Keresztes is deputy editorial page editor of The Wall Street Journal/Europe. </TEXT></DOC>