<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870917-0137 </DOCNO><HL> Bee-Feces Theory Still Has No Sting---By William Kucewicz</HL><DD> 09/17/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTCHEMICALS, PLASTICS (CHM)AEROSPACE (ARO) </IN><TEXT>   Six years ago this week, the U.S. government first revealed physical evidence that the &quot;yellow rain&quot; loosed by aircraft on villages in Southeast Asia was a toxin warfare agent, most probably being field-tested for the Soviet Union. The probable motive was hatred by the Communist governments of Laos and Vietnam for the anti-Communist Hmong people of Laotian mountain villages and for Cambodians at war with Vietnam.    Refugees arriving in Thailand had been reporting the attacks since 1975, and several hundred were interviewed by U.S. doctors, State Department officials and journalists, including The Asian Wall Street Journal's Barry Wain. They told of planes and helicopters dropping a yellowish powder. People and animals became violently -- sometimes fatally -- ill.    In 1981 and 1982, scientists involved in the investigations concluded from symptoms, blood tests and autopsies that the poisons being used were trichothecene mycotoxins. Evidence of Soviet involvement was less strong but included sightings of what looked like chemical weapons being unloaded from Soviet ships at a Vietnamese port. It was well known by then that the Soviets had developed chemical and biological warfare (CBW) agents and equipped troops and military vehicles with anti-CBW devices. The Laotians or Vietnamese surely lacked the know-how to develop a poison gas on their own. Finally, trichothecenes were found on a Soviet gas mask recovered in Afghanistan, where Afghan combatants had described poison-gas attacks by Soviet troops, in one case on an undefended village.    After the findings and suspicions received international publicity from this newspaper, the Reader's Digest, ABC News, the State Department and others, the attacks in Southeast Asia began to peter out. But the debate they provoked in the U.S., so it seems, is still with us.    The evidence of poison-gas attacks had been challenged by Harvard biochemist Matthew Meselson, one of the intellectual fathers of the Biological and Toxin Weapons Convention of 1972, requiring world-wide destruction of such weapons. Surely, the Soviets wouldn't violate his treaty, he insisted, so there must be some other explanation. He proffered the theory that yellow rain was in fact bee feces.    That mainly drew laughter, but a few weeks ago Prof. Meselson returned to the fray. In a Foreign Policy magazine article co-authored with Julian Robinson of the University of Sussex and Jeanne Guillemin of Boston College, he insisted that newly declassified U.S. documents show that &quot;the administration's claim of toxin warfare rests on evidence that, over the past several years, has been discredited.&quot;    Mr. Meselson, as in the past, focused on the leaf samples collected to establish the presence of trichothecenes. These samples were only a part of the larger body of evidence, but they interested Prof. Meselson. He asserted once more that what was found on them was nothing but the &quot;innocuous excrement of honeybees.&quot;    The latest Meselson piece would probably have gone unnoticed had not two reporters, Philip M. Boffey of the New York Times and Philip J. Hilts of the Washington Post, renewed their support for his thesis. The Times backed its reporter with an editorial titled &quot;Yellow Rain Falls.&quot; A separate attack on the yellow-rain evidence had been mounted earlier by Elisa D. Harris, also a Harvard researcher, in International Security magazine.    Prof. Meselson's article zeroed in on the investigative work of a three-man team of CBW experts from the State and Defense departments stationed in Thailand from November 1983 to October 1985. This, of course, was after the attacks had largely ended. But Foreign Policy editor Charles William Maynes was impressed enough with the latest Meselson arguments to claim that they would &quot;demolish definitively&quot; the U.S. government's case against the Soviet Union and its Southeast Asian allies.    It's hard to know how an article mainly about bee feces would achieve such an astounding result. Even the professor's handling of the declassified papers displays a certain selectivity. The Journal has obtained copies of those same papers, and they are not very interesting.    One telegram from the U.S. Embassy in Bangkok refers to nothing more exciting than a visit to the embassy by Prof. Meselson and two colleagues, who had been wandering around in the jungles of Thailand (not Laos or Cambodia) observing the habits of bees. The telegram, but not the Meselson article, makes clear that he and his Thai colleague did not entirely agree even on these observations. Prof. Meselson said that the bees' &quot;cleansing&quot; flight was too high to be seen, but the Thai told U.S. officials that he actually saw an estimated 10,000 bees in flight. If bees on cleansing flights can be low enough to be seen, why in none of the hundreds of yellow-rain reports has no one ever mentioned bees?    The article focuses on the paucity of leaf samples that tested positive for trichothecene mycotoxins. Indeed, the only positive U.S. tests of environmental samples from Southeast Asia were done in the laboratories of Chester Mirocha of the University of Minnesota and Joseph Rosen of Rutgers University (who also found man-made polyethylene glycol in a sample obtained by ABC News in 1981).    By innuendo, Mr. Meselson implies that the independent work of Profs. Mirocha and Rosen is faulty. But he never explains where they might have made mistakes. In fact, neither scientist has ever reported a false positive in any of the control samples submitted to them by the U.S. government to verify their testing techniques.    The Meselson report fails to mention any of the numerous biological samples from Southeast Asia that tested positive for the toxins. In 1982, for instance, the U.S. government tested 73 yellow-rain victims and got 24 positives for the toxins -- a rate of 32.9% and much too high to indicate a natural poisoning that had previously gone unnoticed. Indeed, epidemiologists from the U.S. and Canada have never found any evidence of illness due to natural exposure to trichothecene toxins in Southeast Asia.    The Foreign Policy article falsely says: &quot;At no time, then or now, was any case documented in which diagnostic examination or autopsy provided clear evidence of exposure to chemical warfare agents.&quot; In fact, a report by Secretary of State George Shultz in November 1982 provided detailed autopsy results for a chemical warfare attack victim in Cambodia. The results include the precise levels of toxins found in the victim's heart, stomach, liver, kidney, lung and intestine. The tests were conducted separately by Profs. Mirocha and Rosen, and each found high levels of the toxins.    Prof. Meselson makes a point of extensively quoting the testimony of a resistance leader from the Phu Bia region of Laos contained in a May 1984 telegram to the State Department. In his eight years in the region, the Hmong leader said that he never saw a yellow-rain attack, adding that other Hmong often relate &quot;what they hear and feel&quot; and not what they actually see. He said that &quot;he always speaks the truth.&quot; After this seeming rebuke of eyewitness testimony, Prof. Meselson chose not to quote the next paragraph of the telegram, referring to another witness.    &quot;{Name deleted} is a 40-year-old female who claimed to have lost six of her 10 children in a CBW attack from a rotary wing aircraft during the last harvest season (November-December 1983). The alleged attack took place in a rice field one hour walking distance from Phu Pad village . . . in Vientiane province {Laos}. . . . {She} stated that on a cloudy and windy morning a helicopter passed over 22 Hmong working in a rice field. One heard an explosion followed by a cream-colored rain. {Name deleted} stated that she immediately became dizzy and remained so for 10 days. Other symptoms were vomiting with blood and bloody diarrhea. . . .&quot;    Prof. Meselson also selectively reports the data from one of the most well-documented yellow-rain attacks -- at the Thai village of Ban Sa Tong, near the Cambodian border, in February 1982. He asserts there was no &quot;abnormal incidence of clinical illness&quot; and the &quot;yellow spots later were shown to consist almost entirely of pollen.&quot;    The facts about the attack on Ban Sa Tong, related by a Canadian team of epidemiologists, are quite straightforward. A plane dropped a yellow substance over the village. Thai and Canadian experts saw the powder liberally covering houses and vegetation. Only those villagers in direct contact with the powder became ill, while none of the others were affected. Allergic reaction to pollen cannot account for the high incidence (one in three) of central nervous system disorders among those in the sprayed area. Two laboratories in Canada and one in the U.S. found the trichothecene toxins in the yellow powder from Ban Sa Tong. Moreover, a plastic bag later collected from the site and said by villagers to be part of the weapon contained high levels of two trichothecenes and, the Canadians said, &quot;almost no pollen.&quot;    As opposed to confirming the bee-feces theory, the State Department telegrams actually bolster the U.S. government's case that yellow rain was a man-made chemical weapon. The CBW team from late 1983 to 1985 came across very few reports of yellow-rain attacks, and trichothecenes were no longer found. The world-wide publicity about yellow rain had apparently discouraged the further use of the weapons and doubtlessly saved lives. The bees, of course, were still there, defecating. But the yellow-rain attacks stopped.    ---   Mr. Kucewicz is a member of the Journal's editorial board. A related editorial appears nearby {see: &quot;REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Yellow Rain Revisionism&quot; -- WSJ Sept. 16, 1987}. </TEXT></DOC>