<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871221-0169 </DOCNO><HL> Group of SevenLikely to RestateSupport of Policies---By Walter S. MossbergStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROP CANDA JAPAN GOVMTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)FOREIGN-EXCHANGE MARKETS (FRX)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The Group of Seven major industrial nations is expected to issue a statement, once a U.S. budget agreement is complete, reaffirming its support for stable currencies and coordinated economic policies, according to U.S. and foreign officials.    The statement has been described in overseas news reports as a reaffirmation of the now tattered Louvre Accord, last February's agreement in which the seven nations pledged to coordinate policies and adopted a system of target zones, enforced by intervention and monetary policy, for the value of the dollar against other currencies. But it isn't likely the seven governments are about to establish a policy that subordinates all other economic goals -- such as maintaining liquidity to fend off recession -- in order to support the dollar within specified ranges.    The statement would be designed to calm markets by saying that the governments don't favor a continued plunge of the dollar, and to pat the U.S. on the back for completing a deficit-cutting package. A statement also is seen as a way to cap a round of policy changes in the seven countries, including the U.S. deficit pact, a West German fiscal stimulus package, European interest-rate cuts, and a subtle shift in U.S. policy to intervene more readily in currency markets to support the dollar.    But such a statement also would be an exercise in papering over grave gaps and weaknesses in the governments' policies. Privately, most top economic officials in the seven countries recognize that a currency accord without strong coordinated policies can't survive. And most privately acknowledge that both the U.S. budget program and the German fiscal package fall far short of what's needed to right the imbalance of world trade that has helped sink the dollar.    What's more, Treasury Secretary James Baker remains wary of seeing the Federal Reserve impose tight-money policies to back the dollar, at a time when the stock market crash has raised new fears of recession. That attitude has helped propel the dollar's plunge, which Mr. Baker has in turn used to press for policy concessions from West Germany and other countries that export to the U.S.    The other countries, in turn, have been pressuring Mr. Baker to issue U.S. Treasury bonds denominated in marks and yen. They see this as a way to ease their own costs in financing the U.S. budget and trade deficits, by eliminating the risk of the falling dollar. And they hope it would force the Treasury, which would have to repay in marks and yen, to halt the rise in those currencies against the dollar.    But Mr. Baker has rejected the idea in recent weeks, fearing it would send a signal of surrender and apparently wishing to preserve such a move as a last-minute concession for a bigger package.    Since the market crash, the seven countries individually have reaffirmed the Louvre Accord's principles many times over. But they have been unable to agree on a tough enough new package of policy measures and currency-stabilizing mechanisms to repair or replace the accord.    Lacking a new approach, the governments -- especially the U.S. -- have been unwilling to risk convening a G-7 meeting whose results would be subject to intense market scrutiny. A joint statement, reaffirming the principles of the Louvre pact, if not its details, could serve as a holding action until a major plan can be developed next year to overhaul or replace the February agreement.    The Louvre pact kept the dollar fairly stable from February through September, albeit at the cost of tens of billions of dollars in central bank intervention in the monetary system.    But its policy-coordination provisions collapsed in the weeks before the Oct. 19 stock crash, when Germany boosted interest rates and Mr. Baker mounted a public, market-rattling campaign to oppose the increases.    Within a week or two, the currency-stabilization part of the Louvre accord had also disintegrated, because Mr. Baker and Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan adopted a looser monetary policy to fend off recession and abandoned, at least temporarily, the use of rising interest rates to bolster the dollar. </TEXT></DOC>