<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870331-0090 </DOCNO><HL> SEC Looks Into Icahn-Boesky MeetingsWith Gulf andamp; Western's Davis, Sources Say---This article was prepared by Laurie P. Cohen,Daniel Hertzberg and James B. Stewart</HL><DD> 03/31/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GWSTOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><DATELINE> NEW YORK  </DATELINE><TEXT>   At least two meetings attended by Carl C. Icahn, Ivan F. Boesky and Gulf andamp; Western Inc. Chairman Martin S. Davis are being scrutinized by government investigators as part of the Securities and Exchange Commission's investigation of Mr. Icahn, according to people familiar with the investigation.    The government is trying to determine whether Messrs. Icahn and Boesky acted together in an effort to pressure Gulf andamp; Western Inc.'s management into a leveraged buyout, the people familiar with the investigation said.    The government's interest in the Gulf andamp; Western situation has been reported, but these and other new details have emerged recently among signs that the government's probe of Mr. Icahn is intensifying.    According to those familiar with the investigation, Mr. Icahn and Mr. Boesky secretly met with Martin S. Davis, Gulf andamp; Western's chairman, on at least two occasions in 1985 to discuss Mr. Boesky's proposals for a leveraged buyout or other change of control of Gulf andamp; Western, the large entertainment, publishing and financial services company.    Mr. Icahn arranged the initial dinner meeting, which took place in Mr. Davis's New York office, and was present during at least one other meeting between Mr. Boesky and Mr. Davis, according to the people familiar with the investigation.    At the time, these sources said, Mr. Icahn and Mr. Boesky each had accumulated large positions in Gulf andamp; Western stock that were just below the 5% level that would trigger a public filing with the Securities and Exchange Commission disclosing their stakes.    While Mr. Boesky never specified terms for a leveraged buyout or actually tried to make a bid for Gulf andamp; Western, people familiar with the meeting said that he hinted at an offering price substantially above the market price of the company's stock at the time. Such an offer would have benefited other shareholders, including Mr. Icahn.    If Messrs. Icahn and Boesky, two of the nation's most active takeover speculators, were acting in concert, they would be deemed a group holding nearly 10% of Gulf andamp; Western's stock and their failure to disclose their holdings could be a violation of securities laws.    Mr. Icahn declined to comment on the investigation into his involvement with Gulf andamp; Western. However, he said yesterday, &quot;I have known Mr. Boesky for a number of years, and I have never had any deals or business arrangements whatsoever with him.&quot;    Sources familiar with Mr. Icahn's activities acknowledged that he arranged the dinner meeting, but said he was only acting as an intermediary. The sources noted that Mr. Icahn, unlike Mr. Boesky, knew Mr. Davis. They said Mr. Icahn attended a second meeting at Mr. Boesky's insistence.    Mr. Davis said that Gulf andamp; Western is cooperating fully with the government's investigation, which, he added, is &quot;long overdue.&quot;    Mr. Boesky's lawyer, Harvey Pitt, declined to comment. Gary Lynch, head of enforcement for the SEC, couldn't be reached for comment.    As previously reported, Mr. Icahn, who is chairman of Trans World Airlines, disclosed earlier this month that the SEC has issued a formal order of investigation into whether he violated securities laws in connection with his stock-buying activities. The events involving Gulf andamp; Western are a major focus, according to people familiar with the investigation.    Also known to be under investigation are Mr. Icahn's proposed bids for Phillips Petroleum Co. in 1985 and Viacom International Inc. last year. Mr. Icahn hasn't been charged with any wrongdoing.    The SEC order was issued last Nov. 12 and empowers the SEC staff &quot;to conduct a private investigation to determine whether any persons (including Carl C. Icahn) have engaged in certain acts&quot; in violation of securities laws &quot;in connection with the acquisition of more than 5% of the shares of certain unspecified issuers and the disposition of such shares.&quot;    The Nov. 12 date is two days before the government announced that Mr. Boesky had agreed to settle insider-trading charges for a record $100 million and to plead guilty to a felony charge. The timing of the SEC order, as well as the appearance of Mr. Icahn's name on subpoenas issued at the time of the Boesky announcement, indicates that the probe of Mr. Icahn's activities is closely tied to disclosures made by Mr. Boesky to the government.    At the initial dinner meeting, Mr. Icahn allowed Mr. Boesky to do most of the talking, according to those familiar with the investigation. They added that Mr. Icahn reassured Mr. Davis that he wouldn't raise his stake in Gulf andamp; Western above 5% without Mr. Davis's permission.    The sources said Mr. Boesky first tried to discuss with Mr. Davis how he could gain control of Gulf andamp; Western. After Mr. Davis rebuffed those suggestions, Mr. Boesky proposed a leveraged buyout, the sources said. Mr. Davis also rejected that idea.    Eventually, after at least two meetings and other telephone discussions, Mr. Boesky sought to sell his stake back to the company at a premium over the market price, a practice known as greenmail, the sources said.    According to those familiar with the investigation, the meetings between Messrs. Boesky and Davis quickly deteriorated into acrimony. Mr. Icahn didn't take sides, they said.    Sources familiar with Mr. Icahn said that the investor doesn't believe he was required to disclose details of the meetings since he hadn't any agreement with Mr. Boesky and didn't proceed to accumulate additional Gulf andamp; Western shares afterward. In fact, both Messrs. Icahn and Boesky ended up selling their shares back to Gulf andamp; Western at a profit later that year in connection with a stock buyback program that was under way at the time. </TEXT></DOC>