<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871021-0012 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 10/21/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. RESUMED escorting Kuwaiti tankers through the Persian Gulf.    As the Senate began debating whether to intervene in Reagan's gulf policy, two U.S.-flagged Kuwaiti vessels began moving south from Kuwait under naval escort, a day after a U.S. attack on an Iranian facility. The senators, delaying action on Bork's nomination to the Supreme Court, renewed discussions over whether Congress should seek to invoke the 1973 War Powers Act or take other steps to limit Reagan's moves in the gulf region. A vote was scheduled for today.    Diplomatic sources said the U.N. secretary-general has proposed an inquiry into the causes of the Iran-Iraq war while both nations observe a truce.    ---   A military jet crashed into a hotel near the Indianapolis airport, killing at least nine people and igniting a fire, officials said. The A7-D Corsair jet, en route to Nellis Air Force Base in Nevada from Pittsburgh, crashed into the lobby of the Ramada Inn after the pilot attempted an emergency landing. The pilot parachuted to safety.    ---   Indian troops seized a major road in Jaffna, cutting off escape routes from the Sri Lankan rebels' last major stronghold, an Indian official said. Military sources in Colombo said the Tamil separatists continued resisting the Indian advance, but that New Delhi's peace-keeping forces controlled strategic positions throughout the city.    ---   Prime Minister Gandhi was told by members of Congress that U.S. military and economic aid to Pakistan is likely to resume, but Reagan assured the Indian leader that the assistance &quot;is not directed toward India.&quot; In talks with Reagan at the White House, Gandhi also discussed the situation in Sri Lanka and other bilateral issues.    ---   France acknowledged that a now-defunct French firm, Ratier-Forest, violated Western export curbs by shipping machine tools to the Soviets in the mid-1970s. In Washington, the Commerce Department added Singapore to a list of nonallied countries that are entitled to acquire strategically sensitive U.S. products.    ---   Communist Party officials approved Chinese leader Deng's senior aide as interim party chief. The party's Central Committee, at a meeting in Beijing, also endorsed proposals expected to bolster Deng's drive to change the country's economic and political structure. The party opens its 13th national congress this weekend.    ---   Unesco's 158 member states opened a general conference in Paris and were expected to approve the nomination of Federico Mayor Zaragoza of Spain to be the organization's next director-general. He would succeed Senegal's Amadou Mahtar M'Bow, whose policies apparently prompted the U.S. and Britain to withdraw from Unesco.    ---   Shultz suggested it was time to move the focus away from trying to arrange an international conference as a means to direct Arab-Israeli negotiations. Shultz's remarks followed four days of Mideast peace talks about such a forum, which is opposed by Israeli Prime Minister Shamir.    ---   An American was reported kidnapped in Nicaragua. A spokesman for the Witness for Peace group said Paul Alan Fisher, 41, was abducted Saturday by Contra rebels near La Libertad. He was part of a 32-member team checking on human rights violations in Nicaragua. Two clergymen had been kidnapped Oct. 10 by anti-Sandinista rebels.    ---   The FCC launched an inquiry to decide whether to regulate children's television stringently. The agency voted 4-0 to seek public comment on whether it should reimpose limits on the number of commercials on children's TV. The FCC also will look into whether it should regulate or ban cartoons based on toys.    ---   The Supreme Soviet approved Gorbachev's $774 billion budget for 1988, which is aimed at boosting social spending and improving consumer goods. The move came at the close of a two-day meeting in Moscow by the 1,500-member nominal parliament.    ---   A senior American bishop said there was a &quot;strong consensus&quot; at an international bishops' synod in Rome that the Roman Catholic Church should open all non-ordained ministries to women. The prelate said he believed the synod would suggest to Pope John Paul II that women be formally installed as acolytes and lectors.    ---   The EPA has approved the first legal outdoor release of bacteria engineered to contain genes from another species. The agency cleared a field test in South Carolina of a soil bacteria that has engineered into it genes from a common intestinal microbe. The test, to begin next month, will permit scientists to track bacteria in the soil.    ---   Philippine President Aquino said she would govern by direct action rather than consultation. She also defended her administration against charges of weakness, ruled out peace talks soon with communist rebels and ordered authorities to end a wave of strikes. A bomb exploded in Manila's House of Representatives. No one was injured.    ---   U.S. law enforcement officials arrested 124 members of Jamaican crime gangs in 13 states and the District of Columbia as part of a nationwide crackdown. Officials said the gangs, the Jamaican Posses, have been tied to 625 drug-related murders as well as kidnapping, narcotics trafficking and money laundering. More arrests are expected. </TEXT></DOC>