<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880920-0055 </DOCNO><HL> Rain Doesn't Fall Daily in Cherrapunji, It Just Seems Like It --- Town in India Ranks as One Of Earth's Rainiest Spots; Wearing Shower Curtains </HL><AUTHOR> Anthony Spaeth (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> CHERRAPUNJI, India  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The road to this mountain town takes a traveler through some of India's grander scenery: terraced rice paddies, mighty cliffs of stone, waterfalls cascading in the gleaming sunlight. Then you enter Cherrapunji, and all that grandeur -- and everything else -- suddenly disappears.    For Cherrapunji is a town that lives under a cloud -- literally. It is a town where people wear shower curtains on their way to the market and children in effect are told to go out and play in the mud 250 days of the year. It is also a town where lichen sprouts from drenched tar paper, where leather shoes rot and where dogs spend much of their lives soaked to the bone.    Cherrapunji, you see, is one of the rainiest towns in the world.    &quot;No, it doesn't rain every day,&quot; protests a vendor at Cherrapunji's waterlogged market, his face wreathed in swirling, midmorning mist. &quot;Maybe four or five days in one week.&quot;    &quot;We haven't had even a little bit of sunshine the whole week,&quot; Sister Rose, a teacher at the local Catholic school, says with a sigh. &quot;The children come to school in plastic.&quot; One of their favorite songs has the line: &quot;It rains and rains/Until the stones will break.&quot;    Unlike most of the world's wet places, Cherrapunji is out of the tropical belt and far removed from the nearest rain forest. The town is perched atop a picturesque mountain, 1,430 yards above the plains of neighboring Bangladesh.    Each June, the powerful Southwest monsoon speeds across the steaming Indian Ocean and Bay of Bengal, bringing rains to the subcontinent. The first place the wet wind hits is Cherrapunji -- where it dumps an average of 400 inches of rain each year. Most places get nowhere near that much rain. In misty Seattle, Wash., last year, 32 inches of rain fell. Hong Kong gets about 80 inches a year, and even Pago Pago, noted for its prodigious showers, gets only about 196 inches annually. (The titleholder, according to the National Geographic Society, is Mount Waialeale in Hawaii, where about 460 inches of rain falls each year. But nobody lives there.)    Some days, Cherrapunji gets soaked with 24 inches of rain -- as much as London or Paris receives in a year. Back in the mid-1800s, the town earned its place in the record books for suffering the rainiest 12 months in recorded history (986 inches between August 1860 and July 1861). Five years later, the British pulled their regional headquarters out of Cherrapunji. The place, remarkably, was too rainy even for the English.    The rains have left the Cherrapunji market worse for wear, a sad collection of rusted roofs on rotting wooden pillars. Stunted onions, tiny carrots and anemic chilies are the best that waterlogged fields can produce. The town's Baptist church isn't in much better shape. Its black-stained concrete walls and blackened roof of rust make it look as if it were dragged off the back lot of a horror-film studio.    Stone walls in the town drip with weeds and ferns, and the streets, strewn with debris, have a permanent low-tide look. In many ways, Cherrapunji most closely resembles an underwater town -- an approximation of the fabled Atlantis.    &quot;I am the chief of this place,&quot; declares Freeman Singh Syiem, the 44-year-old king of Cherrapunji. Under Indian regulations, Mr. Syiem is allowed to use the title given him by his tribe, the 50,000 loggers, farmers and coal miners who live in and around Cherrapunji.    He appears less than regal in his blue dress shirt, brown slacks and sagging, striped socks. But his living-room wall is adorned with a spear and three swords, appropriate for a tribal chieftain. The house even looks dry -- except for the visible cloud that keeps pushing in through the windows, billowing the curtains and occasionally reaching the middle of the living room.    &quot;This is nothing,&quot; says Cherrapunji's king, dispersing the mist with a wave of his hand. &quot;To us, this is a clear day.&quot; Mr. Syiem says there are times when it rains heavily, day and night, for two weeks running.    As the crow flies, it is a short distance to the office of the India Meteorological Department. But on Cherrapunji's winding, foggy roads, every drive is a lengthy adventure. Most cars are equipped with fog lamps, but local drivers still must dangle their heads out their car windows, even at noon. Collisions are frequent. Pedestrians suddenly appear out of the mist -- weird visions wrapped in plastic sheets or wielding black umbrellas, glaring worriedly at the passing automobile and, often, walking in protective clusters.    The chief meteorologist has just completed his hourly check of the weather instruments. He explains that the wet season is normally from March to October, but this year it began in January. It seems Cherrapunji might be headed for a particularly heavy rainfall in 1988, with 304 inches recorded by mid-August.    Taking a break, the meteorologist attends to Sunday chores. He starts hanging his laundry out to dry in the steady rain. &quot;I'm hoping that the humidity will drop,&quot; he says. &quot;I just took the reading. Currently, the humidity is 100%.&quot;    Some residents complain that the town's rainy reputation has made a joke out of one of its greatest problems. The local forests have been denuded, so rain rushes off the mountain to the plains below. The water table's low level is worrisome. There is water, water everywhere in Cherrapunji -- but not a lot to drink.    The rain has pounded its way so deeply into the local consciousness, it would be hard to imagine the people of Cherrapunji without it. The rain is in their speech, in their songs, in their very walk. Stroll down a path behind a Cherrapunji native. If there's a green patch, which could hide a puddle of slime, he'll avoid it. If there is a choice between plain dirt and a jagged rock or a half-buried brick, his foot will aim for the rock or brick. A lifetime of slips and falls is reflected in every step.    The local tribe believes that no ailments come from the rains and that they are, in fact, medicinal. When the rains falter during the wet season, mothers keep their children at home to protect them from the dysentery and jaundice they believe occur in dry spells. Local belief has it that when a bad man dies, the rains will thunder down to prevent people from paying their respects. Local wizards, called nong kniahs, have the power to control the rains. But even the strongest can't stop the Cherrapunji rain for more than three days.    Townspeople rejoice when the rains finally stop in October, though a strange thing happens if they don't start back up promptly in March. Many people become agitated, townspeople say. They fall ill and complain of disorientation and headaches. The ailments don't disappear until the clouds once again engulf Cherrapunji and the rains begin.    &quot;They're simply eager to see the rain,&quot; says Sibendra Bhattacherjee, a local teacher. &quot;For them, rain is natural. It's their way of life.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>