<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861230-0020 </DOCNO><HL> ---Disappointment for Osmonds---By Ken WellsStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/30/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABORBANKRUPTCIES (BCY)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)MUTUAL AND MONEY-MARKET FUNDS (FND)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><DATELINE> SALT LAKE CITY  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Investment wizard J. Gary Sheets was sitting on top of the world. Then, suddenly, his world crumbled.    In September 1985, Mr. Sheets saw his once-high-flying investment concern, CFS Financial Corp., sink into insolvency. Only a month later, his wife, Kathleen, and his friend and former business partner, Steven Christensen, were killed in separate shrapnel-bomb attacks.    The murders, initially thought to be the work of a disgruntled CFS investor, now are alleged to have been committed by Mark W. Hofmann, a meek collector of Mormon historical documents. Mr. Sheets, who had invested in one of Mr. Hofmann's documents, had once envisioned profits from Mr. Hofmann's discoveries. But prosecutors' affidavits filed in Utah's Fifth Circuit Court here allege that Mr. Hofmann turned out to be a master forger who killed Mr. Christensen -- and killed Mrs. Sheets with a bomb intended for her husband -- out of fear that Mr. Sheets and Mr. Christensen would expose his forgery scheme.    Mr. Sheets is an inveterate deal-maker who thought he was immune to failure. Now, not only has he failed and lost his wife and a friend but also he faces civil complaints that he defrauded CFS investors and creditors who, all told, put up $184 million. Criminal investigations of CFS's collapse are also under way.    &quot;I can't accept that Gary Sheets would willfully defraud anybody,&quot; a relative says. &quot;But Gary suffered from what I call the Utah Syndrome: He was the sort of self-made, optimistic character that we seem to grow out here who truly believes he can't fail and won't admit failure even when he sees it.&quot;    Not too long ago, the fiftyish Mr. Sheets was among this city's big men about town. He was CFS's supersalesman-chairman, earning $600,000 in commissions atop his $72,000 annual salary. His rambling home straddled a creek in one of the city's best suburbs. A college dropout, he boasted personal net worth of $3.5 million.    He was a high-profile patron of Utah's symphony orchestra, a Mormon bishop, or lay minister, and a confidant of Utah's singing Osmond family, who trusted him to head the charitable foundation bearing their name. Banks made uncollateralized loans to Mr. Sheets's friends based solely upon his recommendation.    Today, CFS, an intricate network of 404 separate ventures stretching from Mississippi to California, is being liquidated in U.S. bankruptcy court in Salt Lake City. An Osmond family member has sued Mr. Sheets for fraud in U.S. district court here, alleging a &quot;devastating breach of trust.&quot; And a raft of other civil suits have been filed.    Though some of CFS's 1,500 investors will be able to recover their money, most of the $150 million poured into the company has been lost in scores of now-defunct limited partnerships, whose assets have been seized by banks. Of an additional $34 million owed by CFS to banks and creditors, probably less than $10 million is recoverable, says Duane H. Gillman, a court-appointed bankruptcy trustee.    Meanwhile, Mr. Sheets has filed for personal bankruptcy and resigned from his influential bishop's position. He is said to be earning his living as a salesman for a nutritional-supplements concern. Through an attorney, David Bird, he declined repeated requests to be interviewed, though he had previously blamed fast growth and poor timing for CFS's troubles.    The company's collapse is being investigated by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and a federal grand jury, along with Utah criminal investigators. They are probing allegations by investors that Mr. Sheets, CFS and various of its entities poured investors' personal pension funds into dubious ventures -- including some that had already begun to fail -- without disclosing their risk. The federal Employee Retirement Income Security Act requires such disclosure and prohibits placing pension funds in excessively risky investments.    Mr. Sheets is also charged by investors, including the Osmonds, with obtaining wrongful access to their funds and of diverting new investor money into tottering, debt-laden partnerships in a desperate attempt to forestall collapse. Once a successful real-estate syndicator, Mr. Sheets also has been accused of taking CFS on a binge of other investment schemes -- ill-fated ventures into water slides, gold mines, hydroelectric plants, jojoba farms, thoroughbred horses and airplanes -- in which the company had scant expertise.    Bankruptcy-court depositions by former CFS officials -- depositions that haven't yet been officially made public -- portray an investment sales organization staggering out of control, choked by its own poorly planned growth and obsessed with commissions. Mr. Sheets, the depositions indicate, seemed willing to approve almost any investment scheme he thought would sell.    A deposition by one former CFS official, Craig Burton, describes a number of CFS real-estate ventures as &quot;neutron partnerships,&quot; pushed by commission-hungry CFS marketing officials who hyped benefits and ignored downside risks while taking fees amounting to 27% of invested capital. Mr. Burton says that these partnerships, like the neutron bombs he compares them to, were designed to &quot;destroy the people but save the property. The property stayed intact, and the investors lost everything.&quot;    According to another bankruptcy-court deposition by a former CFS official, this official once presented Mr. Sheets with evidence that three principals with whom CFS was contemplating a limited partnership in a hydroelectric project were under FBI investigation. Mr. Sheets, the deposition says, replied that the matter was insignificant.    In another case, says the same deposition, joint-venture partners selected by CFS to develop a gold-mining project admitted later -- after CFS had committed investor money -- to having salted both the mine and the gold-dredging equipment with gold dust.    Yet CFS is said to have let the venture proceed. Much of the investor money was spent on gold-mining equipment that one of the joint-venture partners sold to the project for nearly triple its market value, the former CFS official testified in his deposition. The deposition was obtained by a reporter on the condition that the official not be identified.    &quot;The only gravel that ever got turned on that one was when the developers drove the investors in and out of the site,&quot; says a lawyer familiar with the case.    In an interview, Richard Rice, an Idaho dentist, says he entrusted $46,000 of his pension money to CFS seeking a &quot;completely safe&quot; investment, only to learn that it had been placed in highly leveraged real-estate syndications that have since collapsed.    But such mistakes didn't prevent the people running CFS from living in grand style. Mr. Sheets and some of his managers dined and entertained on lavish expense accounts, drove around in top-of-the-line leased BMWs and had ready access to four airplanes, including a Learjet. Mr. Sheets presided over the company's move from modest headquarters to a lavishly renovated building in downtown Salt Lake City -- spinning even the headquarters building into a limited partnership that was so bloated with debt that it also has tumbled into insolvency.    There he set himself up in a spacious suite of offices with a private racketball court down the hall. His own office featured hand-crafted sheep-horn lamps, recessed lighting and a fireplace.    Despite his evident fondness for the trappings of success, Mr. Sheets is described by friends as generous, religious and even self-effacing. He tithed $600 a month to the church, gave thousands of dollars more annually to Mormon charities and often helped friends in need. The picture of him that is developing in courthouses across Salt Lake County doesn't seem to fit the man these friends knew.    As a Mormon bishop, he often opened his rambling suburban home to Mormon friends for religious gatherings. And it was there, intimates of the family say, that he and his late wife, Kathleen, who is said to have been uncomfortable with her husband's jet-setting corporate ways, seemed to find much of the common ground of their marriage.    Jack Wood, a Sacramento, Calif., entrepreneur who accuses CFS of breaching commitments to his geothermal concern, nonetheless says it was hard not to like the personable and dynamic Mr. Sheets. Mr. Wood recalls that he once phoned Mr. Sheets for help because the mails had delayed a check that Mr. Wood had sent to his daughter in Utah. Mr. Sheets, says Mr. Wood, took money from his personal bank account and had a check delivered to Mr. Wood's daughter that day.    Others who thought the world of Mr. Sheets were the Osmonds, fellow Mormons who had made a fortune in recordings and television in the 1970s -- only to lose a sizable part of it over the years to promoters of investment schemes. It was in 1983 that they met Mr. Sheets, a respected businessman who offered friendship and empathy for their past problems.    At first, it seems, Mr. Sheets wasn't interested in getting the Osmonds to invest with him. On at least two occasions, says David Hardy, a family attorney, Mr. Sheets said he had &quot;no intention of benefiting&quot; from the Osmonds' money. Some of the Osmonds, Mr. Hardy adds, considered Mr. Sheets a &quot;father figure.&quot;    But by early 1985 -- at a time, court records show, when Mr. Sheets was aware of CFS's mounting problems -- he began soliciting the Osmonds to invest with him.    According to a suit filed in U.S. district court here by Jay Osmond, Mr. Osmond gave $30,000 of his pension money to Mr. Sheets for investment, and Mr. Sheets promised to put half of it in a real-estate syndication. The suit charges that Mr. Sheets, without disclosing that the step involved &quot;substantial&quot; risks, placed all of the money in an instrument known as &quot;Working Fund II&quot; that was established &quot;for the sole purpose of loaning money&quot; to another Sheets entity already hemorrhaging financially.    Mr. Hardy says that although the Osmonds invested $200,000 overall, Mr. Sheets provided only one disclosure statement -- a private-placement memorandum he delivered to a family member who was coming out of anesthesia at a hospital. The Osmonds, says Mr. Hardy, don't think Mr. Sheets set out to defraud them but are nonetheless &quot;shattered.&quot;    For the most part, the Sheets saga could have happened anywhere. But Mr. Sheets also became involved, through the late Mr. Christensen, in a uniquely Utah phenomenon: the high-stakes search for certain lost Mormon Church historical documents that would, if authenticated, command enormous prices from the church and from wealthy Mormon collectors obsessed with Mormon history.    Friends say that Mr. Sheets, who had helped finance collector Hofmann's successful search for one such document, envisioned a profit scheme irresistible to wealthy Mormons who were often his clients: limited partnerships that would buy documents and donate them to the church, reaping both enormous good will and huge tax write-offs.    Prosecutors say that Mr. Christensen discovered a scheme in which Mr. Hofmann bilked the church and private collectors out of hundreds of thousands of dollars by forging documents and selling them as real. This discovery, they say, led to the slayings. Mr. Hofmann -- who was injured by a third bomb that the police say he set off by mistake -- is scheduled to go on trial in March on murder and forgery charges. He has pleaded innocent.    The bankruptcy filing of CFS in March of this year was all the more startling considering its early successes. Mr. Sheets, who founded the company in 1971, had managed to mine a lucrative niche among well-heeled professionals, many of them doctors and dentists, eager not just for profits but for tax shelters as well. While offering sheltered real-estate syndications, Mr. Sheets also set up a consulting business in which he and other CFS officials, at low-key seminars attended by, say, 50 doctors at a time, dispensed general investment advice.    Later, CFS representatives would call on the doctors with specific investment opportunities. One doctor, who asked not to be named, recalls attending a seminar by Mr. Sheets with the idea of simply &quot;listening to what he had to say.&quot; Well before the end of the presentation, he says, he decided to invest his money with Mr. Sheets. &quot;The man,&quot; he said, &quot;had a silver tongue.&quot;    So eager were CFS investors that company insiders described scenes in which CFS salesmen -- cab waiting, plane tickets in hand -- snatched prospectuses from printing presses and whisked them off to clients who sat waiting with their checkbooks.    But many of the inflation-driven real-estate syndications that had earned CFS millions of dollars in profits in the late 1970s went sour in the 1980s. By late 1984, CFS was in the middle of what company insiders describe as the &quot;Houston massacre,&quot; in which a dozen ill-conceived real-estate partnerships unraveled under a mound of debt in a market depressed by an oil glut.    CFS's diversification strategy also had become a nightmare. Some who had invested in tax-sheltered mining and alternative-energy partnerships found their tax credits being questioned by the Internal Revenue Service. Word began to spread and capital began to dry up. A full year before outside auditors declared CFS insolvent, a number of CFS insiders, led by Mr. Christensen, urged Mr. Sheets to file for a voluntary reorganization that might allow CFS to survive.    &quot;But Gary's ego just wouldn't let him admit that there were insoluble problems,&quot; says one CFS insider. Unable to sway Mr. Sheets, Mr. Christensen eventually resigned.    Mr. Sheets seemed convinced he knew all about the pitfalls of investing. In 1983 he published at his own expense a hardcover book of investment advice. In it, he related that his own investment career had begun shakily when, as a college student, he borrowed at 36% interest from a finance company and went into the gumball-machine business. A promoter had promised a $20 monthly profit per machine, but Mr. Sheets's machines never netted more than $1.28 each. He was forced to liquidate an $1,800 investment for a mere $75.    The lesson, Mr. Sheets wrote: &quot;We can get too greedy if we aren't careful.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>