<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870511-0030 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 05/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   MCFARLANE IS EXPECTED to be questioned closely about Saudi donations.    The ex-national security adviser is scheduled to testify today in the House-Senate hearings on the Iran-Contra affair. He is likely to be asked what he told Reagan about the $32 million the Saudis are said to have contributed to the insurgents in 1984 and 1985. Meanwhile, intelligence sources said Taiwan funneled $2 million into Swiss bank accounts used by retired Gen. Secord and his associates to fund a covert airlift of arms to the Contras.    Secord, in his testimony last week, portrayed himself as a private operator, but investigators said the Taiwan help showed his enterprise benefited from its ties to the U.S. government.    ---   HART'S WITHDRAWAL SPARKED a scramble for his campaign organization.    After the front-runner for the Democratic presidential nomination pulled out of the race Friday in the wake of accusations he was a &quot;womanizer,&quot; other contenders scrambled to win the staff, contributors and support that the ex-Colorado senator had amassed. Meanwhile, speculation mounted that political heavyweights might yet enter the race.    The Democratic Party's chairman said that &quot;the new front-runner may not emerge until after the Iowa caucus.&quot; A poll shows no candidate has support registering in double digits.    ---   Investigators found the flight recorder from the LOT Polish Airlines plane that crashed outside Warsaw Saturday, killing all 183 people aboard, in Poland's worst air disaster. The Soviet-built Ilyushin 62M was carrying at least 17 U.S. citizens. The New York-bound charter flight was returning to Warsaw after engine trouble developed.    ---   The U.S.S.R. and U.S. are moving to check Iran's increasing presence in the Persian Gulf, Arab and U.S. sources said. Each country will raise the number of its military ships in the gulf to guard merchant ships from Iranian assaults. Similarly, the U.S. has agreed to register 21 Kuwaiti ships under its flag.    ---   Filipinos began voting for their first freely elected legislature since 1972 under then-President Marcos. The army was put on alert, and troops were sent to Mindanao to prevent threatened violence by Moslem rebels. About 2,000 candidates are seeking congressional seats.    ---   Reagan urged blacks to &quot;become part of the great technological and scientific changes&quot; to attain economic advancement. The president, who hailed achievements by blacks, made his remarks during an address at Tuskegee University in Alabama.    ---   Prime Minister Thatcher is expected to announce today an early national election, likely for June 11, seeking an unprecedented third consecutive term. As the pound surged after the ruling Conservatives' successes in local elections, British commercial banks cut their base lending rate, effective today, to 9% from 9 1/2%.    ---   French police increased security as the jury trial of Klaus Barbie for crimes against humanity was scheduled to begin today in Lyon. Barbie, 73, is accused of murdering, torturing and deporting Jews and French Resistance fighters when he was Lyon's Gestapo chief. Barbie was extradited four years ago from his exile home in Bolivia.    ---   Brazil's consumer prices grew a record 19.5% in April from March, intensifying speculation that President Jose Sarney would resign, a military coup might take place, price freezes would be announced and banks would be closed. Sarney said he wouldn't step down.    ---   Top Pentagon officials oppose a proposal to station B-52s in Europe if medium-range missiles are withdrawn under a U.S.-Soviet treaty being negotiated in Geneva, saying it would make the bombers too vulnerable. Some U.S. and European officials favor the plan, to allay concerns about an attack by Soviet-bloc conventional forces.    ---   Foreign Minister Peres predicted an early Israeli general election over his plan for an international Mideast peace conference. Prime Minister Shamir said he will present his plan for direct talks with Jordan to the cabinet today. In Jerusalem, over 1,000 demonstrators protested the plans on the eve of the cabinet debate.    ---   South Africa has given interracial couples in Durban and Uitenhage three months to sell their property and move from white areas to districts zoned for what one affected person called &quot;the darker partner.&quot; The apartheid-rules crackdown comes in the wake of whites-only parliamentary elections in which rightists made gains.    ---   The Irish Republican Army sought an informer who may have betrayed the guerrilla group, leading to the deaths of eight gunmen including a top commander in a British commando ambush in Ulster. The IRA said it may try to assassinate British political leaders for its worst setback in the fight to end British rule of Northern Ireland.    ---   Police in Nevada arrested over 700 anti-nuclear activists for trespassing in a Mother's Day protest at the Nevada test site. An official said over 1,000 people protested at the desert site. Another 300 demonstrated in favor of nuclear testing.    ---   Sikh extremists stepped up attacks across India's northern Punjab state, and 13 people were reported killed. The weekend deaths bring to 330 the toll in violence blamed on separatist Sikh militants since Jan. 1. In 1986, 700 people died in such incidents. Some Parliament members called for the removal of Punjab's government.    ---   The U.S. prison population grew 8.6% in 1986, with Western states reporting the largest gains, the Justice Department said. The number of convicts in state and federal prisons rose to 546,659, including 26,610 women, from 503,271 in 1985. Many prisons were overcrowded, with the federal system operating up to 59% above capacity. </TEXT></DOC>