<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870311-0058 </DOCNO><HL> Buying Home in Mexico Is Risky Affair---U.S. Couple's Dream IsDragged Through Courts---By Mary Williams WalshStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 03/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LABOR LATAM </IN><TEXT>   {This is the second of two articles about the experiences of retired Americans in Mexico.}    PUERTO VALLARTA, Mexico -- In 1980, Leland Yeoman, a building contractor from Bakersfield, Calif., bought a second home in this Pacific-coast city of cobbled streets and brilliant flowers. He and his wife, Susan, planned to use it for vacations for a few years, then move in.    But trouble intervened, trouble that will cost the Yeomans tens of thousands of dollars, and perhaps even the house. Their story illustrates some of the pitfalls of retirement in Mexico, where seemingly familiar institutions, such as unions and courts, can hold unpleasant surprises for the unsuspecting foreigner.    When the Yeomans bought the house, they inherited a part-time housekeeper who had worked for the previous owner. Life was all palm trees and sunshine for four years, and then in June 1985, the Yeomans showed up for a vacation, and found the housekeeper had joined a union and filed suit.    She alleged that the Yeomans hadn't paid her the daily minimum wage, provided her uniforms or given her lunch. In addition, the union claimed their home wasn't a house at all, but a guest house, with six employees.    The Yeomans were taken aback. The housekeeper had never asked for a uniform or stayed around until lunch time, they say. They concede they didn't pay her the daily minimum wage but say she didn't work a full day -- just three hours in the morning. They couldn't imagine where five other employees might have fit in their two-bedroom home.    Still, they say, they offered the housekeeper $200 to settle her grievance. She seemed to agree, but there was a catch: The union agent wanted the Yeomans to sign a contract with him, too, promising to pay a monthly fee.    The Yeomans had run afoul of the Confederation of Mexican Workers, or CTM, a powerful labor group forged in 1936. Mexico was emerging from decades of revolutionary upheaval then, and politicians patched together a peace by convincing unionists and other interest groups they were better off inside the new government than out. Ever since, the CTM has supported Mexico's ruling party.    The arrangement has been good for Mexican social stability, but it has also created a entire class of labor middlemen who confront management in the name of the rank-and-file, then take kickbacks in return for dropping their demands. The Yeomans found the system too much to stomach. They refused to sign the contract.    Instead, they hired a local labor lawyer. The lawyer said the suit was unfair. He asked the Yeomans for $210 up front and said he would solve everything in a couple of days. That was the last time the Yeomans saw him.    So the Yeomans found another labor lawyer. This one also said not to worry, and asked for $230 to settle with the union. The Yeomans gave it to him. Two days later, the union struck the house.    As the Yeomans tell it, half a dozen cars filled with picketers inched up the steep, cobbled drive to their front gate. The pickets hopped out, wrapped the house in an enormous red banner, then wired the gate shut with the Yeomans inside. The couple scaled the garden wall and went back to California.    Through a Mexican neighbor, they called the lawyer to find out why he hadn't settled with the union. He told them not to worry, and asked for $455. They wired it to him. He disappeared.    Months passed. Then, they assert, CTM local leader Rafael Yerena sent word that the Yeomans would have to pay the union $12,900 to settle the case -- and that they would still have to make monthly payments. The Yeomans flew back to Mexico, where they told Mr. Yerena they didn't owe the union a cent. Mr. Yerena, they claim, said he would settle for $6,500. They refused and flew back to California.    Mexicans have repeatedly told the Yeomans that the fastest way to solve a dispute here is to make a payoff. &quot;The whole system here is predicated on the fact that Mexicans don't make enough to live,&quot; says a neighbor.    Mr. Yeoman, on the other hand, says that if he backs down now, the union will feel empowered to sue anybody.    &quot;We have the feeling that we are doing something to help the hundreds of other Americans here,&quot; he says.    Months passed. One day, a Mexican neighbor called with the news that the union was showing people through the house, which was to be auctioned off the next morning.    Mr. Yeoman rushed back to Mexico. He was unable to persuade a judge to halt the sale, and the house was auctioned off. He then appealed to the Mexican Tourism Ministry. For the first time, he says, he found helpful officials; one called the judge and asked him not to sign the auction papers.    The judge complied, and the case has been in limbo since, with both the Yeomans and the winning bidder fighting in the courts to establish ownership.    Others promised to try to talk Mr. Yerena down to $1,000, the Yeomans say, only to report back the next day that their approach had backfired and that he was back up to $12,000.    Mr. Yerena denies he ever asked the Yeomans for money. He acknowledges that Tourism Ministry officials came to talk to him, but claims they were simply trying to assess the facts of the case.    The Yeomans, he says, have a confused idea of what's happening. Instead of talking to him directly, he asserts, they usually send lawyers, or their Mexican neighbor, while they remain in California.    Moreover, the labor official insists the Yeomans were running a private guesthouse, renting it out to visitors from the U.S. Six people have testified in court that they worked for him, he says. (Mr. Yeoman vigorously denies that contention.)    On a recent rainy Tuesday, the Yeomans flew in to Puerto Vallarta. They hadn't been back to their house since they escaped the union demonstrators in 1985. They drove into town from the airport, crept up the cobbled hillside in low gear, got out of the car, and peered over the garden wall.    A dead palm tree, toppled in last fall's storms, lay crosswise across the smashed tile roof. Mud had washed down the hillside and under their door, pasting rugs to the floor and soaking the furniture. Termite tunnels snaked up the walls and into the wooden beams holding up the roof. The yard was a riot of weeds.    Mrs. Yeoman burst into tears.    Later, the Yeomans went to see Mr. Yerena. In determined Spanish, Mrs. Yeoman told him the problem had dragged on long enough.    &quot;How do you propose we resolve this?&quot; Mr. Yerena asked. Mr. Yeoman proceeded to explain there had never been six employees, that the house wasn't a hotel, and that the lawsuit was groundless. Mr. Yerena told the Yeomans to go back to California; he would be in touch.    A reporter stayed on and asked Mr. Yerena whether he had any advice for would-be American retirees in Mexico.    &quot;They should invest in Mexico,&quot; he said. &quot;Mexico is safe. They just have to be careful about who gives them their legal advice, so they stay on the right track.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>