<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880212-0130 </DOCNO><HL> The Americas: Can Noriega Still Play His Marxist Card? </HL><AUTHOR> Guillermo A. Cochez </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><DATELINE> PANAMA CITY  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Most observers now characterize Panama's de facto ruler, Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega, as an unsavory character, unfit to continue in his role as head of the Panamanian Defense Forces. However, allegations about his criminal dealings, as well as strong-arm tactics used against political opponents, are nothing new to Panamanians or diplomats familiar with my country. The question is: How could someone so unattractive have remained in power for so long without either U.S. or Soviet interference?    The question actually extends beyond Gen. Noriega. His predecessor, Gen. Omar Torrijos, while appealing more to the romantic fantasies of U.S. and European intellectuals, was just as authoritarian -- and, his foes assert, just as corrupt -- as Gen. Noriega. Yet Democratic President Jimmy Carter tolerated Gen. Torrijos's indiscretions and allowed the CIA to work with him every bit as much as President Reagan's administration worked with Gen. Noriega. And at a time when Fidel Castro actively was supporting revolutionary movements throughout the region, Panama remained the one Central American dictatorship that was spared a Cuban-inspired and -assisted guerrilla movement.    One reason these two Panamanian dictators have been left alone by the superpowers is their insistence that Panama remain a country with an undefined ideology. During the 12 years of Torrijos's dictatorship (1968-1981), the slogan &quot;not with the left nor with the right; with Panama,&quot; allowed him to court regimes allied with the U.S.S.R. as well as those associated with the U.S. Torrijos was a friend of Nicaragua's Anastasio Somoza, whom he later helped the Sandinistas to oust. He was able to develop friendships with democratic leaders such as Venezuela's Carlos Andres Peres, Sen. Ted Kennedy and Spain's Felipe Gonzalez, in spite of acting like a typical Latin dictator at home.    Although Gen. Noriega lacks the &quot;Torrijos charm&quot; (which somewhat insulated him from criticism), he inherited Torrijos's ideological ambivalence and willingly has come to the aid of Cuban agents and CIA operatives simultaneously. However, now that he has strained U.S. support to the point where no &quot;favor&quot; will forgive his megalomaniacal excesses, Gen. Noriega has reached for his last ace -- another insurance policy inherited from the Torrijos era. It is his Marxist card.    The participation of Marxists within the Panamanian bureaucracy goes back to the 1968 military coup initiated by Torrijos. Panamanian communists were persecuted severely (at least one, student leader Floid Britton, was murdered while in jail) by the military immediately after the 1968 coup. Several of their leaders chose to live in exile in Chile and Cuba. But an unsuccessful attempt by a group of officers to oust then-Col. Torrijos in December 1969 (while he was attending a horse race in Mexico) convinced him that without a particular, ideological base of support for his regime, his ability to maintain long-term political control was in jeopardy.    Already some of Torrijos's closest advisers, including his brother, were trying to steer him leftward. And it was at this time that the youth wing of the Panamanian Communist Party (known as the &quot;People's Party&quot;) entered into a secret agreement with Torrijos. The purpose of this agreement was to provide the regime with the international support it urgently needed for internal control and consolidation. In return, the communists received a portion of power they never dreamed of.    The People's Party cadre moved into key positions in areas of public administration, including health, education, labor, foreign relations and agriculture. This allowed it to place more of its cadre in the Panamanian bureaucracy. Numerous comrades were appointed, most of whom graduated from universities in communist-bloc nations. As with the rest of the regime, however, their ideology became contaminated by the germ of corruption. This was particularly true for the political, labor and student organizations, which unconditionally surrendered to the Defense Forces.    The old leadership of the Communist Party subsequently expelled these young members, who surrendered body and soul to the military regime. But this gesture was largely symbolic; the communists maintained the benefits obtained from the military regime. For example, because the Communist Party was not able to obtain the minimum of 19,000 votes during the 1984 elections, it had to be disbanded as an officially recognized party. So even though the electorate has not granted the communists any proportion of government power, they have managed to maintain a high profile in public offices, especially in health and education.    The political crisis that Panama has been undergoing since June 7 again places the Marxists in the spotlight. They have become the only indigenous political group willing to support Gen. Noriega. Consequently, they are doing everything possible to ensure that Gen. Noriega remains in power. They know, as Gen. Noriega's personal military staff does, that if he leaves, they will lose the power they have achieved through corruption and behind-the-scenes negotiations. And Gen. Noriega knows that without their support, the regime has no other organized political group to counter the popular protests from all levels of Panamanian society.    The Marxists have been the ones who have directed paramilitary groups that have terrorized the population and, notwithstanding the fact that they have been identified, continue to act with impunity. The Marxists also have been the only ones within the government to support publicly the closing of newspapers and the imposition of censorship on the communications media.    And this support is not limited to local Marxists. On Monday night, the Nicaraguan ambassador to Panama, Alejandro Arguello, spoke in support of Gen. Noriega on military-controlled television, claiming that Panama suffers from U.S. imperialism just as Nicaragua does. Also on Monday, Cuba's foreign affairs minister, Isidoro Malmierca, reasserted Fidel Castro's support of Panama's military rulers.    The Marxist participation in the regime has been acknowledged privately by the U.S. under the premise that it is better to have them close (even inside the government) than as guerrillas fighting in the mountains. Nevertheless, during the current crisis in Panama, the Marxists have shown their real faces. They know that this is their last chance to keep what they have worked for during the past 19 years. They will try to keep it even at the cost of harming innocent Panamanians.    When Gen. Noriega leaves, the Marxist forces in Panama will have the political space to participate in the electoral process. While neither the Marxists nor any other group will be allowed to jockey for power based on behind-the-scenes deals, there is no space for revenge or for witch hunting. The political forces of the left, as well as honest military men who accept their nonpolitical role in the new democracy, can participate in the process of national reconstruction. All efforts to consolidate democracy will be welcome.    ---   Mr. Cochez is a member of the Panamanian National Assembly and vice president of the Christian Democratic Party of Panama. </TEXT></DOC>