<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881101-0004 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   POLAND PLANS to close Gdansk's Lenin shipyard, the birthplace of Solidarity.    The Warsaw government said the state-owned shipyard would be closed Dec. 1. It is the first big industrial plant to be singled out for closure by the month-old government of Prime Minister Rakowski. Solidarity founder Lech Walesa vowed to fight the move, which he termed &quot;personal provocation.&quot; Rakowski, who has pledged to eliminate unproductive and inefficient enterprises, is a longtime foe of the banned trade union. The announcement came during an impasse in preparations for talks between union representatives and the government.    Walesa said the government's decision soon would cause &quot;tension and conflicts&quot; in Poland. There weren't any immediate plans for protests or strikes.    ---   DUKAKIS COURTED core Democratic constituencies with a populist message.    As the presidential campaign entered its final week, the Democratic presidential nominee said his Republican opponents &quot;have been on the wrong side of every issue of special importance to American women,&quot; including abortion and efforts to achieve economic parity with men. Dukakis, speaking on a campaign swing through California, said he has been advocating an increase in the minimum wage, universal health insurance, and more generous parental leave and child care.    Bush mocked Dukakis's weekend declaration of liberalism as a &quot;breakthrough,&quot; and turned aside the Democrat's call for an election eve debate.    ---   Moslem kidnappers in Beirut released a videotape of U.S. journalist Terry Anderson, who read a message accusing the Reagan administration of preventing his release. Reagan denied that the White House had interfered with the freeing of hostages, saying Anderson's statement was &quot;a script that was given to him&quot; by pro-Iranian captors.    ---   The U.S. announced that it was relaxing some trade, travel and diplomatic restrictions against North Korea in an attempt to coax Pyongyang toward normal ties with other nations. The State Department said the modest steps were in support of the effort begun last summer by South Korean President Roh.    ---   Imelda Marcos pleaded innocent to federal charges that she and deposed Philippine leader Marcos looted Manila's treasury. The judge presiding in the U.S. court in New York refused to let her return to Hawaii until lawyers iron out details of her $5 million bail. Her husband's arraignment had been delayed for medical reasons.    ---   The Supreme Court agreed to decide whether Congress may restrict the president's power to require that federal workers sign secrecy pledges covering government information. A federal judge ruled last May that it is unconstitutional for Congress to limit the use of such secrecy pledges for federal workers.    ---   Israeli soldiers sealed off the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, barring Arab residents from entering or leaving Israel in an attempt to prevent violence during today's national elections. In Jericho, authorities demolished the homes of three Arabs suspected in Sunday's firebombing of a bus, in which four Israelis were killed.    ---   Iran and Iraq resumed U.N.-mediated peace talks in Geneva without any sign of progress on the main dispute blocking a permanent armistice in the Persian Gulf war: where to draw their common border. A truce took effect in August. Neither side has budged on claims to the Shatt al-Arab waterway, which forms the southern frontier.    ---   The Afghan prime minister is to visit the U.N. this week, and the General Assembly is expected to adopt a resolution welcoming the Soviet troop withdrawal from Afghanistan. Moscow has indicated that Premier Sharq could be a compromise figure in a new Kabul regime. Afghan rebels also are to send a representative to the world body.    ---   Soviet and Chinese negotiators settled most of their differences over the 1,500-mile eastern sector of their border, a Kremlin spokesman said as talks concluded in Moscow. The negotiations, in their third round, began Oct. 20. Discussions over the Sino-Soviet western frontier are to continue.    ---   Czechoslovakia said several of the scores of dissidents and protesters detained in Prague last week could be tried on charges ranging from incitement to hooliganism. The article in the country's Communist Party daily newspaper didn't say how many of the 87 demonstrators arrested during a banned rally Friday would be charged.    ---   Died: John Houseman, 86, actor and producer, in Malibu, Calif., of spinal cancer. . . . J. Howard Wood, 87, former chairman of Tribune Co., Sunday, in Chicago. </TEXT></DOC>