<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861203-0091 </DOCNO><HL> Don't Freeze the Arbs Out---By Michael C. Jensen</HL><DD> 12/03/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)TENDER OFFERS, MERGERS, ACQUISITIONS (TNM) </IN><TEXT>   Arbitragers provide important productive services to investors, and the supply of these services is threatened by the current outpouring of self-righteousness and legal action in the wake of the Securities and Exchange Commission's prosecution of Ivan Boesky and others accused of insider trading.    Current SEC interpretations of the law fail to recognize that target shareholder interests are served by a legal rule that allows information to be shared by its originator with others, including arbitragers. There is no economic basis for barring trading on this information so long as it is not stolen.    When takeover bids occur, arbs provide valuable services for target-firm investors who do not have the time, ability or inclination to gather information on takeover bids for companies in which they hold stock. Arbs help direct resources to their highest-valued use. In doing so, the arbs provide three critically important services: 1) they help value alternative offers (including the plans of target management), 2) they provide risk-bearing services for investors who do not wish to bear the great uncertainty that occurs between the announcement and final outcome of a takeover bid or restructuring, and 3) they help resolve the collective action or freerider problems of small, diffuse shareholders who cannot organize to negotiate directly with competing bidders for the target firm. The arbs do this by aggregating large blocks of shares for tender to the highest bidder and sometimes even negotiating with the bidder directly over the offer price.    The current attack on insider trading, if continued in its current indiscriminate form, can have unintended and adverse consequences for small investors, capital markets and corporate America. These can arise if the SEC fails to distinguish among three very different situations.    The first situation occurs when an individual steals information from his employer (say an investment bank or a corporation) and/or his employer's client. Information theft is similar to the theft of any property and should be prosecuted.    The second situation occurs when corporate managers, acting as the agents of shareholders, produce valuable information about their own company. Because managers are in a fiduciary relationship with their stockholders, they do not have the right to claim the value of the information unless their contract with the shareholders gives them that right. Under current SEC rules, such contracts that allow managers to trade on inside information are prohibited (though as Henry Manne of George Mason University noted long ago, this prohibition can harm shareholders when such insider trading would be an optimal way to compensate managers).    The third situation occurs when an individual produces valuable information and voluntarily shares it or sells it to others. Daniel Fischel of the University of Chicago Law School notes that this sharing of information is no different from any other exchange and should not be prohibited. After expending resources to produce valuable information for themselves about how a target company can be restructured to create value, takeover specialists can rationally decide to share that information with others prior to releasing it to the public. In this case trading on such shared information damages no one, and if such sharing is prohibited or discouraged as under current SEC policy, the very investors the SEC seeks to protect (non-insiders) will be harmed.    There are several reasons why takeover specialists would sometimes want to share the value of information they have personally created with others, and in particular with arbitragers. Suppose a specialist has exhausted his capital and borrowing power, and does not have enough shares to ensure victory in a hostile offer for control of the target. By sharing his valuable information with arbitragers (who specialize in evaluating proposed deals and betting their own money and that of their investors on the outcomes), the bidder can enlist the arbitragers' help in accumulating enough shares to accomplish the deal. The arbs are compensated for services provided and risks undertaken by the gains they make on the private information received from the takeover specialist.    The sharing of private information by takeover specialists with the arbs does not harm other investors. To conclude the opposite, as the SEC and many others have done, assumes that other investors in the target company have a right to claim the value of the information created by the takeover specialist. I have never seen an argument, either moral or economic, that justifies such a claim. To the contrary, it is generally accepted that someone who paints a picture or builds a house with his or her own resources owns that painting or house and has claim to the value it commands in the marketplace. Such rules encourage productive effort, and provide the economic basis for progress.    Application of this principle to entrepreneurial takeover activities implies that the producer of valuable information about the creation of value in target firms should also have claim to the value of that information. Rejection of this principle will reduce the resources devoted to these information-production activities, activities that are bringing about the restructuring and enhancement of corporate America.    Most important, however, current law fails to comprehend that the interests of target shareholders are served by a legal rule that allows the producer of private information to share that information with others, including arbitragers. The foundations of this proposition are already recognized by the SEC when the legal form of the sharing relationship is formal. For example, T. Boone Pickens, as chief executive officer of Mesa Petroleum, shared with two other individuals, investors Cyril Wagner and Jack Brown, information Mesa produced regarding the enormous value that could be created by restructuring Unocal. The relationship between Mesa and Messrs. Wagner and Brown was formalized in a legal partnership agreement creating Mesa Partners II. In return, Messrs. Wagner and Brown contributed capital and their own talents and information to the partnership to be used for acquisition of Unocal stock.    Target shareholders are served by a legal system that makes it possible for takeover specialists to share information with others without a formal pre-offer partnership agreement. The partnership agreement locks suppliers of capital and risk-bearing services, such as Messrs. Wagner and Brown, into a binding arrangement with the bidder, whereas the informal sharing of information with arbitragers does not. This informal sharing of information benefits target shareholders because it leaves the arbs in a position to tender their shares to another bidder or the target company itself if either produces a competing bid more valuable than that of the original bidder. One can be sure that the arbs, with hundreds of millions of dollars invested in the target's stock, are highly motivated to discover and tender their shares to the highest bidder. In doing so, they are helping to ensure that the resources of the target firm go to their highest-valued use and that shareholders who hold their shares through the bidding period receive the maximum payment for their shares.    An investor who buys and holds can always be assured of receiving the full value of the information created by potential bidders. Shareholders who voluntarily sell prior to the announcement or outcome of the contest are not damaged, and they gain when they sell at prices higher than would exist in the absence of bidder and/or arb activity. Those investors who voluntarily sell shares to bidders and arbitragers do so because, given their information, they believe the price they receive is higher than the value they place on the firm. Such investors would be better off if they had waited to sell when the full information became available to the market. They do not, however, have a moral or an economic claim to this information or its value, and giving them a legal claim will harm all investors by stifling the production of new information and takeovers.    To avoid this damage, the current definition of insider trading should be changed to make clear that the sharing of legally acquired information between creators of valuable information (including takeover specialists) and others (including arbitragers) is legal.    ---   Mr. Jensen is a professor of business administration at Harvard Business School and the University of Rochester. </TEXT></DOC>