<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881005-0151 </DOCNO><HL> Campaign '88 -- Fallow Ground: Rural Vote Is Vital, But Neither Candidate Pursues It Effectively --- Dukakis Fails to Exploit Edge Farm Distress Gives Him; Values Pitch Helps Bush --- The Mood in Prairie du Chien </HL><AUTHOR> Dennis Farney (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> CMD </IN><G> EXE </G><DATELINE> PRAIRIE DU CHIEN, Wis.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Two stark arrows on a sign in a government office building here sum up the twin political realities of rural America today. The first arrow points to Agriculture Department bureaucrats who, beneath a portrait of Ronald Reagan, interpret an ever-changing web of federal regulations. The second points upstairs, to a mental-health clinic.    Rural America has become both ward and hostage to the political system.    Few voters have a firmer grip on the national imagination than the blue-denimed, taciturn farmers who file in here. They symbolize &quot;a last vestige of American heroism, out there alone with God and the elements,&quot; says Republican strategist Joseph Gaylord.    Yet few voters are more dependent upon government. And though their numbers are small, in a close election rural and small-town Americans could have an outsized influence in picking the head of that government for the next four years. &quot;Rural voters are a critical swing group,&quot; says Democratic pollster Paul Maslin.    These voters, emotionally depleted amid unprecedented federal subsidies, are one of the most intensely cross-pressured blocs in the nation. Last summer's drought and the agonizing rural crisis earlier this decade tend to help Michael Dukakis. Yet farm-program outlays have risen at a faster rate under the Reagan administration than has Pentagon spending; agricultural outlays have quadrupled under Mr. Reagan, peaking at almost $25 billion in fiscal 1986. That helps George Bush. Emergency drought aid alone will total nearly $4 billion -- another strong shot of Novocain.    The great irony is that although both campaigns consider the rural vote potentially pivotal in a handful of battleground states, neither is courting it with specifics. Neither of these urban candidates can convincingly talk &quot;cows and plows,&quot; and neither seems inclined to try. Mr. Dukakis, slow to get organized, has missed opportunities to solidify early, post-convention leads. The Bush campaign is scoring with appeals to conservative rural values.    Both of the vice presidential candidates, who will clash in a televised debate tonight, Dan Quayle of Indiana and Lloyd Bentsen of Texas, come from states with substantial rural and small-town populations. But the overriding reality is that neither campaign has electrified rural and small-town voters, who are less occupied with politics than with the details of their daily lives -- less angry than wearily resigned.    For farmers like 53-year-old Allen Varo, the two would-be presidents remain little more than flickering images on a glassy TV screen, remote and abstract. &quot;Neither one has said anything to me,&quot; he concludes in the parking lot here. &quot;All we get is 'patriotism' and 'leadership.'&quot;    &quot;I still vote as an act of hope,&quot; says Ilana Pestcoe, an occupational therapist in nearby Boscobel. &quot;But most of us sort of vote out of patriotism or civic duty, or a chance to see our friends.&quot;    Indeed, this campaign may be reinforcing a pervasive and growing sense of rural alienation. A recent poll by Peter D. Hart Research Associates for Rural Voice, a nonpartisan organization based in Washington, finds that eight in 10 rural Americans doubt that urbanites understand their problems; one in two feels Washington is ignoring those problems.    It is Mr. Dukakis who once nonplussed Iowa corn farmers by suggesting they grow Belgian endive. It is Mr. Bush who told them, &quot;I'm running for president, not secretary of agriculture.&quot; In their televised debate, both candidates treated agricultural policy like a live hand grenade.    &quot;This may be the first national election where both parties are implicitly acknowledging what has been a fact for some time: Farmers make up only 2% of the national population,&quot; says Alvin Baldus, a former Democratic congressman in this swing district of western Wisconsin.    But other factors are at work as well. One is fragmentation. Policy proposals that help one group (grain producers, for example) risk hurting others (livestock feeders). More fundamentally, the rural political terrain is shifting beneath the candidates' feet -- reshaping itself under the pressure of forced liquidations, population decline, the continuing impact of the drought and the growing tendency of farm families to supplement their incomes with off-farm jobs. Today, more than ever, rural America is a political minefield.    &quot;Dukakis needs to be a cow man in cow country and a sheep man in sheep country,&quot; says Leland Mulder, a former president of the traditionally Democratic Wisconsin Farmers Union. &quot;And if he's not smart enough to realize the difference, he may pay the ultimate penalty.&quot;    This is cow country, the nation's premier dairy district. Southwest Wisconsin, having escaped the last glacier that flattened most of the Midwest, looks more like Vermont than Illinois. All green and gold and beige in the slanting autumn sun, it is a landscape of meadows and wooded valley walls, of goldenrod and great bluffs standing guard over the Wisconsin and Mississippi Rivers.    Politically, it is a district that threw out its Republican congressman in the Watergate election of 1974 and threw out his Democratic replacement in the Reagan landslide of 1980. Its dominant issue is dairy price supports. Yet, as in rural America as a whole, its voters are tugged and pulled by crosscurrents that go far beyond the price of commodities.    Prairie du Chien -- the French name derives from an Indian Chief Dog whom the French encountered here -- remains a healthy town of nearly 5,900. But many smaller towns on the plateau above are struggling, victims of one of the great migrations in recent U.S. history. Between 1981 and 1987, says the Agriculture Department, 864,000 members of American farm families left the land. It is an exodus with political consequences. Many of those who left were marginal farmers, and marginal farmers tend to vote Democratic.    Even farmers who have survived often feel they are barely holding on. Bandanna on her head, rubber boots on her feet, Geneva Pomerening, 58, systematically wipes mud from cow udders in a milking parlor that runs Holsteins through a rural assembly line. She and son John, 25, operate a dairy farm worth a half-million dollars. They rise at 6 a.m. to milk 94 cows, and they milk them again 12 hours later. They cut costs wherever they can. Their expected payoff this year? &quot;We'll be lucky to break even,&quot; she says.    But voters repeatedly volunteer concern about a problem that might seem unrelated to agriculture: the almost prohibitive cost of health insurance. Mrs. Pomerening pays $150 a month for her own policy -- not counting policies for her son and two hired hands.    Even so, she counts herself luckier than a former neighbor who caught his leg in a tractor's power-takeoff. To save money, he left the hospital after only one night. Then he hobbled around for months, his ankle swelling up daily, struggling to save a failing farm. John Pomerening describes the outcome in what sounds like an epitaph: &quot;Burned out. Gave up.&quot;    In theory, rural distress and concern over health care work to the advantage of Mr. Dukakis, who has emphasized economic redevelopment and broadened health coverage as Massachusetts governor. But that is true only if he can do a better job of getting his message out than he has done so far.    &quot;He's got to start moving,&quot; worries Mr. Mulder, the former Farmer's Union president. &quot;The comparison to Tom Dewey isn't too far off the mark.&quot;    &quot;Dukakis is selling the message things are going to get worse,&quot; says Brandon Scholz, executive director of the Wisconsin Republican Party. &quot;George Bush has a heck of a lot tougher job.&quot; The vice president essentially argues that existing farm legislation, embodied in the 1985 farm bill, is gradually working.    Mr. Bush also asserts that a Dukakis administration would mean mandatory &quot;production controls&quot; -- frightening words to bigger, more conservative farmers. Mr. Dukakis, disavowing those words, says he is for voluntary &quot;supply management.&quot; This debate over code words shows how much the rural political landscape has changed since passage of the 1985 bill.    Then, the central farm problem was assumed to be surpluses. Now, should the drought of '88 be followed by a drought of '89, a more likely problem could well be global scarcity. In 1986 Senate campaigns, and as late as the 1988 presidential campaign of Richard Gephardt, some Democratic candidates made political hay by running against the bipartisan 1985 bill. They talked up the alternative Harkin-Gephardt proposal, which envisioned stricter production controls. In today's environment, Democratic political stategists concede, that idea is a net vote-loser, and Mr. Dukakis distances himself from it.    But neither candidate has yet borne down on rural issues. In the semi-vacuum that prevails, Mr. Bush has gained some converts by hitting his opponent as a social liberal who vetoed a bill requiring mandatory recitation of the pledge of allegiance. One of them is Gloria Wall, 40, the assistant county nurse here.    Mrs. Wall sounds like a classic Dukakis supporter -- until she reveals that she will vote for Mr. Bush. A farm wife, she voted for Jimmy Carter. She and her husband Roger have watched six neighbors fail. &quot;All our friends have been diagnosed with stress problems,&quot; she says matter-of-factly. That includes Roger himself, who had an anxiety attack so severe he thought he was having a coronary.    &quot;But I can't vote for Dukakis,&quot; she says. &quot;We always started our day {as school children} with the pledge.&quot;    The Dukakis campaign, moving additional workers into the upper Midwest, plans to focus more sharply on rural issues during the October stretch drive. &quot;If rural voters are talking about the 1990 farm bill and who's going to bring them change, we win,&quot; says Ted Mondale, son of Walter Mondale and Midwestern political director for the Dukakis campaign. &quot;If they're talking about the pledge of allegiance and gun control, we lose.&quot;    Tentative plans include devoting two campaign days to rural redevelopment, car caravans across Midwestern states and the intensified use of surrogates. One of the stand-ins is Jim Hightower, the Texas agriculture commissioner, who is always a quick man with a quip. He has one for his Midwest audiences: &quot;Trying to maintain, as Reagan, Bush andamp; Co. have done, that the farm crisis is over,&quot; he says, &quot;is a lot like trying to put socks on a rooster.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>