<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871224-0016 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 12/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   ISRAELI SOLDIERS ARRESTED hundreds of Arabs in the occupied lands.    Despite international criticism of Israel's handling of recent unrest in the West Bank and Gaza Strip, Israeli troops swept through villages in the occupied territories and detained as many as 350 Palestinians said to have been involved in recent violent protests. At least 21 people have been killed in two weeks of disturbances. Israeli Defense Minister Rabin said the army had been ordered to &quot;shoot to hit&quot; leaders of anti-Israeli demonstrations and to expel or imprison ringleaders without trial.    Israel's cabinet faulted the U.S. for failing to veto a U.N. resolution deploring the situation in the West Bank and Gaza Strip and warned against U.S. support for &quot;extremist elements.&quot;    ---   Italian security police seized a teen-ager who commandeered a KLM airliner en route to Milan from Amsterdam, forcing it to land in Rome. The hijacker, identified as a Dutch youth of Italian origin, claimed to be carrying explosives and demanded $1 million, airline officials said. None of the 97 people aboard the aircraft was harmed.    ---   President-elect Roh outlined foreign and domestic programs, including eradicating South Korea's authoritarian political tradition and working toward diplomatic ties with Beijing and Moscow. Roh, who is to be inaugurated Feb. 25, also reiterated his pledge to seek a vote of confidence in a national referendum.    ---   Three Soviet cosmonauts docked their Soyuz TM-4 capsule with the orbiting Mir space station, where they are to relieve a two-man team that has spent months in space, and conduct a series of experiments. The changeover of crews is the first of its kind and apparently signals the start of permanent manning of the space complex.    Aerospace engineers test-fired a completely redesigned space shuttle booster rocket. The two-minute test of the Morton Thiokol rocket was the second of four required by NASA before the resumption of shuttle flights. The first such mission is scheduled for June 1988.    ---   Sinhalese extremists assassinated the chairman of Sri Lanka's governing party and three of his aides in Colombo. The slayings came less than a week after President Jayewardene pledged action against a group of Sinhalese opposed to a government peace accord aimed at ending the fighting with the island nation's Tamil minority.    ---   Nicaraguan troops patrolled the country's northeastern mining region following two days of fighting in what the Contra rebels called their largest offensive in the six-year war against Managua. New combat wasn't reported, and both sides claimed to have achieved their objectives prior to the start today of a 48-hour Christmas truce.    ---   The Philippine navy said 141 bodies have been recovered from Monday's collision and sinking of a passenger ship and an oil tanker. More than 1,600 people were killed in the accident. Meanwhile, authorities on Mindoro said a four-year-old boy rescued Tuesday wasn't from the inter-island vessel, as the government had reported.    ---   Jordan's King Hussein ended a three-day visit to Moscow and praised as constructive the Soviet attitude toward bringing about a cease-fire in the Persian Gulf war. The monarch, however, appeared to differ with the Kremlin over measures to end the conflict, saying the U.S. shouldn't have to remove its warships from the region.    An Iranian vessel attacked a Norwegian oil tanker, setting it ablaze in the southern Persian Gulf. A Navy helicopter offered to assist the crew of the tanker, which reportedly was loaded with crude.    ---   The Soviet Union broke years of silence about its battles inside Afghanistan, confirming that Afghan troops, supported by Moscow's forces, launched an offensive in a bid to lift a Moslem guerrilla siege in the eastern town of Khost. The fighting was described as heavy, but an official in Moscow didn't provide details about the operation.    ---   A court in Panama sentenced a former army colonel to five years in prison for crimes against state security. Retired Col. Roberto Diaz Herrera sparked nationwide anti-government protests in June after he accused the country's military chief, Gen. Manuel Antonio Noriega, of election fraud and the murder of political opponents.    ---   A Japanese whaling ship defied a U.S. warning of retaliation and protests by environmentalists and departed Yokohama for the Antarctic. Japan's government, which last year agreed to an international moratorium on commercial whaling, said the vessel's crew was planning to catch 300 minke whales for &quot;scientific research.&quot;    ---   Bangladesh's finance minister resigned as opposition leaders said their campaign to oust President Ershad had damaged the nation's economy, sources said. As a two-day general strike ended in Dhaka, the opposition also said that demonstrations would continue until Ershad quits. </TEXT></DOC>