<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880916-0022 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets: Oil Contract Prices Fall 50 Cents a Barrel As Hurricane's Severity Is Downgraded </HL><AUTHOR> James Tanner (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> PET CMD MIN </IN><DATELINE> HOUSTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Petroleum futures-contract prices fell about 50 cents a barrel, as cross-currents whipsawed world oil markets with the force of hurricane winds.    After a big surge of more than 75 cents a barrel Wednesday, based largely on Hurricane Gilbert and jitters about the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries, the markets opened weaker yesterday because of several developments.    Not the least of the bearish signals was the downgrading of Gilbert's severity to a category-three storm from its earlier top rating of five, said Andrew Lebow, a trader and energy analyst at E.D. andamp; F. Man. He also cited the growing likelihood that the hurricane's landfall today would miss the main U.S. oil refining and producing regions of the Gulf of Mexico coastal areas.    Also, Egypt announced a cut of 75 cents a barrel in export prices for its oil because of excess supplies on world markets. The reduction is effective for the remainder of September and drops the price of Egypt's top grade of crude to $12 a barrel.    Traders and analysts said that left the flimsy prospect of production cutbacks by OPEC as the last major support for a market already under pressure from oversupply. But that prop was weakened by word from the Iraqi oil minister, as quoted by a Kuwait newspaper, that Iraq won't reduce its output from the current 2.7 million barrels a day -- no matter what takes place within OPEC, which has scheduled a meeting of its price committee late this month.    By late in the trading day on European spot markets, North Sea Brent crude was down about 55 cents a barrel from day-earlier indications. Elsewhere, the widely-traded Dubai, a popular Mideast crude, was indicated at less than $12 a barrel.    But by early afternoon in U.S. futures trading, the market rallied briefly after traders heard that about 400,000 barrels a day of refining capacity would be shut down on the U.S. Gulf Coast at least for a couple of days. Furthermore, several hundred thousand barrels a day of oil production in the Gulf of Mexico has been shut in for the duration of the hurricane threat, and Pemex, Mexico's national oil company, halted crude-oil exports because of the storm.    That meant Hurricane Gilbert was disrupting oil supplies after all. As a result of the U.S. refinery closings, Venezuela late yesterday announced it will raise prices on 500,000 barrels a day of petroleum-product exports. Also, most major U.S. refiners that hadn't already done so increased their field postings for West Texas Intermediate crude by 50 cents, to $14.50 a barrel.    Nevertheless, in yesterday's futures trading, West Texas Intermediate crude for near-term delivery closed down 50 cents, at $14.90 a barrel. Contracts for October-delivery gasoline finished 1.4 cents lower at 45.6 cents a gallon on the New York Mercantile Exchange, and heating oil was down nearly as much, to close at 42.7 cents.    &quot;Trading was choppy, and there was more than enough news to satisfy both the bulls and the bears,&quot; said Eric Bolling of Edge Trading Corp. Early yesterday, the New York Mercantile Exchange announced that it was increasing the margin rate by $500 a contract because of the trading volatility of recent days.    Despite the pricing fluctuations of the past few days, said Thomas J. Manning, vice president of the oil-consulting firm of Purvin andamp; Gertz Inc., the market's &quot;fundamentals haven't really changed -- just the psychology.&quot; He expects soft markets to continue through the remainder of the third quarter. But prices in the fourth quarter &quot;ought to be $1 (a barrel) firmer,&quot; he said.    In other commodity markets yesterday:   GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: An early rally fizzled in late trading, led by declining wheat prices, said Richard Loewy, an analyst at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., New York. Forecasts that Hurricane Gilbert will bring rains to the hard red winter wheat planting areas of Texas, Oklahoma, Colorado, Nebraska and Kansas sparked selling in wheat. Also, news that the U.S. Agriculture Department rejected several bids for subsidized wheat export sales depressed prices. Although soybean futures also closed lower, fears that Gilbert would substantially damage the Southeast U.S.'s soybean crop eased yesterday as the storm took a more westerly path.    COPPER: Futures prices rebounded from Wednesday's late sell-off to end higher yesterday. December-delivery copper rose 0.95 cent a pound to $1.0465. According to one analyst, there were no purchases of the metal itself by China yesterday. Such purchases in recent days had given the market much of its upward thrust, with the futures posting successive life-of-contract highs. &quot;It is likely that the Chinese, in continually buying copper, became aware that, in effect, they were bidding against themselves as the market rose, so they've decided to lay off for a while,&quot; he said. However, he added, despite profit-taking, the market retained significant underlying demand that became evident yesterday and enabled prices to recover. The succession of new life-of-contract highs was broken yesterday except for the expiring September contract, which set a new high of $1.1160, topping the previous high of $1.1090 posted Wednesday. The independent strength of the September contract was significant, because as a maturing month, it normally tends to reflect conditions in the cash market. However, tight supply and steady, good demand have caused the September contract to mirror conditions overall and become the price leader in futures. The September contract settled yesterday at $1.1160, a premium of 6.95 cents over the December contract, the most active position on the board.    COCOA: Futures prices fell, as prospects appeared dim for agreement on strategic issues at London cocoa talks. December-delivery cocoa declined $28 a metric ton to $1,209. One analyst said that Peter Baron, West German delegate and spokesman for the group of consumer countries at the London meeting of the International Cocoa Organization, was quoted as saying that he was &quot;afraid there would be no solution&quot; on major issues being discussed. One is the price at which the manager of the organization's buffer can intervene to buy cocoa to support the market price. The other is the amount of money owed by producing members to the organization, estimated at $63 million, the analyst said.    COFFEE: Futures prices eased, as rains appeared in some of the parched coffee-growing areas of Brazil. The December contract declined 1.84 cents a pound to $1.2366. One analyst said that there had been some rain over the past three days but that analysts disagreed about whether the amount was significant. According to that analyst, some thought that the rains were inadequate and that dryness still prevailed. Others, he said, believed the dry spell hadn't been serious enough for the rains to be considered significant. Another analyst said dryness wouldn't be a major factor until mid-October. Even if rains held off until then, it would be possible to produce a normal crop, he said.    COTTON: Futures prices plunged the daily limit in most positions, as fears of Hurricane Gilbert faded. Prices of contracts from October through July dropped their two-cent daily limit, while other contracts fell by almost their limits. December-delivery cotton settled at 53.61 cents. One analyst said that concern over possible damage to the cotton crop in Texas has diminished. &quot;Most of the cotton is grown in West Texas, where they'll get rains but the winds won't be that dangerous,&quot; he said. But when asked if the rains could actually prove advantageous to the West Texas crop, he said &quot;I wouldn't go that far yet. The rainfall could be quite heavy.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>