<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871127-0018 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 11/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   FORTY INMATES SURRENDERED to authorities at an Atlanta prison.    As negotiations continued, 39 Cuban detainees and one American prisoner asked to leave the penitentiary and were transferred elsewhere in the federal prison system. Officials also said that Cuban inmates holding 122 hostages in Georgia and Louisiana had agreed on a list of demands after days of stalemate. The riots erupted over the weekend after the State Department announced that more than 2,500 Cubans who entered the U.S. in 1980 would face deportation.    Meese spoke with relatives of the hostages held by the Cuban inmates at the two prisons and said he wouldn't rest until the situations were resolved.    ---   GORBACHEV IS PREPARED to extend next month's talks with Reagan.    A senior official in Moscow said the Soviet leader would remain in Washington an extra day or two if the summit nears a breakthrough on the next step in arms control: an accord to reduce strategic nuclear missiles. Gorbachev is to arrive Dec. 7 for a three-day meeting with the president. The announcement came after NATO foreign ministers, who were briefed by Shultz, expressed support for a U.S.-Soviet agreement to abolish intermediate-range weapons.    Thatcher said Gorbachev would visit Britain while traveling to Washington. It would be his first trip to London since becoming Kremlin chief in 1985.    ---   Chicago's City Council is expected to meet Tuesday to consider an acting mayor to succeed Harold Washington, the city's first black mayor, who died Wednesday of a heart attack. His death leaves political control of the city up for grabs. The acting mayor apparently will serve until a general election in April 1989.    ---   Radio stations in Haiti reported that eight more people were killed in pre-election violence in Port-au-Prince, bringing the death toll to as many as 21 since Tuesday. The government declared that neighborhood vigilante groups, believed responsible for killing supporters of ousted leader Jean-Claude Duvalier, &quot;won't be tolerated.&quot;    ---   Israel blamed Syria for an attack Wednesday by a Palestinian guerrilla who flew into the country from Lebanon on a motorized hang glider and killed six Israeli soldiers. Prime Minister Shamir held an emergency meeting with cabinet officials to consider a possible response.    ---   A U.S. warship was placed on full alert in the Persian Gulf as several Iraqi jets approached in what the captain described as a &quot;ship attack profile.&quot; The aircraft veered off without firing. Near Dubai, an Iranian gunboat attacked a tanker that was in the vicinity of four American warships.    ---   Rebels killed 16 people, most of them missionaries and their children, in southern Zimbabwe, the BBC reported. Government officials declined to comment. The BBC, quoting other missionaries in the African nation, said it was the worst attack against whites since Zimbabwe gained independence in 1980. No one claimed responsibility.    ---   Philippine President Aquino declared a state of emergency in areas hit by Typhoon Nina, which struck the islands with 120 mph winds. As many as 288 people were killed and about 100,000 others were evacuated. Separately, Aquino approved pay increases for soldiers in a move aimed at improving ties with the country's restive military.    ---   Vietnam launched what it called a partial troop pullout from Cambodia. As many as 5,000 soldiers headed toward the Vietnamese border. Hanoi said the withdrawal over the next few days will involve about 20,000 troops, the largest of the six pullouts it claims to have made since 1980.    ---   A senior Iranian leader said Tehran was prepared to fight to &quot;liberate&quot; Mecca and establish an Islamic government at the Moslems' holiest shrine in Saudi Arabia. Tehran's news agency also reported that Iran had detained an alleged Saudi spy for his role in the July 31 riots in Mecca, where 275 Iranian pilgrims were killed.    ---   Sri Lanka's parliament voted to extend a state of emergency for another month as Indian peace-keeping forces continued their drive to disarm Tamil guerrillas in northern and eastern areas. In Batticaloa, Tamil separatists attacked Indian troops at a railway station, wounding two soldiers.    ---   South Africa's government will allow freed ANC leader Govan Mbeki to address a rally tomorrow that would be the group's second authorized public rally since a 1980 ban, organizers in Johannesburg said. The meeting is to be held in Port Elizabeth.    ---   An opposition coalition was headed for a landslide victory in nationwide elections in Suriname, the first vote since 1980. The unofficial results were viewed as a rebuke of the South American country's seven years of military rule. The three-party coalition has pledged a return to democracy.    ---   South Korean police stepped up protection of the country's leading presidential candidates and accelerated security checks at ports of entry. Authorities in Seoul said they believed terrorists might be planning kidnappings or bombings ahead of the Dec. 16 national elections.    ---   East German security agents detained at least 21 people and forcibly entered the homes of several others in a three-day crackdown on Christian activists. Officials in East Berlin defended the action, saying religious activities were a form of opposition to the Communist government. </TEXT></DOC>