<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870320-0182 </DOCNO><HL> Free Police From the Shackles of 911---By Lawrence W. Sherman</HL><DD> 03/20/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   A coup d'etat has taken over American policing. Gradually, with little public notice, police managers have lost control over how officers spend their time. The usurper is the telephone.    According to at least one police chief, 911 runs the police department. Most police effort is directed simply on the basis of telephoned citizen requests for immediate service. This system is neither rational nor democratic.    Sgt. Bud Emerson of the Minneapolis Police Department has an experimental weapon to cut down on chronic calls to 911, something no other police department has. This weapon, a computer printout, lists the handful of addresses that generate the most crime in Minneapolis. The list includes the 500 addresses (out of 172,000 in the city) that produced 23% of all the robberies, 15% of all the rapes and 19% of all the assaults and disturbances in 1986. The list, produced by the Crime Control Institute in Washington, D.C., also shows that a mere 5% of all the addresses in Minneapolis produced 64% of all the calls for police service.    Sgt. Emerson and the four officers in the Minneapolis Police RECAP (Repeat Call Address Policing) Unit have another weapon in very short supply: time. Because other officers are responsible for answering the 911 calls the RECAP Unit is analyzing, RECAP officers have time to study the list and examine the types and times of calls at each address. They have time to talk to the owners, managers and residents of the most active addresses, to diagnose the problems and to seek solutions. And they have time to follow up on the problems to make sure the solutions are working, or to try other approaches that will work better.    Police have known for years that crime is more concentrated in some parts of a city than in others. But it was not until the National Institute of Justice sponsored the RECAP project that it became clear just how concentrated crime is. For even in a high-crime area, most addresses never suffer the crimes that generate calls for police service. Patrolling just as much at those addresses as at the high-crime addresses may well be a waste of time and money.    Police also have known that they get many repeat calls at certain addresses. With the growth of 911 systems, such calls have increased, and police spend more time at these most active addresses than at other locations. But it is not &quot;quality&quot; time. Their responses must be brief and superficial, given the time pressures they are under to respond to still other repeat-call locations. Such &quot;reactive&quot; policing, as Yale University's Albert Reiss calls it, keeps putting out the fire but never takes away the matches.    Minneapolis Police Chief Anthony Bouza, chairman of the Crime Control Institute, agreed to help test the Institute's RECAP plan as part of his commitment to the new philosophy of &quot;proactive&quot; policing, under which police take greater initiative in analyzing and selecting the crime problems they will attack. Repeat offenders, narcotics pushers, drunken drivers and corrupt congressmen (in Abscam) have all been the focus of such proactive efforts in recent years.    While critics of proactive policing find &quot;Big Brother&quot; overtones in such efforts, they probably would find much of the RECAP Unit's work innocuous.    One address on Sgt. Emerson's list, for example, showed almost daily burglar alarms at 5:30 a.m., consistently false. With different officers handling the calls, no one ever noticed the pattern. But once RECAP officer Skip Goodmanson looked into it, he found that a newspaper delivery crew was throwing a stack of newspapers off the truck and up against the front door, setting off the alarm. A conversation with the delivery crew solved the problem.    Another address on the list was a skid-row mission, which generated repeated calls because of drunks they had expelled smashing the windows and breaking in the door. RECAP advised the mission to get shatterproof plexiglass windows and a steel door.    But RECAP is also attacking serious crime. After meeting regularly with the owner of a chronic-call apartment building, RECAP officer David Martens learned that there was a large drug-selling operation in one of the apartments. His information helped the Narcotics Unit get a warrant to make the largest heroin seizure in that city in recent years.    The landlord of another building examined the RECAP printout to see which tenants generated most of the calls for domestic disturbances, noise complaints and other problems. On the basis of the printout, he said he would try to evict the tenants generating chronic problems.    This raises the question of whether the police in a free society should be in the business of getting people evicted, or even providing information to landlords that may have that effect. In Minneapolis, a call to the police is a public record and there is no legal basis to deny anyone access to such information. If evictions can help deter future problems, then police should not discourage landlords from taking such actions.    Most of the businesses on Minneapolis's RECAP list have been surprised to discover just how many police dispatches are directed to their locations. But with a few exceptions, they have been very cooperative in trying to find ways to reduce repeat calls. Number one on the list, a large discount retail store, had 810 calls last year, the bulk of them for police to do paper work on shoplifters who had already been apprehended. In consultation with Sgt. Emerson, the store decided to hire off-duty police officers to book the shoplifters at the store's expense.    Perhaps the least cooperative group has been bar owners, one of whom would not even return phone calls from RECAP. Some of the bars on the list have substantial problems of violent crime. RECAP has ideas for how the bars can reduce such crime (such as not admitting or not serving intoxicated customers). But if a bar doesn't cooperate, the RECAP officers can use their printout to argue that the bar's liquor license should be revoked.    This &quot;problem-solving&quot; RECAP strategy is only one way of dealing with the concentration of crime at a few addresses. In addition, traditional police methods, such as foot patrols, decoys and the presence of police cars, might be much more effective if they were concentrated at the high-crime addresses. Municipal budget cutbacks require police to do what the National Institute of Justice's director calls working smarter, not harder, to fight crime.    ---   Mr. Sherman is a professor of criminology at the University of Maryland and president of the Crime Control Institute, which is developing and testing the RECAP strategy in Minneapolis. </TEXT></DOC>