<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870601-0074 </DOCNO><HL> Ex-CIA AgentSays Aides KnewOf Contra Deals---Testimony Said to ChallengeStatements by AbramsAbout U.S. Involvement---By David Rogers and John WalcottStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAM GOVMTMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Closed-door testimony by the Central Intelligence Agency's former Costa Rica station chief indicates that higher-level CIA and State Department officers knew more than they previously acknowledged about secret arms shipments to Nicaraguan insurgents.    A declassified transcript of the testimony, which was delivered Friday, is expected to be released today by House and Senate committees investigating the Iran-Contra affair. Sources said it contradicts prior statements by Assistant Secretary of State Elliott Abrams, who is due to appear before the panels tomorrow.    Mr. Abrams has sought to distance himself from the operation, but the former CIA official indicated that the assistant secretary was fully aware of a secret landing strip built in 1985 to assist in the arms shipments.    The station chief, identified in earlier testimony simply as &quot;Joe&quot; to protect his identity, has since been recalled from Costa Rica. He has long been involved in providing U.S. assistance to the Contras -- both from a position in Washington and, later, from his post in Costa Rica. Former U.S. Ambassador Lewis Tambs testified last week that beginning in mid-1985, he worked closely with the officer to open up a new military front for the resistance in southern Nicaragua. And the congressional investigation has established that the agent was instrumental in directing drops of supplies and arms to the insurgents in 1986.    Sources said the former CIA official testified that he used a high-level encription device to communicate directly with Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North in the White House and with Rafael Quintero, a former CIA operative who worked in the private Contra-supply network overseen by Col. North and retired Air Force Maj. Gen Richard Secord.    Though Col. North became his principal contact in Washington, the former station chief also testified that he provided detailed information directly to the CIA about the level of supplies reaching the southern forces with whom he was dealing, according to sources.    The southern front was intended to take military pressure off Contra forces in the north, but it also became a means to replace the more independent-minded Eden Pastora, who led insurgents fighting the Nicaraguan government along the country's southern border with Costa Rica. Mr. Pastora won the affection of some American conservatives. But sources said the former station chief didn't hide his unhappiness with the controversial commandante, and said the CIA considered, but never carried out, trying to discredit the leader by linking him to drug traffic in the region.    Investigators are interested in the landing strip in Costa Rica because, though it never was used as much as expected, it could be evidence of a violation of prohibitions against U.S. military aid to the Contras. Similarly, there is increasing interest in the role of a former CIA official in Honduras who allowed a helicopter to be used to carry supplies and arms to insurgents inside northern Nicaragua.    The former station chief shed new light on a network of public and private individuals tapped by Col. North to assist him in carrying out different elements of the IranContra operation. In this regard, besides looking at the role of State Department and CIA personnel, investigators are showing new interest in potential contacts between Col. North and Drug Enforcement Administration agents in the Mideast and Central America.    More broadly, the former station chief's testimony is important to understanding what higher officials in the Reagan administration knew about the Contra supply operation. Mr. Tambs said Col. North served as a conduit to these other officials in some cases, and the station chief's testimony reinforced the ambassador's claim that information was passed on to CIA and State Department officials.    The Reagan administration's Central American policy during this period was overseen by the so-called RIG, or Restricted Interagency Group, which included Mr. Abrams, Col. North, and the then-director of the CIA's Central America Task Force. &quot;Everything that Ollie knew, Abrams knew,&quot; said one administration source.    Within the CIA, higher officials including Clair George, the deputy director of operations, took an intense interest in the Central American task force, according to intelligence sources. The head of the task force was described by one source as having reported in &quot;minute detail&quot; to Mr. George during this period, and investigators are sure to call more witnesses to determine how high the information went in the chain of command.    Separately, Texas financier Nelson Bunker Hunt last week appeared before a federal grand jury in Washington investigating the Iran-Contra affair, and afterward his attorney said Mr. Hunt was prepared to cooperate with federal investigators. Law-enforcement officials said Lawrence Walsh, the independent counsel investigating the affair, wants to question Mr. Hunt about earlier congressional testimony indicating that he may have donated as much as $1 million to help the Contras. Mr. Hunt declined to comment. </TEXT></DOC>