<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870410-0100 </DOCNO><HL> What France's Economic Policy Means---By Edouard Balladur</HL><DD> 04/10/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> EUROPMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   Under the leadership of Prime Minister Jacques Chirac, the French government has launched a program of rejuvenation in the past year. Within this program, economic measures play a central role, measures that, although some call them merely technical, reflect a view of society.    They are firmly based on three principles. The first is that trust and freedom should take precedence over regulation and bureaucratic control. If people at every level of society are deprived of the authority commensurate with their duties, they quickly lose their motivation and their sense of responsibility.    The second principle is that people should not be deprived of the return that their efforts deserve. Freedom is not anarchy; rules, laws, checks and balances are necessary. This is a basic tenet that must be applied to international monetary affairs as well as to domestic affairs. France has been a longstanding advocate of surveillance and discipline in the functioning of the international monetary system. The recent Louvre Agreement on exchange-rate stabilization among the industrialized nations is an example of the contribution that governments can make to an open and growing world economy. Such a cooperative approach amply substantiates the fact that freedom does not mean disorder.    As a corollary -- and this is the third principle -- control in domestic affairs should be administered by the judicial system, not by the government. Bureaucracy, even acting with the best of intentions, all too often is stifling. Last, experience has shown, in France particularly, that sudden changes are dangerous and that one should take time for adjustments and for learning.    When Prime Minister Chirac took office, the first economic freedoms that had to be restored were quite basic: freedom of price setting, of foreign exchange, of hiring and firing.    Except for short periods, prices in France have been &quot;controlled&quot; by the government since 1945. While these controls were supposed to check inflation and provide a protection against price increases, their ineffectiveness can be seen easily by observing the high rate of inflation during this period.    Without freedom to set prices, the responsibility, risk and accountability of businessmen are severely hampered. Moreover, competition for higher quality and lower prices loses its meaning, and the economy's adaptability is numbed. Eventually this translates into higher prices. For the same reasons, French businessmen must be free to reduce employment when necessary.    France used to exercise extreme administrative jurisdiction over foreign-currency dealings. Business operations by French corporations outside of France were subject to detailed controls and authorizations. Even travelers abroad and families with dependents outside of France were restricted and controlled. Such controls have never made a weak currency strong; they are short-term expedients and take an exacting toll on economic efficiency.    It is not enough to lower taxes on businesses if people who work there face predatory taxes. The heart of business in a modern economy is not machines but people, initiative and creativity. If the major part of compensation for a worker's extra effort is taken away by taxes, there is less chance for the economy to develop. Reductions in personal taxes must be aimed at threshold effects and marginal rates. The latter represent the price one has to pay to work in the open economy. This price has become far too high -- at the expense of compensation for efforts and creativity.    Experience shows that as marginal rates increase, there comes a point at which they are counterproductive and the proceeds of taxation, instead of increasing, begin to decline. Until recently, this was the unfortunate state of affairs in France, as in many countries. The point had been reached where some people could say that an elementary right was being altered: the right to benefit from the fruits of one's work. This affected even low-income to medium-income brackets.    The new government has started to lower personal income taxes, and at the same time it has begun to bring its own spending under control. In the 1987 budget, the highest rate of income tax was lowered to 58% from 65%. This is part of a world-wide movement that France must follow to keep its most energetic, aggressive and bright young people and to attract investors.    As in many countries, savings in France are all too often taxed twice: first through personal income taxes and second by taxes on savings. The first measures that the new government has taken on savings are aimed at reducing distortions in savings taxation through a lowering of the income tax and of the corporate profit tax. A law that has been submitted to Parliament goes further. The government approach is to reduce gradually the downward pressure on savings.    The government has reduced corporate income tax to 45% this year from 50% and has announced its intention to continue in this direction. Reducing the corporate profit tax has the advantage of helping to develop savings and influencing the trade-off between investment and saving by increasing the supply of capital.    It is not possible to keep taxes lower without reorganizing public finances to reduce administrative expenses. This effort should not be confused with the many so-called austerity or stabilization programs to which France has been subjected so many times. Those programs essentially transferred by constraint on the whole nation the weight of government frailties and failings. The current plan reduces government expenses; decreases, through attrition, the number of civil servants; eliminates subsidies, and limits increases in civil servants' salaries. The government, like any other supplier of services, must make every effort to lower its costs. This action was started in the interim budget revision of spring 1986 and continued in the 1987 budget. For the first time in many years, expenses will increase less rapidly than prices. The budget deficit that had dramatically increased in the past few years will go down by more than 15% in two years.    Freedom of prices does not mean the law of the jungle. Its ethic is defined and controlled by the law. There is a deep difference between law and regulation, between the judicial system and a government office, between freedom and bureaucracy. After much thinking and legal study, the French law on free competition has been rejuvenated. A new specialized court is an example of an institution that will make it possible for France to go from a regulated economy to a free-market economy -- i.e., an economy of well-tempered freedom.    In the same vein, a system of credit controls has been abolished. This was another extreme case of a regulation whereby the government controlled, or restricted, the quantity of credit each bank in France was allowed to lend. This stringent and counterproductive system has been replaced by control of the money supply through interest rates -- i.e., the price of money. It is an important move for France and should bring an added flexibility to the economy.    The privatization of nationalized companies and banks is another fundamental change in the French economy. The denationalization of Saint Gobain, a large industrial firm, and of Paribas, the well-known bank, have received tremendous support from French citizens. The issue here is what could be called &quot;people's capitalism.&quot; At the end of the privatization program -- which will take several years, since it concerns no fewer than 65 companies or groups of companies -- there will be millions of shareholders in France who never owned a share before, and they will come from all strata of society. A bill that will come up for discussion in Parliament this spring contains provisions that will make it easier for employees to enter into management and personnel buyouts, a formula that has only started to develop in France and is still subject to strict regulation.    The world's postwar experience has shown the limits of policies that were grounded on the idea that governments could set the quantitative parameters of their economies. But government policy is responsible for the basic conditions under which an economy develops. The new government has taken some of the essential measures that will create a sound framework. It trusts the abilities of French men and women to turn around France's economy.    There is no reason for France not to aspire to one of the world's highest standards of living and to growth and job-creation. To accomplish that objective, the government has abolished restrictive policies and has curtailed the growth of public spending. The qualitative changes in France's economy, the return to freedom and to the basic values of a free society, prove that we are on our way.    ---   Mr. Balladur is minister of economy, finance and privatization in France. A related editorial appears nearby. {See: &quot;REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial): Theorie de L'Offre&quot; -- WSJ April 10, 1987} </TEXT></DOC>