<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870105-0103 </DOCNO><HL> Your Next MishapMight Turn Out to BeA Gift From a Friend---Firm Called 'Amazing Events'Treats Unwitting VictimsTo Day of Practical Jokes---By Brenton R. SchlenderStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Michael Scott, an unrepentant practical joker himself, thought he had seen it all when he awoke at 6 one morning to the cackling racket of two roosters chasing a turkey around his fraternity bedroom. Not only were the three fowls fouling and feathering his room, but the door was barricaded so he couldn't get out. After ramming it with his shoulder a few times, he finally forced it open, only to be doused by a bucket of water suspended from the door frame.    &quot;I thought to myself, 'Wow, somebody really got me this time,' and figured that was the end of it,&quot; recalls Mr. Scott, now a lawyer living in Seattle but still incredulous when he thinks back on that morning in 1982.    For, alas, the fowls and the water were only the beginning of a day of customized humiliation orchestrated by Amazing Events Unlimited, a Palo Alto, Calif., concern that torments unsuspecting victims with daylong spells of extravagant shenanigans. By the end of the day, Mr. Scott, then a Stanford University pre-law student, had found himself being seduced by an actress posing as a Harvard University law-school interviewer and stuck with the expensive bill for a disastrous lunch after another law-school interviewer -- this one legitimate, from Stanford, but in on the joke -- walked out on him.    In the meantime, Mr. Scott got drawn into a violent argument between two Stanford University shot-putters (also the real thing, also in on the fun) in which they held him upside down by the ankles and shook him as they continued shouting at each other. Then there were the letters recalling his car, canceling his insurance and warning of an Internal Revenue Service audit. For all this, plus a smattering of more subtle pranks and obnoxious phone calls, as well as a catered party capping it all, a group of Mr. Scott's &quot;friends&quot; paid Amazing Events $400.    &quot;We pulled pranks for years just for the fun of it, and like any good business-school student, we began to wonder, 'Can you get paid for it?' Well, you can,&quot; says Jeff Pinsker, a puckish 26-year-old, who, along with several other Stanford classmates, founded Amazing Events while still in school in 1981.    Starting out as a purveyor of deluxe mischief, Amazing Events has evolved into what Mr. Pinsker prefers to call a &quot;corporate entertainment firm&quot; that handles all the arrangements for company parties, anniversaries and other special events in search of a theme and a little pizazz. Although parties account for most of Amazing Events' annual revenue of nearly $300,000, Mr. Pinsker says, he still masterminds three or four &quot;prank days&quot; a year &quot;just to keep us fresh.&quot;    A full day of pranks, for which Amazing Events charges from $300 up into &quot;the thousands,&quot; requires weeks, and sometimes months, of planning as well as the cooperation of family and friends who supply specifics about the victim's tastes, quirks and habits. Mr. Pinsker then tailors a series of slightly bizarre circumstances and hires extras, and in some cases professional actors, to play the parts.    &quot;The idea is to pepper the victim with pranks that aren't obviously practical jokes but are almost plausible,&quot; says Mr. Pinsker, who occasionally plays a role himself. &quot;And you hit him with them frequently enough that he doesn't have time to dwell on one long enough to see through it.&quot;    Mr. Pinsker's favorite production was a day of pranks aimed at Bud Ferrari, a San Jose, Calif., tax lawyer. Once again, the gags started first thing in the morning, as Amazing Events arranged for Mr. Ferrari's street to be blocked by what appeared to be a street-repair crew.    When he finally made it to the office, Mr. Ferrari was late for an interview with a &quot;job applicant&quot; who refused to stop bragging about his sexual escapades. During that interview, in walked a janitor who insisted on moving all the law firm's decorative plants into Mr. Ferrari's office, explaining apologetically that Mr. Ferrari's window was the only one in the building receiving direct sunlight that day.    So far, Mr. Ferrari suspected only that a bad day was unfolding. Next came more elaborate and unsettling ruses. An actor posing as an investigator for a British insurance company showed up to notify Mr. Ferrari that he might be liable for an accident in which a van he had previously rented while on vacation in Britain had seriously injured some pedestrians when its parking brake failed. This was alarming to Mr. Ferrari because at the end of his vacation he had discovered that he had driven the rented van with the parking brake engaged the whole time.    Fortunately, Mr. Ferrari could get away from the strains of the office for his regular lunch-time tennis game at a nearby club. However, when he arrived, he found three women sunbathing on the court he had reserved. When he asked them to move, they stared blankly and said they only spoke Norwegian.    Back at the office, a frustrated Mr. Ferrari was treated to abrupt visits from a leopard-skin-clad zealot brandishing a religious petition; a vagrant who had found Mr. Ferrari's checkbook and was demanding a reward; and a new client who described himself as a psychiatrist and who within moments had the gullible lawyer at the bathroom sink trying a special &quot;forced release&quot; system of stress therapy involving hourly gulping of half-gallons of water.    &quot;Bud was terrified all day,&quot; recalls Joseph Mell, a colleague who hired Amazing Events to make Mr. Ferrari's 50th birthday an unforgettable one. &quot;Unfortunately, I was never able to witness many of the pranks because I was in hysterics and had to duck around the corner whenever I saw him.&quot; (Mr. Ferrari wasn't available to be interviewed for this article.)    The prank days usually conclude with a party, during which a cake is presented to the hapless patsy, and, after it is cut by a sword-wielding samurai, the cast introduces itself. It was then that Dennis Levett, a Palo Alto commercial real-estate developer, realized the extent of his naivete.    Mr. Levett's prank day had included cutting a deal to sell -- for an immense profit -- a prominent Palo Alto building to a man he thought was a visiting dignitary from China. &quot;When I recognized that the samurai cutting the cake was the same person that acted as the Chinese tycoon's driver and translator, it dawned on me that I'd been had. Then the whole day flashed before me like a newsreel going at 78 rpm.&quot;    While Mr. Pinsker contends that none of the prank days have backfired seriously, there have been some close calls. When Amazing Events was besetting the manager of a swank Palo Alto restaurant with a nightmarish parade of problem customers, Mr. Pinsker, who was playing a busboy with a drinking problem, nearly provoked a fist fight with the victim.    And there have been times when an innocent prank has threatened to foul up a legitimate and very real business deal. Mr. Levett, for example, was so giddy at the prospect of selling the Palo Alto building to the Chinese investor that he politely dismissed serious inquiries about the building from local investors at a meeting later in the day.    &quot;I felt sorry for Denny, because he'd already spent the profits in his mind,&quot; says Roxy Rapp, the Palo Alto businessman who hired Amazing Events to befuddle Mr. Levett. Mr. Rapp, who says he got a headache from trying to keep a straight face all day, concedes, however, that at times &quot;it was scary, because I realized you could really cause some emotional damage to the wrong person.&quot;    When victims finally realize they are victims, many take solace in the fact that they are the center of attention for a day. Some victims, however, are downright deflated when the prank is disclosed. About a year ago, David Woods of Los Altos, Calif., thought he had really won a million dollars in a magazine-subscription sweepstakes when Mr. Pinsker, all decked out in a tuxedo and accompanied by a television camera crew, arrived at his office to present him with the customary oversized check.    There was a problem, however: The check was written to another David Woods living in a neighboring city. Before the crestfallen Mr. Woods caught on to the joke, Mr. Pinsker snatched back the check, brusquely apologized and herded the crew out of the office to go find the &quot;real&quot; winner.    &quot;I'd have to say I was pretty disappointed,&quot; says Mr. Woods, who publishes a construction trade magazine. &quot;After all, it's not every day that you lose a million dollars.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>