<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880201-0103 </DOCNO><HL> Manager's Journal: Surveys Breathe Life Into Market Research </HL><AUTHOR> Al Kusada </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   The survey is an often maligned management tool. However, properly prepared and correctly targeted, a good survey can provide invaluable information on product and market trends and customer attitudes. And it can position a company as a concerned and well-informed expert with potential customers and purchasing executives.    At Minolta Corp.'s Business Equipment Division, we sponsored two surveys that proved to be of great value: In 1987 we studied American small business, and in 1983 we polled secretaries in 21 American cities on the negative and positive aspects of their jobs. In each case, the results helped put Minolta in a better position to market our products to these influential groups.    Both surveys included questions of social and economic interest as well as a marketing dimension. Though Minolta does its share of traditional market research -- including periodic brand-awareness surveys -- we've found that the survey can have broader and more flexible applications.    The survey on the &quot;Evolving Role of the Secretary in the Information Age&quot; revealed that less than 25% of small businesses (20 or fewer employees) and less than 40% of midsize firms (20-249 employees) who responded had installed microcomputers. Little more than 50% of both groups possessed word-processing equipment.    We also heard complaints about cathode ray tube (CRT) terminals. More than half the secretaries cited eye strain as a side effect of CRT displays, while more than a quarter said they had difficulty learning the system.    At the time, our division was in the process of developing our Minolta Office System/PCW-1, which combines word processing, calculating, computing and printing functions. The survey helped us appreciate the importance of small and midsize businesses as potential PCW-1 customers. And we addressed two major areas of concern with our &quot;Type and Learn Concept&quot; software and amber-colored lettering, which has proven much easier on the eyes.    The &quot;Minolta/Gallup Small Business Survey&quot; told us more about small and midsize companies than our sales force could learn in a lifetime of give-and-take with customers.    For one thing, it gave us a better understanding of the difficulties facing the startup of a small business. Lack of capital, inadequate business knowledge, poor management, insufficient planning and inexperience were factors frequently cited in small-business failures.    It also alerted us to the consequences, both to entrepreneurs and to Minolta, of the elimination of the investment tax credit. That was far and away the most frequently voiced complaint of the businessmen we polled. But the survey's value went beyond revealing the hopes and fears of small and midsize companies. Learning that less than two-thirds of small businesses possess a copier, and that less than half this group have personal computers and/or word processors has helped Minolta better address this market.    The survey also showed that improvements in office automation are associated with high rates of sales growth. The firms that have made these improvements are growing more quickly than those that have not. And the firms that have grown the most in the past five years are the most confident about growth in the next five years.    Our competitors were among the many businesses and government agencies that requested copies of the surveys' results. While some companies may treat such results as prized secrets, we are happy to share our results. If the consumer perceives that an entire industry is actively responding to consumer demands, all producers benefit.    The importance of internal surveys, while lacking overt publicity value, also should not be underestimated. The results of our regular surveys of dealers and sales managers have proven helpful in gathering product case histories, improving dealer relations and altering sales strategies. In a typical dealer survey, we might pose questions on business equipment sold, unusual sales or service challenges, sales-incentive programs, unusual product applications or special problem solving.    Information gathered helps us in sales to attorneys, physicians, dentists, architects and other professionals that are of growing concern to us. Members of like professions frequently form private corporations. These small businesses usually require support staff who welcome state-of-the-art business equipment.    The survey, whether in-house or public, is a way to take advantage of changing trends, nip bad news in the bud and make good news even better.    ---   Mr. Kusada is senior vice president of Minolta Corp.'s Business Equipment Division. </TEXT></DOC>