<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871124-0058 </DOCNO><HL> The Reagan Legacy -- Reagan's World:Foreign Stance of U.S.Is Bolder but ContainsSeeds of New Problems---Arms Talks and Persian GulfShape Successor's OptionsAs Deficits Tie His Hands---Iran Affair Hurts Credibility---By Robert S. Greenberger and Gerald F. SeibStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM FREST FORGNMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)NUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>      {Second of a Series}   WASHINGTON -- When candidate Ronald Reagan debated President Jimmy Carter in 1980, he asked: &quot;Is America as respected throughout the world as it once was? Do you feel that our security is as safe?&quot;    As he prepares to leave office little more than a year from now, Mr. Reagan would undoubtedly answer yes. He engineered a huge defense buildup and ended the nation's post-Vietnam paralysis by projecting military power in Grenada, Libya and the Persian Gulf. The pending Soviet arms accord vindicates his strategy of hard bargaining from a position of strength. And he almost single-handedly put the issue of a space-based strategic defense on the national agenda.    &quot;He has people discussing and debating things that they never even dreamed of debating before. And that I think is his legacy, his principal legacy,&quot; says former Defense Secretary Caspar Weinberger.    But for all those accomplishments, Mr. Reagan's record is already starting to fray. The political consensus for more defense spending has long since evaporated. The next president will inherit a troubling list of unresolved regional problems. And the president hasn't won lasting political support for the &quot;Reagan Doctrine&quot; of supporting anti-Communist insurgencies.    Even his most concrete achievement, the prospect of eliminating U.S. and Soviet intermediate-range nuclear missiles, leaves U.S. allies in Western Europe worried about Moscow's overwhelming superiority in conventional arms.    &quot;It is an ambivalent legacy comprised of short-term strength and gains at the cost of longer-term weaknesses and losses,&quot; concludes Samuel Huntington, the hard-line director of Harvard University's Center for International Affairs.    Many of these problems stem from a foreign policy that has, in the Reagan era, been driven more by anti-Communist rhetoric than by a long-range strategy. Robert Neumann, a former ambassador who headed the Reagan State Department transition team in 1980, complains that the administration has had &quot;foreign-policy ideologies rather than a foreign policy,&quot; blunting its long-term impact on the world.    There are some ironies in it as well. Mr. Reagan came into office criticizing the Democrats' tendency to make U.S.-Soviet arms control and summitry the centerpiece of their foreign policies. Yet the administration today points to the prospect of arms reduction and better relations with Moscow as one of its proudest accomplishments, and Mr. Reagan may yet achieve a more revolutionary agreement cutting the superpowers' long-range arsenals by 50%.    Similarly, Mr. Reagan will pass on an achievement few anticipated from an administration that entered office vowing it wouldn't abandon friendly right-wing governments the way its predecessor did: strong support for regimes making the transition to democracy. From Argentina, Brazil and El Salvador in Latin America to the Philippines and South Korea in Asia, Mr. Reagan has put the U.S. firmly on the side of democratic forces.    &quot;They've been surprisingly supportive of the movement to democracy. It wasn't expected and is all to the good,&quot; says Walter LaFeber, a Cornell University history professor and Latin America expert.    But Mr. Reagan also seems likely to leave his successor a list of problems that, in many respects, reads remarkably like the list that he inherited in 1980:    --In the Middle East, U.S.-Iran antagonism -- which helped Mr. Reagan defeat President Carter -- has intensified and become more dangerous. The failure of Mr. Reagan's Lebanon policy, symbolized by the embassy and Marine-barracks bombings in Beirut, undermined American credibility in the region. What credibility was left was shattered by the disastrous revelation of arms-for-hostages dealings with Iran. As for the Arab-Israeli struggle, a promising peace proposal in 1982 withered on the vine when the administration didn't follow through with high-level diplomacy.    --In Central America, Mr. Reagan has failed to win a consensus on U.S. policy. Support for the Nicaraguan Contras remains unpopular in the U.S. And in Central America itself, the situation may be more dangerous than ever unless current peace initiatives succeed. The next president may have to deal with a rebel force that may destabilize Central America because it has nowhere to go and no way to win.    --Although the administration once got generally good marks for beefing up U.S. intelligence capabilities, it has been racked by repeated spy scandals, and lasting damage may result from the Iran-Contra affair and related covert operations. Brent Scowcroft, the national security adviser to President Ford, worries that the revelations create the image of an &quot;improperly controlled&quot; CIA and could lead to burdensome new legislative restrictions on intelligence operations.    --In defense spending, Mr. Reagan persuaded the country to invest billions in new arms, but he will leave with inflation-adjusted military spending declining because of the enormous budget deficits. &quot;Any successor will find himself struggling to get the defense budget back up,&quot; concedes Frank Carlucci, the new defense secretary.    Moreover, the emphasis on defense spending has reduced Congress's willingness to provide sufficient funds for foreign aid to conduct American diplomacy, foreshadowing another U.S. retreat from world responsibilities. And the budget deficits, which make the U.S. dependent on nations like Japan and West Germany for capital infusions, raise questions over whether his successors will be able to conduct a strong and independent foreign policy.    &quot;The American political economy has reached a point where it is very difficult for us to conduct a coherent foreign policy regardless of the people at the helm,&quot; says Stephen Bosworth, who held several top State Department posts, including ambassador to the Philippines, during the Reagan administration.    Mr. LaFeber of Cornell adds that the prospect of budget crunches will also make it difficult and politically unpopular to nurture newborn democracies with financial aid. Early signs of this problem have appeared in the Philippines.    In Mr. Reagan's own mind, it is clear that he hopes to leave his mark on foreign policy in two major areas: the Reagan Doctrine and the Strategic Defense Initiative, or Star Wars, which would shift U.S. strategy toward a reliance on defense and away from mutual deterrence through nuclear arms. But while he has focused intense debate on both policies, they lack broad-based support and are in danger of being at least partly dismantled by a wary Congress or the next president.    Mr. Reagan came into office determined to roll back Communist gains made in the 1970s in Central America, southern Africa and Afghanistan, and Congress approved some military aid to insurgents in all three areas. Mr. Reagan's hard-fought battle for funds for the Contras now may be reversed; the administration wants $270 million in new aid for them, but Congress isn't likely to approve any as long as a peace plan approved by the five Central American governments remains on track.    Moreover, congressional support is thin for continued covert military assistance to Unita, the anti-Marxist group battling Angola's leftist government. Aid to Unita could become a victim of the distrust of covert action in the wake of the Iran-Contra scandal.    Only on Afghanistan does there seem to be widespread support for helping guerrillas resisting the Soviets. Unlike the insurgencies against sitting governments in Nicaragua and Angola, the Afghanistan war is an effort to repulse a Soviet invasion, and probably will continue to be supported after Mr. Reagan leaves office.    The most radical, potentially far-reaching change Mr. Reagan has proposed in American national security is his plan for a space-based strategic defense. His success at framing the issue as one of switching from an offensive strategy to a defensive one probably ensures that his successor will have to continue feeding the Pentagon chunks of money for research.    Still, research doesn't mean a Star Wars system will be deployed. Mr. Reagan himself may yet be tempted into accepting restrictions in return for a strategic-arms accord with the Soviets. Already, the administration is contemplating a pledge to abide by the 1972 anti-ballistic missile treaty for at least seven years, which would, in effect, bar putting a space defense in place during that time.    A Democratic president might well be willing to deal away Star Wars in negotiations with the Soviets, or simply to scrap the idea as provocative. And budget deficits mean that even a Republican president will be tempted to slow research into a project whose ultimate cost can only be guessed at.    &quot;It could easily be knocked out&quot; politically, says Mr. Weinberger, one of the program's strongest backers. &quot;Nothing is in place until it is in place.&quot;    Even the pending arms accord with Moscow -- far and away Mr. Reagan's clearest foreign-policy achievement -- carries with it a legacy of uncertainty. Europe's concerns over the Soviet edge in conventional forces remain unaddressed. And some experts worry that the focus on nuclear-arms issues could jeopardize relations with Third World allies like Thailand that have been enlisted in the global battle against communism.    &quot;If these countries begin to feel that detente means we're forgetting them, the Reagan legacy will be arms-control-centered detente, and that will represent a considerable retreat from the administration's original claims about responding to Soviet conduct across the board,&quot; warns Stephen Sestanovich, a former staffer on Mr. Reagan's National Security Council.    Perhaps the Reagan foreign-policy legacy that his successor will find most vexing is the pervasive atmosphere of mistrust between Congress and the executive. &quot;The president and his people could have been more adept in dealing with Congress,&quot; says Sen. Richard Lugar, the Indiana Republican and former chairman of the Foreign Relations Committee.    The Iran-Contra scandal and clashes over the interpretations of arms-control agreements make it unlikely that Congress will give the benefit of the doubt to Mr. Reagan's successor. Covert operations seem likely to suffer. After the administration spent six years rebuilding the CIA, the abuses uncovered during the Iran-Contra hearings probably will prompt Congress to impose new restrictions.    Such new rules also would crimp the covert actions required by the government's anti-terrorism program. Thus, they might undo the administration's painstaking efforts to build support for aggressive measures against terrorists. </TEXT></DOC>