<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870804-0118 </DOCNO><HL> French Investigators Unravel Dual RoleOf Alleged Iranian Negotiator-Terrorist---By Youssef M. Ibrahim and Philip RevzinStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 08/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST MDEST </IN><DATELINE> PARIS  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Months of investigations by French security services have pinned most of the blame for deteriorating relations with Iran on Wahid Gordji, a translator at the Iranian Embassy whose baby face, slight moustache and modest demeanor make him an unlikely central character in the confrontation between the two countries. Diplomatic relations have been severed and each nation has besieged the embassy of the other; an aircraft carrier-led French fleet is heading for the Persian Gulf as both nations engage in a shouting match.    According to accounts in the French press and interviews with French officials, Mr. Gordji led a duplicitous existence. He allegedly was the architect of a secret Iranian dialogue with senior officials in the government of French Prime Minister Jacques Chirac to improve relations between the two countries and arrange the release of French hostages in Lebanon.    But at the same time, Mr. Gordji allegedly directed a farreaching, Paris-based, terrorist network of Lebanese and North African followers that the French police say killed a dozen people and wounded many more in last year's wave of bombings in Paris, the sources say. The newspaper Le Monde reported last week that French police had established that a black BMW car belonging to Mr. Gordji had been used in the Sept. 17 bombing outside a Paris department store that left four dead and 64 wounded, the most devastating of the terrorist attacks.    The French situation has many of the same features of the Iran-Contra scandal in the U.S., where members of the Reagan administration attempted a dialogue with what they perceived as moderate elements in Iran, only to find -- after shipping arms to Iran in exchange for U.S. hostages -- that moderation in Iran was a mirage.    French government dealings with Iran haven't provoked the political scandal here that they have in the U.S. Indeed, recent reports that President Francois Mitterrand and Mr. Chirac were ready to trade Mr. Gordji for French hostages in Lebanon if the Iranian appeared briefly before an investigator, are widely accepted here. (Iran reportedly rejected this deal.)    But even here there were differences within the government on how to handle Iran. The split opinion apparently carried over to Mr. Gordji, who alleged at a July 2 news conference in the Iranian Embassy here that French Foreign Ministry officials warned him to go into hiding before the police went to his house early on June 3 to summon him for questioning about terror bombings. The police did manage to pick up 60 of his alleged associates. The weekly Le Nouvel Observateur asserted in a cover story that French security services recorded a telephone call from someone at the Foreign Ministry warning Mr. Gordji to go into hiding. Foreign Ministry officials have denied warning Mr. Gordji.    If the Foreign Ministry did warn Mr. Gordji, it apparently was motivated by the belief that he has close ties to Iran's deputy prime minister, Nouvel Observateur said. For more than a year, the magazine and other French sources say, the ministry had conducted extensive secret talks with Mr. Gordji about normalizing relations and releasing French hostages held by pro-Iranian militias in Lebanon.    Warned or not, Mr. Gordji took refuge at his Paris embassy on the night of June 2. When he refused to emerge to answer an investigating magistrate's questions, the Interior Ministry surrounded the embassy with armed police. The Iranians did likewise at the French Embassy in Tehran.    The collapse of France's two-year effort to improve relations with Iran could endanger the five French hostages still held in Lebanon. And there is now a distinct possibility that the 15 French diplomats in Tehran have begun an ordeal paralleling that of the 52 U.S. Embassy personnel held for 444 days in Tehran from late 1979 until early 1981. The French Embassy in Tehran, along with those of Saudi Arabia and Kuwait, Sunday was attacked by mobs angered by the deaths of several hundred demonstrating Iranian pilgrims in the holy city of Mecca Friday. The entire French presence in the Middle East, from embassies to oil company facilities, has become a potential target for Iranian revolutionary fury.    The events now reaching a climax began last September, with the Paris bombings ostensibly carried out by a group of Lebanese demanding the release from French custody of George Ibrahim Abdallah and two other jailed terrorists.    Investigations were carried out by the anti-espionage service, the DST, in cooperation with anti-terrorist units of the French police, helped by a Tunisian recruit of Mr. Gordji, named Loutfi, who turned informant, according to Nouvel Observateur.    The findings were turned over to Gilles Boulouque, a tenacious investigation magistrate, who focused on three links between Mr. Gordji and the bombings, according to the magazine. The first, which appeared to be the hub of Mr. Gordji's activities, was a religious meeting place in Paris called Ahl el-Beit that for years had been used as a recruiting center for Moslems from France's former North African territories and Lebanon living in France. The recruits were sent for religious indoctrination to Qom, the Iranian education center for Shiite Moslems. Some, the police maintain, also received terrorism training in Iran.    A second focal point was a Paris bookshop run by a pro-Iranian Lebanese named Mohamed Mouhadjer, a close friend of Mr. Gordji. And, finally there was the Iranian Embassy, many of whose staffers, it is charged, were responsible for expanding the terrorist network. All three places had been placed under surveillance and were bugged by the DST, French officials say.    &quot;The problem wasn't proving it, there is plenty of telephone and visual surveillance to make the case,&quot; says a former Foreign Ministry official who asked not to be identified. &quot;The problem this government agonized over was balancing this evidence against risking the policy of normalization, with all the dire consequences for the hostages and French interests in the region. It was a race between the good side and the bad side of Iran.&quot;    The good side began to emerge more than a year ago when the French found that Mr. Gordji was a close friend of Ali Moayeri, former Iranian charge d'affaires in France and currently deputy prime minister of Iran, according to various press reports. Nouvel Observateur says the Foreign Ministry delegated a senior official to maintain a dialogue with Mr. Gordji that went on for well over a year.    The Foreign Ministry contends the dialogue brought about the release of five French hostages in Iran during that period. Allegedly in return, France expelled from the country a leading figure of the Iranian opposition, Massoud Rajavi, the chief of the Mujahedeen Khalq leftist organization. And it paid $330 million on a debt Iran has claimed for years but which France had contested.    Mr. Gordji was encouraging. More hostages would be released if France reduced its supply of arms to Iraq, with which Iran has now been at war for seven years, and further thinned the ranks of Iranian opponents to the regime of Ayatollah Ruhollah Khomeini permitted to reside in France.    But French police saw the bad side, and investigating magistrate Boulouque demanded that Mr. Gordji come to the Palais de Justice for interrogation. Mr. Gordji retreated to the embassy, and on July 9 Mr. Chirac demanded that the Iranians produce the interpreter or face a break in relations. President Mitterrand reiterated the position on Bastille Day, July 14.    Iran responded with fresh demands of its own, including the ending of French arms sales to Iraq. Relations were severed July 17. Both embassies remain surrounded by armed soldiers, their diplomats in effect prisoners. </TEXT></DOC>