<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880718-0030 </DOCNO><HL> Aloha Air Hearings Point Up Weaknesses --- System of Shared Safety Responsibility Faulted </HL><AUTHOR> Roy J. Harris Jr. (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> BA </CO><IN> AIR ARO </IN><G> TRN </G><TEXT>   Boeing Co. calls it the &quot;three-legged stool,&quot; the system in which aircraft manufacturers, airlines and regulators share responsibility for travelers' safety.    &quot;We all know what happens to the stool&quot; when one of the legs gives out, Richard Johnson, Boeing's chief structures-technology engineer, said last week as investigators probed the April accident in which an Aloha Airlines 737 lost a huge chunk from the top of its fuselage and a flight attendant was killed during a Hawaiian island-hopping flight.    But the four days of National Transportation Safety Board hearings that ended Friday seemed, rather, to point up how dangerous the skies turn when all three legs become wobbly.    Suspect are both Aloha's corrosion-prevention maintenance and Boeing's original design of the metal fuselage joints on 737s built in the late 1960s and early 1970s. Some safety specialists suggest the old-style seams can become breeding grounds for corrosion, especially in corrosive saltwater environments such as Hawaii's.    Meanwhile, the way the Federal Aviation Administration monitors both airline maintenance and aircraft design -- two of its main safety responsibilities -- also came off in the hearings as somewhat rusty.    Investigators suspect that corrosion and metal fatigue combined in the 19-year-old Aloha 737 twin-jet to create a phenomenon called &quot;multisite damage&quot; cracking, in which the rivets along metal seams on the plane's skin popped in sequence, like the buttons on a cheap shirt. And in such a finding, all three legs of the stool could be implicated when the board's final report comes out in about six months.    Because the Aloha plane's 89,000 landings made it the second longest-flown of the more than 1,500 Boeing 737s in fleets world-wide, the accident has focused attention on the increasing problem of geriatric jetliners. Safety specialists now are asking how airlines take care of their oldest planes -- especially when, for economic reasons, they are keeping planes aloft longer than manufacturers intended.    Boeing's earliest technology for joining skin panels on the 737s has been an issue ever since 1972, when the company received customer reports of 737 corrosion and replaced the design. After the 291st plane off the line (Aloha's was No. 152), Boeing eliminated the so-called adhesive cold bonding that helped rivets hold sections of fuselage skin together.    Throughout the hearings, Boeing officials conceded that joints on the old planes were prone to corrosion-related cracking. But they argued that such cracks couldn't be dangerous if airline maintenance staffs were doing their job. They insisted visual inspections would turn up evidence of cracking of a magnitude necessary to cause a catastrophic failure.    FAA metallurgy specialist Tom Swift disagreed, theorizing in his testimony that cracking around the rivets could have been too small for detection in the visual inspections that Boeing was recommending -- and the FAA was requiring -- during the long history of airline reports of corrosion-related fatigue cracking problems on the 737. Mr. Swift is a proponent of the multisite cracking theory being examined by the safety board as a possible cause.    In the last warning before the Aloha accident, an FAA airworthiness directive effective last November, airlines were ordered to inspect visually along two rivet lines on the top of old 737s. &quot;Eddy current inspections,&quot; using electronic probes that can detect far smaller cracks, might have been able to catch the problems on the Aloha plane. But those checks were required only if inspectors visually found evidence of cracking.    The FAA, following the usual procedure in writing directives, borrowed heavily from the Boeing &quot;alert service bulletin&quot; that suggested the inspections. But it reduced the number of rivet lines to be inspected. And in ordering visual checks, it appears to have accepted Boeing's now-challenged theory that cracking isn't dangerous unless visible to the naked eye.    Another Boeing safety theory -- that fatigue couldn't cause a 737 fuselage tear of more than 40 inches -- also appears to have been proved incorrect by the accident.    For Aloha's part, its airline maintenance -- and especially corrosion prevention -- had been under fire from Boeing for months. But the Boeing criticism of its Hawaiian customer surfaced in public only after the Seattle-based manufacturer released it to the safety board. At the hearings, the kid-gloves relationship Boeing has with its customers reappeared; the plane-maker skipped every chance to question Aloha personnel who testified -- even when they contradicted Boeing.    Among Boeing's knocks on Aloha were that it operated for three years without a formal corrosion-control program, a belief at Boeing that company engineers suggested was borne out by inspections of Aloha planes under the Boeing Aging-Fleet Evaluation Program. The plane that crashed wasn't one that Boeing had scrutinized. Aloha denies that it ever eliminated its corrosion program and argues it followed FAA rules and Boeing service recommendations consistently in maintaining its jets.    If the hearings show the FAA to be too lax in the way it wrote directives based on Boeing bulletins, the agency appeared equally soft in its attempts to attend an important Boeing-Aloha meeting on corrosion maintenance. At the Honolulu meeting, only 10 days before the accident, Boeing barred the FAA's principal aviation-safety inspector for Aloha. Boeing told the hearings that the decision was based on a guarantee of confidentiality given to airlines involved in its aging-fleet program.    As the hearings wound down, all parties seemed to be preparing for a less than comprehensive explanation of the accident. John K. Lauber, chairman of the board hearings, said he would feel safer if the three legs of the air-safety stool could be made to work together better. Aloha argued it had been &quot;vindicated&quot; by the investigation so far. And Mr. Johnson of Boeing, which maintains that its 737 early design is safe, told reporters, &quot;We may never know for certain what caused the accident, because the evidence we really need to look at is in the ocean.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>