<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861219-0169 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Something More Serious?</HL><DD> 12/19/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST LATAMAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   Sen. Daniel K. Inouye and Rep. Lee H. Hamilton, the two Democrats who will chair the Senate and House special committees set up this week to investigate the White House arms deal, are promising a serious endeavor. Delivering on the promise won't be easy, as Sen. Inouye especially seems well aware. &quot;Many of us are headline seekers and you may find one committee trying to outdo the other at scoops and headlines,&quot; the senator said. &quot;I hope that won't develop.&quot;    It's pretty well developed already, it seems to us. Aside from a multitude of free-lance leaks, some true and some false, we have had appointment of a presidential investigatory commission; investigations launched by the Justice Department Office of Professional Responsibility, the FBI and the U.S. attorney in Miami; and &quot;closed-door&quot; hearings by no fewer than three standing committees of Congress -- Senate and House Intelligence and House Foreign Affairs -- all three of which have leaked copiously. The formal appointment of an independent counsel is still ahead, though former ABA President Lawrence Walsh has been back at his old law firm recruiting help for the job.    The special prosecutor will have the task of trying to figure out whether anyone broke any laws. No one is quite sure which laws apply, but surely there's something in the scope and complexity of the criminal code to cover putting the profits from the sale of U.S. arms to Iran into a Swiss bank account for benefit of Nicaraguan contras. We've all been taught to react to moments of political and moral crisis by consulting the entrails of the statute books, then asking what the president knew when.    One of the consequences of this method of inquiry is that Marine Lt. Col. Oliver North and Vice Adm. John Poindexter, the two men who know the most, have exercised their Fifth Amendment rights to keep quiet. A White House proposal that they be granted limited immunity for the purpose of congressional hearings -- meaning that their testimony in that limited arena could not be used against them in court -- got a cold shoulder from the Senate. So the shortest route to getting at the facts has been blocked.    A lot of folks who were clamoring for a special prosecutor two weeks ago are now chafing at the inevitable result. Most of us recognize that there is a lot more at issue here than the letter of the law. Rep. Hamilton wants his committee to examine &quot;what mistakes were made in the foreign-policy process, if any, and we'll certainly be looking at policy.&quot; We agree his committee should indeed look at both the process and the policy. The Senate committee should do so as well. Who knows, they might just possibly learn some lessons about the way the massive American governmental apparatus conducts its business.    Aiding the contras is an administration policy Rep. Hamilton has never agreed with, of course. Congressmen who had fought and ultimately lost the battle to deny Nicaragua's anti-communists military aid were enraged to learn that the White House may have found a way to do it even during the period when the congressional left thought it had successfully proscribed such aid. Some of these lads and lasses are spoiling for a new fight, but perhaps they should consider the risks they themselves run if they try to pillory a Marine officer who mainly was trying to counter the spread of Soviet power. Many conservatives are unhappy that Mr. Reagan struck deals with Iranians after saying he would not do business with terrorists. Maybe both sides should ponder the old foreign-policy maxim, never say never.    To go deeper than all this, it might be interesting to ask if there is anything wrong institutionally. Here again an obvious question is why presidents so frequently think it necessary to cut other institutions -- Congress, the State Department, etc. -- out of the foreign-policy loop. We think we know the answer, but we would like to hear a bit more debate. Are there those people in government and the media who think it is never necessary for the U.S. government to engage in activities that it might want to keep secret? If so, let's hear from them.    Finally, let's look at something that seems to worry Sen. Inouye, and legitimately so. Are we in the process here once more of destroying the effectiveness of an American president? &quot;We view the present situation as potentially explosive and dangerous,&quot; said the Hawaiian senator Wednesday. In the past, he observed, &quot;when adversary countries have perceived our leadership being wounded they attempted to do us mischief.&quot;    Thoughtful people in public life, if they can rise above the melee, might ask themselves why it is that American presidents have fared so badly these past 20-odd years. LBJ retired a beaten man. Nixon was cashiered. Ford could not be elected in his own right. Carter ended his term in frustration and defeat. Reagan has fared best of all, but is now confronted with a gleefully destructive reaction wholly out of proportion to any errors that have been alleged.    Why is it that the Beltway community likes to gang up on presidents? Why should it not? That community has become very large, very rich and very powerful. Its important core is a complex of congresspersons, federal contractors, lobbyists, journalists and high-level members of the permanent government: top civil servants and congressional aides. That community, which soon will command $1 trillion of the nation's resources, has an institutional life of its own. It can only be guided, not drastically changed, by a president. Yet it is the president who has been given the constitutional task of representing the interests of the people, all 240 million of them, in managing this vast enterprise. Does the empire ever fight back? You bet your life it does -- all of the time, and even more fiercely when a president has been weakened.    Whether the Inouye and Hamilton committees will resist being swept up in this current, only time will tell. We wish them luck, for a truly serious investigation clearly is needed to clear the air. Special committees and independent counsel may not be ideally designed for the task at hand, but they are the machinery we have. They're now in motion, and what they need is some time to work. </TEXT></DOC>