<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870113-0064 </DOCNO><HL> White House to Name Edward Kelley,Leif Olsen to Seats on Fed, Officials Say---By Paul BlusteinStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 01/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK)EXECUTIVE (EXE)FEDERAL RESERVE BOARD (FED)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   President Reagan probably will name Edward Kelley, a Houston-based investment counselor, to the Federal Reserve Board, according to administration officials.    And the White House is strongly considering Leif Olsen, the former chief economist at Citibank, to fill a second vacancy on the board.    Officials also said that Beryl Sprinkel, chairman of the Council of Economic Advisers, has become a more serious contender for the Fed chairmanship since he began moderating his monetarist views. But the odds still are viewed as long that Mr. Sprinkel will be named to succeed Paul Volcker when Mr. Volcker's term as chairman expires in August.    Messrs. Sprinkel and Olsen would be considerably different central bankers than the ones President Reagan has nominated in the past. Both men are known as monetarists, meaning that they believe the Fed generally should try to achieve slow, steady growth in the money supply to keep inflation subdued.    Previous Reagan appointees, tending to favor supply-side views, have argued that the Fed could allow faster economic growth because inflation doesn't pose much of a danger right now. Monetarists tend to support tighter credit policies than supply-siders.    The recent resignations of Fed governors Emmett Rice and Henry Wallich have given President Reagan an unusual opportunity to nominate the entire seven-member board. Already four of the members are Reagan nominees, and the betting is that the president won't reappoint Mr. Volcker chairman again unless an economic crisis arises. Mr. Volcker, who carries enormous prestige in world financial markets, initially was named Fed chairman by President Carter in 1979 and was reappointed by Mr. Reagan in 1983, amid shaky financial-market conditions. Although Mr. Volcker could remain on the board under a new chairman, no one expects that he would accept such a demotion.    The probable appointments of Messrs. Kelley and Olsen to the Fed were reported yesterday by syndicated columnists Rowland Evans and Robert Novak. The columnists also asserted that Mr. Sprinkel is the &quot;odds-on favorite&quot; to succeed Mr. Volcker.    As previously reported, Mr. Kelley is being pushed by Treasury Secretary James Baker, a lifelong friend from Houston. Another Texan, economist George W. Rogers, still is being considered, but &quot;it looks like Kelley is it&quot; because of the powerful Treasury chief's backing, an official said.    Mr. Kelley probably will be nominated to serve the rest of Mr. Rice's term, which ends Jan. 31, 1990. He has declined requests for comment, and it isn't clear what positions he would adopt on Fed policy.    Mr. Olsen is the leading candidate to serve the rest of Mr. Wallich's term, which ends Jan. 31, 1988. Mr. Olsen, reached at his Connecticut home last night, declined to comment.    But it's possible, officials said, that nobody would be named to serve out the Wallich term because there would be little time left once the nominee had passed security clearances and Senate confirmation.    The White House also might decide to leave the seat vacant for a while to allow greater geographical diversity in its choices for chairman. Under the law, no two Fed governors can come from the same Federal Reserve district. Mr. Olsen lives and works in the New York district, so naming him to the board probably would preclude naming another New Yorker chairman.    Still another possibility -- though a remote one -- is for the White House to name Mr. Sprinkel to fill Mr. Wallich's seat, with the promise that Mr. Sprinkel would be named chairman in August.    Officials who once scoffed at Mr. Sprinkel's chances of becoming chairman say that his prospects have improved because he has become considerably less dogmatic in his insistence that the Fed follow rigid targets for money-supply growth. In recent months, Mr. Sprinkel has acknowledged that recent rapid growth in the money supply isn't likely to rekindle inflation. He has moderated his views so significantly, officials said, that if nominated to the Fed he would be unlikely to push for a tightening of credit merely to rein in the money supply.    One official said that White House Chief of Staff Donald Regan &quot;is really pushing Sprinkel&quot; to accept a seat on the board now. But Mr. Sprinkel himself reportedly favors Mr. Olsen for the board seat vacated by Mr. Wallich.    The idea of naming Mr. Sprinkel chairman almost certainly would encounter heavy opposition from Treasury Secretary Baker. The Treasury chief's policy of intervening more actively in foreign-exchange markets and his more activist approach to the global debt issue have departed sharply from policies Mr. Sprinkel favored when he was undersecretary of the Treasury.    A Sprinkel nomination also might spark a negative reaction in financial markets. He rated poorly in a recent poll of investment managers by economist Richard Hoey of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. Asked who inspired the &quot;most confidence&quot; among 11 potential replacements for Mr. Volcker, the investment professionals ranked Mr. Sprinkel next to last, just ahead of Mr. Regan. Asked to choose which choice inspired the &quot;least confidence,&quot; Mr. Sprinkel came in fourth. </TEXT></DOC>