<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871111-0005 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 11/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   SHULTZ SAID the White House would delay seeking military aid for the Contras.    The secretary of state, in a speech to the Organization of American States, said the administration wouldn't seek the new aid for the Nicaraguan rebels until next year in an effort to keep the Central American peace process moving. Shultz said, however, that the U.S. wouldn't &quot;sit idly on the sidelines&quot; if Managua tries to score a military victory over the insurgents. Shortly before Shultz spoke, Nicaragua's Ortega arrived in Washington to address the OAS today.    El Salvador's military attacked leftist guerrillas, six days after President Duarte declared a unilateral cease-fire as part of a regional peace plan.    ---   SYRIA AND IRAQ APPEARED to reach a truce at an Arab summit in Jordan.    According to a summit spokesman in Amman, Syria's Assad, an ally of Iran, and Iraq's Hussein were brought together Monday night by King Hussein. The spokesman said &quot;good news&quot; would emerge from the meeting in the form of resolutions to be announced today. While it's unlikely that Syria will abandon Iran, it could mute its strident support for Tehran in return for big payments from Saudi Arabia and other Persian Gulf states.    Iraq said its warplanes bombed two ships off the Iranian coast and attacked a power plant in southwestern Iran in the latest series of air raids.    ---   Reagan is expected to nominate federal appeals court Judge Anthony Kennedy to the Supreme Court as early as today. There is a chance, however, that those plans could be changed by political opposition or the results of a background check of the California judge, who met Monday with the president.    ---   The Supreme Court ruled that the IRS has broad discretion to refuse to release tax records requested by taxpayers, even when deleting names or other identifying features would preserve confidentiality. The 6-0 ruling came in a case involving the Church of Scientology, which sought access to certain tax records.    ---   Ex-trustees of a Teamsters fund agreed to settle U.S. charges that they invested the pension fund's assets in casinos and vacation resorts. Under the accord, outside control of the Teamsters' Central States, Southeast and Southwest Areas Pension Fund will continue probably until 2007 rather than end in 1992.    ---   Astronomers have discovered a planetlike object the size of Jupiter orbiting a dying sun about 50 light years from Earth. If the finding is supported by additional data, it would be the first confirmed &quot;brown dwarf&quot; -- a half planet, half star.    ---   Gunmen in the Philippines ambushed the car of a university president who police had accused of harboring communist rebels. Authorities said the man was wounded and one of his three companions killed in the incident in suburban Manila. Meanwhile, rebels stepped up threats against U.S. nationals, naming plantation executives as targets.    ---   Poland's government announced that police had captured the last major underground Solidarity leader. Kornel Morawiecki, arrested Monday in the city of Wroclaw, had been a fugitive since the 1981 martial law crackdown by Warsaw. He was detained on charges of smuggling and holding forged identity papers.    ---   Reagan welcomed Israeli President Herzog to the White House and reaffirmed the U.S. quest for a negotiated Mideast peace settlement. Herzog's meeting, which came during the Jewish state's 40th anniversary, marked the first official visit to the U.S. by an Israeli head of state.    ---   The White House delayed a test of the Navy's Trident II missile with 12 dummy warheads at the request of congressional leaders. The test could complicate U.S.-Soviet arms talks. A missile's warheads have been counted based on the number carried in tests. The Navy has said the Trident II is designed to carry 10 warheads.    ---   Mayor Xavier Suarez won re-election in Miami, defeating former mayor Maurice Ferre in a nonpartisan runoff. With 99% of the precincts reporting, Suarez had 62% of the vote, compared with 38% for Ferre.    ---   Protests erupted in Sri Lanka at the start of a parliamentary debate over legislation granting Tamil areas limited autonomy in an effort to end ethnic strife in the island nation. Sinhalese hard-liners opposed to autonomy cut train and power lines and staged anti-government demonstrations.    ---   Demonstrators clashed with police in Bangladesh during protests called to demand the resignation of President Ershad. The government reported that at least three people were killed by police and 17 others wounded in the violence in Dhaka.    ---   Tunisia's new prime minister said the country was &quot;determined&quot; to create a multiparty state. Premier Baccouche, at his first news conference since President Bourguiba was deposed over the weekend, also said Tunis would remain friendly toward the West and rely more on private enterprise.    ---   Madrid formally told the U.S. it won't renew a 34-year-old pact covering four military bases in Spain when the treaty expires in May. The notification didn't foreclose further talks. Spain said it would sign a new accord if the U.S. reduces its military presence. The U.S. intends to continue talks.    ---   A U.S. official will visit the Soviet Union to discuss human-rights issues preparatory to next month's Reagan-Gorbachev summit, Moscow said. Meanwhile, the official, Deputy Secretary of State Whitehead, held talks in East Berlin. He is the highest-ranking U.S. official to visit East Germany.    ---   Reagan endorsed creating a cabinet-level Department of Veterans Affairs. The president made the announcement before a group of veterans leaders and members of Congress on the eve of Veterans Day.    ---   Niger President Kountche died in a Paris hospital and was succeeded by Army Chief of Staff Col. Ali Seibou, according to state-run Niger radio. Kountche, 56, who took power in a coup 13 years ago, had reportedly been under treatment for a brain tumor. Seibou, 47, was named acting president of the western African country. </TEXT></DOC>