<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880509-0117 </DOCNO><HL> The Next War: Afghanistan's Fighters May Simply Shift Aim When Russians Leave --- Guerrillas, Some Demanding Islamic State, Are Likely To Turn on One Another --- A Local Tradition: Revenge </HL><AUTHOR> Frederick Kempe (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><IN> ARO MON </IN><G> EXE </G><DATELINE> PESHAWAR, Pakistan  </DATELINE><TEXT>   As Soviet troops prepare to leave Afghanistan after eight years of battling U.S.-backed guerrillas, the discipline of war threatens to collapse into the chaos of victory.    &quot;The U.S. believes it has satisfied its strategic aims by defeating the Russians, but this is only the first phase,&quot; says Hazard Din, a commander of the Afghan mujahedeen -- holy warriors -- who fought the Russians. &quot;The most difficult fighting is ahead.&quot;    Under the Geneva peace accord, Moscow has agreed to withdraw its 115,000 troops from Afghanistan over nine months starting May 15. But that retreat deals with only one of three wars in Afghanistan, the campaign by the mujahedeen to end direct Soviet military occupation. Possibly dragging on for months or years could be the two other wars: one between anti-Communist forces and the Kremlin's puppet regime in Kabul and one among resistance groups over whether Afghanistan should become a fundamentalist Islamic state.    The Soviets seem to have failed in their first use of their military outside Eastern Europe since World War II. Only the months ahead will determine whether they remain the dominant influence in Afghanistan or whether a new government emerges, an Islamic republic of some sort that repairs relations with Pakistan, America's major ally in the region. Such a regime could cause trouble for the Soviet Union by stirring up the 35 million Moslems in its Central Asian republics.    Of the seven Afghan resistance groups, four want to create a more centrally controlled regime run by Islamic law. The other three, which are far weaker, prefer to return to a less doctrinaire pre-1979 Afghanistan of loose central control and tribal rule of outlying regions. Sectarian infighting could turn Afghanistan into a Lebanon in the Hindu Kush.    &quot;We've been surprised and depressed by the pall that has fallen over the mujahedeen since the Geneva accords were signed,&quot; says Margaret Segal, the education coordinator for the International Rescue Committee, which runs a school for Afghan refugees here. &quot;It was such an idealistic situation before. The Soviets were the clear enemy, and the Afghans were the romantic heroes fighting for a just cause. Now, the situation isn't black and white. Their unity against a common enemy might break down. They're afraid of being abandoned by their foreign supporters.&quot;    The Reagan administration, hoping to allay Afghan fears and encourage cooperation, has promised the resistance diplomatic recognition if it could form a regime that included leaders from all guerrilla factions, controlled a wide expanse of territory and had a workable administrative system. The resistance now has sent three exploratory parties inside Afghanistan to look for a provisional capital. Guerrillas already control more than 70% of the territory.    Nevertheless, resistance leaders fear a reduction of U.S. aid as their battle becomes more of a civil war than a liberation struggle. They charge that the Central Intelligence Agency already has stopped shipping the Stinger surface-to-air missiles that helped to defeat Soviet air power.    In fact, the U.S. is supplying only enough Stingers to replace used missiles. Commanders must return the tubes of expended missiles to show they have been fired and not sold to Iran. If an Islamic republic emerges in Afghanistan, U.S. officials want to make sure it isn't too heavily armed. What's more, the U.S. has recently moved to curb Gulbeddin Hekmatyar, one of the most ruthless and fundamentalist of the resistance leaders, by reducing his share of American aid.    But Mr. Hekmatyar continues to portray himself as the inevitable inheritor of power. He is the most politically potent of the seven resistance-party leaders as they begin to transform their alliance from an anti-Soviet guerrilla movement to a force that can topple the Kabul regime and establish a new government.    &quot;We have already started a change of strategy,&quot; he says. &quot;We will not waste time and energy on outposts. We'll go after major targets. Kabul will come under particular pressure.&quot; He also hopes to win a major city back soon, perhaps focusing first on Qandahar. Located in the south, it is expected to be among the first key posts vacated by Soviet troops.    The nature of the war will change along with the combatants. It will become lower in technology and potentially bloodier.    The Afghan regime, lacking the air force and special-forces capabilities of the Soviets, is likely to take a more defensive posture, launching missiles from heavily defended cities and garrisons. It has already withdrawn from some vulnerable positions to avoid demoralizing defeats.    The resistance is likely to use more conventional warfare. It may try to seize strongholds while also relying on inside agents to kill officials in the Afghan government and its intelligence service, the Khad. The aim would be to demoralize officials and force them into exile.    If a civil war develops thereafter, every village and province could be a potential battleground. Barring creation of an interim government representing all resistance parties, traditional Afghan rivalries will become even more violent than in the past because of the mountain of arms piled up and the likelihood that neighboring countries will back their favorites.    &quot;If there is no alternative leadership created, they are going to shoot it out among themselves,&quot; says Pakistani opposition leader Benazir Bhutto. Now that the Soviet troops are withdrawing, she predicts, these rivalries could attract two new influence-seekers, India and Iran, which so far have kept some distance from the resistance movement in deference to the Soviets. The Shiite Moslem Iranians, however, aren't likely to wield much influence in predominantly Sunni Afghanistan.    The resistance commander most likely to pull down the flag in Kabul is Abdul Haq. He has established a network of spies, saboteurs and safe houses in the capital, where he expects high-level defections and extensive desertions from the 40,000-man Afghan army as the Soviets withdraw. &quot;I will try to work inside,&quot; says Mr. Haq, who masterminded undercover attacks against Afghan and Soviet installations (and lost part of his right foot to a mine last year).    In Afghanistan, he adds, &quot;people have stayed in the army because they need to feed their children and because they worry about their families. They join offensives because the Soviets are at their backs with guns. Now that they know they haven't anyone either to protect them or threaten them, it will have an effect on morale.&quot;    Toughest to bring down will be the more highly motivated troops of the Khad and the police. Together, they are thought to number more than 10,000. The resistance hopes these elite troops will flee the country in fear for their lives. Mr. Haq says his strategy, if it works, will diminish bloodshed and leave Kabul intact.    &quot;Almost every party has troops and commanders there,&quot; he says. &quot;If things aren't planned carefully&quot; -- and he says they haven't been so far -- &quot;it could cause problems.&quot; The resistance is trying to avoid this by establishing an interim government in Afghanistan. Previously, the disunity among resistance groups was a strength, making infiltration difficult and attacks on a central command structure impossible. Now, disunity is a weakness because it prevents the collaboration necessary to seize cities and form a new government.    Many believe it won't be easy to topple the Soviet-supported Communists in Kabul. The regime has purchased the services of a number of tribal mercenary militias that will keep fighting out of fear that they will be massacred if they surrender.    &quot;Revenge is an Afghan tradition,&quot; explains Mohammad Khasan Karkar, the former head of Kabul University's history department, who fled to Peshawar last year after being released from prison. &quot;The sheer necessity of saving their own lives could make the militia determined to stand and save the government.&quot;    Najibullah's Communist government is also trying to soften Islamic opposition. It has built mosques, established a ministry of religion, opened an Islamic university and hired mullahs for each unit of the army (paying them as officers). It has tried to buy resistance commanders and reward them with regional autonomy.    These methods haven't worked well, because resentment against the regime runs deep. Yet if the resistance can't assuage fears that its feuding will throw the country into even greater chaos or into a more totalitarian Islamic regime, many Afghans -- particularly intellectuals and the middle class -- might not support its cause.    &quot;We are Moslem, but we are traditionalist and not fundamentalist Moslem,&quot; says Naim Majrooh, the director of the Afghan Information Center. His father, a leading moderate intellectual, was murdered last year after opposing the fundamentalist faction's Mr. Hekmatyar, Western diplomats say.    Concern about the alliance's future focuses on Mr. Hekmatyar. The fundamentalist leader has been a favorite and in some ways a creation of Pakistani intelligence since he first took up arms against Afghanistan's Dauod regime in 1973, after it had ousted King Zahir Shah in a Communist-backed coup. Pakistanis term the Hekmatyar group the best disciplined, least corrupt and most fervent in the resistance.    The CIA has backed Mr. Hekmatyar because of his ability to fight Russians, but now U.S officials worry about his Islamic fundamentalism and anti-Americanism. In a recent interview, he called the Geneva accords a superpower plot against Islam. &quot;He's our Frankenstein,&quot; says an adviser to the Pakistani government.    Mr. Haq, who has known Mr. Hekmatyar for years, says, &quot;He thinks that he is the only good, faithful Moslem among the political leaders in Afghanistan and that he has the right to be leader.&quot;    American officials hope that leaders less ideological than the charismatic Mr. Hekmatyar will rise in influence. They are trying to enhance the position of competing commanders in the field by supplying them more directly instead of through party offices in Peshawar.    Even if the mujahedeen can seize Kabul, they must reckon on continuing Soviet influence. Over the past eight years, Moscow has made Afghanistan an economic dependent. It has helped build factories that account for 60% of the country's industrial output. Afghanistan's main export, natural gas, almost all goes to Russia.    Moscow's economic ties are especially strong with Afghanistan's resource-rich northern provinces. Some Soviet watchers suspect that Moscow would like to divide the country someday, taking the north's resources and forming a security zone between fundamentalists in Kabul and Moscow's Central Asian Moslem republics. These Soviet republics and the five Afghan northern provinces hold the same Uzbek, Tajik and Turkoman ethnic groups.    &quot;When you left Vietnam, you wanted to forget the place,&quot; Mr. Khasan Karkar says. &quot;The Soviets haven't any such intention regarding Afghanistan.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>