<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871207-0106 </DOCNO><HL> Gorbachev and Botha: Two of a Kind?---By Owen Harries</HL><DD> 12/07/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST AFRIC </IN><TEXT>   If foreign leaders were ranked in terms of how favorably they are treated by the Western media, Mikhail Gorbachev would come near the head of the list. P.W. Botha, the president of South Africa, would be close to the bottom. Few would see anything odd about this. Yet it is odd. For there are striking similarities in roles they play within their respective countries.    Both men are in charge of repressive regimes based on ideologies that are hopelessly flawed, intellectually and morally. In each case the performance of the regime is disastrously impeded by the ideology that legitimizes it, to the extent that its ultimate survival is questionable.    Unlike their predecessors, both Messrs. Gorbachev and Botha are well aware of this and, although each owes his present eminence to years of faithful doctrinal orthodoxy, both are committed to introducing sweeping changes. In each case the primary purpose of the changes is to increase the system's efficiency and ensure its continuing viability.    Both men face serious internal opposition to change. In the Soviet Union, Mr. Gorbachev is confronted by an entrenched &quot;nomenklatura&quot; whose power, privileges and status are threatened by his reform program. In addition, many ordinary people who have become accustomed to job security, poor work performance and subsidized food feel threatened. In South Africa, Mr. Botha's attempt to dismantle important sections of the edifice of apartheid faces similar opposition from the Afrikaner establishment, on both doctrinal and monopolistic grounds, and from working-class whites anxious about their racially based economic and social status. The emergence of the Conservative Party as South Africa's official opposition party testifies to the hostility Mr. Botha faces.    At the same time, Messrs. Gorbachev and Botha share another problem that invariably accompanies attempts to change a rigid and repressive system: that of maintaining control over the forces and expectations unleashed. This is vital in three respects: to ensure the authority and survival of the reforming leader himself (remember, as no doubt Mr. Gorbachev does, the fate of Nikita Khrushchev); to prevent the disorder that would legitimize a conservative backlash; and to prevent escalation from the reform they seek to an attempted complete transformation of the system, which they do not want.    In Mr. Gorbachev's case, the fate of Boris Yeltsin, his chosen but apparently impetuous instrument, has demonstrated the importance of this concern dramatically. In South Africa, it has been evident in Mr. Botha's sharp reaction to any external attempt to force the pace of change (such as the efforts of the Commonwealth Eminent Person's Group), and in his insistence on interspersing reform with tough pronouncements and occasional reversions to conspicuous acts of oppression.    There are other important similarities in the situations facing the two men. Both preside over countries that include a multiplicity of nationalities, with power being inordinately concentrated in one group (to which in each case the leader belongs). Again, the fact that both regimes are repressive means that, at least by Western standards, the security forces play an unusually active and prominent role in the political life of each.    As against this list of similarities, there are also some important differences between the two leaders. By no means least as far as Western media treatment is concerned is the matter of style. Mr. Gorbachev is a man of considerable political and intellectual accomplishment, able to charm someone as hardheaded as Margaret Thatcher as well as demonstrate the common touch in street contacts with the Russian people. As these qualities historically have been in such short supply in the Soviet context, they are particularly eyecatching. On the other hand, Mr. Botha is an extremely unattractive public figure -- a hectoring, moralizing bully whose political long suit is intimidation.    Mr. Botha has been in charge of his country for much longer (since 1978) than the Soviet leader has been of his (1985) and therefore rightly can be considered to bear more responsibility for the current state of affairs (though it is relevant to point out that Mr. Gorbachev has been a member of the Politburo since 1979).    Mr. Botha absolutely dominates the South African political scene and has no serious challenger within the ruling party. We know much less about Mr. Gorbachev's power base, but there are indications that it may not be secure, and some good judges predict that his tenure in office will not be a long one. Indeed, the fact that Mr. Gorbachev appears to be prepared to take risks and live dangerously contributes to his attractiveness in Western eyes: Not only is it evidence of the seriousness of his commitment, but it adds a dramatic tension to his performance.    Many of these differences tell in Mr. Gorbachev's favor. But there are at least two other differences that should work the other way.    First, while Mr. Gorbachev has spoken regularly and eloquently about the need for &quot;perestroika,&quot; so far he has actually achieved little. Mr. Botha, on the other hand, already has a significant record of reform to his credit.    Influx control regulations (the famous &quot;pass laws&quot;) have been abolished; there have been limited reforms of the Group Areas Act, permitting integrated communities where residents want them (Hillsborough in central Johannesburg is the best-known example); the Immorality Act has been scrapped, permitting mixed marriages; dozens of central business districts have been opened for trading by all races; black trade unions have been legalized and given the right to strike; universities have been desegregated. In addition, blacks, coloreds and Indians have gained memberships on executive councils in previously all-white provincial governments, and last month a nonracial Joint Executive Authority was established to administer Natal Province and KwaZulu.    Many anti-apartheid activists, inside and outside South Africa, express skepticism about these reforms; and indeed judged in terms of how far there is to go before legalized racism is abolished in South Africa, these changes are modest. But judged in terms of the situation as it was a generation ago, in the days of Verwoerd and Vorster, they are very significant. Even more convincing evidence is that the platform of the most extreme pro-apartheid party -- the Herftighte National Party -- demands no more than a return to the policies of 1967. If changes of the magnitude listed above were to occur in the Soviet Union, they would be greeted with hosannas as proof positive of redemption.    A second difference is this: If Mr. Botha's pattern of reform continues and something approaching a multiracial system -- even one stopping well short of one man, one vote -- results, it would be a pure gain for the West. A divisive moral and political issue would be substantially mitigated (it is the racial character of the regime, not the fact that it is undemocratic, that renders it exceptionally noxious) without creating any new strategic problem of great consequence. On the other hand, if Mr. Gorbachev succeeds the results will be ambiguous for the West: Against the benefits of a more tolerant, less dogmatic Soviet Union will have to be weighed the consequences of a more efficient, effective adversary. For those prepared to think politically, this is not a small difference.    Given all this, how is the Western media's different treatment of Messrs. Gorbachev and Botha explained? At a superficial level it undoubtedly has something to do with the &quot;style-personality&quot; factor. But not much. Coverage would stay much the same if reforms in Pretoria were implemented by a personable, articulate fellow while those in Moscow were promised by a dour and charmless general secretary.    It goes deeper than that. One suspects that, consciously or unconsciously, most Western liberals do not want to see the system in South Africa reformed to the extent that it would cease to be a moral disgrace. They want it destroyed -- even if the cost should be high in terms of bloodshed, disorder and the installation of an alternative repressive regime (which, after all, would be no worse than most other black African regimes and could be excused, as they are, in terms of past injustices).    On the other hand, given the copious evidence of the large and sustained utopian investment of the left in the Soviet &quot;experiment&quot; (and, at various times, in those of China, Vietnam, Cuba and Nicaragua), there are good grounds for believing that a somewhat humanized and relaxed Soviet Union that was also more efficient would be profoundly satisfying -- much more so than the final collapse of that system.    Perhaps this will be thought unjust. If so, there is a simple test: When you are about to pass a judgment -- favorable or unfavorable -- on Mr. Gorbachev's performance, pause to try it on Mr. Botha. And vice versa. It will not always work -- in some instances the relevant differences will so outweigh the similarities as to make the test invalid. But the discipline of considering whether you are applying the same standards consistently will itself be healthy and invigorating.    ---   Mr. Harries is co-editor of The National Interest. </TEXT></DOC>