<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880426-0064 </DOCNO><HL> Gay-Rights Groups and Insurers Battle Over Required AIDS Tests </HL><AUTHOR> Roger Ricklefs (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> INS PHA </IN><TEXT>   John Hancock Mutual Life Insurance Co. has sponsored one program after another to help fight AIDS. Only last month, it helped underwrite &quot;Rhythms of Hope,&quot; a benefit dance performance for the AIDS Action Committee of Massachusetts, and threw a champagne party for the cast.    But Hancock also has been fighting to deny insurance, in effect, to those most likely to suffer from AIDS. Like other Massachusetts insurers, it has gone to court to kill proposed state regulations, pushed by AIDS-issue groups, that would ban testing for AIDS-virus antibodies as part of health-insurance screening.    Insurers and gay rights groups nationwide are escalating their fight over AIDS issues, with testing foremost among them. &quot;If we aren't allowed to test, then our other policyholders will have to subsidize these risks,&quot; says Mary Gallagher, a Hancock spokeswoman.    Benjamin Schatz, director of the AIDS project for National Gay Rights Advocates, a California-based public-interest law firm, counters, &quot;The AIDS crisis points out the fundamental flaw in our insurance system. Those who most need access to health insurance are least able to get it.&quot;    A sense of urgency pervades the testing issue. Scientists once thought that only 10% or perhaps 20% of all AIDS-virus carriers would contract the disease. But new studies raise the estimate to 30% or more. Barring a treatment breakthrough, researchers suggest, most virus carriers eventually will suffer at least some immune-system deterioration.    The government estimates that one million to 1.5 million Americans are infected with the AIDS virus. Most insurance companies consider all these people uninsurable and want to test for AIDS new applicants for individual and small-group health and life policies. So far, the companies have won more battles than they have lost; test bans are currently in effect in only California and the District of Columbia.    &quot;Testing goes to the heart of what insurance is all about,&quot; says Lawrence H. Mirel, executive director of the District of Columbia Insurance Federation. &quot;If you are prohibited from evaluating a risk, you don't want to take the risk.&quot; The federation was founded two years ago to fight the district ban on AIDS-virus testing.    Many people in the AIDS community, however, argue that health care should be a universal right. Stephen Smith, chairman of the Metropolitan Washington Committee on AIDS Issues, a coalition of AIDS-service and gay groups in D.C. that lobbied for the D.C. ban on testing, says, &quot;The key issue for us is to preserve access to quality health care and quality of life for people who are going to develop AIDS. In this country you have to have private health insurance coverage to be assured access to quality health care.&quot;    Opponents of testing don't argue that people with the AIDS virus deserve different treatment than people with other diseases; rather, they say, insurance companies shouldn't be allowed to test for any pre-existing condition before issuing new policies. &quot;We would advocate access to insurance for everyone,&quot; Mr. Smith says. &quot;AIDS is just an urgent part of the more general problem.&quot; He and others suggest a combination of private and public funding to achieve such health coverage.    Many insurance-industry executives say people with the AIDS virus should get health insurance through state-established &quot;risk pools,&quot; which would offer coverage to individuals in high-risk categories, including those infected with AIDS, through high premiums and government subsidies.    William Mayville, president of Professional Insurance Planners in Miami, a self-funded health plan for a small group, says the AIDS epidemic &quot;is so catastrophic that unless the government is willing to make a serious financial commitment,&quot; there is no ready answer.    The Health Insurance Association says AIDS claims cost commercial life and health insurers only $292 million and amounted to 0.6% of all claims settlements in 1986, the latest year for which figures are available. But over five years through 1991, the group says, health claims alone could total $10 billion.    In the Massachusetts case, Insurance Commissioner Peter Hiam over a year ago announced plans for a testing ban. After intense insurance industry lobbying, Gov. Michael Dukakis's administration watered down the rules. Mr. Hiam resigned in protest. Still dissatisfied, the industry argued that even the revised regulations exceeded the commissioner's authority. The insurers obtained a preliminary injunction staying the testing ban, pending a court hearing.    A New York state judge, in a ruling last week on an insurance industry suit, invalidated that state's testing ban on the grounds that the superintendent of insurance lacked the power to issue the regulations. A state insurance department spokesman says he expects an appeal.    Insurers have defeated test-ban bills in several other states. Testing is thus spreading fast, affecting even low-risk groups. A long-married New York City resident with two children had a chance to save $300 a year by switching life insurance carriers -- if he took the AIDS-virus test the insurer now requires for policies of $250,000 or more. Rather than take the risk, however small, of a false positive result that would go on his record, he stuck with the old insurer.    But some alternatives to testing are appearing. Golden Rule Insurance Co. in Indianapolis recently introduced a health policy that pays AIDS claims only if symptoms develop after the first policy year. But it also requires no testing. In writing the policy, the company consulted with Indianapolis gay groups, which found it acceptable. Six states have approved the policy so far.    AIDS groups and gay rights groups are also fighting in court to curb abuses such as testing without informed consent. Mark Scherzer, a New York lawyer, says he is pursuing several lawsuits against insurers that allegedly refused to pay AIDS claims on faulty grounds of pre-existing condition or misrepresentation on applications.    Many lawsuits allege that insurers are screening AIDS risks by rejecting applicants who are gay or live in neighborhoods with large gay populations. A National Gay Rights Advocates complaint to the California Department of Corporations alleges that HealthAmerica, a health maintenance organization, redlined all of San Francisco. Maxicare Inc., which now owns HealthAmerica, declines to comment.    Guidelines adopted by the National Association of Insurance Commissioners rule out considering sexual orientation in underwriting. But 30% of insurers surveyed by the Congressional Office of Technology Assessment say they do so anyway.    Gay rights groups are lobbying hard to bar the limiting of AIDS-related coverage to small amounts, a growing practice. Nineteen states, including Florida, already prohibit the practice, but self-insured groups may be exempted. For instance, a self-insured trust for 2,300 Florida restaurant and hotel workers now pays up to $1 million for a cancer or heart disease claim -- but only $15,000 for an AIDS claim.    With many drug users and homosexuals in the employee group, the little trust already has had 10 AIDS cases, says Mr. Mayville, the Professional Insurance Planners president. When an AIDS patient exceeds his insurance limit, Mr. Mayville says, he &quot;gets the hospital to eat the bill.&quot; But with 10 AIDS cases already, he says, &quot;if we didn't have the limit, the trust wouldn't exist any more.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>