<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870511-0112 </DOCNO><HL> Manager's Journal:Immigration Law May AlienateYour Foreign Professional Staff---By Lawrence Lataif</HL><DD> 05/11/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FORGNJUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS) </IN><TEXT>   An international oil-tanker company in the U.S. recently needed a director of maintenance for its world-wide fleet, someone who specialized in Japanese shipyard engineering and architecture, and it needed him immediately. Delay was stranding the entire fleet.    A year ago, many companies would have hired a foreigner with the requisite skills, put him to work and then applied for a visa. However, just before the dawn of the new age in immigration law, the company in question endured the downtime, not daring to proceed without careful prior compliance with the tough new Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986.    The act, which takes effect June 1 but which has certain retroactive aspects to Nov. 7, rewrites almost a century of American immigration law. It transforms the business of hiring foreign executives and professionals from a matter of routine personnel processing to a vexing, often urgent, issue requiring the involvement of top management. Successful corporate compliance with the new act and its regulations will demand a high level of coordination among top management, personnel managers and legal counsel. Most corporations are neither prepared for nor, in many cases, even aware of the need for this level of involvement.    The act, in general, has the following provisions:    --Every employer, under threat of perjury, must verify in writing that all employees -- U.S. citizens as well as aliens -- are eligible to work and that the required documentation has been examined.    --Every company must develop an extensive &quot;Employment Verification System&quot; and keep records of work authorization.    --Failure to comply can, in the extreme, land corporate senior managers in prison.    One significant reason why increased coordination and centralization are called for arises from the fact that the act generally holds parent corporations responsible for the violations of any of its subsidiaries or divisions.    The Employment Verification System affects recruiting, promotions, transfers and terminations of every foreign employee except those who have permanent-residence visas. Currently, violations of the verification system can trigger sanctions ranging from fines for paper-work violations to criminal misdemeanor and felony prison terms for senior managers of companies repeatedly violating the law. Top executives, therefore, need to monitor and set policy for employment verification and business-visa processing for foreign employees.    While the old immigration law theoretically required visas before hiring, employers could hire first and apply for visas second with no threat of sanctions against them. Consequently, many if not most foreign executives were routinely offered employment before consideration was given to the appropriate business visas.    As with the oil-tanker company, critical initiatives may be stymied or delayed pending application for, and issuance of, the visa. Several months ago, one major European electronics company saw its carefully planned multimillion-dollar research and marketing program for a new computer product jeopardized because 15 key executives and professionals with specialized knowledge had not yet obtained work visas.    In another case, the buyer of a major U.S. company refused to sign the contract to purchase until it received assurances that two key foreign executives would have indefinite work authorization to manage the company after acquisition.    Promotion and transfer decisions affecting foreign workers who want to move to the U.S. or are already in the U.S. no longer can be made without advance planning, with the paper work delegated after the fact to the personnel department. This is true because many categories of non-immigrant visas are limited to the specific job for which the person initially was granted work permission. Giving the foreign employee a promotion or a transfer to a different job could invalidate the work visa.    Along with the new law are regulations that have received little publicity but that also will require a high degree of involvement by senior management. Under these regulations, any immigration filing (for example, a company's application for a visa) becomes a permanent part of the company's immigration compliance profile. The Immigration and Naturalization Service's evaluation of the company's current and future applications will take into account prior filings -- whether they were made before or after the act became effective. Senior management, therefore, will have to live with the representations made in all filings.    In this strict new world of American business-visa law, exaggerated boilerplate claims such as &quot;He's critical to the operation of our division&quot; will not stand up to INS review, especially if after two months the employee is gone and the division continues to function smoothly. Given the potential for a company to be tainted by past filings, it is now advisable, if not necessary, to conduct an internal audit of prior immigration filings in order to calculate potential exposure.    In short, business-visa and compliance procedures will become a constant corporate concern. The steady stream of expected litigation and regulation changes will require permanent channels of coordination and centralization among top management, legal counsel and personnel departments.    In the same way that discrimination, tax, securities and other areas of government regulation have become routine responsibilities of corporate management, so, too, have immigration and business-visa matters.    ---   Mr. Lataif is special immigration counsel in the Washington office of Jones, Day, Reavis andamp; Pogue. </TEXT></DOC>