<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871005-0021 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 10/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   THE U.S. AND CANADA REACHED agreement on a trade accord.    The tentative pact, which would fall short of completely establishing &quot;free&quot; trade, nevertheless was hailed by Reagan and Prime Minister Mulroney as a historic step. The accord, which was reached after hectic negotiations on the eve of a deadline for expedited congressional review, now faces a tough ratification process in both nations. The pact provides for the phasing-out of tariffs and placing limits on other barriers such as subsidies.    The U.S. made concessions by agreeing to a bilateral commission whose rulings would be binding in certain cases. The issue caused a recent impasse.    ---   MEXICO'S PRI CHOSE Budget Minister Salinas as its presidential candidate.    The ruling party's decision virtually assures that the 39-year-old Salinas will take office in December 1988 following elections in the summer. The selection also makes likely the continuation of economic-austerity policies popular with business and foreign bankers but increasingly resented by workers. Many consider Salinas an architect of an economic program that has liberalized foreign trade and sold off some unproductive state enterprises.    The Salinas nomination came after a weekend of frenzied and secret negotiations at PRI headquarters. PRI's president said the decision was unanimous.    ---   REAGAN PLANS to fight to the end to seat Bork on the Supreme Court.    Sen. Hatch (R., Utah) said the president authorized him to say the U.S. Appeals Court judge's name wouldn't be withdrawn. The president is expected to lose his first showdown tomorrow, when a Senate Judiciary panel vote is scheduled. Sen. DeConcini (D., Ariz.), a panel member, is expected to announce opposition to Bork today, Senate aides said.    Depending on the vote of Sen. Heflin (D., Ala.), an indicator of Southern Democratic sentiment, there's a chance of a negative panel recommendation.    ---   An aftershock jolted Southern California, causing one death, dozens of injuries and further damage. The pre-dawn aftershock, the strongest of 22 that followed last week's earthquake, registered 5.5 on the Richter scale at the California Institute of Technology. The main earthquake caused six deaths and about $108 million in damage.    ---   Chinese authorities imposed a curfew and troops sealed off the Tibetan capital of Lhasa following pro-independence demonstrations last week that left at least six dead. Buddhist monks at a monastery outside the holy city said they planned more protests for Wednesday, the 37th anniversary of China's annexation of Tibet.    ---   Salvadoran officials opened talks with rebel leaders in El Salvador, the first since 1984, on ending the civil war that has claimed 60,000 lives. Meanwhile, Reagan is expected to use a Wednesday speech to the Organization of American States to lay out a U.S. Contra-aid timetable and tough new demands on Nicaragua's government.    ---   A GAO report said the Reagan administration violated congressional restrictions in using federal funds to finance a self-described propaganda operation in the U.S. in behalf of the Nicaraguan Contras. The operation appears to have entailed the financing of articles for submission to major American newspapers.    ---   A defense bill faces a veto by Reagan because it contains a provision prohibiting the president from violating the traditional interpretation of the 1972 Anti-Ballistic Missile Treaty. The Senate passed the $303 billion defense authorization bill in a 56-42 vote following a bitter partisan debate on the arms-control provision.    ---   Immigration officials said the U.S. has issued the first notice to fine an employer under the employer-sanctions provision of the nation's new immigration law. The notice, issued to an Arlington, Va., Quality Inn owned by Manor Care Inc., says the hotel faces fines of $16,500 for employing undocumented aliens.    ---   Iran shelled the Iraqi city of Basra in what it called retaliation for a recent series of raids on Iranian oil targets. Tehran also said its naval forces were conducting maneuvers in a Persian Gulf incident Saturday in which several speedboats approached an oil platform off Saudi Arabia, prompting a U.S. warship to race to the area.    ---   Soviet and U.S. officials are consulting on the makeup of an interim Afghanistan government that would oversee the withdrawal of Soviet troops, the Baltimore Sun reported. The consultations began after a meeting last month between Shultz and Foreign Minister Shevardnadze, the report said.    ---   Sessions was released from the hospital following his collapse last week with a bleeding stomach ulcer. He said he would be sworn in as FBI chief Thursday.    ---   Sri Lanka's Jayewardene said he would withdraw Indian peacekeeping forces from a port city northeast of Colombo if the troops did not restore peace after recent separatist fighting in which 21 people have died. New Delhi said Sri Lankan troops had tried to provoke the Indian forces.    ---   Died: Jean Anouilh, 77, French playwright, Saturday, in Lausanne, Switzerland, of a heart attack . . . . Madeleine Carroll, 81, film actress, Friday, in Marbella, Spain. </TEXT></DOC>