<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870513-0125 </DOCNO><HL> Arms Control: Just Say No---By Seymour Weiss</HL><DD> 05/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   While the initial euphoria has died down, an arms-control agreement with the Soviets on the Intermediate Nuclear Forces in Europe still seems likely. Why has this prospect aligned hawks and doves in curious alliances on both sides of the issue?    Administration spokesmen, traditionally hawkish on arms control, make these arguments in favor of the agreement: It would result in a reduction of about 1,300 Soviet warheads as compared with about 300 on comparable U.S. systems in Europe, a major favorable asymmetry. And it would be the first arms-control pact to achieve real reductions. The administration is joined by doves who also see in the agreement the prospect for neo-detente.    What then are the objections? They are several. The agreement is unverifiable, it is based on faulty strategic logic and it courts political trouble.    To start with verification, the Soviet SS-20 is a mobile missiles, inherently difficult to identify even when deployed. To verify the destruction of those already deployed, even assuming this is accomplished with U.S. observers on-site, will require some measure of dependence on the Soviets identifying all the systems they have deployed. Additionally, unless the agreement provides for the destruction of production lines or for on-site inspection of suspected production (and storage) sites, the U.S. would have to depend upon the Soviets not to produce and store additional missiles beyond those they declare for destruction. In fact, Defense Department unclassified publications assert that the Soviets have produced SS-20 missile reloads.    The verification issue is further complicated by permitting the Soviets to retain 100 warheads and associated missiles. This builds into the agreement an ambiguity. Secretary of State George Shultz said that the U.S. preference was that the last 100 warheads and associated missiles also should be destroyed. Inexplicably, Mr. Shultz coupled that statement with the aside that, of course, if the Soviets didn't agree, the U.S. would accept their retention of the residual SS-20s. That is tantamount to having conceded the point.    In sum, on the issue of verification, the agreement is ambiguous at best, utterly dependent upon the Soviets not cheating at worst. History provides ample testimony to the Soviets' willingness to exploit ambiguity in arms-control agreements and -- where that is insufficient to serve their purposes -- to flatly cheat, a point that this administration, to its credit, has repeatedly reminded the American public of. Given the emphasis that has been placed on Soviet cheating on past agreements, it is incredible that the administration would enter into such an unverifiable arms-control arrangement.    Verification aside, what are the strategic implications of the prospective agreement? Some experts, such as Henry Kissinger and Richard Nixon, express concern that the proposal will have the effect of reducing the nuclear deterrent to Soviet aggression, leaving Europe vulnerable to the Soviets' superior conventional force. Others, like Former Secretary of Defense James Schlesinger, argue that such concerns are overstated, since more than 4,000 nuclear weapons will remain in Europe. Each makes valid points, but the Kissinger-Nixon argument seems stronger.    The U.S. systems to be removed are long-range missiles capable of hitting the U.S.S.R. They were installed in the first place in the belief that such a capability served to deter Soviet aggression.    The systems that would remain are largely short-range.    This issue troubles the supreme allied commander, Gen. Bernard Rogers, as it does America's allies, for it seems to challenge the underlying premise of North Atlantic Treaty Organization strategy. From its earliest days the Western alliance recognized that democracies, in time of peace, would not devote the funds nor manpower to match the totalitarian Soviet alliance. Instead, it placed its faith in a deterrence strategy promising a nuclear riposte in the event conventional defense failed.    While many have questioned the credibility of this strategy as the Soviets have developed a nuclear capability to respond in kind, nuclear deterrence remains to this day at the heart of NATO's strategy. Neither the U.S. nor its European allies are prepared to renounce that strategy; many fear the proposed Intermediate Nuclear Forces agreement may be a de facto step in the direction of abandoning a reliance on nuclear deterrence. The agreement has, accordingly, created great political turmoil in Europe. Which leads to the third major objection -- its political impact.    It has been Soviet policy since the inception of NATO to sow discord between the Europeans and the U.S. with the object of destroying the alliance. Recognizing Soviet purposes, the U.S. and its allies have stood together even when confronting politically disruptive issues such as occurred when the decision initially was made to install U.S. intermediate-range missiles in Europe.    Several European governments paid a high political price in resisting opposition from leftist parties to the introduction of the U.S. missiles. They now face the prospect of a U.S.-Soviet deal to remove those missiles. Admittedly, the Europeans had called for negotiations with the Soviets designed to get rid of the SS-20s. Either they, like many in the U.S., never expected the Soviets to accept the proposal or they, like many in the U.S., had not thought through the consequences for NATO security should the proposal be accepted.    In the last analysis the Europeans probably will agree to support the U.S. deal. It is difficult for them to do otherwise. The U.S. is the leader of the alliance and the Europeans' security is still dependent upon that alliance. But much damage already has been done, and to this extent Soviet purposes already have been served.    There is another dimension to the political implications of the proposed agreement. As earlier noted, some supporters see in it a breakthrough to improved U.S.-Soviet relations. Some American experts have advanced the extravagant argument that it is important to sign the agreement because it supports Mikhail Gorbachev's reform efforts, as if it were clear that these efforts were likely to have a significant ameliorating effect upon Soviet totalitarianism. The evidence is sparse, to say the least. The whole notion of a major change in the way the Soviets do business creates a sense of deja vu. Time after time, wishful thinkers in the West have claimed to see nascent development of a major change in the Soviet system. Retired Prof. Charles Burton Marshall of Johns Hopkins School of Advanced International Studies has counted 52 such claims in the past 50 years -- that is, slightly more than one a year! Yet somehow we seem to end up with the same totalitarian state that oppresses its own people and would impose its will on others given half a chance.    If the political effect of an arms-control agreement is, for better or for worse, to entrench Mr. Gorbachev's position in the U.S.S.R., what is likely to be the political effect in the West? The word from the strongest advocates for the agreement is already being whispered: &quot;detente.&quot; A return to those good old days, it is argued, is certain to follow an arms-control summit. Mr. Gorbachev, who will not deign to come to the U.S. unless the U.S. signs on the dotted line, will be lionized by an American press corps of thousands hanging on his every word as he clinks champagne glasses with the American president.    Will Mr. Reagan's view of the Evil Empire disappear with the signing of an INF arms-control agreement? At the 1985 Geneva summit, he enunciated certain conditions for improved U.S.-Soviet relations, including a Soviet willingness to stop violating existing arms-control agreements and resolve regional disputes. But arms-control violations continue, according to the administration, and the Soviets continue to kill Afghans, according to the press. How could the president rationalize the neo-detente that is certain to emerge from an arms-control summit?    An agreement initially assumed to have been all but sealed by Mr. Shultz's trip to Moscow is not yet at hand. The allies might yet resist. Or the Soviets might insist on detailed conditions to which the U.S. administration cannot agree. (If my State Department experience on arms control taught me anything, it is that there is a vast difference between reaching agreement in principle and hammering out the difficult but essential details.)    When push comes to shove, the president may demonstrate that he meant what he said about verifiable agreements and about insisting on civilized Soviet behavior as pre-conditions to improved relations. Still, candor forces acknowledgement that arms control has been an infectious disease for many years longer than has AIDS, and like AIDS it has no cure. Abstinence is the answer, for which the administration shows little interest. If only the administration would take its own advice, offered in a different context, and &quot;just say no.&quot;    ---   Mr. Weiss, a retired ambassador, was director of the State Department's Bureau of Politico-Military Affairs in 1973. </TEXT></DOC>