<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881024-0101 </DOCNO><HL> Europe: Caution Should Guide Kohl in Moscow </HL><AUTHOR> Jed C. Snyder </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP FREST </CO><IN> ARO NUK </IN><DATELINE> WEST BERLIN  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Today West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl starts a visit in Moscow to meet with the Soviet leader, Mikhail Gorbachev. Mr. Kohl's voyage has a strong economic focus -- he has said he sees &quot;extensive&quot; chances for business cooperation between West Germany and the Soviet Union. This at a time when Germany is already leading a new rush to subsidize perestroika -- last week Deutsche Bank closed an agreement to pour some $1.9 billion of aid into Moscow's bottomless coffers. But Mr. Kohl's journey will also mark a troubling moment on the foreign-policy front: The beginning of a Soviet effort to build a resilient detente between Moscow and Bonn, founded upon Mr. Gorbachev's much heralded notion of a &quot;common European house.&quot; Like many a landlord, Mr. Gorbachev will exploit German fears that this home is in a neighborhood that will remain safe only as long as he is collecting the rent.    Mr. Gorbachev's argument will be powerful, appealing effectively to the German public's chronic insecurity about the future of the American commitment to Europe. It will also play to a dangerous belief held by another influential gentleman traveling to Moscow: West German Foreign Minister Hans Dietrich Genscher. Mr. Genscher's belief is that by &quot;helping&quot; Mr. Gorbachev through unilateral offers of arms control, the Federal Republic can assure its own security. Given a new fragility in the ruling coalition between Mr. Kohl's party, the Conservative Christian Democratic Union, and Mr. Genscher's party, the slender Free Democrats, the dovish Mr. Genscher is particularly powerful this season. Mr. Kohl is also looking weaker on the right since the death earlier this month of the legendary leader of his party's southern wing, Franz Josef Strauss.    Mr. Kohl's trip will also serve another goal of Mr. Gorbachev's: to insulate the German-Soviet discussion from the tone and content of the U.S.-Soviet dialogue. An independent Soviet approach to Bonn could have a number of bad effects, not the least of which would be the setting of a precedent for similar special relationships with other North Atlantic Treaty Organization allies. This in turn could fuel increasingly bitter post-INF Treaty debates in the United States over the character and level of the American commitment to Europe's defense.    Moscow's goals are clear: to steer European allies, particularly Germany, away from any effort to modernize either conventional or nuclear Alliance systems. Virtually any modernization decision by NATO would require approval from Bonn, since the Federal Republic's proximity to the East means that shorter-range NATO systems would be stationed on German real estate. Ironically, the INF Treaty has increased the strategic value of deploying such missiles in Germany. There is now a greater likelihood that the German fear of &quot;nuclear singularity&quot; will be realized. This is precisely the reverse outcome of what NATO intended when the two-track INF deployment was approved.    To reduce the nuclear pressure on Germany, the Alliance (prior to the INF Treaty) had attempted to address NATO's more glaring conventional force deficiencies. Here again, however, political pressures surrounding the treaty have subverted the best laid plans of strategists. The treaty's prohibition of deployment of intermediate range missiles, for example, erases NATO's only credible in-theater, land-based, nuclear capability to strike Soviet territory promptly. It also renders impotent key component missions of NATO's conventional capability. In particular, the Alliance will now be prohibited from employing non-nuclear, shorter and medium-range missiles to threaten Warsaw Pact airfields. Although very short-range missiles can be erected under the treaty, there is little political support to replace aging missiles like the Lance in West Germany.    This creates a dangerous asymmetry, since the Soviet Union has a modernized mobile force of shortest-range missiles -- like the Scud-B -- that is permitted under the INF Treaty. Many of these weapons can carry nuclear, conventional or chemical warheads. The principal targets for these weapons are NATO airbases, whose importance will now increase dramatically with the loss of the INF missiles. Tactical air power has become vitally important to NATO as it seeks, quixotically, to replace a portion of the nuclear-strike capability lost with the adoption of the INF's zero-zero formula.    Mr. Gorbachev could slow portions of the Alliance conventional modernization program as well. After a contentious debate, former NATO Supreme Allied Commander General Bernard Rogers was able to secure allied approval for a conceptual shift in Alliance strategy. Adoption of Follow-on-Forces-Attack was designed to destroy Soviet units designated to reinforce front-line forces. With the treaty's elimination of the missiles in the second-zero class, the conventional mission will now be considerably more difficult to accomplish, forcing greater reliance on aircraft that must penetrate dense Soviet air defenses, a task for which they are not well-configured.    Chancellor Kohl's trip to Moscow occurs just as the Alliance is structuring a new forum and approach for East-West conventional arms reductions. The new approach will reportedly look more closely at the more pressing threat to stability in Europe, the danger of surprise attack. NATO's conception of how to reduce that threat, however, differs significantly from that offered by Soviet negotiators.    NATO is anxious to reduce the levels of armored vehicles and mobile artillery, areas where the Warsaw Pact enjoys enormous advantages. The Soviet Union, for its part, seems at present prepared to reduce these weapons only in exchange for cuts in the numbers of the newly crucial NATO combat aircraft. Bonn is sufficiently concerned about the concentration of Soviet tanks and other armored vehicles along the German-German border, however, that the critical importance of maintaining current levels of attack aircraft may be discounted in a rush to agree to Mr. Gorbachev's arms control formula.    It is not unlikely that during the Kohl-Gorbachev meeting, the Soviet leader will offer the possibility of asymmetrical cuts in Warsaw Pact conventional forces, in return for NATO agreement to &quot;triple zero.&quot; Triple zero entails the removal of those shortest-range nuclear weapons that would remain after the INF reductions have been accomplished. This would effectively denuclearize NATO's defense, an outcome that many West German officials privately concede would please Foreign Minister Genscher. Chancellor Kohl would find it difficult to resist insistence on triple zero if the foreign minister threatened to break down the already anemic coalition government in Bonn over the issue.    Mr. Gorbachev is about to apply the principles of perestroika to NATO. Maybe it is time the tenants of the &quot;common European house&quot; evict their landlord.    ---   Mr. Snyder, who analyzes defense at two American think tanks, the National Strategy Information Center and the Center for Security Policy, is currently on a study trip in Europe. </TEXT></DOC>