<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870309-0004 </DOCNO><HL> What's News --World-Wide</HL><DD> 03/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   ENGINEERS ATTEMPTED to right a capsized ferry off the Belgian coast.    Two ships carrying giant cranes began the salvage operation on the British ferry in an effort to retrieve the bodies of 82 people believed trapped in the half-submerged vessel. The 7,951-ton Herald of Free Enterprise fell on its port side Friday minutes after leaving Zeebrugge, Belgium, en route to Dover, England. Relatives of passengers, meanwhile, began identifying the 53 bodies recovered thus far. Of the vessel's 543 passengers and crew, 408 survived.    A Belgian port official said a failed ballast system may have caused the ferry to capsize. Three inquiries opened to determine the cause of the disaster.    ---   Bank records indicate that a Cayman Islands firm believed controlled by a conservative publicist funneled private money to Nicaraguan rebels and to a Panama firm used by the NSC in its Iran-Contra initiative. Separately, a report shows that the firm transferred $1.3 million to a Swiss account overseen by North.    Sen. Robert Byrd said members of the select panels investigating the Iran-Contra affair will meet tomorrow to decide whether to grant limited immunity to Poindexter and North. Separately, the Washington Post reported that Poindexter told Reagan twice in 1986 that proceeds from the arms sales to Iran were being used to aid the Contras.    ---   Sen. Sam Nunn called for a link between the removal of all U.S. intermediate-range missiles from Europe and a reduction of Moscow's forces there. The chairman of the Armed Services panel, speaking on ABC-TV, said any U.S.-Soviet arms treaty should contain a clause limiting Soviet conventional and chemical capabilities in Europe.    ---   Three Israeli ministers demanded an official inquiry into the case involving American spy Jonathan Jay Pollard, which one cabinet minister said had caused &quot;unprecedented damage&quot; to U.S.-Israeli ties. The government, however, blocked debate by referring the matter to a special panel. Pollard received a life prison term last week.    ---   Pakistan said it would continue with the &quot;peaceful&quot; development of nuclear energy and won't be &quot;browbeaten or cajoled&quot; into abandoning the program. The U.S. has warned Pakistan that it will block a six-year, $4 billion aid program if Pakistan builds a nuclear bomb. Islamabad has denied that it is constructing such weapons.    ---   Iran is constructing a complex network of channels east of the Iraqi city of Basra to drain marshlands before a major offensive against the heavily fortified southern port, a British newspaper reported. The London Observer said it obtained satellite photographs showing Iranian troops building the 20-mile-long water sluice.    ---   Shevardnadze arrived in Laos to begin a swing through Communist Indochina on his Asian tour. The Soviet foreign minister, who traveled from Jakarta, is to visit Cambodia and Vietnam but reportedly doesn't carry any new Kremlin proposals aimed at ending the eight-year war in Cambodia.    ---   Officials in Manila said an associate of deposed Philippine leader Marcos has agreed to turn over to the government assets valued at more than $12 million. Antonio Floirenda agreed to give up the assets, which include U.S. properties, in exchange for lifting a freeze on his Philippine properties.    Philippine President Aquino denounced the country's communist guerrillas for the escalation of rebel attacks following the expiration of a 60-day cease-fire last month. Aquino, calling the insurgents &quot;stubborn,&quot; said they &quot;overestimate their public support&quot; and are headed toward defeat.    ---   Chinese leader Deng Xiaoping dismissed as a &quot;misunderstanding&quot; reports that his program for economic and political changes is facing stiff opposition from Communist Party hard-liners. Deng also reiterated a pledge to bring younger people into government, the Xinhua News Agency reported.    ---   Syrian President Assad pledged to liberate the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights, saying &quot;the Golan is Arab territory.&quot; In a speech broadcast in Damascus, Assad also defended Syria's occupation of West Beirut as a way to bring peace to Lebanon.    ---   Kurdish rebels raided a village in southeastern Turkey near the Syrian border, killing eight civilians, state radio in Ankara said. Turkey's interior minister threatened retaliation for the assault and called on Damascus to tighten border security.    ---   Nakasone's LDP was defeated in a byelection in Japan's northern prefecture of Iwate. A Socialist was elected to Tokyo's upper house, and the victory over the Liberal Democrats was viewed as a setback for the prime minister's tax program.    ---   Two election reviews have uncovered &quot;massive&quot; vote fraud and other irregularities in last month's mayoral primary balloting in Chicago. The reviews by the Chicago Board of Elections and by a private watchdog group found that about 50,000 votes in the Feb. 24 primary were improper.    ---   A local Ecuadoran official said at least 100 people were killed in two strong earthquakes Thursday that burst a natural dam in the Andean mountains in the eastern part of the country. The mayor of the town of Tena, southeast of Quito, said about 15,000 people were left homeless and that flooding was hampering rescue efforts.    ---   Died: Edward Zorinsky, 58, Democratic U.S. senator from Nebraska, Friday, in Omaha, of a heart attack. </TEXT></DOC>