<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870924-0096 </DOCNO><HL> Letters to the Editor:On the Docket: Robert Bork</HL><DD> 09/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SUPREME COURT (SUP)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   It is truly pathetic that even the most serious issues facing this country get bogged down in pat phrases that obscure more than they reveal. Edward H. Crane's discussion of Judge Robert Bork's nomination to the Supreme Court (&quot;The Soul of a Congressman,&quot; editorial page, Sept. 14) is full of such phrases as &quot;moral skepticism,&quot; &quot;original intent&quot; and &quot;majoritarianism,&quot; instead of saying what is substantively Judge Bork's position and why he (Mr. Crane) disagrees with it.    Take &quot;original intent&quot; - please. Its critics -- including Mr. Crane -- seem determined to have it mean something that its advocates (from Holmes to Bork) have never meant: the private, subjective beliefs or desires of those who drafted legislation and the Constitution. What those who advocate &quot;judicial restraint&quot; or &quot;original intent&quot; have been seeking, at least as far back as Blackstone, is the cognitive meaning of instructions found in the law.    When I see a sign saying &quot;No Left Turn,&quot; it is not my job to inquire into whether the person who composed or lettered that sign was into Zen or Existentialism. If I understand its cognitive meaning, then I know what to do or not to do. Constitutional law is of course somewhat more complicated, but that only means that it is often more difficult to discover cognitive meaning -- or, more realistically, the boundaries of possible meanings. It does not mean that we are free to psychoanalyze the Framers of the Constitution or to grab their philosophy and run with it.    None of this has anything to do with &quot;moral skepticism.&quot; All that is necessary (and sufficient) is to recognize that moral choices have already been made by the writers of laws before those laws and cases reach the judges.    Finally, there is the bugaboo of &quot;majoritarianism.&quot; What Judge Bork has said is that, within the constitutionally defined boundaries, neither judges nor other selfrighteous groups have a right to supercede or obstruct democratically chosen laws.    What is most disheartening about many such discussions of the impact of Judge Bork (or the Supreme Court) on a range of &quot;issues&quot; is that what is infinitely more important is having, in Chief Justice John Marshall's great phrase, &quot;a government of laws and not of men.&quot; The Bork nomination, at this juncture in history, is too fateful to let phrases and labels stand in the way of judging the man on his substantive -- and very substantial -- merits.    Thomas Sowell   Senior Fellow, Hoover Institution   Stanford, Calif.   ---   Normally an ardent supporter of your editorial positions, I have read with growing frustration your continued defense of Judge Bork. In your Sept. 15 editorial &quot;Bork: Overqualified?&quot; you complain that &quot;The campaign against Judge Bork is shrill, mean and anti-intellectual -- an assault on the notion of the law itself.&quot; Presumably, you mean an assault on the law as conceived by Judge Bork.    Judge Bork has stated: &quot;The participation of churches and of those who address politics in religious terms serves as a reminder that public policy ought always to be based upon, and held accountable to, morality.&quot; (Boston Globe editorial, Sept. 14). This is a curious view for Judge Bork to hold, given his views on morality:&quot; . . . I don't think there is any version of moral philosophy that can claim to be absolutely superior to all others,&quot; a belief that leads Judge Bork to affirm that &quot;the effort to create individual rights out of a general, abstract, moral philosophy is doomed to failure . . .&quot; (as quoted in Mr. Crane's Sept. 14 piece). Does the term &quot;anti-intellectual&quot; ring a bell?    Individual rights are a metaphysical given, a consequence of individual existence, from which both laws and morality must be derived. Judge Bork's belief that individual rights are intangibles, which must be derived from the prevailing morality, or invented by Capitol Hill, is in direct conflict with &quot;original intent,&quot; and with much of current intent. Among other considerations, such contempt for individual rights does not bode well for the free-enterprise system, of which, I presume, the Journal is still a supporter.    William F. Barton   Harvard, Mass.   ---   Your analysis of the Senate battle concerning the confirmation of Judge Bork focuses on civil-rights issues (back page, Sept. 11). Lost in such a narrow focus is Judge Bork's political vision of American society that inspires his approach toward specific legal issues. Those of us in the legal community who have been familiar with Judge Bork for a long time recognize that his approach to law has an equally important, activist dimension, which is fundamentally more dangerous to our democratic process and reminiscent of autocratic governments elsewhere.    While deferring to laws restricting civil liberties, Judge Bork strains to deny the democratic choice contained in laws designed to regulate big business and property interests. He has achieved fame in academic circles largely for his revisionist, anti-populist interpretation of antitrust and other laws regulating capital. According to Judge Bork, antitrust laws should be applied only in a manner that increases economic efficiency. But, utilizing a creatively deceptive analytic transformation, he has defined &quot;efficiency&quot; in neoclassical economic terms to mean the maximization of aggregate societal wealth, without regard for the distribution of that wealth or its political consequences.    Therefore, the theory goes, when big business engages in private monopolistic or cooperative conduct designed to force consumers to pay more for the same product, efficiency and societal wealth are increased and antitrust laws should not intervene: The &quot;rational&quot; consumer who pays more for the same product must value it more and has not been harmed, whereas the seller is better off.    If Judge Bork characterized his theoretical approach to regulating business as the academic theory that it is, academicians could debate its wisdom in good humor. But Judge Bork tells us, with intellectually embarrassing arrogance, that Congress intended for the antitrust laws to be applied as he suggests. He does not adhere to a philosophy of judicial restraint.    Prof. James F. Ponsoldt   University of Georgia School of Law    Athens, Ga.   Re Hodding Carter's Sept. 17 Viewpoint column, &quot;Bork Doesn't Speak for a Slumbering Majority&quot;: It is remarkable that, in the absence of criticism of Judge Bork, his credentials and his suitability for the office, Mr. Carter resorts to a somewhat biased summary of Ronald Reagan's supposed goals in nominating Judge Bork.    He further claims that Judge Bork will win for Mr. Reagan's &quot;political shocktroopers,&quot; who are hiding their &quot;Cheshire Cat grins&quot; in anticipation, those victories that they have been unable to win through the ballot box. I'd like to remind Mr. Carter that Mr. Reagan was re-elected by a large margin, indicating that the &quot;slumbering majority&quot; may in fact agree with his philosophy rather than the failed big-government philosophy of some of his forebears. I'd also like to remind him that the courts and the Supreme Court were meant to be the balance wheel of the Republic.    John S. Salzer Jr.   Arlington, Texas   ---   Two difficulties surround Mr. Carter's viewpoint: One is that both liberal and conservative presidents have been surprised on many occasions with decisions subsequently handed down by appointees who were thought to share their views. The court, as an institution, has seemed to have a way of taking a good bit of the ideology out of most appointees.    Second, the courts have, in the past 30 years, handed the liberal establishment in the country a great many decisions, all taken with the force of law, it could not have achieved through the political process. Was Mr. Carter complaining then?    Richard Ranville Jr.   Flint, Mich.   ---   Prof. Forrest McDonald (&quot;Supreme Court Nominees: A Look at the Precedents,&quot; editorial page, Sept. 16) failed to mention an important point: that Robert Bork will win his appointment to the Supreme Court by a relatively slim margin, if he wins at all. This is quite amazing, given the strong tendency in the Senate to allow a president to pick people for office as long as they are basically qualified.    President Reagan did not seek out a candidate with a broad or consensual appeal. Instead, he reached back into the dark caverns of political and legal extremism to find a person who fits, as he does, into the small bit of the political spectrum peopled by ultraconservatives.    Gerald L. Houseman   Fort Wayne, Ind.   ---   In your Sept. 15 back-page article, you state that the Senate in 1795 refused to confirm President Washington's nomination of John Rutledge for purely political considerations because Rutledge had severely attacked the Jay Treaty. The historically accurate reason for the Senate's rejection was that Rutledge was considered unfit for office by reason of mental instability, perhaps insanity.    Douglas Southall Freeman in volume seven of &quot;George Washington&quot; wrote: &quot;Between the time Washington had nominated Rutledge to be Chief Justice (on July 1) and when the Senate refused to confirm the nomination (on December 15), Rutledge had shown signs of mental instability. Friends excused Rutledge's speech in vehement denunciation of the British Treaty as due to a temporary derangement following the death of his wife.&quot; James R. Perry, former co-editor of &quot;The Documentary History of the Supreme Court of the United States,&quot; wrote in the Journal of the Early Republic, Winter 1986: &quot;On December 26 (1795) Rutledge again tried to take his life. Two days later Rutledge -- unaware of the Senate rejection -- wrote to Washington to resign for reasons of 'ill health'.&quot;    George W. Nordham   Waldwick, N.J.   ---   The Bork hearings are the finest celebration of the anniversary of our Constitution that could have been devised. They have explained and illuminated the function of the courts, the executive and the legislature, and the separation of powers.    Two key points have been made: The Congress may not change the Constitution by statute; the courts may not change the Constitution by personal opinion.    Nicholas Norton   Colchester, Conn.</TEXT></DOC>