<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871001-0113 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Why Not the Best?</HL><DD> 10/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> CONGRESS (CNG)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SUPREME COURT (SUP) </IN><TEXT>   The Bork hearings are over and despite the posturing and special-interest pressures the decision comes down to a handful of senators who seem honestly undecided. For senators interested in a decision on the merits, it's worth pondering for a moment the sweep of constitutional history as it applies to civil rights, judicial activism and Robert Bork.    Taking a broad view is not easy, of course, given the kind of campaign waged against the nominee -- a campaign that started, we see in a Washington Post profile of anti-Bork leader Ralph Neas, the moment Justice Powell resigned and before even the identity of the nominee was known. One thing the senators have to weigh is how business is done in the World's Greatest Deliberative Body. If pressure campaigns of this type are proved to work they will be repeated, and life as a senator will not be enviable.    Still, it's clear that the honest doubts of honest men center on two issues: civil rights, in particular the Supreme Court's historic efforts against racial discrimination; and judicial activism, the propriety of the courts' assuming decisions that properly belong to the elected branches of government. The tension between these issues is no accident but is a product of history.    For of course, the recent era of judicial activism started with Brown v. Board of Education, which ordered school integration &quot;with all deliberate speed.&quot; In trying to enforce this law, the courts encountered extraordinary resistance, often in clear bad faith. Faced with a doctrine of &quot;massive resistance,&quot; the courts were in effect forced to assert extraordinary powers and find extraordinary remedies.    The American people are quite rightly proud of this sort of activist court. The historical justification for Brown is unchallengeable and unchallenged. The decision reversed the judicial activism of an earlier era, Plessy v. Ferguson's unsustainable doctrine of separate but equal. And when the court moved, the legislative branch was hopelessly stalled by the undemocratic institution of the filibuster. In time the court's leadership helped open the legislative branch, allowing such landmark laws as the 1964 Civil Rights Act and, equally important in securing the rights of blacks, the 1965 Voting Rights Act.    All of this is now part of the warp and woof of American society. Practically no one, least of all anyone of Judge Bork's erudition, wants to reverse this kind of progress. But if a stiff dose of activism was crucial in the extraordinary circumstances of Brown, it nonetheless carries its dangers. Supreme Court justices are not elected and cannot be turned out by the people. The courts are not legislative bodies where compromise can be struck and consensus formed, nor executive bodies with experience at administration. The judiciary is supposed to exercise narrow powers and to be limited by a body of pre-existing law and constitutional doctrine, to be &quot;the least dangerous branch.&quot;    Quite predictably, as traditional inhibitions to activism were worn down, the well-known dangers appeared. In the effort to protect the downtrodden, judges discovered plenty of new rights to protect accused criminals, but none for victims. Judges freed convicted criminals from state and federal prisons because of &quot;unconstitutional&quot; overcrowding. Judges deinstitutionalized mental institutions; many of the supposed beneficiaries are today's pitiful homeless. The other day in Missouri, a federal judge asserted the power to levy taxes.    Worst of all, the activist temperament invited anyone with a gripe to come into court, with the hope that judges would make laws that the voters and their elected representatives would never approve. The litigation explosion was upon us.    And inevitably, these results have produced a political reaction. Religious fundamentalists who were previously nonpolitical were turned into the New Right almost overnight by the school-prayer decision. Ronald Reagan could make reining in the power of federal judges a leading platform item in two landslides. Where judges actually have to face elections, Rose Bird and her hyperactivist colleagues were cashiered from the California Supreme Court. The Bork foes have gained an upper hand in public opinion with a one-sided barrage the White House has not exerted itself to offset, but that is no guarantee they will like the final outcome of the game they are playing.    How, then, does Judge Bork fit into this historical maelstrom? As a legal scholar, he stopped supporting judicial activism when he saw that the courts had gone too far; he started to point early to its potential dangers. Yet, as was clear in his five days of testimony, he has no urge merely to turn activism in another direction. For example, he said that some doubtful court rulings, such as the broad view of the Commerce Clause, must stand because so many expectations have built up around them that they are now part of the social fabric. For another, he would give women the same protections blacks get from the 14th Amendment. And of course, his intelligence, integrity and scholarship are unchallenged.    The next phase of constitutional history has already begun; clearly it will consist of reimposing some limits on the excesses of judicial activism. Conceivably this could mean a wholesale rejection of both the bad and the good of the Warren Court, though we would think that likely only if Supreme Court seats become the spoils of demagogic political battles in which intelligence, scholarship and erudition count for nothing.    Honestly undecided senators, we would hope, would be looking for men with the temperament to make the next phase of constitutional history a constructive one, for men with the sophistication to conduct a principled and evolutionary change. In searching for such men, the first one you find is Robert Bork. </TEXT></DOC>