<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870102-0091 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Bookshelf:Deconstruction Is Not Cause for Rejoycing---By George V. Higgins</HL><DD> 01/02/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><TEXT>   Enduring is the sense of angry frustration that many readers experience on first looking into later works of that convoluted chap, James Joyce. Eight years after he published the 1914 &quot;Dubliners&quot; short-story collection, seven years after &quot;Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man,&quot; he resurfaced in Paris with &quot;Ulysses&quot; and no compunction whatsoever about dismaying former lovers with its inaccessibility. And that was just the beginning; in 1939, he put out &quot;Finnegan's Wake,&quot; once and for all establishing a record for aesthetic perversity that seems secure against assault for as long as the Liffey shall run. That Joycean achievement -- an Irish intellectual mandarin's version of cockney rhyming slang, reinvented from the materials of myth, legend, most religions -- could (although it shouldn't) serve as well as the poetry of W.B. Yeats as an introduction to exported Irish literature for the common reader. Unfortunately, Denis Donoghue, himself something of an Irish export (from the faculty of University College, Dublin, via Cambridge to New York University), is determined that both shall.    &quot;We Irish&quot; (Knopf, 276 pages, $18.95) collects some 29 &quot;Essays on Irish Literature and Society,&quot; which in a general sort of way express Mr. Donoghue's principles for the guidance of readers perplexed by the idiosyncrasies peculiar to modern Irish writing. Excluding the texts but not the concerns of his essays in The Atlantic and The New York Review of Books on recent political problems in Ireland, Mr. Donoghue begins by recapitulating Joyce's sin of willful obfuscation. He submerges himself in what amounts to a painstaking -- and inconclusive -- inquiry that those absent from recent academic controversies may find slow going indeed. Only after that self-accreditation does he feel comfortable representing his recent observations on new works by Irish writers. The great issue that beguiles him here is whether deconstructionism offers promise as a tool for the interpretive understanding of deliberately obscurantist writing.    For the benefit of those still in command of their faculties (and possessed of no urge to command a faculty): deconstructionism is a fashionable rage chiefly virulent among teachers of literature harbored in New Haven and Paris. It starts with the nihilistic premise that words as literature exist apart from any denotative function. Neatly exonerating himself of the obligation to say first whether deconstructionism has any merit whatsoever except as a means for the ambitious young professor to acquire tenure (I think it does not), Mr. Donoghue is at liberty to perceive in Yeats and Joyce those creative expressions of Irish singularity conventionally prerequisite to the conventional pronouncement that Irish literary genius is not only genius, but unique. He exercises that liberty, makes that declaration, and in doing so, writes rot.    For the life of me, I have never been able to verify the provenance of the pervasive attitude among specialists in particular periods of literature, or literature of particular national origin, that their subjects must be first nominated and then stoutly defended as supremely fiendish word puzzles. The motive, yes; that's clear: If the subject can be established as nuanced far too subtly for the non-specialist to grasp, then the initiates of the sacred mysteries will be excused from further congress with mortals, and their ravings at better conferences venerated as inspired glossolalia.    Whatever the etiology, the malaise remains an abomination, as Mr. Donoghue's new book conclusively demonstrates. After all the windy blather about whether Mikhail Bakhtin either courageously defied Stalin (or, as seems more likely, was roundly ignored by that worthy) by inquiring whether Dostoevsky and Tolstoy toed the party line (if you have trouble guessing from that sentence what on earth that has to do with Joyce and Yeats, well, the book will give you more); after all the ponderous drivel about whether there is a difference between legend and myth (yes), ought to be (yes, but then again, no), and whether anyone cares (possibly); Mr. Donoghue then offers the lucid half of the book.    It consists of the shrewd observations he composed when moved by events or other writers' books to ruminate on the connection between 20th-century Irish politics and Irish literature. It includes his thoughts provoked when collections of stories by Frank O'Connor and Sean O'Faolain; letters of John Millington Synge, AE and Sean O'Casey; biography (Maud Gonne) and poetry by Seamus Heaney went to him for comment in serious journals. It displays to good advantage his sharp wit (On the poetry of Austin Clark: &quot;Belatedly, he divined that God was trying to tell him something, and then he found that he had something to tell God, namely, that he no longer believed in Him, and now resented the expense of spirit in having believed.&quot;) It affords him opportunities to express reservations about the pontifications of such as Conor Cruse O'Brien on the troubles in Northern Ireland, and to take simultaneous measure of the people of the Republic, to whom (he thinks) much is publicly attributed about matters that interest them not at all. Inside the stuffy pedant there was lurking all along the bright and lively commentator, bored out of his mind. He must loathe the faculty club; pity he took us there. </TEXT></DOC>