<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880805-0070 </DOCNO><HL> Potomac Watch: Peace Breaks Out And Bush Wants Voters to Ask Why </HL><AUTHOR> Paul A. Gigot </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   President Reagan's defense-bill veto is playing as the fall campaign's first salvo on foreign policy, and let's hope it is. Freedom and peace have been breaking out in all sorts of odd places, and the campaign ought to serve as a referendum on at least two simple questions: Do Ronald Reagan's policies deserve some of the credit? And would Michael Dukakis's alternatives do as well?    George Bush in particular should welcome this debate, and this week he began to act as if he does. His recommendation was crucial to Mr. Reagan's decision to veto. More important for his chances in November, Mr. Bush also gave a pair of speeches that began to lay out his own foreign-policy vision, one far more detailed and comprehensive than anything Gov. Dukakis has offered so far.    His message -- reworked by campaign newcomers Robert Zoellick (recently of Jim Baker's Treasury staff) and Dennis Ross (National Security Council) from a draft by Ambassador to West Germany Richard Burt -- is essentially this: Freedom and democracy have been expanding in the world since 1981, and not by an accident of history.    &quot;The revival of American leadership&quot; under Mr. Reagan made an enormous contribution, Mr. Bush says. The military buildup proved to the Soviets the cost of world-wide adventurism was too great, while nuclear modernization and SDI made them get serious about arms control. U.S. resolve helped promote democracy, from Grenada to the Philippines, while America's renewed economic success spread the lesson of free-market development. The choice in 1988 is whether to continue these policies or return to those that brought us Soviets in Afghanistan, Cubans in Angola, and so on.    That summary oversimplifies the argument, but the essence is that Mr. Bush makes a serious attempt to explain why the world looks so much better for U.S. interests now than it did in 1979. He says it isn't, as some Democrats imply, all due to the miraculous Mr. Gorbachev. And even if it were, why did Gorby emerge in the &quot;evil-empire&quot; 1980s rather than in the &quot;inordinate fear of communism&quot; Carter years?    The question poses a challenge for Mr. Dukakis, who hasn't even begun to explain this remarkable change. Indeed, his strategy seems to be not to say very much at all about foreign policy. His &quot;well-received&quot; Atlantic Council speech in June was little more than a routine defense of NATO, while his acceptance speech in Atlanta devoted all of seven sentences to U.S. security. (His boldest line -- that drugs are more of a threat than the Sandinistas -- was a rewrite of Jesse Jackson.)    When Mr. Dukakis is specific, moreover, he sometimes sounds as if he's caught the allergies of his party's left. Expect the Bush campaign to highlight several of Mr. Dukakis's dovish obsessions:   The nuclear allergy. Mr. Dukakis's aides insist the governor no longer opposes &quot;the concept&quot; of a new land-based nuclear missile (weapons are like morals; they're easier to support in concept) but other positions still throw him outside the postwar U.S. nuclear consensus. Journalist Lally Weymouth has reported, for example, that as recently as 1986 Mr. Dukakis opposed America's GWEN network of military communications in Massachusetts. &quot;GWEN is part of a nuclear war-fighting strategy,&quot; he wrote in a letter to the Air Force.    Dukakis aide (and former Ted Kennedy staffer) James Steinberg defends this position because GWEN might survive a nuclear attack. But that's precisely the point: If communications can survive an attack, a U.S. president might be able to plan a response short of total nuclear war. He could also still talk to the Soviets. Deterrence is actually enhanced, but Mr. Dukakis looks at nuclear weapons and sees only the Apocalypse. As Democrat Jay Winik reminds me, this view repudiates a consensus going back to JFK's warning that a president needs options other than simply &quot;humiliation or holocaust.&quot;    Arms control at any cost. The defense bill vetoed by Mr. Reagan contains numerous restrictions on a president's ability to negotiate arms agreements. Already yesterday, Sen. Sam Nunn was telling colleagues he doesn't want the Democrats to fight in public to restore these restrictions, so they'll try to do it all in the next House-Senate conference where voters won't notice. But would Chief Executive Dukakis agree that Congress can unilaterally bind a U.S. president?    The anti-Reagan Doctrine. The one foreign-policy issue Mr. Dukakis will always speak up about is support for the Contras; he never misses a chance to call it a &quot;fiasco.&quot; So Mr. Bush should ask why Nicaragua -- the one place the Democrats have undercut the Reagan Doctrine -- is the only Soviet surrogate that isn't suing for peace. Bush pollster Robert Teeter still insists the Contras get nowhere in the polls, but if that's a problem why are so many Southern Democrats pushing for a new aid package? Ask Texan Lloyd Bentsen.    Centrist Democrats have made these and other points to the Dukakis campaign, but so far to no avail. Indeed, a group led by Mr. Winik, Carter-era Navy undersecretary Jim Woolsey, and Rep. David McCurdy even produced a national security paper in June with dozens of sober-minded themes and ideas. They hoped to influence the Democratic platform or Mr. Dukakis.    But the candidate who's shown the most interest so far is Mr. Bush. Republican Sen. Dan Quayle got hold of the paper and gave it to the vice president at a recent idea session with his foreign-policy advisers. Mr. Bush began reading right on the spot, and, according to Mr. Winik and others, declared he'd have no trouble endorsing it. The Democratic authors still don't know what Mr. Dukakis thinks. </TEXT></DOC>