<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880115-0052 </DOCNO><HL> Parents and Doctors Fear Growing Misuse Of Drug Used to Treat Hyperactive Kids </HL><AUTHOR> Linda Williams (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> PHA </IN><TEXT>   To many doctors, teachers and parents, Ritalin is a godsend that enables hyperactive children to concentrate and control their impulses so that they can do schoolwork. They say the drug has proved safe and effective in 30 years of use in such situations.    But an increasing number of parents and medical professionals are concerned that, in many cases, the drug is being used as a substitute for more productive ways of helping children whose discipline problems stem from other causes.    Thomas J. Long, director of Catholic University's National Center for Family Studies and a specialist in the modern-day pressures on children, says he believes Ritalin is frequently prescribed for kids who aren't truly hyperactive but are instead reacting to stress. Those pushed to grow up too fast and take care of themselves too early, he notes, &quot;respond by being aggressive and inattentive.&quot; Moreover, some kids who spend a lot of time in day care learn early to compete for attention.    Such behavior can lead them to be misdiagnosed as hyperactive, Mr. Long says. And for parents and teachers, Ritalin can look like the easy cure. &quot;They want to see things fixed quickly,&quot; he says, &quot;and we are in a drug-taking society. When we have a headache, we reach for aspirin.&quot;    David Elkind, a child psychologist at Tufts University, also believes Ritalin is increasingly being prescribed for children whose hyperactive behavior is caused by stress. &quot;Drugs should be the treatment of last resort,&quot; he says. But Ritalin &quot;is convenient,&quot; he adds. &quot;Let's face it: It solves the problem.&quot;    Ritalin, made by Ciba-Geigy Corp., is commonly recommended for children who suffer from hyperactivity, or attention deficit disorder (ADD). This group comprises an estimated 3% to 5% of all children, and the number is growing -- although, as doctors point out, it is hard to tell how many cases are accurately diagnosed. Used inappropriately, Ritalin can worsen matters, inducing side effects that include headaches, insomnia and suppressed appetite.    Alleged inappropriate use is the focus of four Ritalin-related lawsuits that have been filed in the U.S. since last October, and the legal battles promise to be both emotional and sensational. Three of the suits are being handled by John P. Coale, a Washington, D.C., lawyer with a flair for publicity who also represents victims of the deadly chemical leak at the Union Carbide Corp. plant in Bhopal, India.    Instrumental, too, in publicizing the issue has been the Citizens Commission on Human Rights. Started by the Church of Scientology, a group founded on the teachings of the late science-fiction writer L. Ron Hubbard, the commission distributes pamphlets about Ritalin use and operates a hot line for concerned parents in the Baltimore area, where Mr. Coale is currently researching another lawsuit.    Grover McCain Jr., a Chapel Hill, N.C., plaintiff's lawyer who specializes in medical litigation, says he believes many more suits will follow. &quot;I know a lot of parents who are very angry about (misuse of) Ritalin,&quot; he says.    Since 1985, the amount of Ritalin sold annually has increased 97% to 2,682 kilograms (many children get 20 milligrams a day in the form of sustained-release tablets). However, the Drug Enforcement Administration, which sets manufacturing quotas, is proposing to reduce the supply by 14% next year in expectation that the controversy will depress demand.    Ciba-Geigy says the recent surge in use is explained by several factors, including the drug's newly discovered usefulness in treating narcolepsy, a condition marked by a frequent, uncontrollable urge to sleep. Also, says a spokeswoman, more doctors are prescribing Ritalin for teens and young adults previously thought to have outgrown ADD. Ciba-Geigy says it sees no evidence that the drug is being misused.    Health officials aren't so certain what is behind the increase, although they know the drug isn't being diverted to street use. However, the Georgia Board of Medical Examiners, which investigated Ritalin use in Atlanta's affluent, fast-growing northern suburbs, concluded that use of the drug there was disproportionate to the expected incidence of ADD. Andrew Watry, executive director of the board, says he believes demand was &quot;in large part driven by the schools.&quot; In addition, he says, parents in the area traded stories about problem kids who did well in school after taking Ritalin, and as the stories circulated the drug came to be looked on as a &quot;panacea.&quot;    One woman who doesn't see the drug that way is LaVarne Parker, who last November filed suit in U.S. District Court in Atlanta against the Gwinnett County School System and several of its employees, among others. Mrs. Parker, an electrical contractor, alleges that the school employees punished her son, Melvin, whom they had labeled hyperactive, and threatened to expel him if he didn't take Ritalin. She says the drug -- which Melvin took for about four years, beginning when he was 10 -- brought on sleeplessness and bad dreams, and slowed his growth. Worse, she adds, he became violent and suicidal.    The lawsuit, handled by Mr. Coale, also charges the American Psychiatric Association with fraud, claiming it misrepresents an overly broad definition of ADD as scientifically valid. The suit alleges that the &quot;fraudulent&quot; definition &quot;induces&quot; parents to give Ritalin to children.    Superintendent Alton Crews responds to the lawsuit with a prepared statement: &quot;Gwinnett County school employees do not prescribe medicine. Nor do they give medication to children. The charges are absolutely without fact.&quot; The APA, for its part, declines to comment on the suit.    Susan Marshall is another mother who says she took the advice of teachers and put her son, Brad, on Ritalin two years ago after he began acting up, falling behind and generally hating the first grade. When the drug didn't work -- and when Brad stopped sleeping and didn't gain any weight -- the Hingham, Mass., housewife took him for an extensive medical exam. The real culprit turned out to be minor brain damage, probably sustained at birth, which had slightly paralyzed his right side and ruined his handwriting, causing him frustration and trouble at school. &quot;Ritalin was a mistake,&quot; says Ms. Marshall, who notes that Brad has done well without medication at a private school.    Many psychiatrists and psychologists who treat ADD children say Ritalin, properly prescribed, deserves its reputation as a wonder drug. And some worry the controversy could cause a backlash that would keep it from kids who need it.    But establishing real need and administering Ritalin properly require careful monitoring followed by a sustained behavior-modification effort, specialists say. &quot;Often, people don't go through all of the steps that are necessary to determine what should be the diagnoses and treatment,&quot; says Mr. Elkind, who believes problems can frequently be solved by changing a child's schedule or school.    Ritalin, adds William Pelham, a psychiatry professor at the University of Pittsburgh Medical School and a leading authority on hyperactive children, &quot;was never supposed to be the only form of intervention, but people relied on it as the only treatment.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>