<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870616-0019 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Grain Prices Shoot Up as a Heat WaveRaises Chances of Drought in Corn Belt---By Jean Marie BrownStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 06/16/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTCOMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)SECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)PRECIOUS METALS, STONES, GOLD, SILVER (PCS)PETROLEUM (PET)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><TEXT>   Scorching temperatures over much of the Midwest sent grain prices soaring, as a crop-threatening drought appeared likelier.    The sharp advances in grains helped strengthen some other markets as &quot;tremendous moves were made across the board,&quot; an analyst said. The day's gains sent the Commodity Research Bureau's futures-price index climbing 4.64 to 234.60.    Computed by a unit of Miami-based Knight-Ridder Inc., the index tracks the prices of 26 raw materials.    Hot and dry temperatures are expected throughout the Corn Belt most of this week. Although rains that may hit the western Corn Belt late in the week would be heavy enough to sustain the crop in those areas, the showers wouldn't be enough to ward off traders' concerns, said Larry Heitkemper, a forecaster at Earth Satellite Corp. in Chevy Chase, Md.    &quot;The fears are well ahead of the crop,&quot; and it's too early for the market to be reacting this way, Mr. Heitkemper said.    Nevertheless most soybean and soybean meal futures prices reached life-of-contract highs, as contracts for delivery after this fall's harvest surged their daily limits. The July meal contract closed at $194.30 a ton, up $8.60.    Corn futures also rallied amid the weather concerns, and yesterday's rally was much more serious than other ones this spring, said Katharina Zimmer, an analyst at Merrill Lynch Futures Inc. in New York. Signs are emerging that the hot temperatures are starting to put strains on the corn crop, Ms. Zimmer said.    The hot temperatures are &quot;nipping some bushels off the yield,&quot; she said.    Wheat futures closed higher despite pressure from the harvest of the winter wheat crop. The strength in the soybean and corn pits helped buoy wheat contracts across the board.    Wheat also climbed as hot and dry weather in parts of the Soviet Union this past weekend underscored speculation that the Soviets may need to import more wheat. Spring planting in the Soviet Union was delayed because of cold, rainy weather, and severe winter temperatures may have resulted in higher-than-usual damage to the winter wheat crop.    An Agriculture Department prediction that the Soviets will harvest 195 million metric tons of wheat this year may be on the high side, analysts said.    In other futures markets yesterday:    ENERGY: Crude oil futures prices rose, closing above $20 for the first time in 17 months. Chart-guided technical buying, particularly after the $20 barrier was breached, fueled the gains, analysts said. &quot;Technical considerations were more influential in the market than fundamental factors,&quot; said Donald Morton, vice president, energy futures, at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. in Boston. Turnover was light until late in the session, with much of the price action stemming from floor brokers, analysts said. At the New York Mercantile Exchange, July crude rose 15 cents a barrel to $20.06. It was the highest close since Jan. 28, 1986, when crude prices stood at $20.17, the exchange said. Heating oil contracts rose 0.53 cent a gallon, to 52.38 cents a gallon, and July unleaded gasoline inched up 0.01 cent a gallon, to 56.01 cents. Some analysts attributed most of the market's strength to strong demand for July crude. &quot;There was some buying on fears of a tight delivery situation&quot; as the July contract expires next week, said Steven Platt, an analyst at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. in Chicago. But traders were hesitant to predict a sustained rally. &quot;We need a followthrough,&quot; said a New York trader.&quot;If we get it, then I'd expect good buying across the board.&quot;    PRECIOUS METALS: Futures prices fell sharply early in the day then recouped most of their losses to end the session just slightly lower. The initial drop stemmed from the dollar's strength against major currencies, traders said. Although the dollar remained firm, higher grain prices and a late-day rally in the oil market reignited concerns about higher inflation, analysts said. Many traders hold precious metals, particularly gold, as a hedge against inflation. The session was significant, some analysts said, because metals were able to rebound despite the dollar's strength. &quot;The major difference in the market is that for the first time in quite a while, metals traders didn't focus completely on the dollar,&quot; said William O'Neill, research director at Elders Futures Inc. in New York. Traders and analysts said a continuing lack of bullion demand will prevent a significant metals rally. &quot;For the last month, we've had practically no physical interest, and renewed bullion buying is needed for a rally to be sustained,&quot; a New York trader said.    SUGAR: Futures prices rose, taking their cue from rumors of possible large sales in the world market and strength in other commodity markets. The July contract rose as high as 6.95 cents a pound before settling at 6.82 cents, for a gain of 0.23 cent. Sugar continues to rise or fall &quot;on the appearance or lack of world market sales news,&quot; an analyst said. There was unconfirmed speculation that the Soviet Union has bought as much as 200,000 metric tons of raw sugar and China about 100,000 tons, another analyst said. A metric ton is equal to 1.1 U.S. short tons, or 2,204.6 pounds.    COTTON: Futures prices surged, with some positions hitting life-of-contract highs and rising the daily limit of two cents a pound before falling back. Cotton-growing areas on the Texas coast from Corpus Christi to Galveston have had heavy rains for two weeks, and so has the Rio Grande Valley, said Ernest Simon, cotton specialist at Pru-Bache in New York. &quot;The crop is not only late, but some of it may be lost,&quot; Mr. Simon said. Meanwhile, weather in West Texas -- the state's major cotton-growing area -- is improving after recent heavy rains, he said. Charles Notis, meterologist for Weather Trades Inc. in Des Moines, Iowa, said rains ceased over the weekend, and there is the prospect of hot, dry weather, which may help planting. Also supporting the market, Mr. Simon said, was China's reluctance to sell cotton for shipment before January. &quot;Apparently they underestimated their consumption and overestimated their crop,&quot; he said. And the Soviet Union, another major producer, hasn't shown interest in selling except at very high prices, Mr. Simon said. &quot;Altogether, this is creating concern about supply, while demand remains good.&quot;    INTEREST RATES: Most prices were higher, as market participants shrugged off a sharp increase in the Commodity Research Bureau's futures price index, a measure of inflation expectations. At the Chicago Board of Trade, September Treasury bond futures rose 7/32 to 92 20/32, after trading as low as 91 29/32. Traders and analysts said the gain reflected technical strength in the wake of last week's rally, along with a recognition that much of the gain in the CRB index was weather-related. Frederic Leiner, financial futures analyst at Pru-Bache in Chicago, said market participants preferred to focus on yesterday's strength in the dollar. </TEXT></DOC>