<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881011-0023 </DOCNO><HL> Commodities: Statement by Saudis Helps to Boost Oil Prices Though Some Say Gains Will Be 'Short Lived' </HL><AUTHOR> Carolyn Phillips (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> CMD PET MIN </IN><DATELINE> HOUSTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Saudi Arabia issued a &quot;no-news&quot; announcement that nonetheless helped push crude oil prices up sharply -- as much as 71 cents a barrel on the New York Mercantile Exchange.    The Saudi government, after its regular weekly cabinet meeting, reiterated that it would adhere to its 4.3 million barrel-a-day quota under the current Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries agreement if other member nations also stuck to their assigned production levels. That has been the official Saudi stance in recent weeks -- one that the Saudi oil minister made clear over the weekend. Reports continue that the country has chosen to flood world oil markets, forcing prices down and pressuring other OPEC members to curb overproduction.    Even though the Saudis disclosed nothing new, world oil markets -- already rallying on technical factors -- responded very positively to yesterday's statement. The benchmark crude, West Texas Intermediate, closed at $13.65 a barrel for November delivery, up 71 cents. The broadly traded North Sea Brent crude closed at $12 a barrel for November delivery, up 50 cents from Friday's close. Products prices soared on the coattails of crude prices, with heating oil and gasoline both up sharply.    The Saudi information minister, Ali Shaer, said in a statement following the cabinet meeting, &quot;Saudi Arabia affirmed anew its keenness to abide by its OPEC quota as soon as other members adhere to their prescribed quotas, while giving full support to OPEC in this direction and preserving its cohesion.&quot;    Traders, many of whom have become quite jaded about OPEC's ability to control its runaway production, seemed more inclined to give the Saudis the benefit of the doubt. &quot;The Saudis are in control,&quot; said Brian Caesar, vice president, energy options, Dow International Energy Corp. &quot;Whenever they come out with a statement the market reacts very violently.&quot;    Petroleum futures opened higher yesterday and, Mr. Caesar and others said, rallyed early in the trading day on technical buying motivated by last week's sharp price declines and Friday's expiration of options for November contracts.    Many traders and analysts said they think yesterday's gains will soon evaporate. &quot;The skepticism is still there,&quot; said Mr. Caesar, on whether the Saudis will have much luck, short-term, at getting other OPEC nations to comply with their production quotas.    Nauman Barakat, vice president of energy investments at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc., agreed that the day's gains &quot;will be very short-lived.&quot; He said the Saudis will have to continue to put pressure on oil prices &quot;probably until the end of the year and exert the maximum pain on the market&quot; before their fellow OPEC members come around to honoring quotas.    In other commodity markets yesterday:   COPPER: Futures prices rose their life-of-contract highs on active demand in a thin market. All contract months posted new highs. October ended at its peak of the day, $1.28 a pound, up 3.80 cents. December rose as high as $1.19 before settling at $1.1860, an advance of 3.45 cents. The absence of some traders because of the Columbus Day holiday helped to accelerate the advance, as did a heavy exodus of traders and copper industry executives to London to attend the London Metal Exchange dinner tomorrow night, analysts said. As a rule, the analysts said, most U.S. copper people stay in London the entire week of this event, resulting in relatively light New York trading that sometimes becomes susceptible to buying or selling trends. One fundamental development that helped boost prices was a greater-than-expected drop in copper warehouse inventories of the London Metal Exchange last week: down 8,275 tons to 92,450 tons; a drop of about 5,000 tons had been generally forecast, analysts said. Copper inventories in warehouses of New York's Commodity Exchange also declined, by 348 tons to 13,080 tons, as of the beginning of trading yesterday. Copper prices have been rising steadily, but yesterday's sharper advance may indicate heightened anxiety on the part of copper users over declining supplies, according to John Gross, president of J.E. Gross andamp; Associates Inc., New York consultants to the metals industry. &quot;Price advances properly reflect the situation in physical copper -- there are no excess supplies and demand continues strong, with primary producers sold out through the year end,&quot; Mr. Gross said. However, he noted, the advance has taken place almost without a correction, which traders should take into consideration.    COTTON: Futures prices rose. The December delivery advanced 1.52 cents a pound to 54.28 cents. Trading was mostly technical, with much of the buying done by funds that follow computer-generated signals, they said. The rising market touched off stop-loss buying orders that accelerated the advance, according to analysts, who said there were no new fundamental developments. One analyst said traders were awaiting tomorrow's U.S. Department of Agriculture cotton report. According to the analyst, expectations are that there will be a major downward revision in anticipated U.S. exports of cotton and a minor downward revision in cotton use by U.S. mills. Global demand also may have been overstated and that estimate may be reduced, the analyst said.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Soybean futures prices edged higher in thin trading after Conrad Leslie, a widely watched Chicago-based crop surveyor, forecast a soybean harvest of 1.482 billion bushels. The forecast was slightly lower than expected by some traders. It dampened recent speculation about the size of the crop's recovery in September from the drought, as well as speculation that the Agriculture Department might significantly increase its one-month-old estimate of the soybean harvest tomorrow. Mr. Leslie's new forecast is only 10 million bushels higher than the estimate the department based on Sept. 1 crop conditions. Corn futures prices closed mixed yesterday in part because Mr. Leslie estimated a harvest of 4.546 billion bushels, slightly more than expected by some traders, and 84 million bushels more than the Agriculture Department's month-old corn forecast. Analysts expect quiet trading today as investors take to the sidelines ahead of the government's crop update, which is slated for release after the close of trading tomorrow. &quot;This is a very very tough year to guess&quot; the size of harvests, said Jerry Gidel, an analyst for LIT America/G.H. Miller, Chicago. Wheat futures prices dipped amid profit-taking by some large commodity funds, said Dan Cekander, an analyst at Rodman andamp; Renshaw Inc., Chicago. </TEXT></DOC>