<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870227-0103 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Oil Rises Amid Buying by Profit-TakersAnd Some Bargain Hunting by Refiners---By Michael SiconolfiStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/27/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PETROLEUM (PET)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON) </IN><TEXT>   World oil prices rebounded amid buying by profit-takers and sporadic refiner demand at lower prices, traders said.    But yesterday's trading, which broke a string of three consecutive daily declines, was seen by many analysts as just a brief pause before prices head still lower. Volume was relatively light, indicating that many traders remain nervous about continuing signs of a glut and shakiness in the oil cartel's production and pricing accord.    &quot;We needed a correction&quot; after the recent price plunge, said Michael McDermott, vice president, institutional energy futures, at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. in New York. Peter Beutel, assistant director of the energy group at Elders Futures Inc. in New York said, &quot;We're not out of the woods yet.&quot;    Oil prices had fallen in 10 of the 13 sessions before yesterday's rally. Over that span, crude oil prices on the New York Mercantile Exchange skidded about $2 a barrel, or more than 10%.    Reflecting the recent price slump, several oil companies yesterday lowered their posted prices, following Sun Co.'s lead Wednesday. Koch Oil Co., Southland Corp.'s Citgo Petroleum Corp. unit, Phillips Petroleum Co. and Diamond Shamrock Corp. all lowered the price they pay for the U.S. benchmark crude, West Texas Intermediate, $1.50 a barrel, to $16.    Nonetheless, crude-oil futures contracts on the New York Merc rose 38 cents a barrel, to $16.78. Unleaded gasoline for March delivery rallied 1.73 cents a gallon, to 46.71 cents, and March heating oil spurted 0.85 cent, to 44.75 cents a gallon.    The spot, or noncontract, market, also rallied. The spot price of West Texas Intermediate rose 40 cents, to $16.80 a barrel, and the March price of North Sea Brent, the abundantly traded European crude, rose 30 cents, to $16.25.    Short covering, or buying contracts to offset those sold earlier, accounted for most of yesterday's price gains, traders said. Some chart-guided computer buying added to the rally late in the day, traders said.    Despite the turnaround, traders and analysts say they will closely watch inventory levels of refined products, which likely will continue to remain high, as well as the actions of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries.    The fate of OPEC's December agreement to cut production 7% and return to fixed prices of about $18 a barrel will hinge on whether members start undercutting the cartel's official prices, some traders said. Yesterday, Ecuador, a small OPEC producer, said it will seek a reduction in its fixed oil price assigned by the accord. OPEC's price committee was expected to study the request within the next few days.    While many analysts expect further short-term declines, few expect prices to dive to the low teens. Prices won't plunge &quot;unless there's a price war, which is unlikely,&quot; said Andrew Lebow, oil analyst for Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. in New York.    In the meantime, says Jayne Ball, oil broker for Dean Witter Reynolds Inc. in New York, &quot;the market will be waiting for OPEC to drop the next shoe.&quot;    In other futures markets yesterday:    FOREIGN CURRENCIES: Futures were boosted by the government's morning report that U.S. durable goods orders fell sharply in January. Still, futures closed below the day's highs after Federal Reserve Chairman Paul Volcker said a further sharp decline in the dollar could lead to a recession. Rumors of possible Fed intervention in support of the dollar helped hold the rally in check, traders said. Traders also were reluctant to speculate in advance of this morning's key report on the January merchandise trade deficit, said Daniel Weissman, head of trading at Manfra, Tordella andamp; Brookes Inc. in New York &quot;If it's higher than anticipated and there's a revision of last month's number upward, there's going to be a lot of pressure on the dollar,&quot; he said. Such pressure, Mr. Weissman predicted, would lead to intervention by the U.S., Japan and West Germany in support of the currency. Jill Cotter, international currencies analyst at Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. in New York, said a January trade deficit of more than $15 billion would lead at least to a temporary rally in foreign currency futures, while a number under $13 billion &quot;would be very supportive of the dollar.&quot;    COFFEE: Futures rose on the growing belief that buying and producing nations at this week's meeting of the International Coffee Organization in London may be nearing agreement about restoring export quotas. The contract for May delivery on the Coffee, Sugar andamp; Cocoa Exchange in New York closed 3.03 cents a pound higher at $1.3011, just below the day's high of $1.3050. Analysts citing wire service reports said buying nations were close to agreeing to a new set of quotas or to reinstituting those in effect when quotas were suspended last February. &quot;The market is stable because they are making friendly noises to each other, but from what we hear they may not be that close,&quot; a trade source said. For one thing, he said, the U.S. has said that without an accord by today, it would go home, &quot;so they're trying to keep the U.S. there, if they can.&quot;    SUGAR: Futures climbed on rumors of active demand for sugar on the world market. The contract for May delivery on the Coffee Exchange closed at 7.86 cents a pound, up 0.17 a cent, after briefly topping the eight cents resistance level. Recent heavy pressure to sell the March contract was absent yesterday. The contract closed 0.37 a cent higher at 7.63 cents, with short sellers closing out their positions by buying the contract. The March contract won't be traded after today. Also, there were rumors that both the Soviet Union and China bought substantial quantities of sugar. But it was hard to tell whether the Soviet business was old or new and whether China actually made a purchase, analysts said. The market's firmness stems from scheduled buying by several other nations in early March that estimates put at a total of at least 100,000 metric tons, an analyst said. &quot;The question is whether the demand is sporadic or sustained, because over the long run, this is still a market with plenty of sugar.&quot; he said.    LIVESTOCK AND MEATS: Slack demand for beef products helped drive cattle futures lower, analysts said. Futures also were hurt by the continued large open interest in cattle contracts in spite of this week's decline in prices, analysts said. Also, traders are concerned that consumer backlash against beef products may follow a report expected from the federal Centers for Disease Control linking antibiotics in animal feed to an increased incidence of salmonella infections in people, said Charles Levitt, an analyst with Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. in Chicago. Pork belly and hog futures were lower as poor demand for pork products continued. </TEXT></DOC>