<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ890914-0073 </DOCNO><DD> = 890914 </DD><AN> 890914-0073. </AN><HL> Hard Choices:@  In Today's Adoptions,@  The Biological Parents@  Are Calling the Shots@  ---@  With Demand Above Supply,@  Adoptive Couples Accede,@  Agencies Hail the Trend@  ---@  Picking a Dairy-Farm Family@  ----@  By Cynthia Crossen@  Staff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal </HL><DD> 09/14/89 </DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J) </SO><TEXT>   Marilyn Burson was 23 years old and unmarried when she agreed to surrender her infant son for adoption. Her one request of the agency where she sought help was that he be placed in a home where he would be the oldest child. Her wish was denied. She held her baby once before she formally relinquished him in 1961. She never saw him again.    Today, a pregnant woman seeking help from an adoption agency could ask that her baby be raised by a Methodist farm family with two other kids, a dog and a swimming pool. She could ask to be allowed to see her child several times a year, write letters, call, send gifts -- maybe even vacation together. And if it's humanly possible, the agency will grant her wish.    Many prospective adoptive couples recoil at the idea of &quot;open adoptions,&quot; which involve intimate and long-term contact with the biological parents of the child. But at many agencies they simply have no choice. The ready availability of abortion, combined with a diminishing bias against single motherhood, has reduced the number of white infants put up for adoption. At the same time, the pool of white couples seeking to adopt has grown. (Most agencies discourage white couples from adopting black babies.)    More than a million couples are chasing the 30,000 white infants available in this country each year, estimates the National Committee for Adoption, a federation of adoption agencies.    During the past decade, these changing forces in the adoption business have shifted power from the adoptive couple to the so-called birth parents. &quot;Birth parents today are calling the shots,&quot; says Richard Van Deelen, associate executive director of Bethany Christian Services in Grand Rapids, Mich., which has been doing adoptions for more than 35 years. &quot;Today, you serve the birth mother or you're not in the adoption business.&quot; And what many birth parents want is a continuing presence in the lives of the children they are placing for adoption.    But there are other reasons agencies have repudiated traditional, closed adoption procedures. Most social workers and psychologists now believe that secrecy was an unreliable and unhealthy way of protecting birth parents and adoptees from the stigma of illegitimacy or abandonment. Far from forgetting the experience, birth mothers like Mrs. Burson grieve about it their whole lives.    Furthermore, adoptees who are now adults are asking agencies about their roots. Adoptive parents, too, are seeking help from the agencies, saying their children are preoccupied with the question of where they came from.    The practice of adoption by strangers wasn't common in this country until the 1920s, when infant formula was invented. Over the years, some agencies have treated unmarried pregnant women insensitively, partly because there were plenty of them. One mother remembers being forced to wear a blindfold and earplugs at the birth so she would never see or hear her baby. Another says the mirror was removed from over her delivery table.    Now, agencies must actively woo pregnant women who might be considering giving up their babies. &quot;In all candor, we're involved in an extremely competitive business, and we're very much into marketing strategies,&quot; says Bryce Hatch, director of Southwest Maternity Center of the Methodist Mission Home in San Antonio, Texas.    The Yellow Pages is perhaps the most important marketing tool, followed by a well-tended network of doctors, clinics, pastors, relatives and friends. &quot;We've been stampeded into {larger Yellow Page ads} by the competition,&quot; Mr. Hatch says.    Much of the competition comes from private lawyers who have taken note of the $12,000 to $20,000 fees typical of adoptions of white infants. &quot;Most attorneys are highly responsive to birth parents' wants and wishes,&quot; says Mr. Van Deelen. &quot;So the birth parents go shopping. They'll read the list to you over the phone, and if you don't provide them with open adoption, full payment of medical expenses -- they'll go down the street to the next provider. It's an adoption free market.&quot;    Jim Gritter, child-welfare supervisor of the Community Family and Children's Services adoption agency in Traverse City, Mich., laments the notion that open adoptions may arise from competitive considerations rather than from the respect due birth parents. So, too, do some skeptical birth parents.    &quot;In the '60s, the catchword was, 'We'll protect you, we'll give you anonymity.' That was the sales pitch,&quot; says Marsha Riben, who put up her daughter for adoption in 1967. &quot;The sales pitch of the '80s is openness. Promise the birth mother openness, and you'll get her baby.&quot;    William Pierce, president of the National Committee for Adoption, is also critical of some of the new practices agencies are embracing, whatever their motive. &quot;It's a new form of coercion,&quot; he says. &quot;Ask a lot of women, which would you rather have, a thousand dollars or a picture of your child. Most of them will say, 'I'll take a picture of my child.' So something of value is being exchanged for their baby.&quot;    When Linda Freeman, then divorced and pregnant, approached the Traverse City agency for counseling two years ago, she was doubtful about adoption. &quot;I said I just didn't think I could walk away,&quot; Ms. Freeman says. But after hearing about the open adoptions offered at the agency, she reconsidered. Ms. Freeman chose an adoptive couple from several profiles, and the couple was at the hospital with her when she gave birth. &quot;If it hadn't been an open adoption, I wouldn't have given her up,&quot; says Ms. Freeman of her daughter. &quot;I can picture {the adoptive couple} holding her. I know what their house looks like. I knew I could call her. It was a tremendous sense of relief.&quot;    A few birth parents still choose traditional, closed adoptions, and most agencies -- even the most staunchly open ones -- will accommodate them. Mr. Hatch recently placed the babies of two women who were not interested in choosing the adoptive parents or knowing anything more about the babies. Ironically, the adoptive parents had been so &quot;brainwashed&quot; by the counseling program, Mr. Hatch says, that they were disappointed the birth parents weren't willing to be more involved.    For most adoptive couples, however, the new openness is unsettling. If that's the price adoptive couples have to pay for a baby, however, most will do it. &quot;When we heard about open adoptions, we thought, these people are nuts, we felt we would never do that,&quot; says Mary Nagle, an adoptive mother in Sulphur, La. &quot;On the other hand, if that was the only way we were going to get a baby, we were going to do whatever it took.&quot; Mrs. Nagle, who maintains a correspondence with the birth mother of her two-year-old son, says her experience with open adoption has been &quot;wonderful.&quot;    Adoption agencies vary widely in the amount of openness they offer, but at most agencies, it now is standard procedure for the birth mother to choose the adoptive couple from prescreened couples. At the Traverse City agency the woman looks at portfolios of at least six families. In the portfolios are pictures of the couple, their home, their pet, their friends, places they have visited and other children in their lives.    A three-page letter addresses birth parents in general, and a page deals with the couple's preferences in food and beverages, clothes, weather, politics, television, cars and other things. There are two forms -- a checklist and an essay -- addressing how open the adoptive parents intend to be toward the birth mother. Another sheet addresses 17 &quot;big-time&quot; questions, such as how the couple deals with stress or how they will handle a three-year-old's temper tantrum in a store.    Birth parents choose their adoptive couples for many reasons, but only occasionally on the basis of their socio-economic status, most agency directors agree. Religion is a major factor, and so are the couple's life style and stability. There are also a certain number of seemingly whimsical preferences, such as the birth mother at one agency who requested an adoptive home on a dairy farm (such a couple existed on the agency's waiting list).    &quot;Some pretty immature gals will be affected by the beautiful home with the swimming pool and the horses and the back yard,&quot; says Mr. Van Deelen of the Grand Rapids agency. But most will be more concerned with values and stability. &quot;Looks are important, too,&quot; Mr. Van Deelen adds. &quot;A couple that presents poorly is going to have a tough time in today's economy.&quot;    Face-to-face meetings between the birth parents and the adoptive couple are becoming more common, and at some agencies, such as Traverse City, they are required. On rare occasions, birth mothers change their minds about the couple they've chosen after meeting them, Mr. Gritter says. &quot;The meeting is indispensable,&quot; he says. &quot;It's the only way for people to see the twinkle in someone's eye, the accent in their voice.&quot;    At many agencies, long-term contact between the birth and adoptive parents is required, if only in the form of unsigned letters sent through the agencies. At the Traverse City agency, the adoptive and birth parents are expected to arrange between themselves how much future contact they plan to have. As birth parent activists point out, such arrangements are legally unenforceable. Once the adoption is final -- usually within six months to a year after the baby's birth -- the birth parents have no legal rights. &quot;It's a gigantic exercise in trust,&quot; says Mr. Gritter. &quot;It's a gentlemen's agreement.&quot;    One adoptive parent, Charlene Canape Giannetti of New York, says she was glad to meet her daughter's birth mother, but resisted further regular contact. &quot;I didn't want to be in constant touch with the birth parents,&quot; says Mrs. Giannetti.    &quot;I didn't want to exchange photos. I didn't want her growing up with another set of parents. I think it's very confusing to the child.&quot;    But with birth parents knowing where their child is living, what if they show up on the adoptive parents' doorstep demanding the return of their baby? It doesn't happen, agency directors say, precisely because the parents know how their child is doing. &quot;Birth parents choose adoption because they want their children to experience a high level of stability,&quot; says Mr. Gritter. &quot;The birth mother doesn't want to be the undoing of her own plan.&quot;    At the same time birth parents are exercising more control over their child's destiny, adoptive parents, often upper-middle-class, well-educated professionals, are finding themselves subjected to unprecedented scrutiny, first by the agency and then by the birth parents.    At Deaconess Home in Oklahoma City, prospective adoptive parents are given the Minnesota Multiphasic Personality Inventory and the Taylor-Johnson Temperament Analysis. If the personality tests turn up any problems, the couple is given the opportunity to go through counseling. If the couple refuses, the agency shows them the door.    At most other agencies, adoptive couples must go through an intensive counseling program to force them to recognize that the baby they're adopting has another set of parents. &quot;In earlier days, we looked at the adoptive parents to see if they could provide for the child and if they were healthy enough to see the child to adulthood,&quot; says Janice Thomas, adoption search coordinator of Catholic Charities of Green Bay, Wis., which began open adoptions in 1974. &quot;Now it's much more important for them to understand the part the birth parent plays in the adoptee's life. If they're not interested in going that far, they can go to another agency.&quot;    Although open adoption is too recent to have produced definitive results of its efficacy, people in the adoption world agree that the closed system has had dire effects on the psychological health of both birth parents and adoptees.    Adoptees have a higher incidence of learning disabilities and mental health problems, asserts Dr. Herbert Weider, founder of the Adoption Study Center at Brookdale Hospital in Brooklyn, N.Y. &quot;They never recover from the blow of learning they've been relinquished,&quot; he says, &quot;just as the birth mother never recovers from relinquishment. But the more normal the interaction among the three parties, the better it is for everybody.&quot;    Only three states now have open adoption records, leaving thousands of people searching for their biological parents or children. Nineteen years after surrendering her son, Mrs. Burson began searching for him. Eight years later, she was finally told that he had died in a freak accident at the age of 15 months. As a birth mother, Mrs. Burson says, not knowing anything about her child's fate was more painful than the anguish of thinking her child was growing up without her. &quot;The way it was, there's always a doubt,&quot; she says. &quot;You're always thinking, 'maybe something's wrong, maybe he needs me.'&quot;    Ms. Thomas says her agency has done 600 open adoptions in the past 15 years, and there hasn't been a single horror story. But she acknowledges that the first generation of children adopted under the open system hasn't reached adulthood, when their experience could be evaluated and compared with people adopted under the traditional system.    Mr. Pierce of the National Committee for Adoption believes that some of the new adoption practices are equivalent to the use of a drug whose explosive side effects won't be known for 20 years. But agency directors argue that they have to take the chance. &quot;We know the old system wasn't working,&quot; says Mr. Gritter of Traverse City. &quot;We had to try something new.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>