<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870401-0109 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Your Turn, Mr. President</HL><DD> 04/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   Dick Allen was hounded out of the White House over a wristwatch and ten $100 bills in a safe. Anne Burford got hers over something she said during a meeting with a refiner. Rita Lavelle actually went to jail. Michael Deaver has been indicted for perjury, apparently because his special prosecutor doesn't feel he could make substantive charges stick.    Charles Wick rode out the matter of taping his phone conversations. Ken Adelman survived the flap over whether arms control is a &quot;sham&quot; or a &quot;shame.&quot; Ed Meese was confirmed, though Sen. Joe Biden's speech reduced Mr. Meese's wife to tears. Bill Rehnquist became chief justice despite a restrictive covenant in a deed to a house he once owned.    So politics are played in the mirrored court of the greatest capital in the world. The basic strategy is: If you can't defeat the policies try to destroy the people. With Don Regan's scalp on the belt over Iranamok, the next target was, of course, the president. It is no reflection on the New Republic that its headline put into words what less forthright journals only hinted at: &quot;Is Reagan Senile?&quot;    The facts about Iranamok are not fully out, but as more of them emerge it becomes clearer than ever what the real issue has been. The controversy has not been about foreign policy or about how to deal with hostage situations. Yes, of course, the president made a mistake in allowing his compassion for the hostages to overwhelm calculations of strategic interests in Iran. But his mistake is coincidental to the point of the controversy; the arms shipment is Mr. Reagan's wristwatch, his deed restriction. As the senility assault shows, the point of the furor is the personal destruction of the president of the United States.    Not that there is anything personal against Ronald Reagan, any more than there was against Dick Allen or Ed Meese. It's merely that if the president falls, his destroyers gain in power. With his tax cuts, his defense buildup and his sympathy with traditional values, Mr. Reagan represents a particular threat to an establishment accustomed to two generations or so of power. Its adherents -- among the Democrats, in the Congress, in the press and in the permanent bureaucracy -- want the Reagan presidency to be dismissed as one big mistake, to go back to the old habits and the old power constellations.    Whether Mr. Reagan ultimately rebuffs this assault is the first key to the national political script for the next six years. Will his policies continue to set the agenda as they have the past six years, or will tax-and-spend politics return? In particular, will power devolve to those with the position and the ruthlessness to play the personal-destruction game?    The outcome of this struggle is yet to be determined. By now the president has batted &quot;senility&quot; out of the park with a competent news conference and a sparkling appearance before the Lords of the Press at their Gridiron dinner. The next step is to demonstrate that the sheer weight of the controversy has not emasculated him. That he can still function as president. That his opponents must reckon with the considerable powers of that office.    Which brings us to his veto of the highway bill. Here is the very model of Congress's ruthless irresponsibility. While complaining about the budget deficit and proclaiming fidelity to Gramm-Rudman, Congress presents the president with a bill padding the administration's request by $10 billion, for a total of $87.5 billion. Worse, the bill micro-manages the state highway departments, earmarking funds for more than 150 specific projects in specific congressional districts. The pork is seasoned with repeal of a previous congressional idiocy, the 55-mile-per-hour speed limit. This concoction arrives on Mr. Reagan's desk six months late, with the deadline of the summer building season pressing down, and with the congressional leaders threatening that, if he vetoes the bill, they will not pass another one and the loss of jobs will plunge the economy into a recession.    As we saw in the 350-73 House vote overriding the veto yesterday, the issue here is not Republican vs. Democrat. The essential dispute is between a Congress representing the sum of individual constituencies and individual interests, and the president as the sole elected representative of a single national constituency, with some vision of a broader interest. The issue is whether we shall have a president.    Still, the president is a Republican, and a triumph of personal-destruction politics would condemn his party to a minority status for as far as the eye can see. It is telling how little Republicans recognize what is at stake. The president was conspicuously deserted yesterday by, among others, his Republican leader in the House. Rep. Bob Michel worried about how the veto would play in Peoria, Ill., which he happens to represent. The bill earmarks $27 million for widening 31 miles of Illinois 121, linking Interstate 74 from Peoria with Interstate 55 to Springfield. For this mess of pottage the leader of the Republicans sells his birthright.    Ultimately what is involved here, though, is not party politics but the governability of this society. No society can function well if it devours public men and even presidents, deciding public policy through gladiatorial contests in the public arena. While Congress could be much less parochial than the self-destruction of its own internal discipline and leadership has made it, a superpower cannot be run by a committee of 535 members. With the world depending on military, economic and even moral leadership from the United States, we need presidents. And they need to have the effective power to make decisions for which they will be accountable. </TEXT></DOC>