<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871105-0103 </DOCNO><HL> Viewpoint:The Crisis of Contemporary Capitalism---By Alexander Cockburn</HL><DD> 11/05/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)ECONOMIC NEWS (ECO) </IN><TEXT>   During one plunge in the markets back in 1963 I went to the London Stock Exchange with a friend to watch capitalism finally fall. We wanted to capture the scene for our grandchildren. But the market rallied and the rendezvous with apocalypse was postponed. Like everyone else, leftists are asking themselves if it's apocalypse now.    By fortuitous circumstance, leftist economists have been doing their job with special diligence of late in presenting analyses of contemporary capitalism's basic problems. Two books in particular spell out their vision with depth and clarity: &quot;Stagnation and the Financial Explosion,&quot; by Harry Magdoff and Paul Sweezy, and &quot;The Imperiled Economy: Macroeconomics From the Left,&quot; a volume of 26 essays by members of the Union of Radical Political Economics. Both books are being published by the Monthly Review Press. They show that for almost 20 years, the U.S. and other industrialized economies have been experiencing declines in their real growth, i.e. stagnation.    This tendency to stagnation can be seen through many indicators, many of which are well-summarized in Cigdem Kurdas's introductory essay in the URPE volume. Mr. Kurdas notes that the real volume of goods and services produced by industrial countries grew 5% annually in the 1960s. This growth rate fell to below 3.5% in the '70s and, for the 1980s thus far, to below 2.5%. Mr. Kurdas also shows that structural unemployment also has risen sharply. In the U.S., where the problem is less severe than in Western Europe, unemployment on an annual basis ranged between a high of 6.7% and a low of 3.5% in the 1960s. For the 1980s thus far, the range has been between a high of 9.7% and the current low of slightly below 6% -- though it is not clear that this figure will be sustained for all of 1987.    In other words, what were once considered politically unacceptable peak unemployment rates are now cause for celebration. Other key indicators of the stagnation of capitalist economies are also presented in these two volumes, including the sustained decline in productivity growth and, most important, the decline in the average rate of corporate profitability.    The leftist economists argue that stagnation is intimately connected with two of the obvious manifestations of the current mess: internationalization and increased financial fragility.    Internationalization has taken many forms. One is the &quot;runaway shop,&quot; in which corporations move their factories to Third World locations where they can exploit cheap labor. But this then forces wages down in the U.S., erodes union strength, and hence weakens domestic purchasing power.    Another form was the explosion of lending to the Third World in the 1970s, spurred initially by the growth of international banking and the Eurodollar market. Such loans turned sour during the severe 1982 recession and continue to act as a major drag on the U.S. banking structure and its export markets -- to say nothing of the Third World countries themselves.    Yet another major form is the contradictions surrounding the U.S. trade deficit. The U.S. cheapens the dollar by paying off the deficit in its currency, but then desperately seeks to lure the dollars back home to finance domestic borrowing. The problems associated with internationalization then feed into those of financial fragility.    In both of these books, the leftist economists argue that as real growth has declined, accompanied by declines in wages and profitability, the U.S. economy has become increasingly dependent on borrowing in order to sustain expenditure levels. Businesses, faced with declining profitability, borrow more in order to maintain spending at competitive levels. Households that have experienced declining real incomes borrow more in order to maintain their living standards. Rich households and corporate raiders have also borrowed more to pursue speculation in financial and real-estate markets.    But the underlying cause of the growth of speculation is also stagnation and the decline in real-sector growth profitability. Investors have come to realize that there are better opportunities to profit through shifting ownership in existing assets rather than in creating new assets. And the government's borrowing has grown concomitantly with that of the private sector -- set off by Ronald Reagan's agenda of cutting taxes for the rich while shoveling everything he could to the military build-up. Because of all these factors, borrowing in the U.S. has risen from 9.6% of GNP in the 1960s to 16.2% for the 1980s.    With U.S. growth being so tied to borrowing, fears of rising interest rates created great misgivings about the U.S. economy's immediate growth potential. Without rising interest rates, the value of the dollar would continue to fall because of the trade deficit. A falling dollar means that foreign investors will be less likely to continue holding their financial assets in dollars. But if foreign investors pull their dollars out of U.S. financial markets, the U.S. will not have the funds to finance its debt-dependent growth.    Hence the widely recognized dilemma: whether to defend the dollar by keeping U.S. interest rates up or defend U.S. economic growth by keeping interest rates down. But what the leftist economists recognize are the depths of this present contradiction, given the links between stagnation, internationalization and financial fragility. With the leftists having established that link, the real question then becomes: Why stagnation?    One view, which is advanced by Messrs. Sweezy and Magdoff and some of the contributors to the URPE volume, is that modern capitalist economies have an inherent tendency toward underconsumption -- that is, because of the highly unequal distribution of wealth and income, the capacity to produce outstrips over time the capacity to consume. Such an imbalance creates excess productive capacity, which in turn creates a disincentive for capitalists to invest in new equipment. From this perspective, budget deficits can partially and temporarily offset underconsumption by creating a demand booster. But the effectiveness of this tool erodes as larger and larger deficits are needed to offset greater gaps between consumption and productive capacity.    Another approach claims that contemporary capitalism has fallen victim to its own forces. That is, competitive pressures from other firms and real wage pressures from labor pushed capitalists toward excessive mechanization. Profitability did not keep pace with mechanization's growth, resulting in overcapacity, declining incentives to invest, and stagnation.    Goaded by such analyses, defenders of capitalism finally shout, &quot;What would you do?&quot; Leftists must reply that there is, ultimately, no antidote to crisis within the framework of capitalism, though there are salvaging measures that could keep the show on the road for a while. But even these -- drastic income redistribution and measures most distasteful to the financial market -- lie well over the horizon of permissible discourse in the U.S. political mainstream. Perhaps only after higher taxes and a balanced budget have brought on a depression will the leftists get the wide attention they deserve.    ---   Mr. Cockburn is a columnist for The Nation. </TEXT></DOC>