<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880211-0104 </DOCNO><HL> Boom and Bust: How a Bold Executive Made Apex Oil Grow, And How It Collapsed --- P.A. Novelly Took Big Risks; Price Drop, Large Loan, Banks' Distrust Hurt Firm --- Shifting of Assets Is Alleged </HL><AUTHOR> Wendy L. Wall (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> BCY PET </IN><DATELINE> CLAYTON, Mo.  </DATELINE><TEXT>   In mid-1981, P.A. &quot;Tony&quot; Novelly made his boldest move. The brash young chief executive of Apex Oil Co. engineered the acquisition of Clark Oil andamp; Refining Corp. for $523 million.    Mr. Novelly, a one-time Shell Oil Co. auditor with a penchant for big deals and big risks, says the struggling oil refiner and retailer fit well with Apex's oil trading and transportation network. But he also concedes another motivation: &quot;I came from Shell, so I wanted to be bigger than Shell.&quot;    The Clark acquisition completed Mr. Novelly's rapid transformation of Apex from a tiny Missouri company into a petroleum conglomerate that, by the early 1980s, had annual revenue topping $13 billion. But it also proved his undoing. To buy Clark, Mr. Novelly negotiated a $740 million revolving credit line with a group of 12 banks. That credit line -- along with gargantuan losses in the futures markets and a withdrawal of Apex's trade credit -- ultimately strangled the oil company.    Last Christmas Eve, Apex and 51 affiliated companies, including Clark, filed for protection from creditors under Chapter 11 of the federal bankruptcy code. Because Apex operated in a highly secretive fashion, its collapse attracted little attention. Nevertheless, the bankruptcy petition is believed to be one of the largest on record for a privately held company.    Moreover, allegations have since been made that the 44-year-old Mr. Novelly may have tried to divert some company assets. In motions filed in bankruptcy court in St. Louis, Apex's lenders contend that a company Mr. Novelly set up in 1986 was used to &quot;loot&quot; Apex and defraud its lenders. Mr. Novelly vehemently denies the allegations and blames the company's troubles on bad blood that eventually developed between himself and Apex's bankers.    &quot;The banks pulled our money in one day because they don't trust me,&quot; Mr. Novelly says ruefully, in what he terms his first interview in some 15 years.    In many ways, Apex's spectacular rise and fall reflect the boom-and-bust oil industry. But it also shows how the ingredients for success in a rough business can be a recipe for failure when things turn sour. The stubbornness that once helped Mr. Novelly in negotiating deals later wrecked business moves that might have minimized the damage. And the secrecy he cultivated when Apex was on the rise later fueled rumors about its troubles and the distrust of him personally.    &quot;He's like the guy who's wearing a pinstripe suit (but) says he's wearing a white suit with broad blue stripes,&quot; says Peter Howell, who represented Chase Manhattan Bank in many of its dealings with Apex.    The collapse also has embarrassed Apex's banks, many of which had been burned in other oil deals. In some respects, the case rivals the long-running feud between the Hunt brothers of Texas and their lenders. Both borrowers bet the ranch on ever-rising petroleum prices, got their banks to go along and then, the lenders say, misled them. Some of the banks, including First National Bank of Chicago and Manufacturers Hanover, are involved in both cases.    Apex owed much of its early success to the Arab oil embargo, which pumped up the value of its large inventories of residual oil. Mr. Novelly used those profits to build more storage capacity, charter fleets and begin trading oil up and down the Gulf and East coasts. By the late 1970s, Apex had grown from seven employees into one of the biggest oil traders in New York harbor.    People who dealt with Mr. Novelly say he was an eternal optimist with an enormous ego. While driving hard bargains, he often unleashed a volatile temper to shave cents off a quoted oil price, a former competitor says. &quot;If he doesn't like a decision, he'll yell and scream,&quot; agrees Edward D. Doherty, a former president of Commonwealth Oil Refining Co. Mr. Doherty adds that Apex always paid bills on the last day -- or late. &quot;It was hard to get Apex separated from money,&quot; he says.    Mr. Novelly sometimes acted abruptly. In 1980, he had Apex buy the Copper Mountain ski resort in Colorado after admiring it from a car window as he sped by. &quot;It's something you want if you're a successful businessman -- to say you own your own mountain,&quot; he now explains.    Such tactics helped Mr. Novelly build an empire that, at its height, included oil refineries, tanker fleets, service stations, office buildings, a travel company, a chemical concern, a meatpacker and a candy maker. Mr. Novelly, who moved to Apex in 1969 and owns half of it (the other half is owned by Samuel Goldstein, the chairman), divided his time among his residence in a posh St. Louis suburb, a vacation home in Vail, Colo., and a company brownstone in New York. He went hunting in Mexico and salmon fishing in Alaska.    Meanwhile, the company's aggressiveness made enemies. In 1982, Apex sued several oil companies after it lost $32 million selling oil futures contracts on the New York Mercantile Exchange. Apex charged that the companies conspired to &quot;squeeze&quot; it by forcing it to deliver oil when they knew it didn't have enough on hand to meet its obligations. A federal district judge in New York threw out the case but said evidence suggested that individual defendants might have been out to &quot;get&quot; Apex. An appeals court later reinstated antitrust and market-manipulation charges against one defendant. That case is now pending.    Apex's secrecy and aggressiveness came back to haunt it after it purchased Clark. Most observers now say Mr. Novelly paid too much for the company, which had no oil reserves of its own. And shortly after the acquisition, oil prices started to slide. In 1983, Mexico and Venezuela told Apex that future oil purchases would have to be backed by letters of credit. The next spring, Charter Co., another big independent, entered Chapter 11. Within 60 days, the major oil companies, worried about Apex, cut off $600 million in its trade credit, too, Mr. Novelly says.    As Apex fell into a cash shortage and scrambled to pay its bills, the company soon was in violation of its debt accord. The banks began pressuring it to sell Clark. Mr. Novelly hired Merrill Lynch andamp; Co. to look for buyers, but he shrugged off those that came along as too cheap. In April 1985, when the banks demanded a $60 million lump-sum payment on principal, Mr. Novelly threatened to throw Apex into Chapter 11. The banks backed down.    Nevertheless, they were fast losing patience. During meetings with the banks, Mr. Novelly blew up, told the banks they were &quot;stupid&quot; and stalked out, say people who were there. Adds an attorney for the banks, &quot;Tony was his own worst enemy because he absolutely refused to treat the banks with any respect or diplomacy.&quot;    Mr. Novelly explains, &quot;I thought they were trying to run my business, and I wanted to run it my way, and they wanted me to run things their way.&quot; He concedes that the meetings were often hostile but says he told the banks only that their ideas were &quot;stupid.&quot;    But the tension didn't crimp his style. In 1985, Apex moved its headquarters to a new building in downtown Clayton. Not wanting to look out on a competitor, Mr. Novelly bought the Sunoco station across the street and hung up a Clark sign.    By late 1985, refinery margins had started to improve. Apex had paid down some debt, and the banks were about to sign a new loan agreement. Then, the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries began to stumble, and a plunge in oil prices launched Apex on its final slide.    In early December, just before the OPEC discord worsened, Mr. Novelly bought thousands of crude-oil futures contracts. As oil prices plummeted some 50%, Apex rode out the drop. By the end of January 1986, the company had racked up paper losses of $53 million. By that July, when Mr. Novelly finally got out of the market, Apex had lost $96 million.    Mr. Novelly denies he was speculating; he says he was using the futures markets to buy oil for his refineries. He says he would have recovered most of the money by year end if the banks hadn't demanded a payment on principal that forced him to abandon his futures positions.    The futures losses -- together with a plunge in the value of Apex's oil inventory -- quashed all hope for a new debt accord. And the banks believed that Mr. Novelly was sabotaging other solutions. Richard Rainwater, the Texas investor and former financial adviser to the Bass brothers, offered to buy the Apex debt at a steep discount; Mr. Novelly, who had solicited the offer, eventually shot it down as too tough. He also rejected a preliminary agreement to sell Clark to a U.S. unit of Marc Rich andamp; Co. AG, the huge Swiss oil and commodity trader.    Meanwhile, Mr. Novelly says the bank-imposed restrictions on Apex's trading activities were hurting his ability to keep it afloat. In early 1986, he formed Clark Oil Trading Co. with the aid of a loan from a Paris bank. Though operating out of Apex's offices, the new trading company isn't an Apex unit and isn't in bankruptcy proceedings.    In the bankruptcy papers, Apex's banks charge that Mr. Novelly used the new company to &quot;loot&quot; Apex. Among other things, they allege that Clark Oil Trading &quot;misappropriated&quot; Apex customer lists and retained the resulting trading profits. Mr. Novelly replies that the company helped Apex by, among other things, fulfilling contracts that Apex couldn't because of the banks' restrictions. &quot;No money has ever left that company that didn't go to one of the Apex companies or didn't pay a bill for one of the Apex companies,&quot; he says.    Finally, in June 1987, Getty Petroleum Corp. agreed to buy most of Clark Oil andamp; Refining's assets for about $400 million. Mr. Novelly says he flew to New York to sign the papers but stormed out of the meeting after learning that stock that he was getting an option to buy would be nonvoting. Getty Petroleum, which isn't related to the Texaco Inc. subsidiary, refuses comment.    Then, Mr. Novelly called Samuel Zell, the chairman of Itel Corp., who previously had expressed an interest in Clark Oil andamp; Refining. The two men quickly agreed on a deal -- which, within a few months, also began to unravel. In late November, Mr. Zell and his partner, Richard Lurie, lost interest in the Clark refineries, although they still wanted the service stations. Mr. Novelly approached the bank group with a new debt accord based on the revised offer. But by this time, the banks had had enough.    Four days before Christmas, Mr. Novelly came to work and found on his desk a note saying Apex's banks were calling the loan. By 10 a.m., a customer had called to say he had been told to pay all money owed Apex directly to the banks. As the cash stranglehold tightened, Mr. Novelly concluded that the company had to file under Chapter 11. On Christmas eve, Apex attorneys kept the St. Louis bankruptcy court open late with a raft of petitions. </TEXT></DOC>