<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880405-0102 </DOCNO><HL> Who Managed the Massachusetts Miracle? </HL><AUTHOR> Lawrence B. Lindsey </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Gov. Michael Dukakis is campaigning for president based on the economic boom in Massachusetts. The statistics he marshals on the campaign trial are impressive. For example, when he first took office in January 1975, the state unemployment rate was 9.7%, 1.6 percentage points above the national figure. Today it is 3.4%, 2.3 percentage points below the national figure. Thus, in the intervening 13 years, Massachusetts has gained an impressive 3.9 percentage points on the nation.    Is the governor responsible? Despite questions about the ability of any state government to influence the performance of its economy significantly in the face of national trends, it is natural for a governor to take credit for things that have happened on his watch. But the data show that most of the improvement in the Bay State's unemployment rate did not occur while Mr. Dukakis was in office.    Of the 3.9-point improvement in unemployment relative to the nation, 3.1 points of it occurred between January 1979 and January 1983, when Ed King, not Mr. Dukakis, was governor and the nation as a whole was mired in recession. This cursory measure of the Massachusetts Miracle indicates that 80% of it occurred in the four years Mr. Dukakis was out of office, while 20% occurred in the nine years he has been governor.    By far the most sophisticated analysis of the Massachusetts Miracle was done by Ronald Ferguson and Helen Ladd of the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard. They broke down the growth in employment in the state into three parts: that due to growth in the national economy, which is the primary cause of job creation in any state; that due to an industry-mix effect, which compares the national growth rate for the state's key industries with the growth in the national economy as a whole; and that due to a competitive-shift effect, which measures what's left over.    State officials have little control over the national economy or, at least in the short run, which industries concentrate in the state. Of the three measures, only the residual competitive-shift effect measures factors over which state policy makers had some control.    During Gov. Dukakis's first term, 1975-79, private-sector employment in the state rose by a total 274,000 jobs. However, had Massachusetts industries done as well as their national counterparts, a total of 353,000 jobs would have been created. Of those, 297,000 would have been attributable to the growth in the national economy and 56,000 to the industry shift effect. Therefore, the competitive-shift effect, over which state policy makers had some control, produced a net loss of 79,000 jobs, according to the Ferguson-Ladd analysis.    The researchers also analyzed 1979-83, the period when Mr. Dukakis was a professor at the Kennedy School and Mr. King, also a Democrat, was governor. These years, which included two recessions, were tough ones for the national economy. Had the state's economy grown at the same pace as the nation's, only 5,000 jobs would have been created. But the industry-mix effect, also outside the control of state policy makers, continued to help Massachusetts, producing an estimated 24,000 additional jobs. However, a total of 117,000 private-sector jobs were created during this period. Thus, the competitive-shift effect produced a net gain of 88,000 jobs during the King administration.    There is a good deal of evidence that the shift from a loss of 79,000 private-sector jobs in the first Dukakis administration to a gain of 88,000 private-sector jobs in the King administration reflected a change in the state's economic philosophy. A review of the headlines preceding the 1978 gubernatorial primary indicates that Mr. King was running against the anti-business image that Mr. Dukakis had created in his first term. James Howell, chief economist for the Bank of Boston, said of Mr. Dukakis, &quot;The Baptists will have air-conditioned hell before the business community sees him as pro-business.&quot;    Further evidence of the difference in the state's economic philosophy under the two administrations is what happened to public-sector employment. While the first Dukakis term did poorly in private-sector employment relative to national trends, the U.S. Labor Department estimates that 21,000 people were added to public-sector payrolls. Under Mr. King, the robust gain in private-sector jobs relative to national trends was accompanied by a 24,000-person cut in public-sector payrolls.    Mr. Dukakis narrowly defeated Mr. King in the 1982 Democratic primary in a campaign that focused on corruption in the state. Political commentators also noted that Mr. Dukakis had dropped much of the anti-business rhetoric of his first term. Although the Ferguson-Ladd analysis stops at 1983, I performed a similar analysis on the data from December 1982 to December 1987, a period beginning just before Mr. Dukakis regained the governorship.    During those five years, the state added 468,000 jobs. Had employment in the state grown at the same pace as the nation's, 442,000 jobs would have been created. The industry-mix effect added 24,000 jobs. That leaves only 2,000 jobs over five years, or an average 400 a year, attributable to the actions of state officials. With total Massachusetts employment of 3.1 million, this number is of no statistical significance.    The trivial size of the observed competitive-shift effect in the second Dukakis term indicates state policies can best be categorized as neutral. This is in sharp contrast to the first Dukakis administration, when the policies had a decidedly negative effect, and to the King administration, with its decidedly positive results. This analysis essentially confirms the cursory finding that Mr. Dukakis did little or nothing to contribute to the Massachusetts economy. Rather, the state was a beneficiary of national economic trends.    Professors Ferguson and Ladd also point to another trend that makes the Massachusetts unemployment situation seem better than it really is. Between 1975 and 1983, the state's population remained roughly constant while the nation's population grew 8.6%. This implies a net out-migration of workers that Census data indicate has continued. To keep the unemployment rate stable, the country has to create jobs just to keep up with a growing population. Massachusetts has no such problem. So, Massachusetts will see a bigger decline in its unemployment rate than the nation even when its rate of job growth is slower than the nation's.    As Professors Ferguson and Ladd say, part of the improvement in &quot;the unemployment rate during this period is attributable to the relative unattractiveness of the state for in-migration.&quot; That hardly seems a miracle the rest of the country would want to emulate, even if it could.    Of equal concern is the mix of jobs that have been created. Of the 468,000 jobs created in the state in the past five years, 70% were in the notoriously low-paying wholesale, retail and service sectors. Only 0.3% of all the jobs created, or one in 360, were in the manufacturing sector.    Aside from job creation, another part of the Massachusetts Miracle making the headlines is the improvement in the state's financial health. Gov. Dukakis claims that he will now be submitting his 10th balanced budget, as the state constitution requires. The state's fiscal rectitude is supposed to become a model for the nation.    In fact, applying federal budget accounting principles to the state's recent fiscal performance would produce national deficits of unimaginable proportions. Since 1983, the state budget has soared 65%, or more than 40% above the rate of inflation. That is nearly four times the rate of growth of real federal spending over the same period. The Democratic chairman of the Massachussetts House Taxation Committee has warned that Mr. Dukakis's spending plans are taking the state down a dangerous path. He said, &quot;The current (Dukakis) administration hopes to be safely across the Potomac before it hits the fan.&quot;    In a state that is supposedly well managed, it is surprising that no one knows how many people actually work for the state. One of the problems is that the current administration frequently hires consultants. The state auditor, also a Democrat, said in a report: &quot;While it is difficult to estimate the loss to the taxpayers, it's painfully clear that the hiring of consultants has been a deliberate dodge by the administration. This pervasive practice is not only contrary to the intent of the legislature, but in many instances is against laws and regulations.&quot;    The state's pension system is also in dangerous straits. Last October, Carmen Elio, longtime chairman of the Retirement Law Commission, the watchdog agency for the pension system, issued a report warning that the state's unfunded pension liability has risen 42% to more than $8.4 billion since Mr. Dukakis resumed the governorship in 1983. Mr. Elio attributed the rise to the swelling public payroll. Two weeks later, the governor fired Mr. Elio, hardly the action of a sound fiscal manager.    Who managed the Massachusetts Miracle? Given the evidence, the real miracle is that the story of the boom in the Bay State has gotten Mr. Dukakis as far as it has. The credit must go to John Sasso, who managed the Dukakis public-relations effort until last October. Who else but a public-relations man could create a miracle out of the mediocre?    ---   Mr. Lindsey is an assistant professor of economics at Harvard University and faculty research fellow at the National Bureau of Economic Research. </TEXT></DOC>