<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ881010-0142 </DOCNO><HL> Europe: Britain Is Favoring Bush for Fear of Dukakis </HL><AUTHOR> Paul Johnson </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><G> EXE </G><DATELINE> LONDON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   My adult memory of American presidential campaigns goes back to Harry Truman and his &quot;give 'em hell&quot; whistle-stop tour. In all those 40 years I cannot remember a contest that has aroused such little interest in Britain as the Dukakis-Bush battle. Previous elections generally have involved a personality popular with the British, such as &quot;Ike&quot; or Ronald Reagan, or a controversial figure such as Richard Nixon. Even Jimmy Carter evoked some response.    President Reagan has been a huge success with the British public, more so than the media reflect, as a warm, friendly soul who cracks good jokes and says simple, true things -- and who pays sincere tribute to America's British heritage. So George Bush, as his acknowledged heir, enjoys a vicarious share of this affection. But as a man in his own right Mr. Bush has made no impact. The only thing widely known about Michael Dukakis is that he is of Greek origin, called &quot;the Duke&quot; and is six inches shorter than his rival.    But among the &quot;political nation,&quot; as opposed to the &quot;real nation,&quot; it is a different matter. The Labor Party and such left-of-center organizations as the Liberal Democrats would like to see Mr. Dukakis win, more from a gut feeling that he is the candidate of the Left than from specific expectations about his policies. By contrast, the government, the Tory Party and business (including, and especially, the City of London) are backing Mr. Bush, and they are clear about their reasons.    Margaret Thatcher has enjoyed perhaps the warmest relationship a British prime minister has ever established with an American president, for though Roosevelt and Churchill found it politic to affect close friendship they differed sharply on many fundamental issues. Mrs. Thatcher has had her doubts about one or two of Mr. Reagan's actions, the invasion of Grenada being the most serious, though she later privately conceded the president was right. She also had strong words about Mr. Reagan's exuberant promise at the Iceland summit to negotiate away strategic nuclear weapons, but here it was the president who beat a retreat.    In general, the special relationship has won a new lease on life, never more so than during the Falklands War; discreet U.S. assistance was deeply appreciated and will be remembered for many years to come. On the geopolitical scene, the Reagan and Thatcher administrations have shared the same strategic assumptions and have worked closely both on the deployment of weapons and their negotiated removal. They are at one over NATO, over the Gorbachev phenomenon and even over the Persian Gulf, a source of private rows in the past. The principal West European governments also have worked well with Washington, especially during Mr. Reagan's last years, and will be sorry to see him go.    Mr. Bush, therefore, stands for continuity, both in the pursuit of an agreed response to the shifts in Soviet policy and in the day-to-day business of reconciling U.S. interests with Europe. He is known to have worked more closely with the president than most vice presidents, and this is a point in his favor. More important is the good reputation he enjoys, with personalities as diverse as Mrs. Thatcher, West German Chancellor Helmut Kohl and French President Francois Mitterrand, as an international operator of great experience and knowledge, and usually of sound judgment. He is acknowledged to be more impressive in private than in public. No one in authority in Europe has real anxieties about being able to work with him.    The prospect of a Dukakis presidency, however, worries many people. Well-informed Europeans are astonished at how little he has traveled, and they contrast his ignorance and lack of contacts with the sharp and often eccentric views he appears to hold about world problems. There is almost complete confusion about where he stands on defense issues and what would be his fundamental aims in negotiating weapons reductions with the Soviet Union. There is some concern about an untried and inexperienced man who appears to take so much advice from academics, notably from the Kennedy School of Government at Harvard, and whose entourage has such close links with the Institute for Policy Studies. Few see a Dukakis victory as a disaster, for the realities of the office will progressively wear away his wilder notions, as they did Jimmy Carter's. But the prospect of ill-judged progressive moralizing from the White House is not one Europeans relish, and they fear that Mr. Dukakis's learning curve may be long and expensive for them.    The British government is particularly worried on two issues. Mr. Dukakis has never been to Africa and his views on the problems of Southern Africa and the best ways to eliminate apartheid are particularly ill-informed. He seems to be under the impression, for instance, that Archbishop Desmond Tutu speaks for all the blacks, indeed all the nonwhites there. The fear is that, as president, and under pressure from the Rev. Jesse Jackson, he immediately will embark on activist policies that ignore both the complexities of South Africa and what is actually happening there. Mrs. Thatcher has been firm and consistent on how to push white South Africa in the right direction. Nothing would be more calculated to bring about a damaging clash with the British government than an aggressive American initiative in this tricky area.    Britain is also highly sensitive about another complex problem, Ulster. It has made exhaustive efforts (assisted, recently, by the Irish government) to educate the Reagan administration on the realities of divided Ireland and the role of British troops there. These efforts have been successful, and there is no worry that George Bush would put a foot wrong over Ireland. Mr. Dukakis is regarded as someone likely to be unsympathetic to the British case. Any ill-considered move by a novice administration would damage Anglo-American relations.    The biggest worry with Mr. Dukakis, however, centers on his likely impact on the U.S. economy. One virtue of the Reagan administration, in European eyes, has been its liberal policies on world trade and its sympathetic accommodation to the European Community's efforts to create a single market. Mr. Dukakis seems to have made the right noises on trade, but with the single European market set for 1992 and already obsessing European governments and business with its consequences, real and imaginary, any changing of the guard in Washington is a disturbing prospect. Right or wrong, Mr. Dukakis is seen as a high spender and a high taxer, whose early moves in Washington -- or indeed whose very victory in November -- would precipitate a fall in stocks and, this time, the serious recession that some Europeans feel is coming anyway. A U.S. recession under a Dukakis administration could be a formula for a trading policy that would add a new dimension of danger to 1992.    To sum up, informed Britons and most other West Europeans, are not excited by the idea of a Bush presidency. But they will happily settle for it, if only for the reason Hilaire Belloc gave to the sensible child: And always keep a hold of nurse, For fear of finding something worse.    ---   Mr. Johnson is a British historian and journalist. </TEXT></DOC>