<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870923-0006 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Action in the Gulf</HL><DD> 09/23/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDESTPETROLEUM (PET)TRANSPORTATION, TRUCK AND SHIP LINES, RAILROADS (TRA)DEFENSE DEPARTMENT (DEF) </IN><TEXT>   Monday's attack by U.S. helicopters on an Iranian mine-layer demonstrated that there are limits to U.S. forbearance toward military assaults on shipping in the Persian Gulf. The attack came just a few hours after an Iranian attack craft fired on a British flag tanker, the Gentle Breeze, killing a Filipino boatswain. It also followed by two months the mine damage to the U.S.-flagged tanker Bridgeton.    The U.S. helicopter attack, which killed three Iranian seamen, left two missing and severely damaged the mine layer, is only a tiny sample of the military power the U.S. Navy and the navies of England, France and Italy could bring to bear on Iran if they chose. Iranian air and sea power is puny in comparison with the Western naval forces in the gulf. It also seems beyond doubt that the U.S. public, which learned to thoroughly detest the ayatollahs and mullahs during the hostage crisis and subsequent horrors, would not be grieved by further naval action against Iran.    The rantings at the U.N. yesterday by Iranian President Hojjat-ul-islam Seyed Ali Khamenei did nothing to improve anyone's opinion of the present rulers of that unfortunate country. The contradiction between his insistence that the mine-layer was an unarmed cargo ship and a Tehran Radio admission that it was a naval vessel gives some idea of the chaotic state of government in Iran.    But the U.S. Navy's purpose in the gulf is not to wreak vengeance on Iran. It is there to protect shipping. We wish the administration had been clearer at the outset that it did not favor either side in the Iran-Iraq war, a point that Mr. Reagan made in his U.N. speech Monday. But that mistake now is history, one more lesson about the perils of Mideast diplomacy. In terms of leadership there is not much to choose between Iran and Iraq. But in terms of U.S. and Western interests it would be a serious mistake, even at this late stage, to write off Iran as a lost cause.    President Khamenei repeatedly described the takeover by the mullahs and ayatollahs in Iran as a &quot;revolution&quot; and clearly his professed hatred for the U.S. derives from the fact that the U.S. was so closely aligned with the deposed shah. In point of fact, the mullah takeover was not a revolution. It was a reaction against efforts by the shah, albeit maladroit at times, to modernize Iran. The country's high priests did not create a new order, they reverted to an old order. In the process they slaughtered their opponents and sent many thousands of young men to die in the war with Iraq.    But their fanaticism also denotes instability. The Reagan administration was made well aware of that when its arms-sale efforts, designed to create a link with Tehran, failed. That awareness also exists in Moscow, where Mikhail Gorbachev has been courting the Iranians for the past year and a half, signifying his own regard for Iran's strategic importance. Without putting too fine a point on it, it is at least worth noting that President Khamenei, in yesterday's speech, deplored U.S. actions against Nicaragua, Grenada and Libya, all of which happen to have been Soviet clients, but made only brief and cautious reference to Afghanistan, where the Soviets have been killing Moslems for eight years.    Which brings us to the problems that the U.S. will face as it tries to promote a cease-fire in the Iran-Iraq war. The U.S.-U.S.S.R. relationship with regard to the Persian Gulf is not fundamentally a cooperative relationship. It is competitive, as it is elsewhere around the globe. The Soviets are being asked to support an arms embargo, if necessary, to compel the Iranians to accept a cease-fire, but the success of that effort remains in doubt.    British Foreign Secretary Sir Geoffrey Howe is hopeful that the Soviets have reached a point where they are making a more rational assessment of their own interests. But it is by no means clear that earning dollars and courting favor with the mullahs by selling them arms is contrary to Soviet interests in the region, even if the Soviets are at the same time trying to win favor in Western Europe.    Despite all these complexities, the U.S. now has correctly defined its Persian Gulf policy as the protection of neutral shipping and the promotion of peace between Iraq and Iran. The mine-layer incident shows that protecting is not a benign enterprise. It sometimes carries with it a need to shoot. Having defined its policy, the U.S. now must stick it out in hope that a show of resolve will further its interest in peace in that region. </TEXT></DOC>