<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870915-0060 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets:Cocoa Prices Rebound From WeaknessTied to Cartel Discord; Oil Also Rallies---By John ValentineStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 09/15/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> COMMODITY NEWS, FARM PRODUCTS (CMD)PETROLEUM (PET)FINANCIAL, INSURANCE, MUTUAL FUNDS, ACCOUNTING, LEASING (FIN)BOND MARKET NEWS (BON)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE) </IN><TEXT>   Cocoa futures prices ended higher, rebounding from a sharp decline caused by the collapse of the International Cocoa Organization talks in London concerning the purchase of cocoa to stabilize prices.    With long-term and short-term considerations taking turns affecting the market, according to one analyst, cocoa for December delivery at the Coffee, Sugar andamp; Cocoa Exchange in New York rose $34 a metric ton to $1,913 after trading as low as $1,847, or down $32. A metric ton is equal to 1.1 U.S. short tons, or 2,204.6 pounds.    The 10-day meeting in London ended without agreement between consuming and producing nations about the price at which the manager of the buffer stock of cocoa organization could re-enter the market to buy surplus cocoa.    The latest failure to pound out a price-support policy was exacerbated by the expectation that cocoa production will exceed consumption the fourth year in a row and by the fact that buffer-stock purchasing remain suspended even as this year's world harvest is about to hit the market, said Sandra Kaul, an analyst at Shearson Lehman Brothers Inc. in New York.    However, although the meeting's lack of success &quot;caused selling because of its long-term implications,&quot; Miss Kaul said, &quot;constructive factors dominated the short-term considerations and were more bullish than the market's behavior indicated.&quot;    For one thing, she said, there is relative tightness in near-term supplies because of sales previously made to the buffer stock for delivery around this time.    An apparently smaller-than-expected Brazilian crop is also having an impact, she said. At the moment it is estimated that the Brazilian harvest will yield about 90,000 bags of cocoa, compared with prelimiminary expectations that the crop would total 180,000 bags. Last year production totaled 160,000 bags. A bag weighs 132 pounds.    The Brazilian crop is a key factor around this time of the year because it provides about 90% of supplies between May and September, before production from other countries begins to hit the market, Miss Kaul said.    In other futures markets yesterday:    ENERGY: Crude oil futures prices rose because of technical factors. In thin trading on the New York Mercantile Exchange, October crude was up 21 cents a barrel to $19.61 after being as low as $19.15 early in the session. Petroleum product prices also had modest increases. The crude oil rally stemmed in part from short covering, or buying contracts to offset those sold earlier, analysts and brokers said. A lessening likelihood that Iran will accept a United Nations sanctioned cease-fire contributed to the rally, traders said. And some buying was triggered by an industry report indicating that above-quota output by the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries is likely to drop this month amid soft demand. Petroleum Intelligence Weekly, an oil journal, said the cartel's production probably will decline as much as 1.5 million barrels a day because of customer reluctance to buy OPEC crude at official prices. Last month OPEC output surged to a one-year high of 19.8 million barrels a day, the publication said. OPEC's official production ceiling is 16.6 million barrels a day. However, despite the forecast of an output drop and the market rally, many analysts said the underlying fundamentals remain bearish. &quot;We're still near the top level in the market,&quot; said Chris McCormack, an oil broker at E.D. andamp; F. Man International Futures Inc. in New York.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Corn and soybean futures prices rose amid reports that midweek showers could slightly delay what has been an unusually early harvest, said Dale Gustafson, an analyst at Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. in Chicago. Weather Services Corp., a Bedford, Mass., forecasting service, expects rain to spread from the western Corn Belt into eastern sections today and to continue through tommorrow. Meanwhile, the Agriculture Department said in its weekly harvest progress report that 10% of the corn harvest has been completed, compared with 6% last year. In an average year, 4% of the corn harvest is completed by this time, the department said. The soybean harvest is 5% completed, compared with 2% last year and a 1% average.    COTTON: Futures prices ended lower as demand carried over from Friday when prices rose the daily limit-flagged. The December contract at the New York Cotton Exchange fell 0.52 cent a pound to 74.52 cents. At one point during the day, December cotton was up as much as 0.81 cent, before plunging 1.6 cents. Early in the day, as on Friday, prices were bolstered in part by a high Agriculture Department U.S. cotton export figure and by rain and hail in U.S. cotton-growing areas that may have caused some damage to the crop. In addition, Iraq was in the market late Friday to buy about 65,000 bales of cotton and was thought to have bought about 50,000 bales, an analyst said.    INTEREST RATES: Futures prices ended mostly lower after a rally attempt fizzled. At the Chicago Board of Trade, Treasury bond futures for December settlement fell 5/32 to 83 15/32, after trading as high as 84 12/32. Although strength in the dollar helped boost prices early in the session, selling by market participants looking at technical price charts led to the change in direction, analysts said. Also helping send interest rate futures prices lower was the rise in oil futures prices after trading lower earlier in the session. Higher oil prices hurt interest rate futures because they can lead to renewed concern about inflation. Traders will be watching this morning's report on U.S. retail sales for August for clues to the strength of the economy, analysts said. Economists surveyed by Dow Jones Capital Markets Report are looking for a rise of 2% in sales.    LIVESTOCK AND MEATS -- Hog futures prices fell amid news that the weekly slaughter is running about 100,000 hogs more than expected, said Thomas Morgan, president of Sterling Research Corp. in Arlington Heights, Ill. In addition, hog weights are about nine pounds heavier than the 10-year average. Traders expect the heavy slaughter to put downward pressure on hog futures prices, which have tended lower for two weeks. </TEXT></DOC>