<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880720-0087 </DOCNO><HL> Trade Switch: Japan Is Getting a Dose Of What It Gave U.S.: Low-Priced Imports --- South Koreans, Other Asians Enter Into Some Markets; Big Trouble in Textiles --- But the Economy is Resilient </HL><AUTHOR> Damon Darlin (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> JAPAN FREST </CO><IN> MON CON TEX PIX ELE </IN><DATELINE> HAKUI, Japan  </DATELINE><TEXT>   You can see the future of Japan in small, depressed textile towns such as this one along the Sea of Japan.    Akito Mori did. He was struggling to make a go of the little textile manufacturing company started by his father. He had slashed employment, farmed out production to subcontractors and cut costs. But he couldn't fight a siege of cheap imports from Asia's newly industrialized countries. Around him, dozens of textile companies were failing. A few people committed suicide to avoid the shame of failure.    &quot;It was like standing at the edge of a cliff and looking down: I could see so many broken bodies at the bottom,&quot; the 46-year-old Mr. Mori says.    So, two years ago, he closed the factory and opened a carpet-cleaning service in the building. He is still struggling, but he sees a future in the service industry.    All this sounds familiar to Americans who have watched imports, mainly from Japan, roll in -- and often roll over -- U.S. industry. However, all this is new for Japan. The import invasion is at an early stage, comparable to where the U.S. was 20 years ago. But in some products, such as calculators, black-and-white TV sets and electric fans, foreign-made products account for about half the sales.    That is true even for 35-millimeter cameras, long virtually a symbol of postwar Japan. What could be more Japanese? But 46.6% of the 35mm cameras sold in Japan last year were made overseas, up from 19.4% in 1986 and only 7.7% in 1980. Although many of them are brought in by Japanese producers that put on their own name, even that is starting to change as Korean makers stamp on their own labels and sell the cameras here.    Economists and industrial planners say the onslaught of imports, as it broadens, will eventually force Japanese companies to lower their exorbitant domestic prices. That would squeeze their profits and confront more and more of them with the same hard decisions that American companies faced: to close down domestic factories and move many operations abroad.    &quot;We are beginning to ride the same boat as the U.S.,&quot; says Yasuo Hayashi, the director of the Ministry of International Trade and Industry's textile division.    Many in Japan aren't ready to concede that. Executives say they aren't worried that Japan will follow America and veer toward becoming a nation of hamburger flippers and people selling each other insurance. Instead, they predict that they can stay one step ahead of South Korea, Taiwan and Asia's other newly industrialized countries -- the NICs, as they have come to be known -- by moving to higher-technology products. The NICs' products, a Hitachi Ltd. executive says, &quot;are just too low in quality to ever be a threat.&quot; And Japanese industry is confident of continuing to control the distribution system that has limited access to its markets.    But are these leaders whistling past the cemetery? Japan occasionally lets its mask slip and reveals its real, and ironic, anxiety about the NICs. Frightened by a 90% surge in knitwear imports from South Korea in the first four months of this year, Japanese producers accuse the Koreans of dumping products below cost in Japan. Another irony: Hitachi, the Japanese electronics company accused of stealing technology from International Business Machines Corp., is itself accusing South Korea's Samsung Group of that offense.    Americans have been saying that Japan wins because it plays by a different set of rules, but Japan will find it harder to finesse the laws of economics. A country with a high standard of living and a strong currency draws cheap imports like a magnet. It happened in the U.S., and it is happening here. Even amid Japan's huge trade surplus, that inflow is accelerating as the Japanese demand more goods than domestic factories produce for the domestic market. The gap is most acute in cement and some other building materials.    So, manufacturers' stranglehold on market access here is weakening. Jusco Co. and Daiei Inc., the K marts of Japan, are aggressively marketing NICs' consumer products, the same way K mart and Sears gave Japan its toehold in the U.S. And with an $80 billion annual trade surplus, the Japanese government finds it harder to curb imports via its well-practiced protectionism.    With textiles, Japan is facing a tricky decision: how to reinstate protectionist barriers removed long ago. Last year, Japan, with an open textile market, imported more textiles than it exported, and the industry is dismayed. &quot;It isn't easy to do a radical adjustment,&quot; Mr. Hayashi of the trade ministry says, but the rest of the ministry is watching because &quot;what is happening in textiles is the first symptom of what is happening to all of Japan.&quot;    What is happening in the textile town of Hakui suggests that Japan faces wrenching changes. In the past 10 years, 38% of the textile companies have shut down, and textile employment has been halved. The town, though rainy in summer and snowy in winter, hopefully looks to tourism. It even thinks, for no discernible reason, that it can become the &quot;U.F.O. center of Japan.&quot; As a first step, the phone company offers a recorded message reproducing what is purported to be the sound of a flying saucer taped in Europe.    A few bigger textile companies, such as Noto Orimono Co., are hanging on. They are doing so by moving out of weaving cloth for apparel to items that the NICs still can't produce with high quality, such as nylon for lightweight tents, the fiber in reinforced package tape and nylon ribbon for computer printers. &quot;So far,&quot; says Takao Nishihashi, Noto's president, &quot;the NICs haven't learned how to do it. We will do our best to stay ahead.&quot; But with a work force whose average age is 40 and no new hiring, the future looks tough.    It looks even tougher in the large tin shed where Ryozo Kobayashi and his wife run 22 taffeta-weaving looms 24 hours a day. When everything is going well, they can get away from the din for all of five hours. Mr. Kobayashi says he hasn't had a vacation in 20 years.    The major companies contract out their less-profitable and specialty lines to such &quot;pappa-mamma&quot; factories, which contitute more than half the industry. But operators such as Mr. Kobayashi don't get rich. He makes 900 50-meter rolls a month and gets 1,270 yen a roll, about $8,800 monthly. But subtract overhead, materials costs, interest payments and living expenses, and not much is left.    Before Mr. Kobayashi can pay off the debt he took on to buy his machines, moreover, the technology will be outmoded, he will have little money to buy new ones, and low-wage countries will have better equipment. The balding 49-year-old says, &quot;Even if I could afford new technology, it won't be sufficient.&quot;    It was that &quot;weaving for wages&quot; squeeze that persuaded Mr. Mori to get out. &quot;We were done in by the high yen and the other Asian nations,&quot; he complains.    Following Japanese tradition, he didn't lay off any of his 20 workers. Some retired early, and he started a coffee shop to keep on a few others. Then, he got the carpet-cleaning idea when his dry cleaner couldn't get one of his rugs clean. He designed a machine based partly on textile-making technology; a carpet is fed into it, conveyed past water jets and hot-air blowers, and then neatly rolled.    &quot;Textiles have no future,&quot; he told his eight remaining employees, &quot;but the carpet-cleaning business would. Will you come with me?&quot; All of them did. It has been hard. No bank would lend him money. The government finally lent him 70 million yen ($538,000), about 70% of what he needed. The first year, he cleaned only 2,500 carpets. Now, he does 10 times that. &quot;We've never felt so enthusiastic for living,&quot; says Mr. Mori, who also runs a sports center.    Says Yoshihisa Akazawa, a 42-year-old worker feeding carpets into the machine, &quot;The problem with textiles was competition from the NICs. There is no danger of that in this industry.&quot;    But in semiconductors, electrical appliances, cameras and even machinery parts, that danger is obvious. It is sensed by anyone walking into a Jusco store or similar mass marketer. No longer is it just products made in the newly developed countries and brought in with the nameplate of a famous Japanese company slapped on. Samsung Group and Goldstar, also of South Korea, are selling more products under their own names. The products, such as low-tech fans or play-only videocassette machines, are inexpensive. But by using their own labels, the companies are establishing independent names and a quality image, just as the Japanese did in the U.S.    The fastest growth in appliance sales is in the outlets of the mass marketers rather than those of the manufacturers, and the fastest growth in the stores is in products imported from the NICs. As early as this fall, Konica Corp. stores will sell Goldstar products.    &quot;From now on, it is a new epoch,&quot; says Takano Kimihide, a securities analyst at Nikko Research. &quot;You can't stop people from buying cheaper products.&quot;    The imports put domestic companies under pressure. No longer able to set prices, manufacturers are beginning to cut them, and, as retailers compete, prices are even fluctuating daily. Camera prices are down more than 10% from two years ago. And, surprisingly, blank videotape is often cheaper in Tokyo, the world's most expensive city, than in Hong Kong, the world's bargain center.    The price cutting is crimping corporate profits. As Japanese companies reduce domestic production, the burden of their fixed costs increases -- even faster than in the U.S. because the Japanese rarely lay off employees. Even Japanese-owned factories overseas feel the squeeze because most of them depend on parts made in Japan, which cost more than the parts made by NICs flowing to factories owned by the NICs. Hitachi says it already loses money making appliances, and the whole industry &quot;is very exposed,&quot; says Yutaka Sugiyama, a Nomura Research analyst.    Battling the imports invasion, Japanese companies are moving quickly into high-tech, high-value-added lines. Big textile makers are making thread that doesn't snap and new, shimmery high-fashion materials. VCRs feature enhanced sound and pictures, and high-definition TV is in the offing. Japanese-made 35mm cameras are super-sophisticated automatic-focus; in some, to get different effects, the photographer can change computer chips as easily as changing a tape cassette. Meanwhile, companies are diversifying outside their basic industries or are playing the financial markets. As a result, the overall profit picture looks healthier than ever -- so far.    By reacting quickly, the Japanese may keep the import damage less painful than it was in the U.S. It will be years before Japan suffers a shrunken trade surplus, higher unemployment and significantly lower production capacity. Its economy remains so robust that it can absorb much punishment before problems get serious, as they might in a recession. And Japan is starting from a huge trade surplus.    Many blue-collar workers can be shifted to the now-small leisure and service sectors. Companies also can trim work forces significantly through retirements; Japan's population is relatively old, with its baby boomers 40 to 60 years of age. And displaced workers, rather than smashing Korean products, adopt a stoic attitude, blaming themselves for not working hard enough to fight off the invasion.    As in Hakui, the trend is toward service industries, economists say. Is that bad? In the U.S., that question is hotly debated by people who worry that America is losing crucial production capacity. In Japan, the debate will probably be similar.    &quot;Japan will continue to be strong,&quot; says David Gerstenhaber, a Tokyo-based economist for Morgan Stanley, but it &quot;is finally going to start losing a few battles.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>