<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880203-0050 </DOCNO><HL> Even In Israel, Market Is Force for Social Change </HL><AUTHOR> Daniel Doron </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> MDEST </CO><TEXT>   Contemporary observers, obsessed with politics, often ignore powerful economic forces that could help resolve seemingly intractable problems.    In Israel, where the government's control of the economy is almost absolute and where its heavy-handed manipulation exacerbates ethnic and social tensions, market forces are eroding the establishment's economic base, while empowering a previously disenfranchised group. If encouraged, market forces will temper Israeli politics and even create better conditions for an Israeli-Arab accommodation than do elusive political formulas.    Many industrial enterprises owned by government, the Labor Party and the banks, as well as the Labor-affiliated sick-fund, pension funds and agricultural cooperatives, are experiencing serious difficulties, reflecting basic structural weaknesses. Economic constraints are also straining internal party unity, as succession struggles are intensified by the reduced ability of both major political parties, Labor and Likud, to dispense patronage. Israeli politicians may soon conclude that even in the short run, their economic domination is no longer an asset but a millstone around their necks.    The same relentless forces that finally are exacting a heavy toll on Israel's statist economy, after years of political misallocation and mismanagement, are now beginning to reward, albeit haphazardly, Sephardic Jews, a group that largely was excluded from political favor and therefore had to make it on its own.    A recent survey of income disparities between Ashkenazim (Jews of European extraction) and Sephardim (those of Mideast extraction) discovered that despite extremely high taxes and transfer payments -- amounting, respectively, to 56% and 25% of GNP -- income gaps kept growing in the past decade, except among the self-employed, where Sephardim overtook Ashkenazim by a wide margin.    This is because in Israel, as elsewhere, high taxes pushed many productive middle-class workers into the underground economy. Ashkenazim, mostly well-established wage-earners, discovered to their dismay that while education and contacts gave them access to coveted jobs, they remained highly taxed. The more recently arrived Sephardim, lacking pull and political access, moved into trades and small businesses, where they satisfied rapidly expanding consumption and participated in the underground economy. Never having been infected by the ethos of socialism, they were generously rewarded for their healthier attitude toward enterprise.    The Sephardim's emergence as a political and economic force began a decade ago with their successful revolt against 30 years of domination by the Labor Party. Labor treated the Sephardim as pliant, lower-class clients of a welfare state ostensibly constructed in their behalf, while it actually expanded middle-class bureaucracy and along with it, its own power. When the Sephardim rebelled against Labor's condescension and excesses, the party's liberal elite accused them of ingratitude or even betrayal, of radicalizing politics, and of primitivism. The Sephardim turned to Likud, which offered their emerging leaders political advancement. The Sephardim stuck with Likud even when party populists abandoned their promise to reform the economy.    As the Sephardim ascended the greasy pole of Israeli politics, it became increasingly evident how wrong (even racist) their critics were. Sephardic society, while more hierarchical and traditional, lacked the Ashkenazic penchant for religious fanaticism or radical politics, utopian fantasizing and factionalism -- qualities that rent Jewish life in the villages of Eastern Europe and still plague Israeli politics. And because they know the Arabs, speak their language and view them more realistically, the Sephardim, though nationalistic, are more likely to reach a workable accommodation with them.    Nothing better illustrates the transformation we can expect in Israel from growing Sephardic prominence than the April 1986 appointment of Moshe Nissim to replace Itzhak Moda'i as finance minister. Both men belong to the Likud's &quot;liberal&quot; wing. Mr. Moda'i, a brilliant Ashkenazic politician and economist who launched a successful economic reform plan, was forced to resign because he was erratic and confrontational. Mr. Nissim, a Sephardi who was untrained in economics, was considered a political lightweight. But Mr. Nissim pulled a Truman. He mastered his tasks, won over his excellent staff, and while never losing his cool, refused to knuckle under to overwhelming political pressure both in the case of the Lavi fighter plane (he voted to ground it against his party line) and in other major battles. More important, Mr. Nissim is committed in practice to basic structural changes and has made a credible beginning at tax and financial-market reform and at privatization.    Mr. Nissim may be able also to &quot;pull an Ehrhard&quot; (the finance minister who launched West Germany's economic miracle by lifting regulation) and complete his modest yet significant macro-reforms by cutting government regulation and control. If so, he could accelerate the change that empowered the Sephardic constituency that recently helped give him the highest (over 60%) approval rate of any Israeli politician. More important, the freeing of market forces could bring about a dramatic spurt of economic growth, as the productivity of currently underutilized capital and manpower increase.    Despite greatly improved living standards, daily life in Israel is terribly difficult for both Jew and Arab because of political manipulation of the economy and bureaucratic harassments.    Since those with less access to political favor suffer the most, explosive resentments build up along traditional ethnic and national divides. Some of the bitterest complaints from Arabs concern bureaucracy and taxes. Significantly, they protest the same condescending manipulation so deeply resented by the Sephardim only a decade ago. Material advancement reduced Sephardic grievances. Similarly, many Arab workers and merchants, whose earning power has greatly improved, counseled moderation during the recent unrest despite death threats and firebombings by Arab extremists.    Less government intervention and greater prosperity cannot by themselves resolve serious ethnic and national conflicts. But economic opportunity can reduce strife and make political compromise easier to achieve. In a free and thriving economy, workers, merchants and entrepreneurs -- who have a stake in peaceful co-existence -- will become the sources of wealth, power and prestige. Simultaneously, the influence of politicians and intellectuals obsessed with power will decline, and so will the urgency of pursuing ephemeral overall solutions that only polarize positions and increase frustrations and strife. Solutions can then evolve gradually and locally and in the spirit of accommodation rather than confrontation.    The U.S., seeking peace in the Mideast, should encourage those forces that could de-escalate the conflict. Instead of focusing its energy on seeking a forced, artificial settlement, the U.S. could profitably promote free economies as a solid basis for peace.    ---   Mr. Doron is the director of the Israel Center for Social and Economic Progress, an independent economic policy group in Tel Aviv. </TEXT></DOC>