<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870604-0020 </DOCNO><HL>  </HL><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><DATELINE> WASHINGTON  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The war on AIDS -- a phrase often invoked in the Third International Conference on Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome here -- has evolved into a battle on many fronts, from laboratory to clinic and from Capitol Hill to the African bush.    And like any war, the frequent hours of tedium and despair are sometimes enlivened by moments of drama and even whimsy.    ---   High theater unfolded late Tuesday when French researcher Daniel Zagury took center stage.    Standing before his fellow scientists and a panting press corps, Dr. Zagury discussed the results of his controversial decision to make himself the first human subject to receive an experimental AIDS vaccine. In a French-Zairean collaboration last summer, he innoculated himself and, subsequently, healthy and sick French and African volunteers to determine if the vaccine could prevent or delay the onset of AIDS. Dr. Zagury has said he is healthy.    &quot;It is premature to discuss clinical benefits, but it should be stressed no one (in the experiment) showed any deterioration in immune or clinical status,&quot; he said.    Dr. Zagury -- described by U.S. colleagues as a &quot;passionate guy&quot; -- said his experiment triggered two important kinds of immune responses in the body: antibodies to neutralize the AIDS virus and increased numbers of so-called helper T-cells, which may be able to fight the virus. Both types of immunity are necessary to knock out the AIDS virus as it moves through the body or hides in infected cells.    Dr. Zagury hasn't challenged his body's immunity by exposing himself to the AIDS virus and isn't expected to do so. But he said he plans such a test in chimps, as well as a related experiment giving special antibodies to infants born of AIDS virus-infected mothers in Africa. His gene-spliced vaccine, fabricated by Bernard Moss of the National Institutes of Health, carries a piece from the outer coating of the AIDS virus stitched into vaccinia, long used as a smallpox vaccine.    Dr. Zagury spoke English in a low, heavily accented monotone. After finishing, he strode from the auditorium in a halo of TV lights without answering questions, frustrated reporters surging in his wake, some climbing over chairs.    Back in the auditorium, a half dozen of the most eminent scientists in the U.S. sat bemused by the furor, their own work all but ignored by reporters. &quot;Either he's very lucky, or it works,&quot; said Dani Bolognesi, a researcher from Duke University. &quot;The data he presented are straightforward, good, solid, immunological data.&quot; If true, he added, &quot;It's very important.&quot;    ---   Studies presented at the conference show that prostitutes in the U.S. are becoming infected in greater numbers.    According to a six-city study by the U.S. Centers for Disease Control, 12% of 1,048 prostitutes tested carried the AIDS virus. The agency's William Darrow said the infections may have resulted from intravenous drug use by the women or their sexual partners, who may also use drugs. Black and Hispanic women were most at risk.    Dr. Darrow cautioned that the women who were tested were recruited from different places, including jails, methadone clinics and street-corner outreach programs. Thus, the figures may not be representative.    --In Las Vegas, nine of 35 or 26% of prostitutes tested were infected with the AIDS virus.    --In Colorado Springs, Colo., 19 of 71 prostitutes tested, or 27%, were infected.    --In Newark, N.J., 51 of 59 prostitutes, or 86%, were infected.    --In Miami, 180 of 309, or 58%, were infected.    --In San Francisco, 74 of 157, or 47%, were infected.    --In Los Angeles, 152 of 217, or 70%, were infected.    ---   Elsewhere, researchers discussed the pathways on which the virus is traveling.    Kenneth Castro, a researcher with the Centers for Disease Control, said he investigated the steamy, mosquito-infested South Florida community of Belle Glade, where a surprisingly high number of residents -- 76 of 16,500 -- have AIDS.    But bisexuality, individuals of Haitian origin, prostitution and drugs -- not mosquitos -- were found to be the virus's continuing routes of infection, Dr. Castro said. One of his major pieces of evidence: Children aged two to 10 (who typically play outside and are frequently bitten) were entirely uninfected. Nevertheless, the sobering near equality of men and women with the AIDS virus in Belle Glade (1.3 men for every one woman) demonstrates to researchers that the U.S. has pockets of disease that approach ratios in the Third World.    From the Montefiore Medical Center in the Bronx in New York, Neal Steigbigel reported that 48 out of 100 heterosexual partners of people with AIDS and AIDS-related complex were infected. And 32 of them have developed AIDS, ARC, or other abnormalities related to the infection, he said. Women number 47%, or almost half of those infected.    ---   In the face of the virus's seemingly relentless growth, some countries have found new ways to remind their citizenry to take precautions.    In Copenhagen, Denmark, Henrik Zoffman said a public information campaign on city buses -- featuring a horizontal bus-length condom -- has been given an international flavor for tourists from both sides of the Iron Curtain.    He showed slides of one bus bedecked with a red, white and blue condom, tipped with stars and bearing the colloquial Americanism: &quot;Take care out there!&quot;    For Russian guests, another bus displays a red condom, bearing a quotation from the poet Aleksandr Pushkin to soothe the lovelorn Soviet on holiday. &quot;Still,&quot; the sign says, &quot;love is possible.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>