<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871118-0121 </DOCNO><HL> Republic at Risk:Disillusionment GrowsIn Brazil After ReturnTo Civilian Control---Huge Debt, Election Dispute,Clash of Rich and PoorMake Governing Difficult---Private Jets, Thoroughbreds---By Roger CohenStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 11/18/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAMMONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)BANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><DATELINE> SAO PAULO, Brazil  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Avenida Paulista, with its shimmering skyscrapers and crowded lanes of stylish cars, is the Fifth Avenue of Latin America, and it still pulsates with the energy that has made this country the eighth-biggest economic power in the West.    The Paulista symbolizes three decades of rapid Brazilian growth, comparable, some say, to U.S. development at the turn of the century. But now this huge country is in trouble. More than two years after a return to civilian rule, a bitter dispute over the length of President Jose Sarney's rule is dividing the country. Problems stemming from Brazil's $112 billion foreign debt have worsened, and social tensions have spilled even nto this elegant avenue. As businessmen hurry along the Paulista these days, they dodge a growing number of abandoned children, just a small portion of the city's million destitute youngsters.    Disillusionment is widespread. President Sarney's government has found neither the money nor the will to alter the daily lives of the 80 million newly enfranchised Brazilians who earn less than $90 a month.    Helio Jaguaribe, a top sociologist, warns of a possible return to military rule if social conflicts stemming from the mass movement of rural poor to city slums continue to worsen. On Sunday, tensions with the military sharpened following a vote by a parliamentary committee in favor of a four-year presidential term and direct elections next year. The military, like the president, favors a five-year term.    An upheaval probably isn't imminent. Brazil's size helps to defuse tension, compromise is traditional here and labor organization remains flimsy. Government ministers dismiss the current confusion as an inevitable consequence of transition, and one of them, Culture Minister Celso Furtado, insists that &quot;a modern political class will emerge.&quot;    Nevertheless, at times this year the country has appeared out of control. Drug dealers brandishing guns have blithely held news conferences in the middle of Rio; buses have been burned; a rock was lobbed at the president. Meanwhile, news reports about starving peasants in the North are interspersed with advertisements for private jets and thoroughbred horses.    &quot;Everything's terrible,&quot; says Francisco Lopes, one of the roughly 1.5 million youths who move each year from the countryside to city slums. Recently, Mr. Lopes was fired from a radio-factory job. Now he is waiting for a bus from Sao Paulo to Imperatriz, about 1,000 miles away. &quot;I know some people there who may find me something,&quot; he says.    The &quot;New Republic&quot; emerged in 1985 to lofty expectations. During 21 years of military rule, the economy had expanded sharply, but many Brazilians hadn't benefited from the boom. President Sarney, thrust into power after the sudden death of the electoral college's presidential choice, was a candidate of the Brazilian Democratic Movement, or PMDB, which had led the movement against the military.    But President Sarney was a former ally of the military regime, and his presence in the PMDB illustrates the extent to which the party had already embraced a wide -- and divisive -- ideological spectrum. Now, splits within the PMDB have paralyzed it, and the content of the new constitution is still being debated. Increasingly, Mr. Sarney's government resembles what political scientist David Fleischer calls &quot;the old regime in new clothes.&quot; It still hasn't found a way out of the authoritarian model that produced Brazil's lopsided development.    Meanwhile, scandals, economic mismanagement, high inflation and revelations of bureaucratic salaries ranging up to $16,000 a month have contributed to a feeling that politicians hold the electorate in contempt. This impression has been reinforced by the president's attempt to hold out for a five-year term and renege on his promise to hold what would have been the first direct presidential elections since 1960 next year.    In general, President Sarney has emerged as a weak and erratic leader. He seems more at home working with the armed forces than with the directly elected congress. His policies veer between attacks on creditor banks and eulogies for foreign capital. A moratorium earlier this year on two-thirds of the country's foreign debt, initially portrayed as a decisive stand to ensure Brazil's future growth, has fizzled into a tentative accord with creditors that appears to change nothing. Last week, long-simmering trade differences with the U.S. exploded into open conflict. Meanwhile, the failure of last year's Cruzado Plan, a program of wage and price controls that was supposed to curb inflation and redistribute income, has intensified the country's sense of despair.    &quot;People, especially the young, no longer feel represented in Brasilia,&quot; says Otto Lara Resende, a former editor of the center-left newspaper Jornal do Brasil. &quot;There is a deeper disillusionment than I have ever seen in the country.&quot; Miguel Arraes, the leftist PMDB governor of the northeastern state of Pernambuco, calls this &quot;the worst crisis&quot; in Brazil's history.    &quot;We're not investing, and I don't think many people are,&quot; says Edson Fregni, the president of Scopus S.A. computer company. &quot;This is a menacing climate, and we're hanging on to any passing log.&quot; Auto executive Wayne Booker agrees. &quot;Don't invest here if you're looking for short-term returns,&quot; he says.    The northeastern state of Ceara, near President Sarney's home state of Maranhao, illustrates many of the problems that have engulfed the nation. Here the average life span of the state's six million inhabitants is 42 years, close to 50% of them are illiterate and only 2% earn more than $450 a month. Textile executive Benedito Clayton Veras Alcantara calls it a &quot;Biafra within Brazil.&quot;    Sitting at his desk overlooking some 2,000 women stitching dungarees, Mr. Alcantara explains that in the past, public office was used to distribute jobs and money in order to build political followings and cement the existing power structure. Power thus remained concentrated in a small elite -- known as &quot;coronels&quot;, or colonels -- that was determined, in his words, to keep &quot;the people just about alive but not strong.&quot;    In the interior of Ceara, paved roads give way to sand and weeds, and miles of uncultivated land are enclosed by fences erected by absentee landlords (1% of Brazil's population owns 41% of its land). Near the small town of Ico, a simple whitewashed schoolhouse stands on the banks of an immense reservoir. But the school, which finally opened a month ago after standing empty for three years, still has no water supply.    &quot;The mayor says he can't yet install a pump to bring water up to the school,&quot; says the headmistress, Maria Edialeuda de Sousa Delfino. &quot;It's all politics,&quot; she adds. &quot;Politics here means that if there's an exam in the education system, you pass on the basis of your friends, not your performance. You need friends to get anything done.&quot;    As she speaks, she is surrounded by about 20 children aged between four and six. All of them are wolfing down a rice and spaghetti mixture topped by a thin meat sauce, their only meal of the day.    The state's PMDB governor, Tasso Jereissati, says he is trying to change things. When he took office, he found that the local government was handing out 146,000 paychecks a month. Some people were being paid for as many as seven jobs, and more than 250 journalists on local papers were on the state payroll. &quot;It was a massive system of political patronage,&quot; he says. &quot;If you were named secretary of education, your role was to provide jobs, not better teaching.&quot;    After nine months, the governor has cut the number of paychecks to 110,000, but more will have to be eliminated to balance the state's books. Pointing to a newspaper photo of an emaciated peasant sprawled under a tree, he says, &quot;We have to find the resources and policies to finally incorporate these people in the nation. Their sense of revolt is growing. History tells us you only find the limit of their patience afterwards.&quot;    But Gov. Jereissati faces a number of hurdles. Landowners, retired military officials and others have started a bitter press campaign against him. Meanwhile, in Brasilia, a finance ministry struggling to control the budget deficit tells him that there are no resources available for the social projects he has promised to start. Mr. Jereissati says he fears that democracy in Brazil could collapse. &quot;Foreign creditors can't push us into a recession,&quot; he warns, &quot;if they want a modern democracy here.&quot;    But then a modern democracy seems a long way off. Like Ceara, the country as a whole is dominated by a narrow elite resistant to change, and it is administered by a bloated bureaucracy that is rife with nepotism and corruption. A huge fraud involving a planned north-south railway much favored by the president has gone unpunished since it was uncovered a few months ago. So, too, has blatant tampering with last year's trade figures. Meanwhile, a whole class of &quot;maharajahs&quot; has been uncovered: civil servants -- mainly military police -- who earn more than $10,000, and in some cases more than $15,000, a month.    &quot;In Brazil,&quot; says Mr. Jaguaribe, the sociologist, &quot;you just don't go to jail if you're rich.&quot;    Meanwhile, the army appears to have maintained decisive influence in the country, assuming what conservative Sen. Roberto Campos calls &quot;a function of boundary demarcation.&quot; It was the army, alarmed at the country's disarray, that pushed the president to insist on a five-year, rather than a four-year, term. Asked about the aims of the armed forces, Maximiano Eduardo da Silva Fonseca, a former minister of the navy, says that there is no wish to return to power. But he criticizes congress as a &quot;sack of cats&quot; and says that the armed forces won't accept &quot;generalized chaos.&quot;    Brazil's lack of resources to finance its development compounds its problems. With half of its 135 million people under 20 years old and 1.5 million new jobs a year required just to absorb those emerging into the job market, many agree with Gov. Jereissati's view that political reaction is inevitable without growth.    The situation poses a problem for Brazil's foreign creditors: Even with the current tentative agreement to resume some interest payments, Brazil is likely to stagger from crisis to crisis unless it gains access to new resources or gets an agreement that reduces pressure over the long term. Recently, Finance Minister Luiz Carlos Bresser Pereira called for fundamental changes in the way that Brazil's foreign debt is handled. And a leading economist, Andre Lara Resende, while conceding economic mismanagement, argues that &quot;this country needs a moratorium, just to try to secure growth and stability.&quot;    Certainly, instability looms now. Brazil as yet is only toying with democracy. Full democracy could unleash powerful forces in a country where the richest 1% of the population has as much wealth as the poorest 50%. The elite clearly fears direct presidential elections, and there is speculation that the vote, now due in 1988 or 1989, will be postponed again.    The country seems in limbo, and a long period of uncertainty appears inevitable. &quot;Never,&quot; says Antonio Delfim Netto, former economic czar, &quot;has the gap between the hopes of the masses and the available means been so great.&quot;    &quot;You walk down Paulista,&quot; says Ashley Jenner, the president of Bank of Credit andamp; Commerce International in Brazil, &quot;and every other person is a kid. They're looking for the good life. And they won't wait too long.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>