<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ871201-0073 </DOCNO><HL> REVIEW andamp; OUTLOOK (Editorial):Backfire II</HL><DD> 12/01/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FREST EUROPNUCLEAR POWER, FUEL (NUK)AEROSPACE (ARO)EXECUTIVE (EXE) </IN><TEXT>   Ronald Reagan's nuclear arms agreement with Mikhail Gorbachev recalls to mind the signing of SALT II in June 1979. The most important thing about SALT II was what it didn't cover. The same goes for the treaty Messrs. Reagan and Gorbachev plan to sign next week. Its scope is limited in such a way as to have little, if any, effect on the steady expansion of the Soviet nuclear arsenal.    As Jimmy Carter went to the Vienna summit with Leonid Brezhnev, there was one big unresolved issue in the SALT II negotiations -- the range of the Soviet Backfire bomber. The U.S. Joint Chiefs said it had intercontinental range, especially if equipped for in-flight refueling, and thus should be subject to the treaty limitations. The negotiators failed to resolve the issue, and at the summit President Brezhnev handed President Carter an unsigned piece of paper stating that the Soviets did &quot;not intend&quot; to give the airplane intercontinental capability. The Backfire today is the supersonic core of the 455 planes in the Soviet bomber force described in Pentagon literature as &quot;intercontinental capable.&quot;    The intermediate nuclear forces (INF) agreement is equally porous. We wonder if our negotiators have ever learned how many SS-20 missiles the Soviets now have, or whether Mr. Gorbachev will whisper that in President Reagan's ear. Such problems aside, the treaty has a fatuous cast. Despite what TV commentators keep saying, no warheads will be destroyed, only missiles after warheads have been detached. The warheads will be used on new and better missiles. The Backfire was excluded from SALT II because the Soviets insisted it was not a strategic weapon. A recently developed Soviet rocket, the SS25, is excluded from INF because it is a strategic weapon.    The SS-25 is produced in the same factory, near Sverdlovsk, that produces the SS-20 intermediate-range rocket the INF treaty proscribes. Americans stationed outside the plant to verify Soviet compliance may notice that the the SS-25 looks a lot like the SS-20. The SS-25 has twice the range of the SS-20, but carries only a single warhead, whereas the SS-20 carries three. The two rockets, however, are of similar size and can be moved about -- and thus easily hidden -- by means of reloadable, roadmobile launchers. But the SS-25 is under no INF restriction.    The Soviets, in giving up the SS-20 and some obsolete shorter-range weapons, may be ridding themselves of an entire &quot;class of weapons,&quot; as the press releases say. But they will not lack for nuclear weapons. In addition to the SS-25, they will have a new SS-24, which is larger than the SS-25, not to mention shorter-range cruise and submarine-launched missiles. A new Blackjack bomber will be a follow-on to the Backfire. There is nothing in the INF agreement to suggest a decline in the number of Soviet nuclear warheads, which is expected to rise to 12,000 by the year 1990.    It has been argued that the U.S. as well isn't surrendering much in military terms. The 108 Pershing II rockets to be removed from West Germany are immobile and vulnerable. Theoretically, their deterrent role can be better filled with air and submarine-launched missiles. The decision to ban conventionally armed as well as nuclear ground-launched cruise missiles, though, will do much to frustrate hopes of a high-tech conventional defense, erasing a potentially important Western military advantage.    When the U.S. withdraws the Pershings and 256 cruise missiles from Europe, the Soviets will have achieved an important political objective at almost no cost to their own offensive capability. Their long-term goal has been to convince Western European nations, and West Germany in particular, that Europe's future security is dependent not on U.S. arms but on the good will of the Soviet Union. A corollary is that Soviet good will can be earned through economic and political concessions.    This is better understood in Europe than in the U.S. The Reagan administration's assertions that Europe supports the INF deal is based mainly on the unwillingness of Europe's leaders to challenge it publicly. High-ranking European politicians, in their private conversations, express serious reservations about the effects on European security.    Does the U.S. have any choice but to welcome a Soviet leader who seems to be seeking accommodation? That is an interesting question, but there is a difference between merely testing sincerity and signing on the dotted line. Jimmy Carter signed on the dotted line after being assured that the Backfire was not what it in fact was. As the embarrassment in the Senate later proved, it was not one of Mr. Carter's greatest moments. So much for history's lessons. </TEXT></DOC>