<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880520-0097 </DOCNO><HL> Game of Nerves: In Edgy South Korea, Threat of Terrorism Haunts the Olympics --- Many Targets Will Be There; Angry North Might Use Surrogates in a Strike --- Japanese Red Army Is Back </HL><AUTHOR> John Walcott and Urban C. Lehner (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST MDEST FORGN </CO><G> EXE </G><TEXT>   It sounds like a terrorist's dream. Iranians, Libyans, North Koreans, and Palestinians can all find -- assembled in one spot and before a global television audience -- all of their greater and lesser satans. The Israelis will be there, along with the Kuwaitis, Iraqis and British, and, of course, the Americans.    Worse, the host is another prime target: South Korea -- the hated rival of one of modern terrorism's founding fathers, the ruthless North Korean leader Kim Il Sung.    The occasion is the Olympic Games, that quadrennial celebration of human brotherhood through sport. This year's summer games may put brotherhood to the test.    Worried intelligence officials don't want to scare anyone away from the September games, knowing that doing so would just hand North Korea the propaganda victory it seeks. &quot;At the moment, we hold no intelligence saying any of these groups is planning to do anything,&quot; says L. Paul Bremer, the State Department's ambassador-at-large for counterterrorism. He says that &quot;the {South} Koreans have, to me, an impressive ability to run security. They're a disciplined society with a centralized intelligence apparatus.&quot;    That didn't help last Nov. 29, when two North Korean agents blew up a South Korean airliner in flight, killing 115 people. Captured, one of the culprits acknowledged the attack was designed to frighten visitors away from Seoul. It was, in other words, an installment on a threat Mr. Kim had made two years ago that he &quot;will not stand idly by and permit the holding of the 23rd Olympiad&quot; in South Korea.    Some officials hope Mr. Kim will hold off because so many of his benefactors will be there. &quot;The East is coming. The Third World is coming. They all want peaceful games,&quot; notes Samuel Pisar, a lawyer for the International Olympic Committee. &quot;None of them will countenance any disturbances.&quot; But intelligence officials say nobody has much influence over the volatile Mr. Kim (the &quot;Great Leader&quot;) and his unpredictable son and heir, Kim Jong Il (the &quot;Dear Leader&quot;). The xenophobic Kims bitterly resent the way the games will generate attention and, probably, admiration for South Korea.    &quot;A lot of effort was made to find economic and other levers that could restrain the North Koreans,&quot; one U.S. official says. &quot;But we didn't find any. Even if the Soviets and the Chinese knew what Kim was up to, they couldn't make him stop.&quot; Seoul offered to let North Korea be the site of a few events, but Pyongyang spurned the offer, insisting it must be a co-host of any Korean Olympics.    South Korea's counterterrorist forces, though among the world's best, are experienced mostly in stopping infiltrators from the North and choking domestic dissent. As a result, some U.S. officials think that if the North Koreans try to disrupt the games, they may subcontract the job to the terror underground. &quot;It's a lot easier to get into South Korea from Tokyo or Hong Kong or Manila than from North Korea,&quot; notes Noel Koch, who worked closely with South Korea's military and intelligence agencies when he was the Pentagon's top counterterrorism official.    As it happens, the Olympics coincide with a recent and sharp surge in terrorist activity, from the Far East to Africa. And intelligence officials say Iran, Libya, Lebanese Shiite extremists, the PLO, and the notorious Palestinian plotter Abu Nidal have renewed terrorist operations this spring after and 18-month lull.    In this ignoble group, North Korea stands tall, both as practitioner and as teacher. Over the past 20 years, U.S. officials say, as many as 5,000 soldiers, guerrillas, hijackers and bombers, from two dozen countries, have been schooled and armed in North Korea or by its military advisers.    One of the only known photographs of Abu Nidal was taken in North Korea. Receiving much of his education there was Abu Daoud, a Yasser Arafat aide who helped plan the massacre of Israeli athletes and coaches at the 1972 Munich Olympics. North Korea remains on friendly terms with Libya and Syria and is one of Iran's major arms suppliers.    But the most likely troublemakers, experts agree, are members of the Japanese Red Army. Intelligence analysts from the U.S., South Korea and Japan fear that North Korea may be part of the reason for a sudden re-emergence of this eccentric terrorist relic of the 1960s.    The Japanese Red Army first appeared as a radical offshoot of the student unrest of the late 1960s, and its members quickly made common cause with fellow extremists in Europe and the Middle East. Their goal, they said, was a &quot;simultaneous world revolution to destroy capitalism and imperialism.&quot; The group reached the height of its notoriety in 1972, when three members massacred 26 people at Israel's Lod airport. It then went underground and seemed dormant -- until a troubling series of recent developments:   --On May 10, Japanese police arrested Yasuhiro Shibata, who as a 16-year-old allegedly helped hijack a Japan Air Lines jet to North Korea in 1970. Officials say Mr. Shibata and a handful of other JRA members had whiled away most of the intervening years in Pyongyang. Japan's National Police Agency is questioning him about possible North Korean attacks on the Olympics.    --Italian police are searching for another JRA member, Junzo Okudaira, who they suspect set off a car bomb outside a USO club in Naples, Italy, last month, killing a U.S. servicewoman and four Italians. Italian authorities also are checking unconfirmed sightings of Fusako Shigenobu, a former Tokyo barmaid and the widow of one of the perpetrators of the Lod airport massacre, who heads a JRA cell in Lebanon's Bekaa Valley.    --Another alleged JRA member, Yu Kikumura, was arrested on the New Jersey Turnpike April 13, carrying three homemade bombs and a map of New York City with pinholes marking, among other points of interest, a USO club in midtown Manhattan. U.S. intelligence and law-enforcement officials say Mr. Kikumura spent about a month in the U.S. before he was arrested. His travels, one official says, &quot;suggest he was servicing some sort of network here.&quot;    --Japanese police arrested Osamu Maruoka, another alleged member of the JRA, near Tokyo's City Air Terminal last November. He had arrived in Japan from Hong Kong carrying a false passport and a ticket on a connecting flight to Seoul. Intelligence officials say Mr. Maruoka had been trying to set up a terrorist network in the Philippines.    --Late last year, Bank Negara Malaysia, Malaysia's central bank, quietly warned the country's bankers that JRA terrorists may have been stashing explosives in safe-deposit boxes around the world. It said a large quantity of aging, unstable explosives, apparently planted in 1966, had been found in the Singapore branch of a Malaysian bank. Among those who might be authorized to open JRA safedeposit boxes, the central bank said, were four names used by North Korean intelligence officers. They include Kim Kyon Hui and Kim Sung Il-the agents who blew up Korean Air Lines Flight 858 last November.    The JRA sometimes appears to be as unstable as its aging explosives. It has used a variety of names, including the &quot;Anti-Imperialist International Brigades&quot; and the &quot;Jihad Brigade.&quot; Its two major branches apparently have very little to do with each other. One is in Lebanon's Bekaa Valley, that melting pot of radical Palestinians, Iranians, Libyan and Syrian intelligence officers and Shiite terrorists. The other is in North Korea.    To the North Koreans, the choice of Seoul to be the host of the Olympic Games is an insult. It's easy to understand the sensitivity. The two Koreas, still technically at war, have been locked in a deadly economic, political, and military competition since their armed conflict ended in stalemate in 1953. Each is battling to be recognized, both at home and abroad, as the real Korea.    For Pyongyang, this battle isn't going well. South Korea has one of the world's fastest-growing economies. It is even carrying on a small but flourishing trade with its archenemy's supposed allies in China and Eastern Europe. Its military soon may be strong enough to deter aggression without the help of 39,000 American troops. North Korea, in contrast, remains an eccentric backwater that is hobbled by food shortages, can't pay its foreign debt and is on bad terms with almost everyone but a few other Third World countries.    The arrival of teams from some 160 lands to compete on South Korean soil, with as many as two billion people watching on television at times, will have a profound symbolic impact. &quot;The Olympics,&quot; says Mr. Koch, the former Pentagon official, &quot;will determine who won the Korean War.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>