<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870824-0005 </DOCNO><HL> Toward Effective, Lawful Covert Actions...---By Lee Hamilton</HL><DD> 08/24/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> LATAM MDESTAEROSPACE (ARO)MONETARY NEWS, FOREIGN EXCHANGE, TRADE (MON)EXECUTIVE (EXE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   The Iran-Contra investigation raises again the question of whether the U.S. can conduct effective covert operations within the constitutional framework of government. For us in Congress, the question is not whether the U.S. should conduct covert actions. Rather, it is how we can conduct them effectively and lawfully. These double requirements may be difficult to meet -- yet most in Congress believe that the need to meet them is imperative.    During the recent hearings, Lt. Col. Oliver North and Rear Adm. John Poindexter spoke of the importance of &quot;plausible deniability.&quot; They both testified that they withheld information from Congress and key cabinet officers, including the secretaries of state and defense, in order to keep covert operations secret. Adm. Poindexter went one step further: He said he kept the Contra diversion secret from the president himself so that the president could deny it.    Col. North and Adm. Poindexter's actions represent a seriously flawed understanding of what &quot;plausible deniability&quot; means. This is a concept by which a nation undertakes clandestine activities (or wants it to appear that such activities have been undertaken) without leaving behind proof that the nation is involved. The idea is to protect that nation from identification with an activity if the actions are revealed or go awry.    Adm. Poindexter and Col. North took a concept that normally pertains to protection of a government and transferred it to protection of a political leader. Plausible denial, in this instance, meant evading presidential responsibility and accountability.    The avoidance of responsibility in presidential decision-making is a concept that has never worked well in our system. Accountability is central to our ideal of the proper functioning of a democratic system of government. Our political tradition and our public mores foster the belief that political leaders should take responsibility for their actions and those of their subordinates. We expect our leaders to tell the truth and to know what is going on below them.    The issue of accountability in presidential decision-making is not a new one. It was examined at length in the mid-1970s by committees headed by Frank Church in the Senate and Otis Pike in the House. It was their judgment, and that of Congress as a whole, that the president should be in charge of covert action because it is an important and potentially volatile extension of his authority -- one for which he should take ultimate responsibility. The committees concluded that the president should not use subordinate officers as scapegoats for decisions that he made, or should have made. They also felt that nonaccountable covert actions could become foreign-policy disasters.    The recommendations of the Church and Pike committees led to the establishment of permanent intelligence committees in the House and Senate and to a more thorough internal review process in the executive branch. Under this process, revised but continued by each successive president, all covert-action proposals are examined by the intelligence committees before they are submitted to the president for his approval.    Under this system, key elements of accountability are present because appointed and elected officials in both branches of government are actively involved. The Hughes-Ryan Amendment of 1974 requires personal presidential approval of CIA covert actions on the basis of a written determination, or &quot;finding,&quot; stating why they are in the national interest. The president has the right to proceed on all covert actions. Covert-action findings are reviewed by intelligence committees of the House and Senate in accordance with the Intelligence Oversight Act of 1980, but the committees cannot stop the initiation of a covert action. Congress authorizes the budget of the CIA, but only rarely has it prohibited funding for a specific covert action.    The intelligence committees have at times expressed their opinions, both positive and negative, about covert operations. In well over 90% of the cases, Congress has supported both Democratic and Republican presidents in the use of covert actions. On rare, but significant, occasions when there has been no clear national consensus (as in the case of large-scale paramilitary assistance to resistance groups in Nicaragua and Angola), there has been opposition in the intelligence committees and in Congress to the president's covert proposals. But even in such cases where the issue is contentious within Congress or within the executive branch, the existence of a presidential finding has not been used to damage the president by making it public.    It is a measure of the broad philosophical support for the concept of accountability that none of the members of the Iran-Contra panels have questioned the existing framework for the review of covert actions. Prior notice to Congress of covert actions in almost all cases, and timely notice in those rare cases when prior notice is not provided, has been a stable part of this framework. The procedure worked well for several years -- that is, until the Iran-Contra affair.    That brings us back to the testimony of Adm. Poindexter and Col. North. Adm. Poindexter was advancing a theory of deniability that has no place in the American policy process. If he approved, without presidential authority, the diversion of funds from the Iranian arms sales, he broke the chain of accountability, and did not, and could not, insulate the president from responsibility as he had intended. Presidential control, presidential review and full consideration and advice are essential if a president is to conduct and control covert actions effectively.    Col. North and Adm. Poindexter's approach to secrecy in the conduct of covert operations also misses the point. Denial of U.S. involvement in covert actions is intended to conceal our involvement from the outside world. It should not be used to conceal such actions from the officials in the executive and legislative branches who have the responsibility to approve, direct and review covert operations.    In the Iran-Contra affair, according to Adm. Poindexter's testimony, the president was not in control of his foreign policy because his own staff did not keep him informed. It was apparently largely through the Tower Special Review Board and congressional hearing process that the president was able to discover what had been done in his name. That is the kind of deniability no president wants and that the American people will not accept. It is the best argument against plausible denial, and the best argument for accountable government.    ---   Rep. Hamilton (D., Ind.) is a member of the House Foreign Affairs Committee and chairman of the House Select Committee to Investigate Covert Arms Transactions With Iran.    (See related story: &quot;...and a Bipartisan Foreign Policy&quot; --- WSJ Aug. 24, 1987) </TEXT></DOC>