<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880824-0139 </DOCNO><HL> Asia: Zia's Death Gives New Life to Kabul Regime </HL><AUTHOR> Robert Kaplan </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST MDEST </CO><TEXT>   In the course of three trips to Pakistan this year, I befriended an Afghan mullah living in a refugee camp. During one late-evening talk, he raised his eyebrows in the cynical, all-knowing manner of the East and declared: &quot;Pakistan people don't like Afghan refugees. Life is very difficult for us here. Afghan refugees have only one friend in Pakistan, Zia ul-Haq.&quot;    Beneath that hyperbole was an unpleasant truth still not sufficiently accepted in the West: President Mohammed Zia ul-Haq's militant support for the Afghan mujahideen was not a policy his own people might see in Pakistan's best interest. Only in the first years of the war was Mr. Zia's Afghan policy truly popular at home. By 1988, reeling under the burden of 3.5 million refugees and beset by terrorism, the overwhelming majority of Pakistanis had grown to despise the refugees and were ready to cut a less-than-favorable deal with the Communist regime in Kabul.    So widespread was this sentiment that last spring President Zia's prime minister, Mohammed Khan Junejo, and minister of state for foreign affairs, Zain Noorani, were having serious disagreements with Mr. Zia over his intention not to curtail cross-border arms deliveries to the Afghan guerrillas, as the Soviets were demanding. This was one of the lesser-known reasons why President Zia abruptly dismissed the whole cabinet and dissolved the national assembly on May 29.    The outside world, the U.S. included, was disappointed by President Zia's minicoup, which dealt a blow to a fledgling democratic process. Not so the mujahideen. &quot;Now we have Zia back in control,&quot; one commander told me. The mujahideen's own bravery and generous U.S. support notwithstanding, they were well aware that only one man was making the difference between victory and defeat in Afghanistan. That man was Zia ul-Haq.    The Afghan war was President Zia's war: Almost single-handedly, he provided the rear base; he provided the logistical backup; and if he provided too many guns to a fundamentalist guerrilla faction that was long on rhetoric but short on fighting ability, that seemed to be a small price to pay for his openly stated commitment to topple the Soviet-backed Kabul regime. Now Mr. Zia and several of the top generals who implemented that policy for him are dead, victims of an Aug. 17 air disaster in the desert of southern Punjab that was almost certainly sabotage.    Here are three incontrovertible axioms:   First, during the 1980s, no foreign ruler in the world had a greater negative impact on Soviet foreign-policy objectives than President Zia.    Second, in no other pro-Western country were Communist intelligence agencies better positioned to wreak havoc than in Pakistan. It was the principal and only foreign target of the Khad -- the 25,000-strong Afghan government security force that was, literally, created by the KGB.    Third, no other politician in Pakistan had the political skills of President Zia. For years, he had been deftly outmaneuvering his rivals. His May 29 minicoup came when Mr. Khan Junejo was out of the country, and Benazir Bhutto, Mr. Zia's chief domestic opponent, was pregnant. A coup, in the ordinary sense, against him was never really possible.    No single act of violence in recent memory has the potential to work so completely in Moscow's interest at such a critical juncture in its strategic fortunes than Mr. Zia's death. Officials in Washington are now saying that Kremlin involvement is doubtful, and that the Kabul regime is a more obvious culprit. To be sure, Khad assassinations without prior KGB approval have not been uncommon in Pakistan. But to believe that Khad could plan and carry out the assassination of Mr. Zia, his top generals and U.S. Ambassador Arnold Raphel without someone in the KGB getting wind of it in advance is not easy.    Indeed, a look at Moscow's behavior toward Afghanistan since Mikhail Gorbachev came to power in early 1985 is instructive. According to an exhaustive report commissioned by Swedish relief experts, 1985 was the bloodiest year of the Afghan war. In that year, more than half of Afghanistan's farmers who were still in the country had their fields bombed, and more than a quarter had their irrigation systems destroyed and their livestock shot by Soviet and Afghan government troops.    When brute force failed to change the course of the war, and after U.S. Stinger missiles were introduced, Khad and the KGB stepped up a terrorist campaign to undermine the guerrillas' rear base. In 1987, urban bombings in Pakistan accounted for one-third of all the deaths and half of all the wounded in terrorist incidents world-wide. I never met a Western official who doubted that Khad -- and by implication, the KBG -- was behind those atrocities. In some cases, the bombings were announced by Radio Kabul hours before they actually occurred.    President Zia ran one of the most benevolent, orderly military dictatorships in the world. Pictures of the president in public were rare. Criticism of him in the media was not only allowed but widespread and often vicious; sometimes even his wife was humiliated in print. Opposition figures like Ms. Bhutto and Wali Khan, a man who has openly supported the Kabul government over the mujahideen, had been able to operate relatively freely. There were almost no political prisoners.    Lacking the late president's stature, any new military strongman will, perforce, have to be harsher than President Zia to stay in power. And if the army follows through on its promise to hand power over to civilian politicians, it is questionable whether any of these politicians can deliver more democracy without a lot more chaos and instability.    For the Soviets, Mr. Zia's death opens up all sorts of options. Getting Pakistan to freeze, or at least to curtail, cross-border arms deliveries to the mujahideen is now a serious possibility. That, coupled with Soviet air support from bases inside the Soviet Union, could keep the Kabul regime in power for another year or more. In the meantime, the Soviets will work hard for a diplomatic rapprochement with Pakistan; something Pakistani officials, if not Mr. Zia, had been hoping for and talking about for months.    The handwriting is already on the wall. Only hours after President Zia was buried, the country's new ruler, Ghulam Ishaq Khan, indicated that Pakistan's policy toward the mujahideen will change, and that the mujahideen might even be pressured to accept some sort of coalition with the Afghan Communists.    Finally, after several years of brutal trial and error, Mr. Gorbachev can see some light at the end of his long Afghan tunnel. If the KGB was in any way connected with President Zia's death, then it was a bold master stroke by Mr. Gorbachev, who is an even more formidable adversary than anybody in the West has yet suspected.    ---   Mr. Kaplan is writing a book on the war in Afghanistan. </TEXT></DOC>