<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880401-0116 </DOCNO><HL> Foreign Insight: Germany's Boring 'Bear' of a Chancellor Shows He Is in Charge of Political Circus </HL><AUTHOR> Thomas F. O'Boyle (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> EUROP </CO><DATELINE> BONN  </DATELINE><TEXT>   The free-for-all that is German politics lately has begun to resemble a three-ring circus. Even Helmut Kohl apparently thinks so: The chancellor says he is sick and tired of being treated like a &quot;dancing bear.&quot;    It is true that Mr. Kohl doesn't perform clever tricks like the other circus animals around him. His old political nemesis, Franz Josef Strauss, the lion of Bavaria, roars constantly about the shortcomings of the chancellor's financial and foreign policies. And, like a seal balancing balls on his nose, Foreign Minister Hans-Dietrich Genscher slips from one government to the next without dropping his portfolio. By contrast, the chancellor is big, blundering and boring. And he hibernates a lot, burying himself for long periods while critics fulminate about his lack of leadership.    The critics are at it again. Predictions of Mr. Kohl's imminent demise abound in Europe. His Christian Democratic Union has lost ground in five of the six state polls held since his re-election in January l987. A sixth state setback is likely in May.    But almost certainly the critics are wrong about Helmut Kohl's political future. Already in office for more than five years, he is likely to be re-elected in 1990 and could even become the longest-serving chancellor in West German history.    His political survival tells much about West Germany, Europe's most important economy and America's major strategic interest in Europe. After 40-odd years of striving and saving to rebuild their nation, West Germans these days are cautious, complacent, self-satisfied. The public doesn't want to be challenged. Instead, Germans want to enjoy life, to forget their past and stop fretting about their future. Basically, boring is beautiful.    Konrad Adenauer and Ludwig Erhard, West Germany's first two post-war chancellors, had their Wirtschaftswunder, or economic miracle. Willy Brandt, who led the nation in the early 1970s, had his Ostpolitik, or political opening to the East bloc. Helmut Kohl simply exists.    And existence is all Germans seem interested in these days. Their desire to shut out the real world shows up in Germany's stubborn refusal to recognize the role its economy must play to assure a healthy global economy. It is also evident in the blind belief of a growing number of Germans that Mikhail Gorbachev's Soviet Union is somehow benign. So, it is small wonder that a leader who stirs himself from hibernation only rarely is just what Germans want. Helmut Kohl is a survivor, a man from a working-class background who, despite all the criticism, is fundamentally in step with the German public.    He is a manager, not an initiator. His native caution strikes a responsive chord with the average German. It isn't great government but it plays in Pforzheim.    The chancellor understands that in the rough-and-tumble of coalition politics, it is best to avoid the sort of bickering that is common between Mr. Strauss and Mr. Genscher. If his leadership style is purposefully wishy-washy, it also allows him to sidestep landmines.    But, on occasion, he puts his foot down. When he does, Germans jump. They aren't accustomed to the sight of their chancellor acting like a chancellor. Curiously, Mr. Kohl's outbursts follow a somewhat predictable pattern. Only twice since his re-election -- in disputes last week over tax cuts and last summer over the dismantling of Pershing 1A missiles -- has Mr. Kohl appeared decisive.    On both occasions, his sudden assertiveness came at a time when questions about his leadership had built to a crescendo. The effectiveness of this strategy was evident last week when Mr. Kohl, confronted with renewed cabinet bickering over Bonn's tax-reform package, threatened to resign unless unity was restored.    Such tactics can be dangerous. But Mr. Kohl saw an opportunity to look &quot;presidential&quot; and took it. The tax cuts passed, and the chancellor silenced his sternest critics. He forced friend and foe to concede that Germany needs Helmut Kohl.    He can get away with threats to resign because he knows no one can fill his shoes. Within his own party, Finance Minister Gerhard Stoltenberg once was seen as a possible successor but a scandal in his home state of Schleswig-Holstein has crippled his political future.    Among the opposition Social Democrats, Mr. Kohl has already defeated at the polls two of the party's three top leaders, Johannes Rau last year and Hans-Jochen Vogel in 1983. The third, Oskar Lafontaine, the ambitious left-wing governor of the Saarland, is desperately muddling toward the middle of the road. He recently irked the trade unions by challenging their demands for fewer hours and more pay. It is doubtful the conservative German electorate will embrace Mr. Lafontaine.    So, don't count out the dancing bear. He just might dance into the 1990s. </TEXT></DOC>