<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870609-0054 </DOCNO><HL> U.S. InvestigatesRole of ThreeIn Kidder Case---Sources Say Ex-President,2 Employees Are FocusIn Boesky 'Parking' Case---This article was prepared byDaniel Hertzberg, James B. StewartAnd Steve Swartz in New York</HL><DD> 06/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GESECURITIES INDUSTRY (SCR)STOCK MARKET, OFFERINGS (STK)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)SECURITIES AND EXCHANGE COMMISSION (SEC) </IN><TEXT>   The government is investigating whether former Kidder Peabody Group Inc. President John T. Roche and two Kidder employees were part of an illegal scheme to &quot;park&quot; stock for takeover speculator Ivan F. Boesky, people familiar with the investigation said.    Charges that individuals at Kidder parked stock in the firm's account to hide Mr. Boesky's ownership were made by the Securities and Exchange Commission last week when Kidder paid $25.3 million to settle without admitting guilt SEC civil allegations of insider trading and other securities-law violations. The individuals allegedly involved in the parking scheme weren't identified in the SEC complaint.    People familiar with the case said that the SEC and the Manhattan U.S. Attorney are studying the possible roles in the suspected parking scheme of Mr. Roche, who was ousted last month as Kidder's president and chief operating officer by the firm's parent, General Electric Co.; Anthony C. Woodruff, who is co-head of listed equity trading at Kidder; and Donald V. Little, an institutional salesman in Kidder's Boston office, who handled Mr. Boesky's account for the firm.    The government is seeking to determine whether Mr. Roche gave Mr. Woodruff and others approval to park stock for Mr. Boesky, who was a major customer of the firm's Kidder, Peabody andamp; Co. securities unit, people familiar with the investigation said.    Robert Morvillo, Mr. Roche's lawyer, declined to comment, as did Mr. Woodruff's attorney, Paul Grand. Charles Stillman, Mr. Little's lawyer, said, &quot;We hope that after careful consideration, law enforcement authorities won't view this as a case that should be prosecuted criminally.&quot;    Max C. Chapman Jr., Kidder's executive vice president and chief operating officer, declined to comment. Spokesmen for the U.S. Attorney and the SEC declined comment on the investigation.    In its complaint, the SEC alleged that Kidder engaged in a parking scheme with Mr. Boesky's Seemala Corp. to conceal Seemala's ownership of securities and the fact that it was in violation of SEC capital rules. The complaint charges that Kidder agreed to hold securities for Seemala, and that Seemala would buy back the same securities in a short time and book all profits or losses.    The SEC complaint specified one case of alleged parking, in which Kidder bought $10.4 million of Unocal Corp. stock from Seemala in July 1985. A month later, Kidder resold $5.9 million of Unocal shares to Seemala, selling the remaining stock in the open market. Kidder was paid $68,750 in commissions -- twice its normal rate -- by the Boesky unit, the complaint alleged.    In an interview yesterday, Mr. Little said: &quot;I'm stuck in the middle of this thing. I had nothing to do with this parking thing.&quot; Mr. Little said he handled the Boesky account as a salesman, but said that any stock transactions Kidder did for Mr. Boesky would have been carried out by Kidder's main New York office. Mr. Little said he didn't know which Kidder employee would have handled the trades. Messrs. Roche and Woodruff couldn't be reached for comment.    The people familiar with the investigation said that the government is looking into two or three other transactions in which Kidder may have parked stock for Mr. Boesky. Mr. Boesky pleaded guilty in April to a felony charge brought by the U.S. Attorney in New York, and is awaiting sentencing. Last November, he paid a record $100 million in penalties to settle without admitting guilt SEC civil insider-trading charges.    According to people familiar with the investigation, some Kidder officials believe that any parking for Mr. Boesky was simply a misguided attempt to accommodate a major customer. For example, they said they don't believe the alleged parking involved the preparation of false invoices or parking of stock by Mr. Boesky for Kidder.    Allegedly false invoices and mutual parking with Mr. Boesky have figured in government investigations of Drexel Burnham Lambert Inc. and in the guilty plea to two felony counts earlier this year of former Jefferies Group Inc. Chairman Boyd L. Jefferies. Drexel has denied any wrongdoing.    Moreover, some Wall Street lawyers have complained that the government, in its insider-trading investigation, is overzealously prosecuting as criminal offenses parking violations that the SEC formerly treated as civil offenses.    A spokesman for the U.S. Attorney said, &quot;We don't view pursuing an investigation of parking as trivial or unfair.&quot;    Nonetheless, if Mr. Roche were charged civilly or criminally in the alleged parking scheme, he would be the highest-ranking Wall Street executive at a major securities firm to be directly involved in the burgeoning Wall Street scandal.    Mr. Roche was ousted last month as part of a GE-sponsored major management shake-up at Kidder. Kidder's settlement of civil charges with the SEC doesn't preclude the U.S. Attorney from bringing criminal charges against individuals at the firm.    Also, GE has said it may sue for fraud any Kidder employee found criminally guilty. GE would seek to recover from such employees money it paid them for Kidder shares last year -- when GE acquired its 80% stake in Kidder.    Separately, sentencing of former Kidder investment banker Martin A. Siegel, set for Thursday, was indefinitely postponed yesterday in New York by U.S. District Judge Robert J. Ward. Mr. Siegel pleaded guilty in February to two felony counts for his role in the Boesky insider-trading scandal. It is the second postponement for Mr. Siegel, who is expected to testify in possible criminal trials arising from the Wall Street scandals. Such postponements are typical for individuals who are expected to be witnesses. </TEXT></DOC>