<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ861209-0110 </DOCNO><HL> Those Being Interrogated---Government Denies Illegality---By Barbara RosewiczStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 12/09/86</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> MDEST </IN><DATELINE> NABLUS, Israeli-occupied West Bank  </DATELINE><TEXT>    The first three daysof his interrogation were the hardest, says 20-year-old AkramGhazal, the clean-cut drummer in a Palestinian pop band.   His head was hooded and banged into the wall, he says. His interrogators, he claims, punched and spit on him, pressed a foot into his crotch, and clasped their hands over his nose and mouth until he gasped and tears welled in his eyes. He says he was forced to take a cold shower and then stand naked in the winter air before an open window. All the while his interrogators demanded: &quot;Who are your friends? You have to tell us all the story.&quot;    Mr. Ghazal -- whose story can't be either verified or disproved -- says his interrogators in a military prison in the Israeli-occupied West Bank wore civilian clothes and used pseudonyms like Capt. Uzi, as in the famous Israeli submachine gun. He is convinced they belonged to the Shin Bet, Israel's elite and super-secret internal-security agency. This is the agency that, in April 1984, beat to death two Palestinian bus hijackers shortly after they were taken into custody, then lied and forged evidence to try to cover up its role in the killings.    Its interrogation of suspects is the most controversial of the Shin Bet's duties. But in various ways, the Shin Bet is the hidden hand that keeps the 1.3 million Palestinians under tight control in the lands Israel captured from Jordan and Egypt in the 1967 war. &quot;You must understand, the Shin Bet in the occupied territories has a lot of power. Not only with people in prison -- it has a lot of power in everyday life,&quot; says Dov Chenin, a young Israeli civil-rights lawyer.    Known formally as the General Security Service, the agency shuns publicity. It polices itself and reports only to the prime minister. It has no telephone listing. The public isn't supposed to know even the name of its chief. When an agent is killed in the line of duty, his death usually isn't reported. &quot;The whole thing is a big black box,&quot; says Diane Orentlicher, a lawyer with the New York-based Lawyers Committee for Human Rights, which is looking into the handling of Palestinian suspects.    But the Shin Bet has come in for some uncomfortable attention since the bus-hijacking case. In addition, persistent reports from Palestinians, their lawyers and lately from Amnesty International allege that Shin Bet mistreats Arab suspects during interrogation. Like Mr. Ghazal, who says he was released without charge after 15 days, suspects commonly complain of hooding, cold showers, sleep deprivation, and being beaten and spit on.    The Shin Bet declined requests made through official and private channels for an interview. But the prime minister's office, in a general response to written questions by this newspaper, concluded: &quot;No illegal means are employed in the interrogation of suspects by the Shin Bet, and insofar as complaints are received regarding improper investigatory practices, these complaints are examined fully and carefully.&quot;    Some of Israel's neighbors in the Middle East, such as Syria, are accused of much more brutal treatment of suspects and dissidents, of denying legal rights, and of restricting access by journalists and others who might want to report abuses. But Israel sets itself above its neighbors by depicting itself as the only true Western-style democracy in the Middle East.    Because of the agency's impenetrable secrecy, no one can be sure that Israel's democratic society knows exactly what its secret security agency is up to and approves. Shlomo Gazit, a retired general who used to oversee the occupied territories, insists: &quot;The Shin Bet doesn't need public credibility. It is a clandestine operation. The less the public knows about it, discusses it, refers to it . . . the better.&quot;    In fact, Israelis by and large don't seem concerned about not knowing exactly how their government's main internal-security agency operates. This is, after all, a jittery country where grocery stores search handbags and airports check trash cans for bombs. Against the constant threat of terrorism, Israelis tend to revere the Shin Bet as their guardian angel.    In contrast to Israel's Mossad intelligence agency, which works abroad, the Shin Bet operates inside the country and in occupied territories; it functions as a sort of secret police, foiling terrorism and hunting spies and subversives. There are indications its ranks are small; in 1979, Iran claimed it found in the U.S. embassy a CIA document listing the Shin Bet at about 1,000 agents.    To a visitor to the occupied West Bank or Gaza, the Shin Bet is invisible; the conspicuous force here is the army, manning roadblocks and patrolling the Arab towns in jeeps. But behind the scenes, the Shin Bet works to prevent hostile acts by Arabs against Jews, and sometimes by Jews against Arabs.    It investigates bombings, shootings, protests, stone-throwings and contacts with the outlawed Palestine Liberation Organization. It also has a say in which Palestinians get driver's licenses and permits to travel. It files court documents that occasionally help close Palestinian newspapers. And many lawyers for Palestinian suspects believe that when, from time to time, the home of an Arab suspect is demolished, the Shin Bet helps select the target.    The agency evidently is good at its job. In 12 months ended last March, Israeli security forces uncovered 223 &quot;terrorist cells&quot; and left only half a dozen serious incidents unsolved.    In Ubidieh, an isolated Palestinian village of 6,000 in the parched hills between Bethlehem and the Dead Sea, there is a feeling that little escapes the notice of &quot;Abu Nader.&quot; That is the Arab pseudonym of an Israeli agent who monitors the town and especially its youth, townsfolk say. If he isn't Shin Bet, he has the whole town convinced he is.    &quot;Sometimes,&quot; says Shukry al-Radydeh, a strapping 26-year-old on the village council, &quot;he comes two or three times a week, stops you in the street and says, 'I'm Abu Nader. I am responsible for Ubidieh.' And he tells you to come see him next week.&quot;    It is said that Abu Nader speaks good Arabic and wears civilian clothes, a yarmulke and a handgun. His office is in a fenced-in concrete military building. An American visitor asking to see him there is allowed inside the fence by a soldier, but after a short wait a man in civilian clothes steps from behind a locked door and says, &quot;Sorry, it's impossible.&quot; He also politely declines to divulge Abu Nader's real name or job title.    Villagers describe some of Abu Nader's methods as a blend of threat and reward. Abid Hasasneh, 32, a sunburned Palestinian lawyer who prefers construction work to practicing law under Israeli occupation, says that when he wanted to travel to neighboring Jordan, the agent offered him a deal. &quot;Abu Nader told me, if you are friends with us, if you bring information for us, you will be free to go anyplace you want,&quot; he says. Mr. Hasasneh says he refused and now can't travel across the border.    He also can't obtain the Israeli security clearance he needs to get a driver's license; when he presented his driver's-test application, he says, Abu Nader drew a big X across it.    Ahmed Yaseen Radydeh, 18, says Abu Nader threatened to make him miss his high-school graduation exam next year if he refused to give information. He already missed the once-a-year exam this year because he was under arrest for being at a demonstration.    Ubidieh townsfolk suspect certain residents of collaborating with the Israelis and steer away from them. Many of the young people don't get together at night anymore because Abu Nader sometimes shows up at their homes late at night, escorted by a jeepload or two of soldiers. &quot;I have a friend whose father tells him every day, 'Don't go with Shukry,'&quot; says Mr. Radydeh, the village-council member, &quot;because he thinks I'm very active and he doesn't want to see his son arrested or every day asked to go in to see Abu Nader. Shin Bet makes the relationship between the people no good.&quot;    The most controversial of the Shin Bet's activities, though, go on in interrogation rooms within military compounds or prisons. There agents grill Palestinians who have been arrested, sometimes for a specific offense but sometimes simply in an effort to flush out information about what others are up to.    A Palestinian under interrogation in a security case in the occupied territories can be kept isolated from lawyers and family without formal charges for 18 days and in some cases longer. Sometimes, Israeli officials say, army or police investigators join the questioning. The Shin Bet's role isn't to prosecute crimes, but typically, say lawyers who defend Palestinians, a suspect breaks during Shin Bet questioning and then is turned over to a uniformed police officer, who writes down a confession in Hebrew and presents it in court.    Though Palestinian suspects sometimes complain of serious brutality, more typical are stories of physical and psychological measures that leave no marks but that wear the person down until he talks. Israeli officials say that some such techniques would be illegal but add that they don't think the measures are used.    The Palestinians' accounts were impossible to corroborate. A written request was made to Israeli military spokesmen three months ago for verification, at least, of arrest and criminal records. No reply was received after repeated follow-up requests.    Saker Elias Nazal, 34, is a Palestinian who says he served 10 years of a life sentence for conspiracy to plant bombs in Israel, was freed in a prisoner exchange last year, then was rearrested last spring and held for 112 days. A small man with chronically shaky hands, Mr. Nazal complains that during one of his first interrogation sessions after his rearrest, a &quot;Capt. Yuval&quot; in civilian clothes pushed him into an iron cupboard and to the floor. Afterward, he says, he was taken to a room with five investigators standing in a circle and was thrown roughly from one to another, as they variously shouted, knocked him to the ground or spit on him.    Another night, he asserts, &quot;Capt. Yuval&quot; forced him to take a series of cold showers and afterward to stand naked before a heater, an air conditioner or an open window. One cool night, he says, he was left outdoors, clothed, handcuffed to a metal pipe and needing to urinate. Mr. Nazal says that though he was innocent, he finally pleaded guilty to possessing ammunition in exchange for his release on a suspended sentence.    Lawyers for Palestinians say their clients sometimes report being put in the &quot;aasafeer&quot; or &quot;birds&quot; room, a cell shared with Palestinians who have turned informant. The lawyers say their clients sometimes admit illegal activities to the &quot;birds,&quot; believing them to be comrades, but when deception doesn't work, the cellmates may resort to force.    Odeh al-Zaghmory, 30, a researcher with a master's degree from Iowa State University, believes he did time in the birds room. After his arrest last May, he says, he spent four days in a cell with 12 other Palestinians who &quot;started asking questions, and from that I decided they were collaborators.&quot; One night about 2 a.m., six of them backed him into a corner, beat him and &quot;put a bath towel here at my neck and pulled,&quot; Mr. Zaghmory says. They left him alone when he agreed to write a statement, even though it didn't admit any guilt, says the researcher, who is awaiting trial on charges he received illegal military training from the PLO.    Some of the allegations are of humiliation or intimidation. Mr. Zaghmory says that an agent called &quot;John&quot; spit on his forehead &quot;and he told me not to remove the spit until it came down my nose.&quot; He also says his interrogators goaded him with the Palestinian flag, draping it on his chest (while his hands were cuffed behind him) and giving him permission to urinate only if he left the flag in place. Mr. Zaghmory says he refused, apparently rather than desecrate the flag.    In response to Amnesty International's charges that Palestinian suspects are sometimes subjected to &quot;abuse, insults and threats,&quot; the Israeli Justice Ministry last year said that &quot;such activities are clearly against Israeli law and policy&quot; and are punishable, if not by prosecution then by disciplinary action. In a rare disclosure in 1979, Israel said two Shin Bet agents had been reprimanded and assigned new duties. An agent called &quot;Jack&quot; had forced a Palestinian to call himself a poodle, crawl on all fours and bark, an investigation found, while the other agent had slapped an arrested Arab journalist and bound his hands to a pipe &quot;a number of times,&quot; though never for more than an hour.    Because the Shin Bet's secrecy extends even to its code of behavior and disciplinary record, it is unclear where the agency draws the line. A 22-year-old Palestinian student, Salim Mahmoud Quariq, complains that during his 44 days under arrest last spring, &quot;Mike,&quot; a blond, Arabic-speaking agent, would spit on his own boot and then &quot;sit on a desk and wipe the spit on my beard.&quot; Mr. Quariq filed a complaint alleging that another agent, &quot;Elias,&quot; punctured his left eardrum by clapping his hands over his ears.    The most common complaint is of having a canvas hood tied over the head for hours. Isaac Toussia-Cohen, an Israeli lawyer, says the Israeli government for years denied that it covered detainees' heads; now the attorney general's office says hoods are used, but &quot;only for short periods of time&quot; and not when prisoners are in their cells. The sacks serve the legitimate security goals of protecting suspects' identities and preventing communication in corridors, the government says.    Col. Uri Shoham, the chief military prosecutor, says 30 minutes of hooding probably isn't illegal, though &quot;if it becomes three to four hours, I agree it's illegal.&quot; But arrested Palestinians who think their interrogators were Shin Bet all tell of spending hours with their heads covered, including times when they are alone in a cell; the only exceptions are those taken to a detention center for Palestinian youths that apparently has switched from hoods to blindfolds. The Palestinians express surprise when told that Israel considers prolonged hooding illegal.    Jamil Khadr Abdul-Karim, a bony, clean-shaven man who looks older than his 30 years, describes at length how, he says, he spent 21 of his 35 days under arrest last summer alone in a small cell, sitting on a metal chair frame lacking a seat, with his hands cuffed behind him and a hood tied over his head. &quot;In that cell, unless I was taken out for interrogation&quot; or a meal, &quot;there was always the sack,&quot; he says.    Mr. Abdul-Karim, who says he served seven years in prison on charges of recruiting PLO members and trying to blow up a collaborator, asserts that for the first few days after his rearrest, he wasn't allowed to sleep, the guards opening the cell door to shake his hood whenever he dozed off.    The government response to such complaints is somewhat fragmented. Israeli officials insist that force and maltreatment are prohibited by government policy. But even most senior officials can't guarantee what goes on inside the interrogation rooms because they don't have entree.    Government officials won't say what techniques interrogators do use to get as many confessions as they win; an estimated 90% of convictions in Palestinian security cases are based on confessions. They contend that arrested Palestinians falsely claim mistreatment to embarrass Israel or to justify to comrades why they confessed.    They note that just this year, in a complaint against the military, an investigation exposed as a liar a 12-year-old Palestinian boy who told a TV crew and a news conference that he had been arrested and interrogated, beaten, hooded, tied to a chair, given cold showers and forced to stand for hours with his hands held high. The investigation found the boy had never been held at the prison, and his mother admitted her son had lied.    The prime minister's office also says some Palestinians are trained &quot;to evade the questions of interrogators, to affront them with the aim of shaking them off-balance and even to inflict bodily injury on themselves in order to disrupt the examination and make it more arduous.&quot;    If there really were a pattern of mistreatment, some Israeli officials contend, it would have been leaked to the foreign press by now by some Israeli insider who is more credible than Palestinian detainees. In addition, Israeli officials note that they open their legal process to Palestinians under occupation so that they can register complaints about mistreatment.    But the complaint procedures aren't helpful to most Palestinians. A complaint that a suspect was forced to confess is heard in closed-door hearings where an Israeli military judge weighs the suspect's word against the Shin Bet's. Often, detainees don't have lawyers. Defense lawyers say that when they file written complaints against interrogators, they invariably get back a terse reply saying the allegations are unfounded.    Israel permits the International Red Cross to visit prisoners in the occupied territories after 14 days. The organization sees fewer than half of the West Bank detainees that soon and doesn't attempt to see all of them in any period. It won't discuss its findings or how many complaints it files to the Israelis.    So there is bound to be lingering uncertainty. &quot;At the beginning, I believed the Shin Bet,&quot; says Amnon Zichroni, 50, a Tel Aviv civil-rights lawyer who is more accepted by the Israeli establishment than are most of the two dozen or so Jewish and Arab lawyers who handle Palestinian cases. &quot;But I listened to stories from my clients. All the stories in a way are the same. All those clients are talking about the hood, that in the winter they are put without clothes outside, that they used to take them to cold showers. Sometimes, they are crying. My feeling is those people are not lying.&quot;    The Shin Bet's credibility among military judges and prosecutors may have been hurt by its effort to cover up its killing of the bus hijackers. But many Israelis seem willing to live with ambiguity about the Shin Bet's practices and allow it more leeway to fight terrorism than they do their police to fight street crime.    Retired Gen. Gazit, for instance, says Israel is justified in denying &quot;Arab terrorists&quot; in the occupied territories all the democratic niceties it guarantees ordinary criminal suspects inside Israel. &quot;We definitely do have two modes of treatment and interrogation,&quot; he says, one for criminals and another for suspected terrorists. &quot;If it weren't for the second procedure, we wouldn't have so many confessions. And if we didn't have so many confessions, we wouldn't have so many terrorists in jail. And the result would have been 10 times more acts of terrorism.&quot;    Democracies everywhere face the same dilemma, argues Ehud Olmert, a rightwing politician. They have trouble admitting, he says, &quot;that the secret service by its very nature has to cover up, that it does things that are in that gray area where the law ends and the other things are done. Otherwise, why need a secret service?&quot; </TEXT></DOC>