<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880822-0095 </DOCNO><HL> After Zia: Pakistan Waits to See If President's Death Brings Martial Law --- Interim Government Pledges Elections in November, But the Promise Is Fragile --- If Miss Bhutto Should Win </HL><AUTHOR> Mary Williams Walsh (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> FREST </CO><DATELINE> KARACHI, Pakistan  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Anxious Pakistanis are waiting to see whether their country can make its first nonmilitary transition of power in three decades, or whether it must endure yet another bout of martial law that could destabilize Pakistan and the region.    &quot;The central issue is whether the army wants a return to democracy, and if so, what kind of democracy,&quot; says Karachi newspaper columnist Sultan Ahmed.    Martial law would be nothing extraordinary in Pakistan, an important U.S. ally but one that seems barely able to hang together as a nation. The last four heads of state in turn declared martial law when they took power, and the one time a national election was held without rigging, civil war broke out and Bangladesh was created out of what was once East Pakistan.    Yet the late president and army chief of staff, Mohammed Zia-ul-Haq, who died last week in a suspicious plane crash that also killed the U.S. ambassador, had promised to hold national elections later this year. Pakistanis are widely dissatisfied with military rule, and the prospect of an election had given them hope. In light of that, some analysts are saying that martial law now would be the worst possible course.    &quot;If the elections are postponed, then I apprehend violent reactions in this country,&quot; says Ghafoor Ahmed, vice president of the religious Jamat-e-Islami Party. &quot;The army wouldn't be able to cool it down or control it. And if there is instability in Pakistan, then it could spill over into India and Afghanistan.&quot;    President Zia's ruling strategy was to maintain executive power along with control over the army, to assuage religious fundamentalists by preaching &quot;Islamization,&quot; and to proffer cosmetic liberalization by ending martial law and scheduling elections.    And, most important to Washington, Gen. Zia had been the staunchest backer and conduit of arms for the U.S.-backed Moslem guerrillas, whose resistance to Afghanistan's Soviet-supported government recently caused Moscow to begin withdrawing its troops from Afghanistan. In support of President Zia's efforts in behalf of the Afghan resistance, Washington gave Pakistan more than $3 billion in economic and military aid between 1982 and last year, and the U.S. has approved additional aid amounting to $4 billion through 1993.    But for 11 years, President Zia forestalled political liberalizations. As a result, social and political pressures are starting to pull Pakistan apart, along ethnic lines. Since 1986, Karachi, the commercial capital and Pakistan's largest city, has been consumed by riots and massacres. The violence may reflect the end of the more-or-less peaceful coexistence of the country's ethnic groups that prevailed for the first 39 years of Pakistan's history.    Yet Karachi has been unusually quiet since President Zia died. Troops have been deployed at television and radio stations, but they are staying in the background. Shops were closed until Sunday, but there have been few manifestations of grief.    Instead, hope is palpable that the president's death might somehow usher in an era of fair elections and popular civilian government. In a nation normally fascinated with conspiracy theories, few people seem willing to consider the possibility that someone in the army had done the president in.    &quot;There are no institutions left in the country except the army,&quot; says Mr. Ghafoor, noting that President Zia himself had sacked the cabinet, the prime minister, and the national and provincial legislatures earlier this year. &quot;If, God forbid, there are any doubts about the integrity of the army, then there will be anarchy.&quot;    Pakistani optimists take heart from acting President Ghulam Ishaq Khan's promise in a press conference Saturday that an election will indeed be held on November 16, as planned. The 73-year-old Mr. Ishaq Khan said the details of the electoral process will be up to the courts -- a danger signal -- but he also offered &quot;special tribute to the armed forces,&quot; which he said had put their &quot;full weight behind the constitutional process.&quot;    In addition, Pakistanis point out that the most powerful generals -- and those most likely to have declared martial law in a crisis -- perished in the president's doomed plane. The new army chief of staff, Gen. Aslam Beg, is said to have neither the inclination nor the internal army support to carry off martial law. He is a mohajir -- a man born in what is now India -- and in ethnically divided Pakistan, that makes him the odd man out in the army. The Pakistani army is overwhelmingly composed of Punjabis, men born in northeastern Pakistan.    Yet pessimists say an army clique still could stage a coup against the new chief of staff and declare martial law. All eyes in Pakistan are now on the half-dozen army corps commanders stationed about the country. &quot;For the army to sit back and allow power to get out of its hands would be unthinkable,&quot; says Sardar Sherbaz Khan Mazari, the leader of a small opposition party.    Mr. Mazari and others think that just one violent incident might be enough to provoke new army intervention. And violent incidents aren't hard to come by in Pakistan.    Last Thursday, for instance, mysterious attackers fired rockets at two refineries and an oil storage depot in the port of Karachi. Some of the rockets fell wide of the mark, and those that hit oil tanks somehow didn't rupture the steel. Still the attack caused panic in neighborhoods near the port. Police have taken several suspects into custody, identifying one of them as an activist of the Pakistan People's Party, or PPP, which had been the dominant opposition to President Zia's government.    Meanwhile, to the north, in the disputed territory of Kashmir, Indian army troops are reported to have moved in after local Moslems protested President Zia's death by sacking a government building and burning a bridge. Ten people have been reported killed and more than 100 injured in the region, heightening existing tension between the two countries; India had already been accusing Pakistan of training Sikh terrorists.    And tomorrow will be the 10th day of Muharram -- a sacred month of mourning observed by Shiite Moslems -- in Pakistan. Each year on the 10th and 11th days of Muharram, thousands of Shiites parade through the streets of the cities, and in recent years the marches have led to bloody rioting with Sunni Moslems. Tension is running particularly high this year because a Shiite leader was gunned down in the northern city of Peshawar two weeks ago.    If ethnic and religious violence doesn't provoke a military intervention, a breakdown within the civilian interim government might. Even before the plane crash, the nation's economy was in such bad shape that President Zia himself called it &quot;virtually bankrupt.&quot; And now, businessmen say that acting President Ishaq Khan has a long history of policy differences with Pakistan's chief economic planner, Mahbubul Haq.    If the army does manage to stay out of politics in the coming weeks, power is almost sure to go to PPP leader Benazir Bhutto in the November election. Miss Bhutto is the daughter of Pakistan's last elected prime minister, a populist who was executed two years after Gen. Zia took power in a 1977 military coup. Mr. Bhutto was convicted of ordering a political murder.    Even before President Zia was killed, Miss Bhutto had been trying to convince skeptics that the military would permit her to govern. In rallies, she publicly blamed Pakistan's many problems on President Zia, not on army rule per se. She stated that if the army is corrupt, it is because President Zia was corrupting it.    And after the plane crash, she offered her condolences for the deaths of the generals on board -- all but Gen. Zia. She has been careful not to suggest publicly that some faction within the army had sabotaged the plane.    &quot;To speculate prematurely on the cause of the crash isn't wise,&quot; she said in an interview over the weekend. &quot;This is to invite further volatility. It's a very delicate time in our country's history.&quot; Despite Miss Bhutto's conciliatory attitude toward the army, observers believe she differs deeply with the military over Pakistan's role as the biggest backer of the resistance in neighboring Afghanistan, known as the mujahadeen. Three million Afghan refugees and mujahadeen are in Pakistan, and many Pakistanis feel the foreigners have brought their war and their problems here. Miss Bhutto hasn't done anything so drastic as to call for the Afghans to go home -- to do that might be popular in Pakistan, but it would alienate the U.S., and Pakistanis think a politician can't succeed here without American backing.    Yet others in Miss Bhutto's party have called for the Afghans to leave, and no one thinks she would come close to matching the late Mr. Zia's support for the mujahadeen.    &quot;We are committed to the implementation of the Geneva accords, as they are widely interpreted,&quot; she said, when asked over the weekend how a PPP government would handle the Afghan issue. That suggests a shift from the approach of President Zia, whose unique interpretation of the Geneva accords under which the Soviet Union agreed to withdraw its troops permitted him to keep arming the mujahadeen while pledging not to interfere in Afghanistan's internal affairs.    A PPP strategist, Syed Tariq Sohail, further stated that if the PPP comes to power in November elections, it will try to find factions within the Kabul government that could be persuaded to work in coalition with the mujahadeen. That notion isn't likely to sit well with the mujahadeen commanders, who want to overthrow the Kabul government, not join it. Still, Mr. Tariq Sohail says, &quot;We feel a compromise can be worked out.&quot;    ---   Anthony Spaeth in Islamabad contributed to this article. </TEXT></DOC>