<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870813-0113 </DOCNO><HL> Illegal Aliens:Is It Safe to ComeOut of Hiding?---By Leon Wildes</HL><DD> 08/13/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)CONGRESS (CNG)INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE (IRS) </IN><TEXT>   The typical illegal alien is accustomed to living by his wits. He may belong to the underground economy and probably has developed a sixth sense for self-protection. He is unlikely to be enticed out of his shadowy existence except with a clear likelihood of bettering his position.    Despite the liberal amnesty program for illegal aliens that went into effect in May, many illegal aliens sense that it is still too dangerous to emerge. They simply do not trust the Immigration and Naturalization Service. These instincts, based upon the INS's handling of the amnesty procedure to date, are probably correct.    What Congress intended as a simple procedure for qualified applicants has been converted by the INS into a trap for the unwary. Take a few examples:    Any application filed with the INS that is not fully documented normally is returned with a request for resubmission with additional documentation. For some unspecified reason, amnesty applications that are not fully documented are being rejected out of hand.    Applicants who qualify for amnesty are concerned about how the government will treat their spouses and children who do not qualify. The INS has no national policy on the subject. Rather, the fate of the spouses and children depends upon where the application is filed. While one district director has indicated his intention to permit family members to remain on until they can also apply for legal status, others have stated that deportation proceedings are in order.    In defining the terms of the amnesty legislation, the INS has minimized the number of applicants who qualify. For example, certain aliens who entered the U.S. lawfully but base their claim to amnesty on the fact that on Jan. 1, 1982 (the cutoff date for eligibility), their status was no longer lawful are required to prove that their illegal status was &quot;known to the government&quot; on that date.    That's a reasonable enough requirement. The INS, however, defines this to mean &quot;known to the INS,&quot; thus eliminating applicants whose illegal status might have been known to other government agencies, such as tax authorities. This definition not only eliminates many applicants but also forces them to rely on the INS's notoriously poor record-keeping practices.    To encourage applications, Congress prohibited the INS from using information in amnesty applications as the basis for attempts to deport aliens who are found ineligible. But this protection is being eroded by INS policies. Some INS officers misconstrue the Social Security Administration's willingness to cooperate with them as requiring applicants to file their applications for Social Security numbers through the INS. Unless these applications are kept confidential, the INS could use them to locate and deport unsuccessful amnesty applicants.    (Another discouragement is the fact that the law does not include amnesty from tax liability. While the Internal Revenue Service has no apparent plan to seek out amnesty applicants who have failed to pay their taxes, under a new provision it requires aliens applying for permanent residency status to provide information on whether they were required to file tax returns for the previous three years. Applicants failing to provide this information are subject to a $500 fine. Since they often are employed &quot;off the books,&quot; aliens can have a hard time obtaining such records from their employers. Moreover, they may fear the INS will use the records to locate unsuccessful amnesty applicants.)    While INS regulations state that applicants are eligible for amnesty even if they have been out of the U.S. in individual absences of less than 45 days or aggregate absences of less than six months, the INS also holds that any return to the U.S. documented by an admission card makes an alien ineligible for the amnesty -- on the ground that if he received an admission card, his status was temporarily lawful, thus invalidating his claim of continuous illegal residence. The effect of this is to eliminate many aliens who have traveled abroad, since foreigners (with the exception of Canadians and Mexicans) generally are issued arrival cards upon their return to the U.S. It is clearly inconsistent for the INS to allow periods of absence but then, in a Catch-22, disallow absences documented by its own arrival cards.    These problems have been made worse by the INS's slow start in beginning its public-education program on the amnesty. It is only now launching a campaign to increase public awareness of the program. Moreover, it didn't promulgate its regulations until May 1, four days before the program was to begin.    In last year's immigration law, Congress chose to offer a liberal amnesty to the illegal aliens who have been here the longest. To protect these applicants, it formulated what it thought was a confidential application process, intended to reach the largest possible number of illegal aliens. Although the amnesty program is gaining momentum, it is still operating at just half its capacity. About 425,000 people applied in the first three months of the program out of an estimated two million to four million who are eligible.    The amnesty program was a carefully balanced part of the most revolutionary change in our immigration law in 30 years. For the first time in U.S. history Congress enacted a federal law penalizing employers for employing undocumented aliens, thus transferring to employers the duty to enforce the immigration laws. This controversial change would not have passed had it not been carefully balanced by a liberal one-year amnesty provision to legalize the status of most of the undocumented alien population.    The application period lasts only until next May. If would be indeed unfortunate if the INS failed to discharge its obligation and didn't reach those whom Congress intended to benefit.    ---   Mr. Wildes, an attorney who specializes in immigration law, is former president of the Association of Immigration and Nationality Lawyers. </TEXT></DOC>