<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880719-0009 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   DUKAKIS RECEIVED Jackson's pledge to cooperate in the fall campaign.    The Massachusetts governor, whose Democratic presidential nomination is assured, and the civil-rights leader sidestepped their differences in a show of unity that promises Jackson a major role in the campaign but makes no commitment of a place in a future administration. Jackson, who met with Dukakis for nearly three hours before the opening of the Democratic convention in Atlanta, also indicated that he wouldn't challenge Texas Sen. Bentsen for vice president.    Texas State Treasurer Ann Richards, in the keynote address, called for an end to eight years of GOP rule and said Dukakis would &quot;get on with the future.&quot;    ---   IRAN SAID it accepted a U.N. resolution for a cease-fire in the war with Iraq.    U.N. Secretary-General Perez de Cuellar immediately opened consultations with both sides in the eight-year Persian Gulf conflict, and said a truce could take effect within a week. While announcing acceptance of the resolution, which also calls for a withdrawal of troops and a prisoner exchange, Tehran said its soldiers would stay at the front. Iraq, which agreed to the resolution upon its passage last year by the world body, said it would &quot;be cautious and wary until peace is achieved.&quot;    The Reagan administration lauded the move by Iran, which could reduce tensions in the gulf region and restore some normalcy to U.S.-Iranian ties.    ---   MEESE PROBABLY VIOLATED tax and ethics laws, a report concluded.    Independent prosecutor McKay found enough evidence to warrant charging the attorney general with conflict-of-interest and federal tax violations, but decided against prosecuting Meese after concluding that he wasn't &quot;motivated by personal gain.&quot; McKay's 814-page report discloses a pattern of efforts by Meese to assist his friend Robert Wallach, and describes details about the attorney general's missteps and &quot;probable&quot; illegal acts.    A lawyer for Meese, who has announced plans to resign as attorney general by early next month, criticized the report as a &quot;very cheap shot.&quot;    ---   The Soviet leadership rejected a bid by the enclave of Nagorno-Karabakh to secede from Azerbaijan. But Tass reported that the Presidium of the Supreme Soviet had &quot;made provision for measures that would ensure the region's real autonomy.&quot; The dispute over the region has sparked five months of ethnic unrest.    ---   Scattered anti-apartheid protests erupted throughout South Africa to mark the 70th birthday of jailed black nationalist Nelson Mandela. Police bans and tight security prevented major celebrations. Services were planned in at least 30 countries, and world leaders issued statements condemning the life imprisonment of Mandela.    ---   Shultz arrived in Tokyo, where he is expected to discuss trade and the Cambodian conflict during talks today with Prime Minister Takeshita and Japanese officials. The secretary of state, on a tour of Asia, voiced criticism of South Korea's closed-market economy before leaving Seoul.    ---   Israeli Prime Minister Shamir denied suggesting a Palestinian role in the future administration of the occupied West Bank and Gaza Strip, where residents staged a general strike to protest Israel's detention of thousands of Arabs without trial. In Jerusalem, visiting Dutch Premier Lubbers criticized Israel's handling of the unrest.    ---   Moscow offered to provide the West with details of its troop strength and weaponry in Eastern Europe and said it would allow inspection before the start of new negotiations on reducing conventional arms. The proposal came as NATO expressed reservations about a Warsaw Pact plan for separate talks on scrapping short-range missiles.    ---   Nicaragua's Contras elected military commander Enrique Bermudez to the rebels' seven-member political directorate. Bermudez is considered a hard-liner who opposes peace talks with Managua. The move came on the second day of a three-day Contra meeting in the Dominican Republic.    ---   A Navy helicopter exploded off the coast of San Francisco, and all eight crew members were presumed killed, a Coast Guard official said. The aircraft was on a mine-detection exercise. The cause of the blast wasn't immediately known.    ---   Seve Ballesteros of Spain won the British Open golf championship, defeating Zimbabwe's Nick Price by two strokes.    ---   Died: Harold P. Goodbody, 82, ex-managing partner of defunct Goodbody andamp; Co., Sunday, in Williamstown, Mass., of cancer. </TEXT></DOC>