<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880222-0020 </DOCNO><HL> What's News -- World-Wide </HL><SO> </SO><TEXT>   SHULTZ DISCUSSED &quot;a full range of issues&quot; with Shevardnadze in Moscow.    The secretary of state and the Soviet foreign minister both claimed &quot;good progress&quot; in daylong talks on arms control, human rights and regional conflicts. But a Moscow spokesman faulted the U.S. program to modernize short-range missiles in Western Europe. The meeting was the first in a series of monthly talks aimed at preparing for a Reagan-Gorbachev summit later this year. Shevardnadze said &quot;there is a good chance&quot; for completing an accord to reduce superpower long-range missiles in time for the summit. Shultz is to meet with Gorbachev today.    Shultz met with Soviet dissident Andrei Sakharov, who said the U.S. should show restraint in developing Reagan's space-based antimissile system.    ---   King Hussein doesn't plan to meet with Shultz during the secretary of state's trip to the Mideast later this week. According to U.S. and foreign sources, the Jordanian monarch will remain in Europe since he sees nothing new in the latest U.S. peace initiative aimed at ending unrest in the Israeli-occupied territories.    Israeli soldiers killed two Arabs in clashes in the West Bank, and Palestinian organizers called for an escalation of protests to coincide with Shultz's visit. In Jerusalem, Israeli Prime Minister Shamir rejected calls for a full government debate on the U.S. initiative, but said the 10-member inner cabinet would discuss it this week.    ---   Hezbollah extremists clashed with Shiite Moslem militiamen searching for a kidnapped U.S. Marine in southern Lebanon, and the Iranian-backed group declared support for the abductors of Lt. Col. William Higgins. A Hezbollah leader in Lebanon said he believed Higgins had been smuggled out of the area near the port city of Tyre.    ---   Nicaragua's Ortega warned the country's opposition against provoking &quot;an insurrection that can destroy them.&quot; The Sandinista president also said Friday's suspension of peace talks in Guatemala between the Managua government and the Contra rebels was &quot;abrupt and unexpected.&quot; The two sides couldn't agree on a 30-day truce plan.    ---   Greek Cypriots elected a communist-backed newcomer as president. George Vassiliou, who supports conciliation with the Turkish side of the divided island, defeated a veteran conservative in the runoff election. Incumbent Spyros Kyprianou was knocked out in voting last week.    ---   Soviet citizens will be allowed to take out bank loans to build private homes under a government decree that marks a major change in resolving the country's housing problem. The announcement also stated that &quot;unjustified restrictions&quot; on housing contruction and purchase of building materials have been removed. It didn't elaborate.    ---   Pope John Paul II blamed the rivalry between East and West for social and economic ills in the Third World and faulted the global financial system for an &quot;all-consuming drive for profit.&quot; In his seventh encyclical, issued Friday, the pontiff also accused the U.S. and Soviet Union of imposing &quot;imperialism&quot; on developing nations.    ---   TV evangelist Jimmy Swaggart told his congregation in Baton Rouge, La., that he had sinned against his family and God, and that he would stop preaching until church officials complete an inquiry into his conduct. The Assemblies of God denomination has been investigating Swaggart, reportedly for allegations of sexual misconduct.    ---   Rescue workers in Brazil searched for survivors of mud avalanches that killed about 100 people and left more than 5,000 homeless in Rio de Janeiro. The flooding, caused by torrential rains, was the second such disaster to hit the South American country this month. About 170 people were killed in Petropolis two weeks ago.    ---   China isn't expected to block an arms embargo against Iran that the U.S. is seeking in the U.N., American officials said. They said Beijing, which sold about $1 billion of arms to Tehran last year, wouldn't support calls for an embargo, but indicated it wouldn't veto such a resolution.    ---   Kohl said the West should take Soviet leader Gorbachev at his word on reducing conventional arms. The West German chancellor, in remarks published in a Bonn newspaper, also said his discussions Friday in Washington with Reagan boosted relations between the U.S. and West Germany.    ---   Archbishop Tutu condemned a bomb blast Friday in Namibia and air raids in retaliation by South Africa. At least 18 people died in the explosion, and Pretoria's jets bombed bases Saturday in Angola said to be used by guerrillas that South Africa's government blamed for the explosion.    ---   Died: Axel Johnson, 77, Swedish industrialist, Friday, in Naples, Fla. </TEXT></DOC>