<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870206-0078 </DOCNO><HL> Fuel Fraud:Gasoline-Tax EvasionIgnites a CrackdownBy U.S. and the States---FBI Cites Organized Crime;Treasury May be LosingAs Much as $800 Million---Bargain Prices on Long Island---By Andy Pasztor and Rose GutfeldStaff Reporters of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/06/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> TAXESPETROLEUM (PET)JUSTICE DEPARTMENT (JUS)INTERNAL REVENUE SERVICE (IRS)TREASURY DEPARTMENT (TRE)CONGRESS (CNG) </IN><TEXT>   All offices of the Federal Bureau of Investigation recently received a memorandum warning agents to be on the lookout for an increasingly pervasive crime: gasoline-tax fraud.    &quot;It's definitely a high priority for us,&quot; says Anthony Daniels, head of the FBI's white-collar crime investigations. He estimates that gasoline-tax evasion -- by middlemen, for the most part -- costs the U.S. Treasury as much as $800 million a year, while depriving states and local governments of additional millions of dollars in revenue. &quot;We're sure that it's going on all over the country,&quot; Mr. Daniels says.    The FBI has set up five federal-state strike forces to crack down on phony transactions and on the organized-crime groups that it says are frequently behind the schemes. Congress and the Internal Revenue Service have moved to plug loopholes in the law, and many states are tightening long-neglected collection procedures.    But stopping the schemes won't be easy. Some state prosecutors, lawmakers and other critics say that combating such fraud should have been a top priority years ago when it was first uncovered.    Local, state and federal taxes account for more than a third of the retail gasoline price in some areas. At the state and local levels, gasoline-tax fraud has caused payers of other taxes to pay more to make up for the revenue losses. At the federal level, where gasoline-tax receipts finance highway projects, the Federal Highway Administration says the extent of evasion represents a &quot;potentially disastrous loss&quot; of revenue for road construction.    Also hurt are legitimate gasoline dealers who pay taxes and then can't compete with the fire-sale prices offered by the illegal operators.    Outdated collection methods of the federal government and many states contribute to the problem. Generally, for example, the current federal excise tax of nine cents a gallon, along with most state gasoline taxes, doesn't have to be paid until the gasoline is sold to a retailer. Until that final step, the law allows an unlimited number of tax-free sales as the gasoline moves from importers or refiners to middlemen and finally to retailers. The tax is ordinarily paid by the middleman in the chain who sells the gasoline directly to the retailer -- after adding the tax to his price.    The fraud occurs when nobody at all pays the tax. This is accomplished by such abuses as &quot;daisy chains,&quot; or sham transactions in which gasoline is passed among a web of tax-exempt businesses to try to hide tax liability. Shell companies, often consisting of nothing but a mailing address and a telephone, also have been used. Prosecutors say invoices frequently are falsified to indicate that the tax was paid by one of these companies. The government then discovers that the firms either no longer exist or don't have the assets to pay the tax.    Occasionally, gasoline retailers are in on the scheme, so that they can obtain low-price fuel.    Some daring evasion schemes have been traced to Florida. Last October, a state grand jury indicted a Miami-based distributor, Amber Oil Corp., and others after, prosecutors say, Amber's still-unknown owner collected hundreds of thousands of gasoline-tax dollars from legitimate companies with the promise of passing the money on to the state. Investigators say none of the payments were made. The investigation is continuing, and more charges are expected.    The biggest case in which criminal charges have been filed is in New York state and involves Sheldon Levine, who was described by prosecutors as the most successful distributor of unbranded gasoline on Long Island. During the investigation, Mr. Levine's phone was tapped, and the entrance to his office was kept under surveillance for more than six months.    According to an indictment filed in state court in Suffolk County, N.Y., last October, Mr. Levine, the owner of Snug Harbor Fuel Corp. and No Brand Petroleum Inc., and nine other individuals conspired to cheat local, state and federal governments out of a total of nearly $56 million in taxes. The defendants are accused of shipping more than 200 million gallons of gasoline into the state, primarily from New Jersey, and then using six front corporations and bogus transactions to hide the fact that taxes hadn't been paid. Mr. Levine has pleaded innocent, and his attorney has filed motions challenging the legality of the wiretaps and surveillance.    By evading taxes, investigators say, some distributors on Long Island were able to sell gasoline to local filling stations at substantially lower prices than spot cargoes were going for in New York harbor. The disparity in prices finally alerted authorities. &quot;A hell of a lot of people were selling gas at what should have been a loss,&quot; says John Ryan, a New York state assistant attorney general. &quot;But nobody seemed to be going out of business.&quot;    Investigators say their first big break was a criminal case filed in 1985 against Michael Franzese, a polished 35-year-old millionaire described by a federal law-enforcement official in congressional testimony as a rising star in the Colombo crime family. With his clean-cut looks and varied financial interests in 18 companies -- ranging from gasoline distributors and automobile dealerships to construction and movie-production firms -- Mr. Franzese symbolized the new breed of organized-crime bosses. He liked to regale associates with stories about his high living and success as a Hollywood film producer who owned a $1 million house on Long Island where he lived with his wife and five young children. But Mr. Franzese had a darker side.    According to a 99-page indictment and other documents filed in federal district court in Brooklyn, the Franzese family empire benefited from credit-card fraud and kickbacks from the president of an insurance company that did business with a labor union controlled by Mr. Franzese. Papers filed in the court by prosecutors say that Mr. Franzese also threatened to kill the son of a friend and longtime associate in the gasoline business if the father cooperated with investigators looking into the gasoline-tax schemes. No charges were filed in connection with the alleged threat. The father, Lawrence Iorizzo, later helped prosecutors unravel the tax schemes.    Last spring, Mr. Franzese pleaded guilty to racketeering and conspiracy charges and agreed to pay a total of $14 million to the federal government and the states of New York and Florida, which also were defrauded. He is currently serving a 10-year prison term. Mr. Iorizzo and at least two dozen other individuals have been convicted or have pleaded guilty on charges stemming from the case.    Further investigations of gasoline-tax fraud are under way in Florida, Connecticut, Massachusetts, Texas, Delaware and several other states.    The prosecutions in New York and Florida show how a new generation of organized-crime groups, determined to use intimidation and financial savvy to broaden their activities, has quickly pocketed huge illicit profits by infiltrating the gasoline-distribution industry. Considering the potential risks and benefits, &quot;it's a lot safer than running drugs,&quot; says James Lewis, a senior prosecutor for the Florida Department of Law Enforcement.    Some prosecutors worry that the scam artists have shown ability to stay a jump ahead of the efforts to stop them. &quot;I don't think anybody predicted the severity of the problem,&quot; says New York's Mr. Ryan. During the first round of investigations in the early 1980s, Mr. Ryan says, &quot;the crooks figured out the gaps in the system faster than we did.&quot;    The recent prosecutions have been accompanied by legislation at the state and federal levels. A provision of the new federal tax-revision law generally will require the refiner or terminal operator to pay the tax, when the gasoline is removed from the terminal.    But congressional support for the change has been less than overwhelming. After the Treasury Department proposed the revision in July, some lawmakers were reluctant to adopt it, partly because the estimates of the revenue it would raise were so uncertain, ranging all the way from $200 million a year to more than five times that much. Lawmakers didn't think such estimates were solid enough to show that evasion was a big enough problem to warrant changing the law.    The only reason the changes eventually passed, says Anthony McMahon, the Federal Highway Administration's chief counsel, is that more income was needed to help make the new tax-revision law revenue-neutral. The changes don't take effect until Jan. 1, 1988, a year later than most provisions of the tax law. Legislators say this will provide time to take a more informed look at the problem, but many law-enforcement officials fear that it simply gives tax evaders a longer grace period.    And the provision remains controversial within the industry. The Petroleum Marketers Association of America, which represents independent distributors, contends that the changes provide a considerable competitive advantage to large gasoline producers and international oil companies because they own most of the refineries and many of the terminals.    Thus, the argument goes, although they will be paying the tax, there will be a lag between the time they sell the gasoline and the time they have to pay the tax, so they will have the advantage of being able to use the money in the interim.    Also, it is argued, because they have their own distribution networks, the transactions often will be paper transactions within the networks. But independent middlemen will have to shell out cash for the full price including the tax, because the tax cost will be passed down the line.    Meanwhile, IRS officials, who have increased by 10% the people and other resources devoted to gasoline-tax evasion in fiscal 1987, say that such fraud ranks right behind phony tax shelters and tax protesters as an enforcement priority. The IRS also is developing training programs for agents and state tax collectors and is considering steps to improve compliance before the tax-law changes take effect.    So far, however, the clearest enforcement gains have come at the state level. Since June 1985, when New York shifted responsibility for payment of motor-fuel and sales taxes to whoever brings the gasoline into the state, receipts have climbed by more than $150 million annually, state officials say. The state uses roadblocks to check whether fuel trucks entering the state carry proper invoices.    Florida's legislature in 1985 passed a law severely limiting the number of tax-exempt sales of gasoline and establishing more stringent licensing requirements for distributors.    But some states still don't believe that drastic action is warranted. Illinois, one of six states currently conducting audits of large gasoline distributors in conjunction with the IRS, hasn't &quot;turned up a problem so far,&quot; says Verenda Smith of the state Department of Revenue.    Even officials in states that are cracking down worry that criminals will simply find new ways to skirt the laws. &quot;There's so much money to be made nonviolently,&quot; says Karl Felsen, a spokesman for New York's Department of Revenue, that &quot;they're not going to give it up easily.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>