<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870209-0066 </DOCNO><HL> ---Both Are at Opposite EndsOf Risk Spectrum---By David StippStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/09/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> GENI BGENFPHARMACEUTICALS, HOSPITAL SUPPLIES, MANAGEMENT (PHA) </IN><TEXT>   In biotechnology's race to develop a new generation of drugs, Genetics Institute Inc. and its rival, Biogen N.V., seem to be reenacting the fable of the tortoise and the hare.    During most of the past five years, Genetics Institute operated quietly as a small, closely held company housed in an old, abandoned hospital in Cambridge, Mass. Its chief executive officer, a low-profile businessman named Gabriel Schmergel, charted a decidedly conservative course aimed at long-term returns. The company minimized risks -- at the cost of limiting its potential early returns -- by developing its first products with the help of big drug companies.    Meanwhile, Biogen gambled on quickly developing a big winner with little outside help. The company burst into prominence in 1983 with a $58 million public offering to support its development of high-profile, anti-cancer drugs, such as interferon. With the international glamour of dual headquarters in Geneva and Cambridge, Mass., and with Nobel laureate Walter Gilbert as chief executive, it seemed hot on the trail of dazzling breakthroughs.    But now Genetics Institute -- largely on the strength of its work on a new class of promising gene-spliced drugs called blood cell growth factors -- is emerging as an important contender in the fledgling biotechnology industry. Meanwhile, Biogen -- struggling with heavy losses from an overextended research program -- has faltered.    &quot;Genetics Institute hasn't been around as a public company very long and has had less money to spend than Biogen,&quot; says Robert Kupor, an analyst with Cable, Howse andamp; Ragen in Seattle. &quot;But it clearly has outshone Biogen.&quot;    The contrast between Biogen and Genetics Institute illustrates the dramatic differences in the biotechnology industry over what is the best route to success. The strategies pursued by the two concerns reflect the very different philosophies of their founding scientists. Despite the similarity of their work, the companies represent opposite ends of biotechnology's risk spectrum.    After helping venture capitalists set up Genetics Institute in 1980, Harvard professors Mark Ptashne and Thomas Maniatis decided they needed business expertise and handed over the reins to Mr. Schmergel, a Hungarian immigrant who formerly ran Baxter Travenol Laboratories Inc.'s international division.    &quot;It seemed to me that building a company requires the skills of a business professional,&quot; says Mr. Ptashne, who, along with Mr. Maniatis, has acted as a consultant to Genetics Institute. &quot;I never thought I would be the right person for that.&quot;    Mr. Gilbert, however, then a Harvard University professor, figured he was the right person to lead Biogen. In 1981, he left the school to become the company's chief executive.    During his time at Biogen's helm, the company took on a freewheeling academic atmosphere, some former company insiders and industry experts say. Its dual operations in Europe and the U.S. required heavy travel and other expenses. It tried to do too much too fast. Now, it is trying to sell part or all of its European operations in an effort to reduce its losses. In addition, its stock price plunged in the last six months of 1986 from about $19 to about $7 a share before recovering slightly in the recent market rally. On Friday, the shares closed in national over-the-counter trading at $10.25, up 50 cents. Shares of many competitors have fared much better.    The company's biggest bet under Mr. Gilbert was to pay for most of the development costs of gamma interferon itself. Biogen hoped to reap larger rewards from the drug than would have been possible by licensing it early. Gamma interferon showed promise in clinical trials as an anti-cancer drug and, more recently, as a potential treatment for rheumatoid arthritis. But after years of research on the substance, its complicated actions in the body aren't well understood. And turning it into a marketable drug has proven more difficult and expensive than expected.    &quot;Wally (Gilbert) felt he could get products through the (Food and Drug Administration) fast,&quot; says Robert Cawthorn, formerly president of Biogen's European operations and now chief executive of Fort Washington, Pa.-based Rorer Group Inc. &quot;So he was all for spending to build up research, assuming revenues would come in. But they didn't come in, and he spent too much.&quot;    Mr. Gilbert, who has returned to Harvard after resigning from Biogen in 1984, maintains that a large research effort was required to develop products both to license for short-term returns and to develop in-house for larger, long-term returns.    While Biogen made headlines, Genetics Institute's Mr. Schmergel flew around the country eating humble pie. Since the company had remained private to avoid Wall Street pressures for short-term returns, he spent most of his time trying to find drug-company partners to help fund research.    &quot;It was very humiliating,&quot; he recalls. &quot;Middle managers who used to get five minutes of my time (at Baxter Travenol) would make me cool my heels for hours. Then they would tell me that we were the 10th biotech company they had talked to that week and number 92 on their list&quot; of prospective research partners.    To conserve resources, the company rented space in Boston's antique Lying-In Hospital, a former birthing center near an unsavory neighborhood. &quot;We had people who were mugged going to their cars,&quot; recalls Mr. Schmergel, looking out a window of the company's fashionable new two-story building in Cambridge. &quot;I told everyone, 'Just give your money if you get mugged and don't get into any fights.'&quot;    Common sense dictated Genetics Institute's choice of drug research projects, Mr. Schmergel says. Company scientists initially wanted to work on interferon, but gave up the idea when Mr. Schmergel argued that other companies held commanding leads in research on it.    In 1983, the company dropped research on interleukin-2 -- a potential anti-cancer drug Biogen has spent years developing -- because of concerns that it would have toxic side effects and a limited market.    Genetics Institute has devoted much of its resources to developing gene-spliced versions of naturally occurring substances that promote blood-cell growth. Biogen also has researched the substances but is behind Genetics Institute in developing them.    &quot;The blood-cell growth factors are rapidly emerging as the new stars&quot; in biotechnology, M. Kathleen Behrens, an analyst with San Francisco-based Robertson, Colman andamp; Stephens, wrote in a recent report on Genetics Institute. The reason, she explained, is that they show promise in treating cancer and infections and have less serious side effects than such drugs as interferon and interleukin-2.    One of these new stars is erythropoietin, or EPO, which makes red blood cells proliferate and is being tested as a treatment for anemia. Another is granulocyte-macrophage colony stimulating factor, or GMCSF. It speeds production of white blood cells, which are crucial in fighting off infections, and is being tested as an immune-system booster in patients with cancer and acquired immune deficiency syndrome, or AIDS.    Today, Genetics Institute and Biogen are among a number of concerns -- including Amgen, Chiron Corp., Centocor Inc. and Cetus Corp. -- that are jockeying for position as biotechnology's No. 2 company, following Genentech Inc., the undisputed leader.    Both Genetics Institute and Biogen are unprofitable, but unlike its rival, Genetics Institute seems to be marching steadily toward profitability.    Genetics Institute's losses -- about $4.5 million last year -- reflect the company's increasing expenses to develop proprietary drugs and to build manufacturing muscle. Propelled by anticipated profits from proprietary blood-growth factors, substances that promote bone growth and other drugs, the company should report rapid earnings growth in the early 1990s, some analysts say.    Biogen's outlook is somewhat hazier. Wall Street analysts gave the company high marks when in 1985 it named James L. Vincent, a hardheaded businessman known for building up Abbott Laboratories Inc.'s medical diagnostics business, to succeed Mr. Gilbert. But Biogen's losses widened to an estimated $27 million last year from $19.1 million in 1985. Analysts agree that Mr. Vincent must soon make major changes for the company to continue as a major biotechnology player.    Mr. Vincent argues that Biogen's losses aren't large compared with competitors' expenses to purchase assets of their research partnerships. Indeed, South San Francisco, Calif.-based Genentech recently took a $370 million charge when it acquired assets of two of its partnerships.    He adds, though, that his first mission at Biogen has been to reduce its losses. The elimination of first-class air travel along with other belt-tightening measures trimmed costs 15% last year. To further cut costs, Biogen is negotiating to sell -- or to form a joint venture to run -- its Geneva operations, which would reduce the company's 375-member work force by about a third, Mr. Vincent said. He added that the company hopes to report a break-even quarter by the end of the year.    Major uncertainties, however, will remain about Biogen even if it achieves those goals. One of the company's licensed drugs -- alpha interferon -- is on the market as a treatment for a rare form of cancer, and its gamma interferon may soon be approved in West Germany to treat rheumatoid arthritis.    But hopes for several of Biogen's main projects have dimmed. Expanded anti-cancer studies with interleukin-2, for example, haven't replicated earlier exciting results with it reported in 1985 by National Cancer Institute researchers.    Moreover, gamma interferon's anti-cancer potential remains controversial: &quot;I think it is promising for cancer,&quot; says Seth Rudnick, a Johnson andamp; Johnson research manager who formerly directed clinical studies at Biogen. &quot;But I don't think it will have the breadth of application people once expected it would have.&quot; Mr. Vincent asserts lowered expectations for the drug stem from past exaggerated reports about it.    Many uncertainties remain about Genetics Institute's projects, too. Indeed, after an $86 million initial public offering in May priced at $29.75 a share, the stock fell below $20 by year's end. It closed at $22 in national OTC trading Friday, down 25 cents.    But the main question about the company, analysts say, is how big its success will be, not whether it will succeed. &quot;Genetics Institute has been a kind of plodding company,&quot; says Linda Miller, an analyst with PaineWebber Inc. &quot;But it gets business done.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>