<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ870204-0163 </DOCNO><HL> ---Scandal in Southeast AsiaThreatens Financier's Empire---By Raphael PuraStaff Reporter of The Wall Street Journal</HL><DD> 02/04/87</DD><SO> WALL STREET JOURNAL (J)</SO><IN> FRESTBANKS, THRIFT INSTITUTIONS (BNK) </IN><DATELINE> BANDAR SERI BEGAWAN, Brunei  </DATELINE><TEXT>    Six months ago, FinanceMinistry officials of this oil-rich sultanate entered theheadquarters of National Bank of Brunei to seize alldocuments related to the privately held bank's $687 millionloan portfolio.   It didn't take long. The chief of the raiding party soon left with two dozen thin files tucked under one arm.    &quot;There would be a signature card and nothing else,&quot; says a Brunei source familiar with the episode. &quot;It was amazing: Here you had hundreds of millions of dollars in loans with no documentation whatsoever, no record of security, nothing.&quot;    What the officials did discover, however, was that about 90% of the loans outstanding -- $621 million -- went to companies linked to or relatives of the wealthy Malaysian financier and hotelier Tan Sri Khoo Teck Puat, whose family owned more than 70% of National Bank.    The National Bank affair has developed into one of the biggest financial scandals in Southeast Asia in recent years and threatens to embroil the Khoo family and the government of the tiny former British protectorate in protracted legal battles. Already, it has tarnished Tan Sri Khoo's name in financial circles, forcing him to resign from the board of Britain's Standard Chartered PLC and to sell the bulk of his 29% stake in Exco International PLC, also of Britain.    Many bankers believe it also will force him to dismantle his vast business empire -- consisting of investments in hotels, property and financial services in Australia, Asia and Britain -- to pay off more than $470 million owed by Khoo-related companies at the end of 1986.    Neither Brunei officials nor spokesmen for Tan Sri Khoo will discuss details of the affair publicly. But an account of what happened can be pieced together from interviews with those familiar with the case and from an examination of documents obtained in Brunei, Singapore and Hong Kong.    Brunei sources close to the investigation of the bank, which the government seized and shut down on Nov. 20, say audits show that it functioned essentially as a powerful money machine for the 70-year-old financier and his family.    The inquiry's findings, corroborated in part by associates of the Khoo family, indicate that the big acquisitions that earned Tan Sri Khoo a reputation as a financial wizard with bottomless pockets were financed partly by what amounted to interest-free loans from National Bank. The acquisitions included stakes in both Exco and Standard Chartered.    Among the Brunei government's other discoveries:    --National Bank pumped an ever-rising tide of funds into Khoo-family companies, with such loans jumping to $622 million by mid-1986 from $93 million at the end of 1980. Almost all the loans were overdrafts, with no fixed schedule of repayment. Most went to shell companies that had minimal capitalization and pledged no security for the loans. Although the bank accrued interest on the loans and recorded it as profit, in many cases the Khoo companies failed to pay any interest for years at a time or paid only sporadically.    --The bank listed as active credits loans on which it hadn't received payments of interest or principal for years. In some cases, the borrowing concerns were defunct.    --The bank financed almost all of its Khoo-related lending with short-term, interbank borrowings from more than 30 non-Brunei banks, mainly in Singapore. It also used the borrowings to meet operating expenses, pay dividends and repay interest and principal on earlier borrowings. As the financial obligations of the Khoo family and National Bank grew, such borrowing escalated sharply, rising to $228 million at the end of last October from $129 million at the end of 1985 and just $32 million at the end of 1983.    Documents obtained in the National Bank investigation also shed new light on one of the central mysteries of the affair: the close but enigmatic relationship between the Khoo family and Brunei's ruling royal family, headed by 40-year-old Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah, who has served as both monarch and prime minister since Brunei's independence in 1984.    The documents indicate that the Khoo family made several offers in 1985 and 1986 to sell its entire interest in the bank to the sultan and to manage the bank on his behalf.    Sources believe that had the plan succeeded, it could have opened the way for Tan Sri Khoo to exercise enormous financial clout with little risk.    &quot;My God, can you imagine? Khoo could have made a move on General Motors on the basis of Brunei's wealth,&quot; says a financial analyst in Brunei. &quot;He could have collateralized himself into becoming the richest man in the world.&quot;    Brunei has arrested five National Bank officials and auditors, including the chairman, Datuk Khoo Ban Hock -- who is Tan Sri Khoo's eldest son -- and charged them with criminal breach of trust, criminal conspiracy to cheat companies or persons who might lend to or deposit funds with National Bank, and making false statements in annual reports of the bank.    Warrants have been issued for the arrest of two other Khoo associates and former National Bank officers in Singapore, but they haven't been located, and their whereabouts are unknown.    The bank officers and auditors have yet to enter a plea in the criminal proceedings.    Brunei also has filed civil suits against Khoo-related companies in Brunei, Hong Kong, Singapore and Malaysia for the recovery of about $442 million they borrowed from National Bank and against 14 Singapore-based, Khoo-controlled concerns that guaranteed the loans. A separate, $185 million suit has been filed in Singapore against Tan Sri Khoo himself as personal guarantor of Brunei-incorporated Leo Investment Corp., National Bank's biggest borrower.    So far, the Khoo family hasn't presented detailed defenses against any of the Brunei actions. Tan Sri Khoo is believed to be in Britain and wasn't available for comment. The Khoo family's Singapore lawyers, Donaldson andamp; Burkinshaw, declined to discuss the matter.    In private, family associates don't seriously dispute some of the main findings of the investigation. But they contend that Brunei's scanty banking regulations didn't expressly forbid such practices and argue that prior to the government's intervention, the bank had always met its financial obligations.    Noting that Brunei law doesn't bar a bank from lending to its officers or shareholders, a Khoo family associate says no provision was made for long-outstanding loans because the family &quot;owned the bank and they owned the companies it lent to, and they know they can be repaid.&quot;    The associate adds: &quot;It's like managing your own household account.&quot;    He and other acquaintances of the family allege that the Khoos and National Bank are victims of a &quot;vendetta&quot; waged by the Brunei government after the Khoos' once-close links to the royal family weakened in recent years for various business and political reasons.    These family associates bitterly criticize the arrest of Tan Sri Khoo's son and refer to Datuk Khoo and the others held with him as &quot;hostages.&quot; (The men arrested in the National Bank affair weren't charged under banking laws but rather with commercial crimes under Brunei's penal code.)    More than 30 foreign banks, with loans outstanding to National Bank totaling as much as $234 million when it was seized, are watching the tussle anxiously. Brunei is eager to persuade them that its crackdown isn't motivated by a campaign against the Khoos.    &quot;Foreign banks got very antsy,&quot; says a Brunei source. &quot;But in the long run it can only be a healthy thing to get a better grip on the banking system.&quot;    National Bank was formed in 1965 in Brunei -- then a British protectorate -- by Tan Sri Khoo. For years, the bank remained a sleepy institution in a colonial enclave. Brunei was known mainly for its rich oil reserves, which today give its 220,000 residents a per-capita income of about $17,000 a year, and for its polo-playing, Anglophilic Islamic monarchy, headed until 1967 by Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah's father, Sir Omar Ali Saifuddin. Tan Sri Khoo forged a friendship with Sir Omar that led to business ties between the two families.    National Bank grew rapidly in the late 1970s and early 1980s. By then, though, Brunei was preparing for full independence and a new, nationalistic generation was revamping policies inherited from colonial administrators.    A skirmish in 1983 between National Bank and the government's newly overhauled Brunei Investment Agency -- custodian of an estimated $20 billion to $30 billion in petrodollar investments for the sultanate -- provided a whiff of trouble to come.    The agency's newly installed managing director, worried by talk of runs on National Bank, sought and received approval from Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah to withdraw deposits of $140 million in U.S. currency and $47 million in Brunei money. Caught off guard, National Bank couldn't meet the demand for the U.S. dollars and asked for a year to repay the funds. It eventually managed to do so in about five months.    In July 1986, a new computerized monitoring system at the Finance Ministry picked up another warning signal almost by accident. Officials were attempting to analyze capital flows out of Brunei to ensure that banks were lending locally in proportion to their local deposit base. Because Brunei's domestic economy is small and the country is wealthy, officials expected to find the banks to be heavy capital exporters. But one wasn't.    &quot;While all the other banks were putting money offshore to the tune of several billion dollars, National Bank was bringing it in,&quot; recalls one financial source.    Because the bank paid high interest rates for its short-term foreign borrowing, it had to be making ever-riskier loans at even higher rates to earn a profit, ministry officials concluded. They decided an audit would be in order.    Within weeks, another bombshell fell that prodded them to take immediate action: Switzerland's Banque Gutzwiller, Kurz, Bungener announced plans for a $30 million issue of floating-rate notes for National Bank.    &quot;It came totally out of the blue,&quot; says a source. On July 29, ministry examiners made the two-minute trip to National Bank's two-story headquarters and asked for its loan register.    They were in for a shock. The register totaled just $46 million, while National Bank's most recent monthly statements had shown loans outstanding of $687 million. Where was the balance?    On July 31, examiners confronted National Bank's Brunei-based general manager, Azlan Robert Teo, with the discrepancy. Mr. Teo said he had provided figures for &quot;local branches;&quot; the remainder of the loans originated in the bank's &quot;head office.&quot;    When examiners asked where the &quot;head office&quot; was, Mr. Teo pointed to the ceiling and said, &quot;Upstairs,&quot; referring to the bank's upper story. But investigators later learned that &quot;head-office&quot; loans meant those booked at the Daiwa Building in Singapore, the headquarters of Tan Sri Khoo's Asian operations.    Annoyed and increasingly suspicious of National Bank's evasions, ministry officials demanded that Mr. Teo turn over all loan documents.    The scanty records told them little about what National Bank's loans ultimately had gone for, but they told a lot about how the bank operated. &quot;It was as if it was actually two banks -- one for local lending in Brunei and another for lending to the Khoos,&quot; says one source.    Investigators found that at the end of June 1986, National Bank had loans outstanding of $621 million -- about 90% of its total portfolio -- to a few companies linked to Tan Sri Khoo or to his relatives.    National Bank records showed that loans outstanding to Khoo-related concerns more than tripled in 1981 to $327 million, leveled off briefly and then spurted again to $467 million in 1985 and $621 million by mid-1986. The portion of the bank's portfolio lent to Khoo-related companies or individuals ballooned to 80% in 1981 from less than 50% the year before, then rose to 90% in 1986.    While evidence of a direct correlation is skimpy and coincidental, the jumps in lending to Khoo-related companies closely parallel Tan Sri Khoo's acquisitions of substantial shareholdings in Southern Pacific Hotel Corp., Exco, and Standard Chartered in 1981, 1985 and 1986, respectively. Less than a month before the Brunei investigation began, Tan Sri Khoo completed the purchase of a 5.25% stake in Standard Chartered for about $118.2 million.    Ninety percent of the Khoo-related loans was recorded as overdraft transactions in 24 accounts, with no repayment schedule specified. The loans had little or no documentation and, according to a source familiar with the records, &quot;absolutely no collateral in any case.&quot;    Brunei's seizure of National Bank on Nov. 20 stunned the Khoo family. An acquaintance says they &quot;honestly felt they were still in the negotiating stage.&quot;    Family associates privately spread the word among Singapore creditors that the Khoos were victims of a &quot;vendetta&quot; by Brunei's government and the sultan. But Brunei sources say the vendetta charges don't stand up to close scrutiny.    The real center of the bank's activity was at the Khoo family's Singapore offices. Every Thursday, the National Bank chairman, Datuk Khoo, would take a morning flight on Singapore Airlines to Brunei with slips of paper listing the previous week's transactions. Once there, he would bring the bank's books up to date.    In the evening, often after spending an hour or so at Sultan Hassanal Bolkiah's $300 million palace -- a residential and government-office complex -- Datuk Khoo would catch the 6 p.m. Royal Brunei Airlines flight to Singapore.    &quot;The Khoos were just moving money around from one account to another while the total just kept growing,&quot; says a Brunei source close to the investigation. &quot;They were using the bank as a way to borrow for themselves. The bank would borrow, the funds would be transferred to the Khoos' Brunei accounts and then taken out and used to acquire things, and would never be repaid.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>