<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880928-0085 </DOCNO><HL> Efficiency Expert: Chile's Finance Chief Teaches a Dictatorship About Free Markets --- Hernan Buchi Now Fears Vote On Gen. Pinochet's Future Perils Economic Progress --- Growth Without Freedom </HL><AUTHOR> Roger Cohen (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><CO> LATAM </CO><IN> MON BNK </IN><DATELINE> SANTIAGO, Chile  </DATELINE><TEXT>   Every morning, a young man with a mop of blond hair runs up the stairs to the 12th floor of Chile's finance ministry. He sits down at a cluttered desk, which is adorned with a photograph of Gen. Augusto Pinochet. From his window, he sees the Moneda palace, bombed by the general when he seized power in a 1973 military coup and occupied by him ever since.    The vigorous 39-year-old looks more like a U.S. tennis star -- an angular Jimmy Connors perhaps -- than an official of a Latin American military junta. But this is Finance Minister Hernan Buchi -- fitness fanatic, loner, teetotaler. He also comes across as a modest man, reluctant to be the center of attention: &quot;The point should be policies,&quot; he says, &quot;not individuals.&quot;    Mr. Buchi has been quietly applying free-market policies since he entered government in 1975 as an aide in the economics ministry. Chile has changed. Capitalism, as nowhere else in Latin America, is all the rage. Workers own big stakes in newly privatized companies. Exports are booming in cellulose and salmon. Bureaucracy is out. More than 200,000 people have left the state payroll. In everything from pensions to steel, the private sector is taking over from the state. Businessmen scoff at neighboring Peru and Argentina and compare Chile instead to Australia.    The transformation has made of Mr. Buchi a reluctant central figure in next month's plebiscite, when Chileans are to vote yes or no to extending Gen. Pinochet's rule till 1997. The Oct. 5 balloting is much more than a vote on a repressive military regime responsible for killing thousands of Chileans in the 15 years since the overthrow and death of the democratically elected Marxist president, Salvador Allende. (This month, Mr. Allende's widow, returned to Chile for the first time since the coup to campaign against Gen. Pinochet.) The vote will pit the advocates and beneficiaries of Mr. Buchi's &quot;silent economic revolution&quot; against its detractors and victims.    The contest is a bitter one. Opposition demonstrations have been violently broken up by police. Chile is deeply divided between the poverty of its many slums and the flashy world of its new jumbo supermarkets, where the products of many nations abound. These divisions are hardened by the regime's portrayal of the vote as a straight choice between Marxism and a free market.    The outcome is likely to be close, because many Chileans want to safeguard the economic reforms, even at the price of extending Gen. Pinochet's rule to nearly a quarter-century. Most Chileans don't like their dictator but may be afraid to see him go. The question, argues former Mining Commissioner Bruno Philippi, is: &quot;Does Chile go back to being a third-rate Latin American country or not?&quot;    That question prompts another: Does the long, tough shift from a closed and stagnant economy to an open and dynamic one require authoritarian rule? Economic chaos in the new Latin American democracies of Argentina, Peru and Brazil is being effectively used by the regime to warn of what could happen here. Meanwhile, the country is the darling of U.S. businessmen and financiers.    &quot;Mr. Buchi is brilliant,&quot; says Geert Geisterfer, until recently the head of corporate banking for Citibank in Chile. &quot;If bankers could export him to the rest of Latin America, they would.&quot;    He is an unlikely candidate for such admiration. The minister much prefers mountaineering to social climbing at cocktail parties. &quot;I couldn't live boxed up. It's important to measure yourself against a mountain,&quot; he says.    When he first became minister in 1985, he was sometimes mistaken for a junior aide. At a Manufacturers Hanover Corp. luncheon in his honor in New York that year, one banker recalls, Mr. Buchi wasn't even recognized at first. (People mistakenly gathered round a man in the Chilean delegation who looked the part better than Mr. Buchi did.)    In the new, consumerist Chile, this is a man who doesn't even own a car. The son of a retired air force officer, he lives quietly with his wife and two daughters in a small house in Santiago. He prefers the Scientific American to the weekly news magazines. His training was as a mining engineer, not as an economist. Among his recent reading: &quot;The Eye of the Fly.&quot;    Not that he is uninterested in economics. On weekends, he will interrupt a 15-mile jog and turn up unexpectedly at the house of Central Bank director Andres Fontaine. &quot;He's had some idea about fiscal policy or the balance of payments while running and wants to discuss it,&quot; says Mr. Fontaine. &quot;He stays five minutes, then runs over to our debt negotiator, Hernan Somerville, to continue the discussion.&quot;    The presence in the government of this eccentric man says a lot about the regime and about Gen. Pinochet. Despite his tough image and despite his brutality, he isn't a typical Latin American strongman. He is indulgent of talent that can serve him. His commitment to a free-market economy has attracted brilliant economists. His regime is more popular than military governments usually are.    Take the situation at Chilectra Metropolitana, an electricity company privatized by Mr. Buchi shortly after he became minister in 1985. Workers now own 27% of the enterprise. Having initially opposed the scheme, which gave 2,600 employees the option to buy stock with money from their pension funds, union leaders now meet on company property to buy and sell shares. One, Francisco Storch, has amassed 40,000 shares, with a current market value of more than $20,000. Regular dividends have helped him buy a small house on the Pacific Ocean.    &quot;I'd never owned a share, never even knew what a dividend or the stock exchange is,&quot; he says. &quot;Now I follow prices every day in the paper. When I compare what I have to what I had in 1970, I have no doubt I will vote yes,&quot; he says.    Down the hall, receptionist Susy Salinas explains how she sold her shares in 1986 for a 20% profit. With the proceeds, she bought a Santiago apartment. Now, she buys and sells shares regularly, currently holding stock in Soquimich, a mineral company. She had no idea what a share was before 1985. Ownership &quot;gives one a different attitude,&quot; she says.    Similar processes are at work in many companies whose employees form part of the new constituency Mr. Buchi has helped forge for Gen. Pinochet. Of the more than 500 companies in the hands of the state development corporation, Corfo, in 1973, just 20 remain. &quot;We had everything from cinemas to (candy) factories,&quot; says Deputy Director Manuel Macaya. He mentions that selling off the companies has earned more than $2.2 billion.    Mr. Buchi is committed to these changes. Since he entered government, he has worked in health, social security, planning, taxation and as banking superintendent. He has devised a shift to private health insurance policies and worked out tariffs for privatized bus services. &quot;He knows every area,&quot; says Ricardo Silva, who as director of national accounts worked closely with Mr. Buchi. &quot;He's like a physicist who knows that if one piece moves, so, too, does another, and he's always looking for equilibrium.&quot;    But Mr. Buchi's detractors say his policies lack balance. They allege that private enterprise and exports have thrived on the backs of workers whose minimum wages of $48 a month are among the lowest in Latin America. His policies, contends economist Patricio Meller, &quot;are based on the premise (that) you can control workers with the army.&quot; Strikes, he points out, are banned. Socialist Sergio Bitar says, &quot;Buchi makes sure real interest rates are positive and leaves torture to the interior ministry.&quot;    In the slum of Violeta Parra, one of the many that ring Santiago, tires are burned at night as residents protest Gen. Pinochet's candidacy in the one-candidate election. Many are very young -- they have never voted or known anything but a government that crushes its opposition with tear gas, water cannons and shadowy murder. Arturo Alcaman, a miner out of work for a decade, has an additional complaint: &quot;Mr. Buchi has divided this country into the super-rich and the poor.&quot;    Extreme poverty still exists in Chile -- people ill-housed and ill-fed. The government puts the number at about 15% of the 13 million population; the opposition claims 40%. The economic record of the regime, though improved in the past four years, has by no means been a complete success: average annual growth of 2.6% since 1973, compared with 4.4% between 1960 and 1970.    Mr. Buchi counters that there are no miracles in economic matters. Poverty will gradually fade as the country's wealth increases. &quot;The fact is that companies make more money after they have been privatized,&quot; he says.    With change, tough problems are inevitable, he argues. &quot;But the fact is the problems you face are no bigger than the ones you have already, the difference (being) that you are building a future. Economic change does not come in years. It comes in generations.&quot;    Mr. Buchi doesn't like to talk about politics, and Mr. Silva says that on political matters -- as in much else -- Mr. Buchi escapes precise definition. &quot;In U.S. terms, he'd be a Democrat when it comes to the deficit and a Republican on deregulation,&quot; he suggests. Mr. Buchi comments that what he sees in government is honest people trying to do their best for Chile. &quot;I would have an ethical problem if I saw the machinery of government geared to repression. But I don't see that,&quot; he says.    Insiders speak of a special understanding between Mr. Buchi and the 72-year-old Gen. Pinochet. Both are result-oriented backers of private enterprise who share a vision of Chile as an export-led economic power comparable to Scandinavia, or even South Korea.    The relationship was not always so close. When Mr. Buchi first entered government 13 years ago, he had just returned to Chile with a master's degree in business administration from Columbia University in New York. His hair was longer, he drove a motorbike and he wore jeans to work.    As the former mining commissioner Mr. Philippi, a close friend, recalls, Mr. Buchi's style didn't please Gen. Pinochet. After Mr. Buchi's first meeeting with him, the president summoned Sergio De Castro, who was finance minister at the time. &quot;Who's this man with long hair?&quot; he asked. &quot;I don't like it.&quot;    &quot;But he's brilliant,&quot; Mr. De Castro replied.    &quot;I don't care, I don't want him around,&quot; said the general.    Two weeks later, Gen. Pinochet happened to sit next to Mr. Buchi at a lunch. Afterward, he called in Mr. De Castro again. &quot;You're right,&quot; he said. &quot;The hair doesn't matter.&quot;    What mattered at the time was economic liberalization, and it was clear that Mr. Buchi could help. Under Mr. De Castro and his aides -- known collectively as &quot;The Chicago Boys&quot; because many of them had studied at the University of Chicago -- the military government set about transforming a closed, state-dominated economy. Tariffs were uniformly cut to 10%. And drastic cuts were imposed to reduce a deficit running at 25% of the total output of goods and services. (Mr. Buchi observes that &quot;the deficit under Mr. Allende was 50% of the budget, which was 50% of the GNP.&quot;) Privatization began.    After a terrible year in 1975, when the GNP fell 12.9% as oil prices rose and copper export prices plunged, growth resumed. It was financed in part by lending from foreign banks flush with petrodollars. Imports poured in. Companies struggled to adjust to world competition, but many really weren't solvent. And Mr. De Castro's doctrinaire insistence on a fixed exchange rate priced many of them out of the market.    Then, when international lending abruptly dried up in 1982, Chile went into a nose dive. Suddenly, a rapidly amassed $20 billion foreign debt, amounting to slightly more than the GNP, had to be paid back.    Large banking and industrial groups collapsed. Total output fell a staggering 14.1% in 1982 alone. In April of that year, Mr. De Castro departed, to be followed by four ministers in less than three years. Growth -- and slow growth at that -- didn't resume until 1984.    Looking back, Mr. Buchi and other officials are critical of Chile's early attempts at economic reform. The mistakes were an overvalued peso, an excessively brutal cut in tariffs and -- an error in which international banks were complicit -- huge foreign borrowing. The main achievements were slashing the deficit (now less than 1% of the GNP) and reducing inflation.    Mr. Fontaine of the Central Bank says Mr. Buchi is &quot;less laissez faire&quot; than his predecessor Mr. De Castro. The exchange rate is actively adjusted. Privatization is more aggressive, fiscal incentives to investment greater (the corporate tax rate on reinvested profit is just 10%).    The results have been impressive. Annual growth over the past three years has been more than 5%, and growth is expected to exceed 6% this year. Mr. Buchi believes such growth can be sustained.    Foreign investment has poured in, totaling $1.6 billion so far this year alone. Exports have surged to a predicted $6.5 billion this year, up from $5.2 billion in 1987. They now represent about 30% of the GNP, compared with about 12% when the Chicago Boys went to work. Copper's share of export revenue has been halved, to 40%. Provincial centers of prosperity have emerged tied to such new exports as kiwi fruit and timber.    A balanced budget has kept inflation down to 5.1% for the first seven months of this year. Unemployment has fallen to less than 10% from its high of 25%. The foreign debt now totals three times export revenue, compared with 5.2 times in 1985. Real wages are returning to 1980 levels, something unusual in Latin America.    But all this economic progress, in Mr. Buchi's view, is vulnerable. If the &quot;No&quot; vote wins Oct. 5 -- opening the way to multiparty elections within a year -- he fears the economy's delicate equilibrium will blow up. According to his scenario for disaster, real wages will increase, hitting the competitiveness of exports. Corporate taxes could be raised, and investment will dry up. Debt payments could be restricted, prompting a mess akin to Peru's.    Consumption, meanwhile, will rise, producing inflation and balance of payments problems. Then the temptation will be to start restricting imports by raising tariffs -- now unified at 15% -- and the economy will start closing again. Then, he asks, &quot;where do you stop?&quot;    Others don't see so much at stake in the repudiation of an infamous dictatorship. The 16 parties that make up the center of Chile's political spectrum and have buried their differences to campaign for a &quot;No&quot; vote argue that they don't want to undo Chile's economic transformation. It forms the basis, they say, for growth with democracy. But they do want to see Chile's new wealth spread around more evenly.    &quot;To Buchi, dictatorship is efficient, democracy inefficient,&quot; says the socialist Mr. Bitar. &quot;That is simply not true.&quot; </TEXT></DOC>