<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880329-0008 </DOCNO><HL> Futures Markets: March Delivery Copper Falls Sharply As Concern About Supply Diminishes </HL><AUTHOR> John Valentine (WSJ Staff) </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><IN> MIN CMD PET FIN BON </IN><G> TRE </G><TEXT>   March delivery copper, which led futures prices higher recently, fell sharply yesterday as concern diminished that there wouldn't be enough of the metal to cover outstanding contracts.    The March contract, which will trade for the last time today, fell as much as 7.75 cents a pound before partially recovering and finally settling with a loss of 6.15 cents at $1.076.    The weakness of the March contract affected other copper futures contracts. May, the most actively traded month, for example, declined 2.55 cents to $1.005.    Futures started to ease late last week, as inventories of copper in warehouses of New York's Commodity Exchange increased while the number of outstanding March contracts declined.    Apparently attracted by higher prices, warehouse inventories on Wednesday through Friday rose from 9,002 tons to 11,170 tons on Friday. At the same time, the open interest, or contracts that remained to be liquidated by an opposite trade or delivery of the commodity, declined to 639 contracts by Friday, or the equivalent of 7,988 tons.    &quot;As the amount of copper available for delivery rose above the number of contracts that had to be satisfied, the threat of a `squeeze' in the March contract evaporated,&quot; said William O'Neill, research director for Elders Futures Inc., New York.    Also contributing to the weakness yesterday was an increase in warehouse supplies of the London Metal Exchange for the first time in four weeks. LME stocks last week rose 425 tons to 56,725 tons.    While the supply problem relative to the March futures contract appears to be resolved, the overall supply and demand picture in the industry remains one of limited inventories at a time of peak demand, analysts and trade sources say.    Said Fred Demler, metals economist for Drexel Burnham Lambert, Inc. New York, &quot;We're experiencing only momentary relief from tight supplies.&quot; Global inventories among producers and consumers &quot;remain critically low and we are about to enter the peak consuming second quarter of the year,&quot; he added.    A price-supporting factor, which could have impact in the near future, came from another quarter. According to Warrenton Refining Co., a secondary copper refiner in New Canaan, Conn., said copper traders and the industry generally may have been misreading declining automobile production statistics as negative for copper.    In its March 11 analysis of the copper market, the firm observes that copper usage in automobiles has risen to 48 pounds per car today from 36 pounds in 1980, because of the growth of electrical and electronic systems in the vehicles.    &quot;Thus, while automotive production might decline this year, copper consumption could conceivably hold steady or possibly increase,&quot; the report says. The automotive industry is a significant consumer of copper, accounting for about 5% to 10% of annual consumption, one trade source said.    In other commodity markets yesterday:   COCOA: Futures prices fell on a news report that the Ivory Coast, the world's leading producer, might reduce its offering prices in order to sell more cocoa. The May contract fell $37 per metric ton to $1,573. Despite a rally last week when a prolonged price decline ran out of momentum for the moment, the cocoa market has been burdened by a huge oversupply that has put a crushing weight on prices, analysts said. Contributing to the price weakness has also been the inability of producing and consuming nations to agree on methods of combating the surplus, they said. The Ivory Coast, for its part, has been holding back its selling of cocoa in the hope of higher prices, but its supplies have built up to the point that it may become more anxious to sell, one analyst noted.    INTEREST RATES: Weakness in the dollar sent bond futures prices skidding just over a full point to their lowest level in nearly 9 1/2 weeks. The ability of the stock market to rebound off its lows despite the softer dollar, and price gains in several commodity markets, also depressed bond futures prices, said Frederick Leiner, a futures analyst with Prudential-Bache Securities Inc. in Chicago. &quot;People were expecting a flight to quality out of stocks and into bonds. When that didn't happen, the bonds sold off further,&quot; said Gary Dorsch, a futures analyst with LNS Financial Group Inc. in Chicago. Bellwether bond futures prices for June settlement closed down 1 1/32 at 89 7/8.    ENERGY: Futures prices ended slightly higher after early easing caused by a report that members of the Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries were producing oil at well above the official maximum rate. West Texas Intermediate for May delivery ended seven cents per barrel higher at $17.10, while May heating oil was up 0.27 cent a gallon to 46.1 cents and May gasoline was 0.18 cent higher at 48.67 cents a gallon. The market was initially influenced by a report in the Middle East Economic Survey. The closely watched petroleum journal said OPEC nations during March would produce oil at the rate of 18 million barrels per day, or 1.5 million barrels above the official OPEC maximum level of 16.5 million barrels daily. One analyst observed that the figure was at odds with a widely held estimate of OPEC output of about 17 million barrels per day. But the impact of the report diminished through the quiet trading day and prices recovered, an analyst said.    GRAINS AND SOYBEANS: Soybean-futures prices rose amid heavy buying, said Victor Lespinasse, a floor broker at Dean Witter Reynolds Inc., Chicago. He estimated that futures contracts for roughly 12 million bushels were bought yesterday. Among the big buyers was Candamp;D Commodities, which has riled the soybean pit on several occasions this month with its heavy trading. The rise in soybean-futures prices was also helped by reports that the Brazilian soybean crop, which is under harvest, is suffering from a drought. Although rain is expected this week, some analysts are speculating that the crop might already be damaged. Soybean traders are primarily concerned with the report expected Thursday from the Agriculture Department on the amount of acreage U.S. farmers intend to plant this spring. Most analysts are forecasting only a small increase in soybean acreage, which would help support futures prices. Wheat-futures prices fell despite news that the Soviet Union, as widely expected, bought 475,000 tons of subsidized U.S. wheat over the weekend. The Agriculture Department recently agreed to compensate exporters for selling one million tons of U.S. wheat at cheaper world rates to the Soviet Union. Wheat traders might have been disappointed by a big pickup in the volume of wheat auctioned by the Agriculture Department. </TEXT></DOC>