<?xml version='1.0' encoding='UTF-8'?>
<DOC><DOCNO> WSJ880331-0159 </DOCNO><HL> LEISURE andamp; ARTS -- Film: A Sacrificial Mom Gives Life to World </HL><AUTHOR> Julie Salamon </AUTHOR><SO> </SO><TEXT>   Last year the movies were filled with babies. Cherubs all, they arrived -- often unexpectedly -- at the homes of the people who would tend them, unmarked by the vicissitudes of the birthing process. They could have been plucked from cabbage patches, delivered by storks. In a fictional landscape nearly empty of love or even affection between men and women, the babies offered the only romantic fantasy that seemed safe in an era of disease and sexual confusion.    This year it seems that infants have been momentarily replaced by a new version of an old fantasy object: the pregnant woman. It seems that everywhere you look, on prime-time television or at the movies, you'll see omnipotent waddlers, liberated from both their Brooks Brothers suits and from men.    There's Maddie on television's &quot;Moonlighting,&quot; well into maternity wear. On a whim she recently married a man she met on a train, then divorced him three days later. Her pal David patiently waits for her to decide whether to marry him, even though neither he nor she knows who the father of her unborn baby is. He, meanwhile, has become a Better Person by helping another unmarried friend through her Lamaze classes and childbirth. When David informs pregnant pal No. 2 that he still loves Maddie, she nods absent-mindedly as she turns her moony gaze to her newborn child.    The dispensability of men was more pronounced on the pilot for &quot;Heartbeat,&quot; a new show about female doctors that lies somewhere between &quot;St. Elsewhere&quot; and &quot;Dynasty.&quot; In last week's premiere episode, a married couple is forced to turn to artificial insemination because the man has &quot;weak sperm.&quot; A doctor implants the borrowed goods into her patient. The two women chat cheerily. The doctor, smirking a bit, tells her patient that conception is more likely to occur after orgasm -- an accomplishment the patient is left to achieve on her own. The camera leaves her lying in the examination room, laughing in ecstasy. Her husband is nowhere to be seen.    The movies are slightly more conservative but just as decisive in the portrait of modern men as surrogate people. Women may once have been slaves to their chauvinist oppressors, but they were slaves with one irreplaceable source of power: Only they could bear heirs.    The New Woman, as represented on big and little screen, isn't equal to men at all. She's far superior. She doesn't need men either for protection or for conception. In Alan Alda's new picture, &quot;A New Life,&quot; for example, the doctor, played by sometime TV lawyer Veronica Hamel, is an old-fashioned girl. She insists on marriage before pregnancy, though once the baby is born the main use she has for her husband is as nanny.    Given all this many men may view the &quot;The Seventh Sign&quot; with some relief. In this religious suspense film, a pregnant woman is restored to her primitive role as the source of life. But when she bears the child that will save the world from the prophecy of Revelations, she dies. She's served her purpose.    This isn't a gothic excursion into satanic domination of the womb, like &quot;Rosemary's Baby.&quot; Screenwriters W.W. Wicket and George Kaplan choose instead to make a literal-minded fable based on the mystical Jewish and early Christian doctrines of apocalypse. The age-old portents of doom crop up in the disaster news that fills odd corners of the Sunday paper: Rivers running with blood, frozen ruins uncovered in the desert.    These &quot;signs&quot; point inexorably toward the coming of Antichrist and the End of Days, which can be forestalled by -- you guessed it -- the delivery of a healthy baby by the expectant mother, played by Demi Moore. It is up to her to upset the chain of events meant to thwart that delivery.    The Australian director Carl Schultz's previous films have been small-scale incursions into the frailties of human relations -- bittersweet tales of fitful childhood (&quot;Careful He Might Hear You&quot;) and uneasy old age (&quot;Travelling North&quot;). Here, in his first American film, he's working the tricky terrain of eschatological abracadabra with a young California couple at the center of the hocus-pocus. And he's produced a well-paced suspense picture that's haunting, even though the plot moves a little mechanically and almost entirely without humor.    The picture links the terrifying predictions of the ancient Jewish and Christian writers to the depressing chaos of modern times, which the heroine, Abby, listlessly imbibes from the evening news. Abby is understandably upset. This is the seventh month of her second pregnancy. The first miscarried and Abby then tried to kill herself. Now the suspense is killing. Will she fail again? The screen fills again and again with her big belly, as the world races toward extinction. Only Abby is a bridge of hope to the future.    Mr. Schultz directs Ms. Moore as well as she ever has been directed, though she doesn't have the depth or range to take the suicidally inclined Abby beyond her symbolic role as unwitting brood mare to all posterity. This is obviously not a finely wrought psychological drama.    For men and babies, however, &quot;The Seventh Sign&quot; will make an uplifting Easter movie. Jurgen Prochnow (&quot;Das Boot&quot;) plays the Jesus figure -- the mournful man who watches the events leading to the world's end unfold -- with affecting sadness. The picture ends on a note of resurrection -- and hope, except, of course, for the sacrificial mom.    ---   In the middle of the British thriller &quot;Bellman and True,&quot; a character says to the movie's down-at-the-mouth hero: &quot;Try not to be a Michael Caine. Act natural.&quot;    This bit of advice is really a sly comment on the film in which it appears. &quot;Bellman and True&quot; is a kind of Michael Caine classic, a story of intrigue made into something much more by its intriguing characterizations and an overhanging sense of weary sorrow.    The fine actor Bernard Hill plays the Michael Caine part. Here he's a man called Hiller, a worn, middle-level technocrat who's been victimized by a woman and who drinks abundantly to dull the pain. He's dissipated and meek, yet given a strength and resourcefulness when he, and more importantly the stepson he loves, are placed in danger.    The bank robbery that moves the action along is the least of this absorbing drama, and it is staged ingeniously. Director Richard Loncraine has imposed a striking bleakness onto the scenario; a sense of rot pervades. And he keeps the tension high. His villains are a Dickensian lot; one of them has the chilling habit of calling people &quot;Dear Heart,&quot; even as he helps brutalize them. </TEXT></DOC>